So this is the 11th year in a row that I've done an Earth Day talk, it's kind of like
people like me come out of the closet one day a year to tell you the things.
Last year I promised to do two things after my talk.
One was to maybe do only ten slides and talk for five minutes on each slide and the other
was to get a haircut and neither of those did I do this year, so there's a hundred and
seventy-seven slides, I'm going to speak relatively fast.
What I'm trying to do the last fifteen years I've been trying to put together a cohesive
picture of humans and our predicament and I'm going to try tonight to simplify something
that's complex but it's still going to be complex so I have a six hour version of this
online that you could watch if you're interested.
So with that, Earth Day, right the reason I'm doing this is so we will continue to have
Earth Days, maybe every day will be Earth Day in the future when thirty, forty, fifty
years from now our kids and grandkids will care about nature and the Earth.
2050 is a gateway to 2250 where I would imagine our descendants hopefully could coexist in
a world with hummingbirds and elephants and dolphins.
That world is still possible but it is at risk.
So we continually get messages in the news on NPR all the time about the stock market
is at all time highs but the real stock market which is our ecosystems, the ten million species
we share the planet with are near all time lows.
Just real briefly going over this, if we count the weight of all the mammals on the planet
right, ninety six percent are humans and our cows, pigs, sheep and goats.
Only four percent are wild mammals including the two percent of those in the oceans.
So land mammals, humans and our livestock outweigh them fifty to one.
Vertebrates, any animal with a backbone have declined fifty two percent since I was born
vertebrate populations.
What a horrible thing to say on Earth Day.
Birds, seventy percent of the birds alive on this planet are chickens and turkeys, thirty
percent are wild birds.
That's not only because we like to eat chicken, it's because the bird populations are declining
especially grassland birds and insectivores because insects are declining.
We don't have experts that have funding to be studying this over decades but there have
been some studies in Germany Nature Reserve showing an eighty percent decline in insect
populations over the last forty years.
The latest estimate is that the world insect population is declining in mass two point
five percent per year.
Part of this is due to things that are unseen.
We can't even measure their impact.
Phthalates are micro plastics that are a byproduct of fossil carbon in our plastics.
They've tested remote ant species in many different places in the Amazon that tested
positive for phthalates.
There's pollution in the bottom of the ocean in the Mariana's Trench that's ten times
stronger than in a Chinese river because that's where it descends.
I'm sure you've all heard about the issues with plastics.
There are five trillion pieces of plastic in the ocean that are measurable in size.
By the year 2050 under this trend there will be more plastics than fish.
Many of you are aware of climate change.
This chart on the top shows the CO2 concentration over the last 400,000 years and we're spiking
upwards.
It hasn't been stable over this time.
If you look at the middle graph in the red that's the red temperature.
We kind of evolved our industrial and agricultural systems in that tiny little stable period on
the right.
I'll talk about that a little while.
The oceans are kind of the bastard stepchild of the environmental story.
Ocean has acidified 25% in the last 150 years.
There's 2% on average less oxygen.
Yes, we had that horrible Notre Dame fire that raised a billion dollars last week but
our world is on fire.
The natural world is on fire.
In order to diagnose what we do about that and what is the trajectory forward we have
to first analyze and diagnose the patient.
That's what I'm going to try to do the rest of this talk.
What I'm going to frame is a battle that you've never really heard about.
We have some famous battles in history.
King Kong and Godzilla, David and Goliath.
We had the blob in Los Angeles and I'm getting closer to the reality of our story.
We had the Star Trek episode, The Borg and Earth.
What I'm going to talk about today is the human super organism functioning as an energy
hungry blind purposeless amoeba.
That is what our culture has become.
The rest of this talk is I'm going to explain the logic quickly of why that's the case
and what it implies.
We have two predominant cultural narratives right now.
We have the Green New Deal where we migrate energy systems to 100% renewables, work towards
zero emissions.
We have business as usual, which is nothing's wrong with the past model.
There are no shortages of anything and we just need to deregulate and reduce taxes.
I'm going to tell a third story, one that integrates human behavior, energy, money into
this super organism emergent dynamic of how humans are currently functioning.
Real brief backdrop on some of these things, ecology.
In nature, things depend on and get benefits from energy.
There's an energy cost and an energy revenue in every transaction.
The cheetah gets a lot of calories from chasing, successfully hunting a gazelle.
Energy capture in nature, organisms and ecosystems self-organized so as to access more sunlight
to degrade an energy gradient.
An oak tree will have the maximum surface area exposed to the sun on its leaves.
It won't have one leaf.
It won't have 10 million leaves.
It will have the right amount in order to access sun.
Human behavior.
Well, we evolved from pre-hominated ancestors all the way back to proconsul in the trees.
We are adaptation executors.
We don't go through life trying to maximize our amount of children.
We try to get the same feelings that our successful ancestors got via hormones, endocrine cascades,
neurotransmitters, dopamine, oxytocin, things like that.
When we make a winning stock trade, our brains think that we just bagged a gazelle on a hunt
for our tribe.
The amount and type of stimuli in our modern world is orders of magnitude more intense
and able to hijack our attention span than our ancestors.
When we're playing Fortnite, our brain is also thinking, wow, I am the best hunter in
my tribe, and that explains why there's no young people here tonight, one reason.
We are also ultra-social, which means we are one of the most social species on the planet.
We care about what others think of us.
We do what others recommend we do.
We are part of this large group entity that's cooperating towards profits, GDP, surplus,
and we are intensely susceptible to wanting to be liked and respected.
We also care enormously about the present versus the future.
Our ancestors, human and otherwise, focused on the present.
If they were worried about some distant event, they would have been out-competed in the moment,
so we have an intense preference on the present.
Not only the present this year, but the present tonight, the present this week.
Energy economy.
Again, I have a two-hour series on this, and I'm going to cover it in five minutes.
We are energy blind as a culture.
We think the world revolves on money and human cleverness.
Energy just like in nature underpins human economies.
About 200 years ago, we puzzled out how to get this fossil carbon compounds out of the
ground.
We're taking them out 10 million times faster than they were sequestered, but they're enormously
powerful, and they describe most of the economic benefits that we've experienced the last couple
hundred years.
This is my farm, not too far from here.
I'm about one-tenth of a horse, though since I made this slide, I think I'm now about
one-ninth of a horse.
That's next to Binga, my horse, who's one horse.
That's my mini Rhino, which is 45 horsepower worth of work, and that's my truck with a
little bit of diesel fuel, does the work of 150 horses.
This is all because we have this fossil sunlight packed in this dense, small area, one barrel
of oil, does four and a half years of my physical work for 60 bucks.
By the way, a plane does 100,000 horses worth of work.
The story of our economy, the story of industrialization, is replacing things that humans used to do
manually with machines powered by fossil carbon, coal, oil, and natural gas.
Me and a chainsaw can do the work of 100 people with an ax or a saw, but as the price of gasoline
goes up, we get fewer benefits.
This is energy scale.
This is the magnitude of human energy use.
You saw the previous speakers' pictures, Cynthia showed how much trees were around.
Until the mid-1850s, most of American fuel was trees, biomass, and the beige and the
bottom.
Then we found coal, oil, natural gas, hydroelectric, nuclear, and solar wind, geothermal, and other
things in the yellow.
This is a bit of a shocker, but if you think about one barrel of oil can do four and a
half years of my work, we have the labor subsidy in the amount of coal, oil, natural gas we
use today, which is 17 terawatts a year, of 500 billion humans right now.
There's 5 billion of us in the workforce.
This is the subsidy that we're given to us by this ancient sunlight all the time that's
underpinning all of this.
These benefits have given us, the average American today has 50 times the goods and services
that the average human did in the year 1800.
We've exploded not only in population, but in GDP per capita, the benefits we got per
capita.
There's a biological law called Kleber's law, which shows that the metabolism or how much
energy an organism or an animal uses is its mass to the three-quarter power.
The same dynamic happens in human systems.
The global economy and all these individual economies, the same dynamic shows the size
of the economy is correlated to how much energy it uses.
It's no surprise that the amount of world energy use is extremely correlated in the
last 50 years to our GDP.
If we burn more, we're going to generate more GDP.
Briefly on money, money is created with no reference to the underlying amount of energy
natural resources available.
Its only reference is to the productivity of our economies.
The productivity of our economies has been going down, and so what we've done is we've
added more and more money to pull resource consumption forward in time.
I was born in the late 1960s.
Since then, we've grown our debt as a nation and as a world more than we've grown our
economies, our GDP, in every single year, and that relationship is accelerating.
Right now, the world is 330% debt to the size of the world economy, so imagine if your
salary was $50,000 and you owed the bank $165,000.
That's the situation the entire world is in.
Energy depletion, we hear these narratives in the news.
Both of these graphs show the exact same thing.
It shows that the United States peaked in oil production in 1970, sharp decline, and
we've moonshotted through that because of technology and cleverness, and now we're
surpassing Saudi Arabia and Russia as the world's largest oil producer.
This is true, but this is also true, is that basins, reservoirs, wells follow a logistic
curve, kind of like a bell curve.
This is America, the lower 48 states conventional oil.
We added Alaska, which isn't really contiguous to the United States on top.
We added offshore things in the sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and now we're adding tide oil
to the mix.
Tide oil is the source rock.
There is nothing left after tide oil.
It's where the oil migrated to these other areas.
The cost of oil extraction is up 370% in the last 15 years, so there's a lot of it left,
but it's getting more costly in energy, water, dollar, and environmental terms.
Why is this important?
Because energy underpins everything in our societies, and as it gets more expensive,
so do other things.
This graph shows the red shows the consumption of energy in the mining industry in Chile,
and the blue is how much copper they actually got out.
As we go to lower quality resources, any kind of resources, there's more rock, there's
more roads that have to be built, there's more energy that has to be used.
Energy is embedded in everything.
Effectively, our culture is energy blind.
We have these fancy economic formulas, and I have a master's from one of the best business
schools in the country.
They never taught me this.
This is the standard economic circular model, but we conflate the dollar value of energy
with the work value of energy, and we don't include the cost of pollution at all.
All we do is account for how much it costs to extract that barrel of oil, which can then
do four and a half years of my work.
What happened?
Let's put this all together.
The chart I showed earlier on temperature in the last 450,000 years, this little section
here is blown up.
This is the last 10,000 years.
All of a sudden, humans, which we had lived roughly 290,000 years in relative harmony
with nature, all of a sudden we started to stop moving around, stop hunting and gathering,
and started agriculture.
This set in motion all the other things that I'm going to talk about here.
This little creature represents the agenda of the gene, kind of our prepared learning
when we're born.
We like certain things.
Certain things are cultural, certain things are genetic.
Would you prefer 10 degrees, 65 degrees, or 110 degrees?
You prefer to be poor or rich.
Do you want zero children greater than zero?
Would you prefer a newspaper, dial-up, DSL, or broadband?
Do you need to be in town tonight, drive a car, take a walk, or a bike?
Prefer to be viewed as more or less successful than your neighbor.
Care about how your life is in 2019 or 2029.
Prefer to win or lose wars.
What do all these things have in common is our preferences are tethered to energy use.
This is a conceptual graph.
Back in the day before fossil carbon, we had the sun and the soil and water, and we had
a maximum amount, a capacity of how much geologic solar flows could produce for human societies.
Then we started to mine underground and find these ancient ores and resources, and again,
they follow something called a logistic curve, which we find the easiest stuff first, and
then we grow up the scale, and then we hit a maximum, and then the latter half is the
more expensive, less dense, costlier stuff.
This is things like oil, and then we overlaid monetary representations of these resources
in the black line.
Early economists actually did recognize the importance of resource productivity.
They had land and what land could create for us in the economic models in the 1900s, 19th
century.
But then over time, because of this massive bolus of fossil magic, our system grew so
fast and large that our land did no longer explain all this wealth.
So all of a sudden, the economists jettisoned this land productivity, and they parsed everything
into two things, labor and capital.
So right now, all the economic Nobel laureates in the world do not treat energy as anything
special.
It's all labor and capital, but you can't blame them because during this period, the
red line and the black line looked kind of similar.
But in order to maintain, after the 1970s energy crisis, in order to maintain our access
to all this energy and resources, we increasingly had to go to globalization and to debt as
a way of keeping our access to more and more energy.
Now our society views the world solely through this financial lens, and we've not only
financialized the human experience, but also the explanation of it.
So what we're doing is we're using this black line, which is central banks and guarantees
and artificially supported markets, to pull the red line forward.
We're using debt as a way to continue to consume more than we would otherwise be able to.
So using credit out of thin air pulls consumption forward in time.
It'd be the same way if a helicopter dropped a billion dollars over Red Wing.
All of you would leave this talk immediately and be diving on the ground with your backpacks
grabbing stuff.
But at the time that the helicopter did that, no change in the amount of resources or energy
or oil or phosphorus or copper would have happened.
So this is kind of an analogy to what's happening on our current economic system.
So if you think of an oil field that has different tiers and different costs, if there's no debt,
it follows this sort of curve.
But if we're able to borrow money and generate credit, we actually find more oil.
We find a new, the black tronch.
We're able to increase the amount of energy that we use in the short run.
But the cost is when it's done, it depletes very rapidly.
And this is, again, a kind of an example of what our economic system is doing.
Since it's Earth Day, I'll note that this credit mechanism not only is pulling consumption
forward in time, it's also pulling carbon forward in time, which, depending on how
things unfold, is good news.
So not to get economically wonky, but I just found this graph today, despite all this massive
credit injections in our society, productivity per unit of human labor is at 40 year lows.
In other words, all this stuff is kind of running out of steam.
Not only that, but I'm sure you're all aware that most of the growth in the economy is
going to the top 5% or even the top 1%.
So the media and household income hasn't changed in 25 years.
Not even the top 5%, only the top 5% are participating in this GDP.
So economic growth is slower and it's not for everyone.
Okay, getting back to the big picture, you all know what a murmuration of Starlings is.
One Starling, an individual bird, follows three simple rules.
Do what your neighbor does.
Don't get too close and fly towards the center.
And the result of this is these beautiful formations in the sky called murmurations.
Humans are doing the same thing.
We're following three simple rules.
We coordinate in our households, in small businesses, in corporations as nations to acquire surplus.
Then we follow cultural rules on socially accepted behavior and we spend the surplus on cool stuff
like Netflix and pizza and Game of Thrones and a trip to Disneyland and all things that
our culture approves.
But the emergent property of this, of 7.7 billion of us pursuing these simple rules,
is we're turning into this energy-hungry super-organism the same way that Kleber's law with the arteries
and veins of an animal, we're doing that planet-wide.
And if you think about this overhead view of a city, and if this was in full motion,
you'd see the brake lights and the headlights going in a different direction.
It looks a lot like arteries and veins.
And the hemoglobin is oil and diesel and gasoline.
So metaphorically, but not so much metaphorically, we're functioning as an energy-hungry super-organism.
I call it amoeba, which I'll explain why in a second.
What are the implications of humans functioning as an amoeba?
Okay, so the United States and the United Kingdom and a few other economies are becoming
less energy-intensive.
We can generate some economic output by using a little bit of less energy.
But physically, the world, because we import a lot of our stuff from China and other places,
the global human society is functioning as an energy-dispating structure.
Gross world product could easily be renamed gross world burning, because every single
good in service in our economies, this clicker, this microphone, this computer, this building,
these lights required a fire somewhere to produce and deliver to where we consume it.
Okay, number two, behaviorally, global human society functions using simple tropisms akin
to an amoeba.
It's not thinking, it's just mindlessly going forward.
In effect, the larger the group of people, the less able it is to depart from the gene
agenda, which is tethered to energy use.
So culturally, selection pressure will not weed out the less sustainable models, which
ours certainly is.
Humanity as a whole has become the superorganism.
And there is no one driving the bus.
We all like to think there's this smart group of billionaires in Davos or Obama and all
his buddies in Europe and whatever, they have a secret plan.
They don't.
I know some billionaires, they're as perplexed and scared as the people in Red Wing.
They certainly have a lot more cushion financially, but they don't know what's going on.
The conversations in Davos last month, you could read the news, they're clueless about
what's happening.
They know something is terribly wrong.
Back to Earth Day.
Issues like population, climate change, ocean acidification are not the problems.
They're the symptoms of human economies optimizing GDP, which is correlated with carbon.
Look at all these conferences on climate in the last 50 years, relative to our CO2 in
the atmosphere.
So many of the environmental issues we face are a byproduct of the metabolism of this
amoeba dynamic, which is why they've been getting worse, not better.
So asking voters to keep carbon in the ground is behaviorally similar to arguing with a
forest fire.
So let me make an important distinction here.
These were some of the environmental facts I listed earlier.
These ones in the red, the climate, ocean risks and some of the plastics ones, but not
all, are part of the metabolism of human society.
They will be fixed when the scale of our economy goes down.
These other things have a cultural component.
Europe just voted to eliminate all single-use plastics.
There's a lot of backlash in China right now for the dumping of sharks back in the ocean
after just taking their fin off, and ivory is becoming socially not cool to have.
So the things in yellow are things that we can culturally, socially change.
But the things in red, which are the climate and ocean things, are more linked to this
mass to the three-quarter size.
So back to this.
All key decision makers in our world today are expecting this black line is our reality,
and it's going to continue.
And we're using this black line by creating more money and more credit, especially places
like China and Japan, and the stories that support this to temporarily increase the red
line.
There is no credible institution or government body or corporation globally that is specifically
planning for an end of growth, but for the developed world, 80% of people, growth is
already over.
And I could spend an hour on this because it's so essential, but it's also a little
complicated and scary, but the red line shows credit growth in the world, and the blue line
shows GDP growth, the growth of our economies.
They're incredibly correlated.
So our economies will grow as long as we can continue to borrow money, and we're already
at 330% debt to GDP as a developed world.
Could we go to 400%?
Sure.
Could we go to 500%?
Yes.
600?
No.
700?
No.
So at some point, we have a cultural bill due.
We've been consuming more than our means for 50 years, and that bill is coming due.
And that has implications for our societies, for our economies, for our environment, for
our communities, and I'm going to get into that a little bit.
Renewable energy, which is more aptly called rebuildable energy because we have to rebuild
it every 20 or 30 years.
Under current cultural guidelines, renewables, we're only adding them to the mix.
We're not subtracting the other stuff.
This is the last 19 years.
The gray shows the increase in fossil carbon use, and the green shows the increase in
renewable energy.
So other than this one year, which was the great recession, fossil energy is still 75%
of our increase in use.
So rebuildables are currently merely making fossil carbon more efficient globally.
So if we think of this superorganism dynamic, what's going to happen is this is just going
to be bigger with solar and wind and still coal and natural gas and oil.
So we will use less of the coal and stuff as fuel, but we'll grow the whole system.
So the narratives in the news, though, are that we're going to continue to grow the economy,
this blue line, using stochastic variable renewable technology, which if you think about
the 500 billion fossil workers we have is unlikely.
They are mature.
They are cheap.
We can use them towards some effect, but it's going to be a smaller system.
And very few people are talking about the size and scale of how we could use hardly any coal,
oil, and natural gas and use them as seed corn to invest into renewables.
Where is the scale of that?
Most of the narratives are we're going to continue this.
So what we're doing is we're kicking the can.
This is an emergent property of almost 8 billion of us following the simple rules I talked
about.
We're functioning as a superorganism.
We're now growth constrained as a culture and we're going to kick any and all cans forward
to keep growth going.
What happens when we've kicked the can as far as it will go and it's now blocking the road?
I think this moment is coming in the next decade.
The social and economic recalibration is related to this.
They're going to change everything.
They're going to change education, philanthropy, institutions, societies, and the environment.
So under this framing, viewing humanity as a superorganism, what is not likely to happen?
We're not likely to grow the economy and mitigate the sixth mass extinction and climate change.
We're not likely to grow the economy by getting rid of the bad fuels and replacing them with
rebuildables.
We're not likely to choose to leave fossil carbon in the ground because it's so tethered
to our experiences, our life standards, our wages, our profits, our growth, the cheap
stuff that we buy.
Governments are not likely to embrace limits to growth before limits to growth are well
passed.
Okay, so under this framing, what is likely to happen?
We're going to grow our gross energy while the net declines.
We're going to have all kinds of technologically feasible energy schemes that aren't really
going to produce much energetic contribution to society.
We're going to, and you're going to see this in the 2020 election, we're going to have
modern monetary theory, which is basically printing money from the government because
the government can never go bankrupt to spend in the real world, but MMT is divorced from
a biophysical understanding of energy and resources.
We're going to, in the 2020 election, have universal basic income conversations.
Andrew Yang is already talking about this because half the people in our country are
broke and we're going to have to support them.
Otherwise, it will be bad.
We're going to have fewer environmental regulations.
Already today, on Earth Day, Trump is bragging on how great he's done for the environment
and by the way, he's repealing all this protection of national parks and things like that.
Look what happened in Brazil with Bolsonaro.
They're allowing more soybean farming in the Amazon, et cetera.
In my opinion, we're going to be pedal to the metal on all these things until we hit
a wall, but we will hit a wall.
So the choreography, I don't know what's going to happen in the future.
I consider the future a probability distribution of various possibilities, but I think in
informed by this analysis, which I might have some things wrong, but generally, if I squint,
I think I've got most of this right, certain paths that we're currently following are going
to be dead ends.
So this is my opinion that in the next decade, we're going to face what I call the great
simplification, a reduction in advanced economies around 30%.
Maybe more is likely now.
In my opinion, it's a foregone conclusion because we're using so much credit and debt
to continue consuming the amount we are today.
So once we remove these low productivity additions of credit with the shift towards lower productivity
energy resources and with the return to current solar inputs, like using the lower quality
stochastic sources.
So a 30% drop in the economy is exactly what happened in the 1930s.
That was a 29.6% peak to trough decline.
The good news is that energy use and well-being are extremely correlated when you're very
poor.
But once you have basic needs met, there's very little well-being and human development
index from more energy use.
United States uses 30 times the energy as the average Filipino, the average American,
but they're equally happy.
So we don't need all this money and energy to be happy as long as we have community
and the people around us are healthy and have sufficient resources.
Kuwait, average earnings, $70,000 a year, Guatemala, $7,000, equally happy.
There's lots of examples of this.
We just don't, we compare ourselves so much to others that we believe this is true as
long as it's true for everyone else.
So a 30% drop in GDP in this country brings us back to 1993.
Now, it's not going to be shared equally and that's going to have to be addressed.
But 1990s were not such a horrible time.
So in my opinion, we face a certain choreography of how this is going to unfold.
Right now, we have to deal with partisan issues, trust in science, trust in media,
the fact that the left and the right are not talking to each other.
They only care about the messenger, not the message.
We're going to have to navigate that now.
We're going to have to navigate this financial economic reset in the next decade.
And if that happens, we have a chance, possibly a great chance because our current system
is so frozen, to put in caps and floors and appropriate taxes and non-renewable resources,
put a tax on them, eliminate human labor tax, lots of different social initiatives that
could never happen right now were in this can kicking mode.
Why aren't you hearing more about this?
Well, in my opinion, the intelligentsia and the media are islands of expertise separated
by oceans of non-science.
You've got experts on renewable energy on this island and on this island, climate change
experts on this island, psychologists, this island, finance, and you don't have a cohesive
narrative that ties everything together because they don't talk to each other and their status
depends on them being experts in their one subject.
Worse, the story that I'm telling is almost the perfect storm for the human brain to ignore
or deny.
It's complex.
It's threatening.
It's in the future.
I'm not hearing this from anyone in my tribe.
Why didn't I hear this from Rush Limbaugh or Rachel Maddow?
They're not talking about this.
There's not an immediate answer to what you can do about it.
So we evolved almost to perfectly ignore the synthesis that I'm telling you.
So getting back to these two predominant cultural narratives, they both share many of the same
shortcomings, a lack of natural resources to complete these efforts, the systemic inability
of financial credit to expand forever, and current societal dissonance that will make
these difficult to implement.
So I've been dealing with policymakers.
I met with a state governor last month, mayors, and I've found something amazing.
So I believe that there's four possibilities we can continue to grow in the future.
We can kind of muddle through, which is this zero to 2% bouncing around, or we bend, which
is a 30% drop in the size of our economies, or we break, which is Mad Max, which is certainly
possible, though I don't think it's likely.
So as individuals, high level people, low level people, bartenders, waitresses, truck
drivers, mayors, CEOs, we can understand this.
This makes sense.
We might disagree about the odds.
But once you put on the hat of a mayor, a planner, a CEO, a politician, these type of
futures remain in our social blind spots.
They can only see this pink, which is grow, which makes this really a social puzzle on
how to have these conversations.
So there's two interrelated challenges with this.
One is the fact that we need to plan for a drop in the size of our economies.
Two is we need to figure out how to even have the conversation about it, because it's so
awkward.
So what to do as a culture?
So we need to change the narrative.
Right now, we're so proud that we're exhausting our children's inheritance with the last oil
that we have.
What we're effectively doing is we're draining America first and bragging about it.
A wise nation that has the ability to print our own money and is the seniority of the
world currency market, we should print money and buy other people's oils and leave ours
in the ground, because we're going to need it.
Your grandkids are going to like that amazing fossil magic for something.
We need, like I said, to educate, plan, and implement a tax not only on carbon, but on
all non-renewable resources, phosphorus, carbon, I mean copper, et cetera, for when the credit
party ends.
And simultaneously at that moment, there'll be a lot of people that are unemployed.
We remove taxes on human labor.
This could not happen right now.
We're going to do the opposite of this right now.
We need to regain civil discourse, trust in science, media, and our neighbors, because
the challenges I'm talking about tonight from the human amoeba are nonpartisan.
This is not a left versus right story.
And we need to educate and inspire young people and old people to care beyond their
own self-interest, maybe beyond their own species, because the real stock market is in
real trouble.
We have thousands of emojis and icons to represent all kinds of things that we text
to someone.
We have no icon that represents the future.
It's an abstraction to our culture.
We need some sort of cultural icon to represent our shared collective future.
We need Earth Trek imagination and inventions instead of Star Trek ones.
Again, imagine what sort of investments as a culture would be appropriate to the great
simplification line instead of business as usual line.
So with my students, I list the top 10 inventions that humans ever made.
You might be able to guess a few of them, but for lack of time, number three was a bicycle.
Number two was a story, our ability to tell stories.
And the best invention was the golden retriever.
But all three of these things use very few resources and give us great brain experiences.
And that's the direction we need to go.
We need to differentiate between clever and wise.
Okay, what about philanthropy and institutions?
We're having these billion dollar philanthropists that spend $50 million a year and keep the
billion there and spend their 5% a year or whatever.
We need to spend that down because it may not exist in 10 or 20 or 30 years.
So philanthropy needs to spend down and make a difference now while they can.
About investments, even if they don't agree with what I'm saying tonight, even if they
think what I'm saying is 5% or 10% plausible, that behooves them to change their campaigns
and their investment strategy.
What about as a community?
Social capital is going to be paramount.
Most people don't even leave their houses anymore.
So one suggestion I have is this summer, go and knock on the door of 10 people within
a half mile of your house that you've never met before.
We need to have conversations about life with real people.
Imagine everyone in your city, including you, living on 30% less.
I think this is a real possibility in the next decade.
What would you do if the blue line is more your future and the people in your community?
Communities are going to go different ways.
There's guns, gold, Bitcoin and beans dynamic that when people start to figure this out
and they will, that's going to be the response.
Or there's going to be do my civic duty, care about the nature in my place, farmers markets,
community meetings, healthy ecosystems.
So your community, our community is going to have a choice of which of these things
to stress.
And every community in America is going to be different.
But I would like to have this brief talk tonight.
I would like this to be a clarion call where we have weekly or every other week or whatever
we can do meetings about what's really going on.
Yeah, they're going to be unpleasant and maybe uncomfortable and awkward, but we need to
start talking about the real issues that face the world in this area.
We need facilitators between the economy and the environment.
We need to think about the world is about to get a much bigger place in the next decade.
So we need to think about the micro components for all the things we use in our life that
come from South Korea or Bangladesh or somewhere.
We need to localize and regionalize supply chains.
We need to tie to this place, to your place, wherever you live, consider giving 10% of
your time and effort.
Every week to doing something that matters in your community, I would choose something
to do in nature as well.
But if we're not going to do it, who is?
I mean, this is Red Wing 140 years ago.
What's Red Wing going to look like in the future?
We need to think and talk about a different trajectory than business as usual.
What about as individuals?
I have 50 of these for my students and I limited to like five or six here.
First of all, think for yourself, reject the consensus trance.
Make sure you're a critical thinker and test whether the reality matches what you think
it does.
Remember that the best things in life are free after our basic needs are met.
So we are incredibly focused on comparing ourselves to the Joneses.
When we finally catch up to Jones, we realize he's kind of a knucklehead and miserable.
We have to care about absolute wealth as opposed to relative wealth.
Go on periodic vision quest.
I went for a week hiking the Appalachian Trail with my brother.
It was really hard work, 10 hours a day.
I didn't have my phone.
I had some withdrawal symptoms, but I felt amazing after.
We need to unplug from technology.
Choose your tribe.
We're on this runaway train where the amoeba is shoveling fuel into the engine.
But meet at the dining car with people that share your values, your morals, your sense
of humor and that you enjoy hanging out with, who you are surrounded by as a major, major
influence on your outlook and what you do in life.
Do I first and beat the rush?
If you think about this energy and money reality that I've laid out, just like in Minnesota
and Wisconsin when you're looking in a snowstorm at two or three cars ahead of you to see the
brake lights in case something is happening, do the same thing.
Try to imagine what the likely trajectory might be in the next decade and make choices
accordingly.
Learn a physical skill.
A lot of my students have no physical skills at all.
They just think that their major is going to get them through life.
They can't grow or fix anything.
Not that I can really, but I'm good with the chainsaw and I grow potatoes.
As an individual, would you do appropriate investments of your time and resources and
money?
Finally, aspire to be net positive.
We have so many social shaming things like, oh, you eat that hamburger.
You shouldn't be a vegetarian or I can't believe you flew somewhere.
To minimize your extraneous energy use and to be a good environmental steward, that's
good hygiene.
But on a larger scale, you're just becoming a smaller part of a big problem.
So I teach my students to maximize your impact, not minimize it.
Try to make a difference at larger scales than your own life.
Educate and inspire others on new aspirations and values.
One of my favorite things to do in life in the morning is check my wildlife camera in
the backyard.
I don't see stuff like this often.
This was a few years ago.
I saw a bear and sometimes there are flying rabbits.
Like Cynthia said, I had a badger last year and I also had a fisher cat.
I was so excited.
This was a dopamine better than winning a stock market or a fantasy football contest or anything.
I was like, whoa, a fisher cat on our property.
We have to care about the creatures in our place because if we don't, who will?
And the steps are you first have to understand what's going on, which I hope I've given
a little bit of insight into.
Then you have to care because some people don't care.
Then you have to do.
And then you have to strategize on how to grow it and be more effective.
And then you have to do some more.
So we're alive at this amazing and perilous time.
It's not as perilous as some of our ancestors faced.
We are facing this super organism dynamic, but as individuals in small groups, we can
accomplish amazing things.
And my last advice is life is amazing.
Live it.
Try to do something beyond your own immediate comfort and self-interest.
We as a species live on a heliocentric world and we figured it out.
We evolved and we figured it out.
We're functioning as an energy-seeking mindless super organism and we figured it out.
I invite you all to play a role in our cultural evolution towards some new mitochondria after
growth that we have higher values towards something larger than our own self-interest
that respects the rest of the planet.
Thank you.
