What is the price of time?
We don't think about it much, but since we are biologically finite life creatures,
we do put a price on time and that is what we culturally refer to as an interest rate.
Joining me today is financial historian Edward Chancellor
to discuss his recent book called The Price of Time,
which is a history of interest rates, the 5,000 year up and down ride of interest rates and human
cultures, specifically the highest and lowest rates of interest ever in the last 40 years and
how low interest rates today have fueled what some could defend as the largest bubble in the
history of our species. Mr. Chancellor is a former Wall Street professional.
He writes for Reuters and The New York Times and other financial press publications, financial
times, and we had a wide-ranging discussion on finance, interest rates and the future. Please welcome Edward Chancellor.
Greetings Edward, welcome.
Nate, thanks for having me.
It is a pleasure. So in addition to some mutual friends, I think we have at least one other
thing in common. We were both on Wall Street in the early 90s. I don't know, you were at Lazard.
I don't know if that was in New York City, but I was at Salomon Brothers and Lehman Brothers in
the early 90s in New York. I was at Lazard, what was called Lazard Brothers in London.
Oh, in London. Okay, excellent. So you have written an incredibly impressive tome on the history of
interest rates and monetary systems called the price of time. And my work on biophysical economics,
how energy, money, growth, behavior of the environment fit together. Interest and exponential
compound interest is a really central part of it. So you are now a world-renowned scholar on this
topic and I hope we can spend the next hour or so taking a deep dive into humanity's history,
present and future on the concept of interest. So Albert Einstein referred to compound interest as
the eighth wonder of the world. Can you tell us what is the origin of interest?
Well, I'm going to correct you to start with by saying that Albert Einstein never actually
referred to interest. That was a comment, the interest being a wonder of the world,
that appeared in the mid-1920s in, I think, in a sort of American insurance advertisement,
perhaps in your neck of the woods, not Chicago or thereabouts. And like a lot of comments,
either ascribed to Einstein to Keynes or to, who's that, who's the old baseball player?
Mickey Mantle? Who has all this? Babe Ruth? No. Oh, Yogi Berra. Yogi Berra. Yogi Berra,
say, Yogi Berra, Einstein and Keynes. If there are any sort of loose quotes hanging around,
they normally get sort of distributed between one of those three people. But in that case,
anyhow, Einstein never said it. However, you know, compound interest is a wonder of the world,
a pretty terrifying concept to behold. And people have been worrying about the concept of compound
interest for millennia. We first find the notion of compound interest in
Mesopotamian credit activities. And there's even the word for, the Assyrian word for interest is
and the, which means the offspring of a goat, a kid goat. But and compound interest is mash, mash.
Say any word I can say in ancient Assyrian. Anyhow, and we see there was a dispute between
two territories in ancient Mesopotamia over some land, which one of the, one of the territories
claimed. And the other, the other territory then called Lagash demanded a back payment of rent
compounded over a long period of time at I think 33% a year. And the Lagash demanded of its neighbour
the equivalent of 8 trillion litres of barley, which is more several times more than the US
annual barley output. And you can see there the share in possibility of compound interest.
And then by the 18th century, a fellow, an English sort of philosopher's statistician called
Arthur Price made a calculation that if, I can't remember what it was, a sort of a
gold coin had accrued interest since the time of our saviour to 1770 or thereabouts,
that the size of the gold compounded would be twice the equivalent of twice the
weight of the earth or the volume of the earth. And that sort of critique of compound interest
finds its way into or the impossibility of compound interest finds its way into socialist
critiques of interest. So for instance, Karl Marx picked up Price's
piece on the impossibility of compounding. And as you're interested in energy
and economic productivity and finance, you're probably aware of Frederick
Soddy, the English Nobel Prize winner chemist who, I think you know better than I did,
he got a Nobel Prize for the discovery of radioactive isotopes or something. And yeah,
so Soddy got bored with chemistry and then became a sort of monetary crank in the 1920s.
And he wrote a book, I can't quite remember, it's called on the subject of what he called
virtual wealth. And there he also describes the absolute impossibility of compounding,
compounding in a world of finite resources. What you're thinking about is how
how economic productivity is linked to the energy that sustains life on earth. And now
in a world of limited resources, you can't have an infinite compounding.
So I have numerous reflections based on your initial comments. My first is I feel somewhat
intimidated that I have to really up my game on this podcast because of your articulate British
accent, it makes me want to be smarter for some reason. So it's wonderful listening to you.
My second thought is I wonder if positive interest is because we're biological creatures with finite
lifespans. And so there is, like the title of your book, a price of time. And bearing on what you
just said though, our cognitive brains can understand that exponential growth and compound
interest, like you said, the trillion leaders of barley and the virtual wealth that Soddy wrote
about is an impossibility. But that's like a long-term thing. At the same time, our actual
human steep discount rates that we care about the present more than the future wants stuff,
experiences, consumption now. So the infeasibility of perpetual growth and exponential interest
is someone else's problem, which is why we constantly recognize it and constantly kick
the can forward. What are your thoughts on that? Well, first of all, I think, as you say, we humans
do have prefer the present to the future and have a what's called a positive time preference.
And this actually works to our advantage economically and financially, namely that,
as I mentioned, as I take the title of my book, the price of time. If you put a price on time,
you will use time more efficiently. And that price of time is also price of risk. So you will
take your risk more efficiently. And that's true whether you're investing in financial
securities or whether you're actually engaging in actually sort of entrepreneurial activity.
So I think that that humans mortality and the positive time preference actually contributes
to our economic efficiency of using scarce resources. Well, as for the compounding of
interest, I think we have to take it with a pinch of salt. It's very easy for a mathematician
to create a simple formula and say, well, if this compounds over X number of years,
the amount of debt will be unpayable. And this is in a way the underlying thesis of Thomas
Piketty's capital in the 21st century, where he argues that if the rate of return is above the rate
of growth, you're going to get rising inequality, this sort of compounding of wealth in the hands
of a few. But it actually ignores the fact that, as we all know, most people have investments,
and if they're not Warren Buffett, they actually spend the money they receive. So there is actually
no compounding of wealth over an infinite period of time, but even over decades for,
as I say, everyone apart from the extraordinary perverse Warren Buffett, whose main pleasure
in life is to enjoy the compounding of his wealth by not spending it. But he's a one-off.
Why is interest important or even a critical component to a healthy economy or a capitalist
economy? You mentioned the efficiency of risk-taking. Could capitalism exist without interest?
What are your thoughts on that?
So I think, I'll take the question to sort of met a level first and then get more specific.
At a meta level, all our economic transactions take place across time, and we need something to guide
those transactions. Now, how are you going to balance your current savings with your
future consumption? How are you going to, if you have future consumption needs and you're
making investment, what will the return on that investment be relative to the consumption you
need to make in the future? If we have a certain amount of savings and a certain amount of demand
for those savings, what balances those two, the demand and supply of savings? At that level,
interest is necessary, and the Yale economic historian, Bill Gertzman,
he says that finance is like a time machine or a spaceship that travels across time,
and he then says that, and I think this is right, he says that the discovery of interest
is the most important discovery in the history of finance because it allows for inter-temporal
transactions, for transactions across time, and that is true for all societies,
not just for a capitalist society. Somewhere in my book, I cite an economic analysis of the
Soviet Union by a Hungarian economist whose name slips my mind at the moment, and he points out
that the fact that the Soviet Union didn't have an interest rate, and they had a central bank
that printed money and high levels of inflation, but they didn't have an interest rate to help
coordinate economic activities. They relied instead on the central planner, and the central
planner, as we know, well most of us know, the central planner will never have enough information
to coordinate all the information in an economy, and so you need, I mean it's common, everyone
I think understands that, and this is the critique of communism, is that they didn't have a price
of goods to allow for the supply and demand and for all the information contained within prices,
but at a financial level, the most important price of all, what Jim Grant, my friend, the
financial historian and journalist, calls the universal price, the most important price in the
system, in the financial system, is the interest rate, and I think that's true for all economies,
but I think it's specifically true of a capitalist economy. You can imagine, for instance, a
negrarian economy, a feudal economy, sort of trundling along, where someone is just
farming and perhaps paying their dues to the landlord in kind, not requiring that much
interest, although bear in mind, as I mentioned before, in the agrarian economies of ancient
Mesopotamia, they had interest, so that can't be a coincidence, but if we think of capitalism,
what does capitalism, what do we mean by capitalism? Well, it drives its name from
the word capital, and then we think, well, what is capital? Capital is anything, any object,
any, it doesn't even have to be an object, it can be a sort of service or it can be
something embedded in a piece of software, but anything that produces a stream of income
over a period of time in the future. Didn't the origin of the word capital
in your book you wrote, it came from cows or something like that?
Yeah, that's the Latin, yeah, caput, the head of cattle, and actually all these, the language for
money, pecuniary in Latin, capital comes from, capital of pecuniary is a, I think, flock of
geese, the ancient words for, I mentioned mash being a kid goat in Greek, the word for
interest is tokos, which is a calf, so there's a link if you're getting the picture, that the
productivity of capital is linked to interest. And I'd go back to what I was mentioning before,
that if you have an asset, whatever it is, that delivers a stream of income in the future,
you need to put a present value on that asset, because otherwise you can't buy it or sell it.
I mean, how would you price a share if you didn't have interest? Because if it had an
infinite stream of income, the share price without a discount rate would have an infinite
value, and it's the same true of a house, you couldn't have a housing market without a discount
rate applied to the future income. So with a meta big history arc, humans didn't need
interest rates before the agricultural revolution, because we didn't have possessions,
we were hunter-gatherers, but with the dawn of surplus and accumulating and storing surplus
and trading in order to keep track and make sense of our world, we had to have a price on time.
I think you're right that we obviously don't know what happens in a prehistoric period by
definition, but what we can once farming becomes settled, and once there is private property of
some sort, or at least property that people are laid, whether it's an official or an individual
farm that someone's laying claim to that property, if someone then wants to borrow that property,
and that property has the nature of being productive, then the lender is only going to
lend that property in return for an interest payment, or in other words, a share in the
profit. And they were, incidentally, I think I mentioned in the book, they were doing that
in the Midwest in the United States, up until the beginning of the 20th century, that people were
lending cattle and taking the cattle back plus a calf at some stage in the future, that was the
loan contract. So that type of agricultural loan contract with interest has been around for four
millennia or so. So I mentioned the role that interest pays in as a discount rate in the valuation
of assets, and that allows for financial markets and real estate markets and capital markets of
all sorts to take place. I also mentioned sort of in passing that interest influences the nature
of investment, real investment in the economy. So when we talk about, when you're making an
investment, you talk about a hurdle rate for the investment, or sometimes investors will think
about the payback period. What's my payback period? Well, the payback period embeds an interest in it,
and one of the arguments in my book is that having a higher payback period actually helps with the
allocation of capital from low return businesses to high return businesses. And that actually,
therefore, the interest rate or the existence of interest plays an important, you could,
might even say, fundamental role in Schumpeter's notion of creative destruction. And within that
is a sort of, you know, notion of sort of survival of the fittest and bearing in mind that as the
interest rate, when it becomes a hurdle rate, it will influence, you know, the type of investment
activities people make. And if they make, it's all well and good to make investments with very
long dated returns. But at a certain point, you will, you are likely to be misallocating capital
and to be wasting money. And I think that's, you know, we're already seeing evidence of that,
you know, in Silicon Valley, which was absolutely sort of inundated with capital
in the last decade, at the time when interest rates were zero, and investors, you know, were
crying out for potentially high return investments, and the money went to Silicon Valley, and some of
it was probably well spent, but a great deal of it was wasted in sort of pie in the sky scheme. So,
I think that's another, you know, absolutely vital function of interest for the capitalist system.
Let me read you a quote from your book, where you are quoting 19th century economist Irving Fischer.
Nature is, to a great extent, reproductive. Growing crops and animals often make it possible to
endow the future more richly than the present. Man can obtain from the forest or the farm more
by waiting than by premature cutting of trees or exhausting the soil. In other words, nature's
productivity has a strong tendency to keep up the rate of interest. That makes sense to me
in a pre-industrial sense, but now we are basing a financial and economic system not only on the
interest that we get from the hydrological flows of the sun and the soil and the rain,
but also the mining of non-renewable resources that we're depleting 10 million times faster than
they were trickle-charged by daily photosynthesis in the form of coal, oil, natural gas, copper,
other things. So how do you see that disconnect of our monetary system is treating these non-renewable
resources kind of as if they were interest when they really were drawing down capital?
You know, that's the point that my old boss, Jeremy Grantham, at GMA, often makes.
I didn't know you knew him. I'm a big follower of his writings.
Right. And I worked with Jeremy in the asset allocation division. And Jeremy, you're probably
also keen on Kenneth Bolting, the economist. Jeremy likes the way it refers to sort of spaceship
earth. How can you think of having infinite growth in the world?
On a finite planet. You're either a madman or an economist.
Exactly. Now, my, so I...
Yes, yes. Edward, I'm one of those guys, but go on.
In principle, a low interest rate should be associated with a longer dated view
of the future. If you think about sort of time preference, it's sort of lack of impatience.
And in that case, then perhaps a low interest rate would be associated with sort of
allocating resources in a more sustainable way. However, one also then has to look at the evidence
of the world around you and say that the low interest rate of recent years actually doesn't
appear to be associated with, you know, long sightedness, but actually sort of extreme
myopia. And I cite, and I think the best example of that is actually China, which I cite in the
book that, you know, the, you'll know this better than I do, but am I right in saying that sort of
something like half of man made carbon emissions have taken a place since
the mid 1990s. And the great... That's correct.
You know, bulk, bulk, great bulk of the increase has come from China and China
has had, you know, to my mind, you know, the greatest real estate boom in history. I mean,
the valuation of Chinese real estate relative to GDP looks, you can't, you can't really tell
because the Chinese need list to say won't give you inaccurate data. But it looks to be
roughly on par valuation wise with the Japanese real estate bubble economy of the 1980s. But then,
you know, as your, you know, but that has been accompanied by an extraordinary building of
of residential real estate and also of infrastructure and funded with debt at very low
rates of interest. So I mentioned in passing in the book that actually the environmental
catastrophe that China itself has unleashed in the last 20 odd years has been encouraged by these
extraordinary low rates of interest. Otherwise, at higher rates of interest, you wouldn't have had
the credit growth and you wouldn't have had the investment boom. And bear in mind, you know,
China's investment was running at, you know, roughly 50% of GDP. The Chinese cement consumption,
as you know, cement is very sort of to production, conventional production of cement
is very polluting. And yet, you know, Chinese cement consumption per capita was, you know,
over a ton per capita, roughly on par with where the Spanish got to when they had their
crazy real estate boom prior to the global financial crisis. But in Spain, had a population of
30 odd million, and China's population was 1.3 billion. So, you know, that was a lot more
cement and a lot more emissions. So here, this is our first conversation, Edward. So you don't
know a lot about my views, but here's here's my meta view on finance, bringing back to what you
just said. There's something in ecology you mentioned before we hit record that you're
studying some of the things of Howard Odom. Howard Odom had a theory on the fourth law of
thermodynamics, which he called the maximum power principle, which states that organisms and ecosystems
in nature self-organize so as to better degrade an energy gradient. In other words, energy is the
currency of life. And it is true that in nature, a tree will grow the right amount of leaves, not
to be the most efficient or not to grow the most amount of leaves, but to have the right amount
to access the amount of sunlight with all the shadings and everything else. I would argue that
finance is a tool that humans use as a social contract to increase our cultural metabolism
to access energy in the same way that a tree grows the same amount of oak leaves. So just
hypothetically, let's say that 50 years ago, debt was not introduced in a massive way globally.
And for whatever reason, we humans had no access to debt. Then as resources became
more difficult to extract, we would have had to tighten our belts, we would have had to conserve
and innovate with higher resource prices. But instead, we went a different route. We used finance
as a way to turbocharge the size of our economies, our cement production, the whole thing. And as
you said, a long dated view of humanity and sustainability would have a higher interest
rate, which would have acted as a dampening feedback on our consumption and growth. But
in order to keep the mouths fed and in keep our consumption going, we did the opposite. We had
very, very low interest rates. As you write about in your book, this might be arguably the biggest
bubble in the history of our species, because of what central banks have done. That was a
mouthful. Do you have any reaction to that? Yeah. Well, I mean, when you mention the
Howard-Odoms idea, sort of ecosystem, extracting, arranged to extract energy, and how a tree grows
to an optimal height with resource limitations and gathering energy work from its leaves and so
forth. Immediately, it reminded me, as I mentioned in the book, I don't know when, you know, you
must have been to, you must go through New York from time to time, you see these little skinny
towers and these skinny towers that sort of almost touching the sky, these tiny little
needles for billionaires, and they strike me as being a tree that has grown too tall.
We think, I went to talk about the misallocation of capital in recent years, in VC. I mean,
imagine that we, on the one hand, people worry about CO2 emissions. On the next hand,
we venture capital funding space travel. I mean, space tourism. It doesn't really
make much sense. I'd go back to China and see that China becomes a sort of wasteland,
as large parts are given over to building, and then discharges go into the sea,
creating these sort of dead zones there. And I, as I said, and bear in mind, actually,
it now occurs to me that we talked earlier about Soviet Union, as you know, Soviet Union was the
worst as far as I understand, the worst polluter of all time. And I'm not saying that the absence
of interest in the Soviet Union was directly related. Oh, yes, probably not worse in terms
of emissions, but worse in terms of just degrading your environment. I mean, from what one reads,
pools of crude oil lying around. And if the interest encourages scarcity and prudent use
of resources, and then actually a higher interest will actually encourage and, you know,
will get you closer or a higher interest will get you closer to a more efficient extraction
of, you know, economic output for the unit of energy. I mean, that's an idea. Can I say,
Nate, there's one idea that I'm going to be interesting to hear your thoughts. I haven't
really embedded it. I haven't put it in the book, which is namely this, if you, if one buys the sort
Howard Odom view that, that, you know, all economic activity, you know, all economic growth,
all economic activity results from transfers of energy and extraction and use of energy.
And, you know, we can clearly see that, you know, over the sort of last 300 years, it shift from,
you know, what sort of coal fired industrial revolution in Britain, and then, you know, then
oil and natural gas to the current day. We're now moving, regardless of, even if you don't,
even if carbon emissions are not your primary concern, there is a scarcity to those natural
resources, in particular to oil. And oil becomes more and more expensive over time to extract,
you know, the, you can no longer just, you know, stick a rig in the, you know, in Texas or in
Saudi and pull it out at almost no marginal cost. And so that, if you take that view, then actually
you could argue that the trend global trend rate of economic growth in the economy is naturally
declining. And, and if that's the case, and if this is sort of big if, if the interest rate
were connected to the rate of economic activity, which is sort of some argument, I'm sort of
come, I'm half warmed to that argument in my book, then you could say that this is an underlying
that the rising cost of energy extraction, or declining energy return on investment,
actually would be linked to a decline in interest rates. I didn't, I didn't actually
put that in my book. Partly, I think, because I came to the whole Howard Odom thing just as I was
coming to the end of the book, and I didn't seem to be able, I didn't know I could integrate it.
But I think it's an interesting thought. I might be curious to hear your thoughts on it,
on that subject. I have a lot of thoughts on that. I think, I think you're right
that we are kicking the can of, okay, so productivity, in my opinion, is a function
of innovation and technology combined with the massive energy surplus we get from fossil
fuels, which the math of it works out to 500 billion human labor equivalents per year,
relative to five billion real humans, and the mineral contributions. And we've taken those
latter two things for granted because we've always had more and it's generally been cheaper.
But productivity growth peaked 50 years ago at exactly the early 70s when
also oil production growth peaked. We still have positive productivity growth. It's growing
every year, but it's growing at a declining amount. And what we're doing is we're trying to keep all
the demographics and the various aspects of society fed and happy and stabilized by stimulus
checks, by artificially low interest rates, by too big to fail guarantees. And so paradoxically,
at a time when we should be getting biophysical signals of inflation and higher interest cost,
because resources are getting more scarce, we are not willing culturally or politically to
admit that. So we're doing the opposite, kind of like we're solving a credit crisis with more
credit sort of story. And we're reducing interest rates and guaranteeing other things and not allowing
what you referred to early as the creative destruction and in doing so building a bigger bubble.
Yeah. Now, I will think back to how the Europeans responded to Russia's invasion of Ukraine last
year. Natural gas prices went through the roof. All these governments that are putatively committed
to net zero 2050, or at least they say so. And yet the moment gas prices started to rise, and I'm
talking about natural gas prices for a home meeting, started to rise in Europe, the governments then
availed themselves of very cheap borrowing. And this was when the central banks hadn't really
given up their quantitative easing projects or at least were right at the end of the
quantitative easings. And the cost of government debt remained very low. And the government were
just going out and borrowing to subsidize not new energy production, but actually just to
subsidize consumption as it stands. And that seemed to me, well, I mean, I can sympathize
if a person has trouble heating their home. But for a societal basis, you know, I got the
subsidy, I didn't need it. It didn't make any sense at all. And actually, of course, what does it do?
It prevents you from actually economizing in your energy use. There's another interesting,
I mean, you probably picked this up, and I probably mentioned it in passing in the book,
but the very low interest rates, as you know, encouraged a lot of venture, a lot of venture
capital or V or high yield investment in high yield debt investment into these US fracking and the
shale. And that those were, and perhaps you have a different view, but it seemed to me that those
were businesses that didn't actually generate the amount of return required to keep them in business,
which is why firms like Chesapeake went bust. But they did, in the near term, give you a little
boost of extra oil production at an uneconomic cost that kept people that kept a lid on oil
prices in the near term. Yeah, I totally agree. It's so interesting to unpack this in real time
with you because we don't know each other. And I didn't know that you knew about the term energy
return on investment. I wrote my PhD on that topic, you know, 15 years ago. So in the beginning of
your book... By the way, Nate, I did a podcast the other day with this guy called Paul Chapman.
Does that mean anything to you? So he does podcasts about commodities and so on. He was,
anyhow, he's been pursuing that sort of interviewing people on this sort of E-Roy.
Well, don't get me started on E-Roy. I think it is a fantastic concept,
conceptually, that we can create money, but we can't create energy. And the energy has a cost
in biophysical terms, not in dollar terms. But to try and make decisions on it and use it as a
fine laser digit that a 10 to 1 E-Roy is better than an 8 to 1, it's fraught with peril in my
experience. Because a lot of judgment goes into the comparative estimations.
Into the boundaries that you use on defining things, yes.
Yeah, so, because I hear there is a lot of debate, isn't there, going on between
what's the E-Roy of wind, you know, onshore wind, offshore wind, solar panels versus the E-Roy of
your conventional... And I think, depending on which way you lead, you can come up with...
Give me the E-Roy you're looking for, or is that unfair?
Exactly, that's exactly right. But here's why it's important is because our society
and our institutions and our cultural stories and our expectations were built on something
like a 20 to 1 E-Roy or higher in aggregate. So, friends of mine who are experts in this,
think that the inflation rate setting aside central banks for the moment, the inflation
rate of a society should be 1 over the E-Roy. So, if the E-Roy is 20, then inflation should
be 5% a year. And as E-Roy declines from 20 to 15 or down to 10, the inflation will go up because
there is harder access to get copper and oil and things like that. Of course, that's not what
happens in reality because by decree, central banks declare what the interest rates are.
So, that is the huge gauntlet that I think we're facing now, the biophysical gauntlet
of energy and resources are telling us one thing and interest rates and money are telling us
another thing and we're headed for a giant reckoning between those.
Now, I mean, I might say, I mean, a couple of thoughts. One is something I took away from Odeon
where he talks of inflation, if you remember, being the decline in the value of money relative
to a unit of energy. So, I suppose because if you think about it, money allows you to
because it can be translated into things that produce energy, it actually allows you to sort
of transfer energy. So, I can see if you have too much money relative to a declining E-Roy
or a declining source of surplus, then you'll get to get inflation. The other thought, I think,
why I said earlier, I only give a sort of qualified approval to the notion that
interest is linked to economic productivity because you see in the ancient world,
and this is pointed out in the great book by Sidney Homer and Dick Silla called History of
Interest Rates, which goes back to the same time period as my book, back to Mesopotamia.
What they describe is these sort of U-shaped, did you pick that up in the book? I think I
included a chart in my book from Homer and Silla. You shaped interest rates over time. So,
whether it's in Mesopotamia, in Greece, or in Rome, that each time civilization goes into decline,
as it reaches a late stage, interest rates are very low, and as the civilization starts to decline,
then interest rates start going through the roof. You could see that would make sense
because as a society is relaxing you. Could it be because of the lack of trust suddenly?
What is the role of trust in interest rates? It could also be greater risk. It also could be to
do with, and the risk might also include debasement of the currencies or inflation that tends to take
place as societies collapse. It could also be linked to the scarcity of resources. In fact,
on the one hand, you might say that the interest rate is linked to our productivity,
but also it's linked to the scarcity of resources. If you have a society that's collapsing,
then resources become more scarce. If you want to borrow my sheep or if you want some grain from me
to carry on and find me, I'm going to charge you more because it's no longer as abundant
as it was before. I now have to pay you about triple mash, mash, mash, mash. Yes, something like that.
So that's not a good foreboding, Edward, that you said that historically there are U-shaped
interest rates, and right at the time of civilization upheaval, interest rates are very low.
What does the concept of massive, a few years ago, massive up to $16 or $17 trillion worth of
negative interest rates in Europe? That's no longer the case now, but under what biophysical
scenario, does a negative interest rate make sense other than speculation and the momentum of
central bank's past decisions? Well, I mean, if interest is the price of time,
a negative interest is putting a negative price on time. It's turning the clock backwards,
and so you had, you know, in Europe, you had a sort of Alice in Wonderland world. I mentioned
so, you know, that you could actually buy 30-year, let's say, Swiss government bonds with negative
yields in the expectation of capital gains because rates were still continuing to go bad. You were
buying negative yielding bonds for capital gains and holding conventional stocks for income. I mean,
how crazy does that sound? No one caring about yields any longer. The fact that in Europe,
not only were companies able to, normal companies able to borrow negative rates, junk bond rated
companies borrowed a negative rates. So there was no pricing of risk, and there is another,
I mean, this is linked to the negative rates, but a point that Bill Gross, your ex-Pimke, the so
called the old bomb king, made. He said, you know, he said, he said, he was saying, you know,
roughly 10, 12 years ago, these very low rates don't make any sense at all because a healthy
banking system needs positive carry. And by getting rid of the positive carry in the banking system,
and in the financial system at all, or at least putting the carry down to very low levels in
which someone's taking on a huge amount of duration risk or interest rate risk by buying a long dated
bond, you're building up a huge amount of risk in the system. So I think, you know, I think that
these negative rates and the ultra low rates are, to my mind, their end product was the sort of the
COVID market mania of 2020 to 2021, which Warren Buffett's sidekick Charlie Munger said was
the craziest financial markets in all of history. I don't know how much history Charlie Munger
is, he's been around for a while. But I mean, I think that's, you know, I've read quite a lot of
financial history. And I can't think of any markets in aggregate that were quite as crazy
as what we saw in the last, you know, ending at the beginning of last year.
Well, you stay tuned for 2024 and 2025. So in your book, you have a chart at the very beginning,
I don't know that the screen can see this, but we'll share it, that shows 5,000 years of interest
rates. And with the exception of the very beginning, which is 3000 BC, the highest and the lowest
interest rates have been in the last 40 years. What is up with that?
At the highest would have been, I think, I mean, the two, two, several countries compete for highest
rates. I think Germany had very high rates right at the end of its hyperinflation. I think that
Brazil and Argentina in their hyperinflations, they had very high rates. So clearly, and now,
you're not going to get a hyperinflation without a paper currency. And so clearly, the very high
rates are linked to the arrival of fiat currencies and high inflations. And then the very low rates
also linked to the fiat currencies in that once you move into a world of fiat currencies,
then the central banks have a much greater say, determinant of what the interest can be.
There's no, there's no, I mean, they used to talk about the so-called zero lower bound as if
and then they discovered actually, hey, we can take interest rates before below zero. So you would
never have it in a world in which, you know, the units of money were restricted by some hard rules,
such as under the gold standard, you're going to have much more restricted movements in interest.
And in fact, under the gold standard, what you see interestingly is you had very stable long-term
rates and very volatile short-term rates. And the volatility of the short-term rates
was necessary in order for the central bank to make sure that it kept enough gold bullion
in its reserves to cover its note issuance. Now, once you move into the fiat money era,
we get the sort of opposite, we get more stable short-term rates because, you know,
central bankers don't like, they don't like, you know, economic downturns or whatever,
but the net result is much more volatile long-term rates. And so again, that's not, you know,
particularly comforting for it, because if in the 20th century, we saw the lowest interest
rates ever and the highest, and the 21st century, we've seen the lowest in history.
So the question then would be, do you then make a step, you know, at some stage to even higher
than we've seen in before? I don't know. So you also wrote a very popular financial book called
Devil Take the Hide Most, which was about historical financial manias. Let me ask you this, Edward.
At all of these historical financial manias, people in power were delusional about the risk.
Either they were delusional or they were helpless to the momentum of what was going on in the day.
How is this time any different? I mean, you look at the Bank of Japan now has bought 50%
of the government of Japan's government bonds. I mean, how big of a bubble are we in?
And how disconnected from reality are the central bankers and the people in charge?
Or are they cognizant of the risks that we're discussing, but they're just powerless to avoid
turning the heat on for people and getting food delivered, etc.?
Well, I mean, to go back to the historical manias, as I point out in Devil Take the Hide Most,
it's not just that the manias tended to take place with the active connivance
of the political authorities, who were often sharing in the games. The classic case was the
South Sea bubble in which it took place in Britain in 1720, which the company, which was
run by these crooked people, the sort of Sam Bankman freeds of its day. They actually just
bribed members of parliament. They bribed the King of England in order to get their scheme
off the ground right through. And you see that right through to the Japan's bubble economy in
which politicians are involved. I think in the recent years, I think the very low interest rates
and the sort of illusory wealth that they've created, the virtual wealth, suits the politicians
absolutely fine because the politicians have extremely short time horizons, whatever they say.
So actually, the very low interest rates help, as we used to say, kick the can of various problems
down the road. If you have incipient pension problems, if you have a society with inadequate
savings, then the easiest way to deal with the inadequate savings is to inflate the assets of
what saving has taken place, which what's happened in America. I didn't mention it in the book,
but I did crunch the numbers a few years back. And what you find is that in the U.S., a U.S.
household wealth, as measured by the Fed, used to move in line with U.S. net savings, sort of
would make sense. You save and it becomes a piece of wealth. But then over the last 30,
40 years, it's diverged. So we have the less we save, the more the interest rates went down,
and the more actually the valuation of what assets we had rose. So in fact, you had an
inverse relationship between wealth and savings. To me, almost a definition of a bubble.
And that suits the politicians very well. Do the central bankers understand it? I don't think,
I think their problem is cognitive. I think that they just, they have models that don't describe
the world. And they have, I think, I suppose my view and my background is a historian before
going into banking and investment. But my view is that the central bank, as many of
whom are sort of drawn from ranks of sort of physicists and mathematicians, have no real
understanding of actually what an economy or a financial system is. It's sort of,
their understanding is limited to models that do not, in any way, describe the nature of the
complex economic system that we have. And that would explain why, I think they know the last
30 years, I mean, look at the epic mistakes the central banks made. They didn't see or understand
that the dot-com bubble, they didn't understand the credit boom at all. They just said, hey,
with the dot-com bubble, they said, we live in a world of efficient markets. Who are we to say
that this is a bubble? With the credit bubble, they said, oh, well, one person's debt is another
person's asset. Hey, who cares whether, you know, debts and assets are rising in tandem? Give me,
you know, and then when you've got the low interest rates, they said, oh, well, these are to do with,
you know, declining population or something in the real world. We've got nothing to do with that.
I mean, you know, even as they were actually going about deliberately manipulating short and
long-term rates to levels that had never been seen before, then you get to the position, I mean,
as I'm ranting now, but then you get a position of the inflation, which they unleash, where once
again, they fail to see it and fail to, and fail to constantly fail to acknowledge their
responsibility for. So, I mean, I think that the central bankers as a community as a whole
are, you know, exhibit sort of group think and a failure to actually analyze in a modest way,
recognizing, you know, one's own, you know, one's own with humility, the complex nature of the system
and the impact that their actions are having on this complex system.
I fully agree with that, but it's almost too late in the game, because if they really did
understand the risks, I think, well, I mean, what is the way out? We're being squeezed by both
directions here by energy and resource depletion, by geopolitics, by declining real productivity,
and look at what happened with the Fed raises in the last 12 months, all of the bonds on bank
portfolios, you know, they have paper losses on those things, especially in Europe, if they own
negative yielding debt. In 2011, Edward, I met with one of the voting members at the time of
the FOMC talking about these things, and he said, we have models that look at 2% growth in the future,
and then we have quarter percent variations up and down from that. And I said, well, what if
growth in the future is zero? I didn't even say negative, I just said zero. And he had like this
blank stare, and he's like, well, that would be bad. So, I think they just implicitly assume
that the animal spirits of productivity and human ingenuity will eventually continue to grow,
and if we grow, we can pay back our debts and things like that. So, I personally have come to
the conclusion, which is one of the reasons I liked your book so much, I do think we're living
in the greatest bubble of our history, and we are making the bubble bigger by not acknowledging the
bubble. Do you agree with me? What do you think? Yeah, I mean, so, that's part of, you know,
go back to what I was saying earlier about the interest as a discount rate. Well, you know,
if you take the discount rate down to its lowest level ever, you're going to inflate
the valuations, and what we got was a so-called everything bubble, a bubble in everything,
and you can see that, you know, going back to what I was mentioning before, the Fed's U.S.
household wealth and U.S. household net wealth is far above its long-term average, I think,
sort of, I'm saying off the top of my head, around 150% of GDP above its long-term average,
and that bubble in wealth seems to, as I mentioned earlier, seems to be inversely
related to the decline in interest rates. And in fact, every time the central banks
have met a crisis, whether dot-com or Lehman, so each time, as you know, they take an interest
rates down to a lower level, and we've had a bigger bubble following it. And I think now,
yes, we're at the highest level of net wealth. I looked at the recent data published for this year,
and that's come off, you know, really hardly at all, despite the big sell-off in the markets last
year. So if you're going to get mean reversion, I'm not saying you will, but if you're going to get
mean reversion, then you've got a lot more wealth to evaporate. And as I say in the book,
a definition of a bubble economy is an economy that is dependent on the bubble. And so, because
all these income streams are related to the bubble. You and I worked in finance, obviously,
our incomes at the time were dependent on how much, you know, market activity was going,
you know, how much financial market activity in investment banking or what the valuations
markets were. So if you're in finance, which in the US and UK have grown to much higher levels
of national income than in the past, your income is a derivative of the bubble valuation.
So, and then when you end the bubble, you have to have a massive reallocation of resources. It's
probably a good thing, but it, you know, it doesn't take place overnight. And it's not
very easy. And there are obviously huge amounts of vested interests in keeping the bubble
inflated as long as possible. So the last big bubble that burst was the
1929 to mid-30s credit collapse in the US and in Europe. But after that, we had 40 or 50 years of
growing oil production still ahead of us. This bubble, that is not the case with resources. So
how do you see this all unfolding, either in the short term with the Silicon Valley Credit
current banking crisis or this decade with this larger bubble? Are we going to have hyper
inflation or deflation? Will we switch from a 2009 situation of a too big to fail and find that
we're going to be in a situation of too big to save, like France or Japan or something like that?
What are your speculations on all that?
Well, first of all, you know, the thesis of the book was that these ultra low rates
had gotten to all the cracks of the financial system and of the economy and that therefore
the system would be extremely resilient, so seemingly fragile or non-resilient
to any interest rate rises. And that's what we've seen over the last year. The market's selling off
and then we had the UK pension funds almost going bust and then we had the cryptos. I mean,
I know it's a sort of laughable sideshow, but you have the crypto winter and then more seriously,
you have the problems in the regional banks with Silicon Valley Bank going under. And as I
point out to in the book, the ultra low rates created a huge amount of duration risk or asset
sensitivity, you know, that market sensitivity to changes in interest rates. And in a way,
all the problems we've seen to date are linked to this duration risk or interest rate risk.
And I think slowly, you know, the policymaking world, which appeared to have been oblivious,
as you know, in the investment world, people have been talking about this for years.
But I noticed this week, you know, the IMF chief said, you know, oh, the world faces,
central banks should go, should be careful what they do. There are a lot of risks out there.
There's a lot of interest rate risk. So that's one point is I would expect if the central banks
continue raising, you will uncover more problems in more different areas. And you won't necessarily
know where they are. But you know, my my view is, you know, it's not my job to analyze the entire
world, but to give people a framework to start analyzing their own areas. I think the one of
the problems ago, that once you realize that that the question of the sensitivity of the system to
interest rate hikes, which is an inherently deflationary impact, is that the central banks
will then become reluctant to tighten or they've lost, they're not, and I think they already are,
they won't admit it. But you can see that, you know, that the interest rates are massively negative
in real terms have been over the last couple of years. And if you can't use the interest rate
lever to control inflation, and let's just assume that, you know, governments will continue to be
fiscally profligate, then you're going to then you're actually in danger of having
much stronger inflation. And then there's another problem to think about, which is that
the central banks, they're not just have an incentive to keep interest rates low, but they're
already going back to use their balance sheets to support tottering financial institutions. So
the Bank of England came out to, you know, to help to step into the UK Guilts market to buy
Guilts when the pension funds were going bust. Then, you know, now the, you know, the Fed is
offering, I mean, offering this financing to US banking, whereby they're taking the collateral
at, I think they're taking it a par value rather than a market pricey, I can hand over to you
$80 million a market price of collateral and get $100 million back from the Fed. So the Fed is
then taking on more central banks are taking on potentially more security risks on their portfolios
at a time when they're already losing money on their portfolios.
This is what I meant by too big to save is the central banks of the world are acting kind of
like leveraged bond funds in cahoots with the governments that they're associated with. But
how does that end? Well, I mean, so people are very blithe about central banks not having negative
equity. The Reserve Bank of Australia has already announced that its equity has formally been wiped
out. The Bank of England, which has an indemnity from the UK Treasury for its asset purchases,
its quantitative easing asset purchase, it recently sent to Her Majesty's Treasury a note saying,
well, if we were to run off our securities under such a scenario, we may have losses of 200 billion
pounds, which we expect to be indemnified for. Well, that's actually quite a lot of money. I
mean, it's roughly, it's not quite as much as the government spent on the COVID policies,
but it's in that region. So either you get a situation where as far as I see it,
the central banks just invert e-commerce, print money to all operate with negative equity.
But there's a situation where if they're printing the money to make good their shortfall, then
that would seem to me inflationary. Or the taxpayer has to make good, which actually would
be hugely painful. And the one other point I make, Nate, is that over the last, I mentioned to you
these very ever lower rates to keep the bubble afloat over a 30-year period from the dot-com
bust, you know, well, really from the LTCM hedge fund bust in the early fall of 1998.
Each time rates have been brought lower, got a bubble, then we brought it lower. So the bubble
requires ever lower interest rates. It is not just enough to say, okay, we're not going to be as high
as we would have been. We're going to have to have lower interest rates because you have to
inflate the bubble to give people the wealth that their savings and the returns on those
investments won't have. The economy is entirely in the bubble economy. It's hooked on capital gains.
And you can only produce those capital gains by ever losing some monetary policy. Now,
I don't think that, so I think that, I think I don't know exactly what's going to happen next,
but I don't think over the next five years, you know, it's going to be smooth sailing for sure.
Well, yeah. So one other point that we didn't talk about, well, there's a lot of points we didn't
talk about, but if you look at the increased duration risk because of the raising of interest
rates, that's a problem, right? For the viability of the financial system, but also the amount of
government debt, like the United States is now over 32 trillion in debt, and that's fine if we're
paying 1% interest, but if we pay 5% or 7% some historical average interest rate, we're going
to be paying so much of our annual income on debt service that it will be untenable. So that's
another reason that we want to have low interest rates. But let me ask you this. I agree with you.
I think we will, the default path is we will quote unquote print money to kick the can further.
You're a financial historian. Are there any examples in history that come to mind
of a similar tenor where people got austerity and realized this and instead of printing money,
they actually took the economic pain, had the creative destruction go on, and then they came
through that and had some other options? Or does it always end with print until something
implodes in the culture? I was thinking, actually, I'm reviewing a new book on inflation. I was
thinking about when does inflation come about and when does it not? Actually, it's curious,
so for instance, in the US during the Civil War period, the Union was issuing these green backs,
green backs were depreciated in value. But then after the war, they actually retired the green
backs at their old power value. So in other words, the Washington actually decided to make good on
on the dollar. Now, it's also true after the in the Napoleonic Wars, Britain ran up a huge amount
of debt to fight Napoleon, and the gold conversion of banknotes was suspended. And after war,
they actually brought back the banknotes to par with gold and restored convertibility.
After the First World War, Britain, actually, again, having gone off the gold standard,
did actually go back onto the gold standard at its old power, admittedly creating quite
deep problems. And I'm thinking, okay, so that's one set of problems where in cases where these
countries actually didn't go down the sort of default or the inflation route. But then the
other cases after the First World War, you had hyperinflations in Austria, in Hungary, in Germany.
And so what's the difference? It's like the victors, the victors actually can hold on to their
currencies and will actually make great efforts. And whereas the demoralized
countries that have been defeated, whose societies are fractured, and whose economies are weak,
are more likely to take the inflationary route or even the hyperinflation. So you have to,
I mean, we're not fighting a war, but you have to think, are we a winner? Or are we a loser?
I would argue that we are fighting a war. We are fighting a war right now. I mean, we're making
the biophysical phase shift from both from a unipolar to a multipolar world, with Russia and
China and others having a say. And also, I think the Ukraine war was kind of a shot across the bow
from the narrative of money and technology, our powering society to resources, particularly
energy, are really important. Russia and Saudi Arabia together account for 45% of world oil
exports, that oil that's available for purchase. And so I do think that war and geopolitics are
also part of this story that you're telling. So from a monetary perspective, given all of your
readings of history, what sort of broad guidelines, I'm not asking for an antidote to the current
bubble, because that would be too large of a question, but what sort of broad guidelines might
you offer from a historian's perspective on a more durable, stable monetary system in the future?
Well, I'm glad you didn't ask me how we would get out of this current
impasse, because I think that's... That's too big of a question, I know.
Yeah, yeah. But I'm thinking, I have been thinking, I think we need a new type of
monetary unit. I mean, I'm not saying go back to the gold standard, but this,
you know, this fiat currency that we've been playing around with, you know, for the last
50 years since the collapse of Bretton Woods, it's associated with, you know,
initially a period of very high inflation, and then these series of asset price bubbles and
financial crises. And I think we need to move... And as I mentioned, as we constantly talked about,
it's also associated with us handing to a committee of people at the central banks
the power or control over the most important price in the economy, the price of time, the
interest rate. And we can laugh at the, you know, ridicule or pull our hair out at what the central
bank has done. But, you know, no individual, they've been handed an impossible task.
And so I think we have to, at some stage, get back to a world in which a monetary unit that
cannot just be increased at will, whether by a central bank or a commercial bank.
And we probably need to deal with the leverage of a fractional reserve banking system, which,
you know, really, you know, from, well, from, I don't know, from time immemorial fractional reserve
banking has its own, has its own, you know, weaknesses that you have too much leverage and
you have an asset liability mismatch, which is what happened to Silicon Valley Bank. And the
answer, you know, we can design a financial system that in which, you know, the banks
actually don't take leverage that your deposits are not levered into long dated loans. And I think
we'll, I think we'll have to go down that system once we've got rid of the current mess. And there
is a future in that for, for fintech, if you want, there is a future in that for, for banks going,
you know, much closer, you know, closer to what's called the Chicago model, where they
simply own short dated government debt to cover their, their liabilities. And then the, you know,
credit activities can take place out of the banking system and not to be, but in which the
losses are, you know, are contained. And in which in such a world, if you limit the, the growth
of the core money, you should then get an interest rate, which more closely matches the savings,
the actual savings and actual demand for savings in an economy. And therefore the, you know, I
didn't, I didn't know if there is such a thing as a natural rate, but you can see that there is a rate
of interest, which isn't that manipulated. If you went back to a world, so to speak, where, where
the currency is hard in a way it isn't today. I agree with that. And it's an incredibly complex
question. I wrote a paper like 10 years ago that referenced the annual interest of forests
that grow is 2.8% to the volume of the forest grow at 2.8% a year. That's what can be sustainably.
I'd like to see that. I'd like to see that. I'd like to see that paper. I mentioned, didn't I,
that Karl Marx sort of teases, refers to the tree theory of interest. For there was a German,
is he called art, A-I-N-D or something like that, a German economist of the 19th century who, who
said, you know, he said the interest arrives from nature and is linked to the annual growth rate
of trees. But we're subsidizing that with all kinds of things that are one time endowments.
I refer to it as the carbon pulse, which is now, you know, starting to very soon to decline,
still very, very powerful. And the amount of wealth that we get from that dwarfs the 2.8%
interest on forest growth. So I agree with you that in the future, there's got to be some,
there's two questions. How do we navigate the current bubble without destroying society? That
is its own problem. And then what is a more sustainable monetary system for future humans?
And I think that that second question, there has to be some biophysical tether to land,
land productivity, energy, something, because to run the world kind of like a casino or a
leverage bond fund. And when you get in trouble, you double down and leverage more is, is a recipe
for disaster. Yeah, I think the Hayek, the Austrian economist, and actually I think
Ben Graham, the securities analyst, they both, you probably know this, they both,
as far as I can remember, suggested a currency reform in the 1930s of a commodity based currency.
And I mean, as for having land as a basis for a banking system, that was actually the original
idea of John Law, who adapted it slightly to create the Mississippi bubble. So the trouble is,
if you create credit, if you create credit on land, then you actually can have a sort of,
you've created a perfect bubble machine. So you had to be quite, you had to be careful of what
sort of limitations. Well, let me ask this then, forget about all the, the details,
is the creation of bubbles itself part of our human genome?
Possibly. I think we would, I think we would probably have bubbles if it weren't for monetary
excess, because, you know, people can get excited about things. And because, particularly, you
know, new technologies have first mover advantages that, and, and excess returns, you know, like
Microsoft did in the 80s and 90s, they've got the whole sort of tech bubble and .com boom going.
So I think, and that's not necessarily a bad thing, sort of, in which you have a period in which
people are thrashing around for what are all the mid-read opportunities available to us.
I think the trouble is that when it's underwritten by an easy money policy, it goes way too far.
And, and then, you know, what we've done the last 25 years or so is we sort of, I'm just repeating
myself, but, you know, we pushed ourselves further and further off course. So I think that having,
you know, Silicon Valley come up with some ideas and, you know, it doesn't really matter if nine
out of ten ideas fail, if one idea is good one. But if you have too much money going to Silicon
Valley, you have a massive waste of resources. Do you think that between now and the eventual
popping of this bubble that central bank digital currencies will be a reality so that governments
can control, maybe they even would have your currency have an 18-month expiry date, you have
to go spend this before it expires in order to boost aggregate demand. What do you, what do you
think about that possibility? Well, you know, we lovers of freedom are quite worried about the
potential for CBDCs because, you know, the central bank can look into every one of your
transactions and cut you off when you're doing something that is not sort of socially approved.
And as you say, actually even threaten to take your money away if you don't spend it,
which is just returning to negative interest rates. It's a massive expansion of the state
into people's personal lives. And it's, and to my mind, you know, yeah, I mean, people have referred
to CBDC as a digital panopticon, the panopticon being the prison designed by Jeremy Bentham,
in which an individual prison guard standing at the top could observe every action within the
prison. So I think that that would be, and I think, you know, that's where China seems to be
going pretty fast. And that would be very worrying if our central banks and politicians would go
down that route. I was talking to a friend of mine the other day, who sits in British Parliament,
he says that the Bank of England is pushing through on its CBDC plans without any parliamentary
scrutiny, which is I think is extraordinary, that if money is a sort of power in a, in a,
in a society that CBDC gives you the greatest power that has ever been known to man,
that you should hand all that power to a bunch of people who've so conspicuously failed
in recent years without any oversight is, is, you know, extremely worrying. Having said that,
if you are well designed CBDC, backed by, by government debt, so it wasn't, didn't just
conjured out of the air, could be a sort of hard money. If, if, and when I say well designed,
that would mean that it could only increase by, you know, three or four percent a year.
And that you can see, that would, you know, that would sort of take the world of the Chicago plan
fully backed money into the digital sphere. It would be hell, a nightmare for the commercial
banks, because they would lose all their deposits to it. Because who would want to, you know,
keep their money at Silicon Valley Bank or whatever, when you can keep it at a central,
on a central bank app that much more easily. But I mean, for me, you know, all the convenience
of those functions would be more than outweighed by the loss of privacy if a central bank could,
had complete control over it. And I, and, and obviously, you know, we've gone through sort of,
you know, a number of unprecedented restrictions on our liberties in recent years. So,
so I think that's probably something one, you know, one wants to lose but sleep over.
We've covered a lot, but at the same time, we've really only scratched the surface. I don't think
people understand, I think followers of this podcast understand the centrality of energy and
resources and the environment to our lives. But we take for granted the price of time,
which is the price of money in our global economy. If you, if you have a few minutes left, I'd like
to ask you some personal questions that I ask all my guests, just a few of them. Given your lifetime
of, well, scholarship on finance and financial issues and your recognition that we're living
through this incredible, widely coyote financial bubble. Do you have any personal advice to the
viewers of this program at this time of kind of appending global economic crisis?
Well, from an investment perspective, you know, from what we've been discussing,
it seems to me to make sense to consider sort of the inflation proofing of your investment.
One of the things I, you must have picked this up on reading Howard Oatom that
gold actually has an extraordinary high innate energy content. And if I, you know, and in a way
Bitcoin, so digital gold has a sort of fabricated energy content of completely wasting resources.
So it makes me feel quite, you know, feeling that one wants to hold gold in the current
environment, a sort of balance to the portfolio. And gold wasn't doing particularly well last
year in dollars as when the dollar was strong, but seems to be coming back. So that, and then I
think that, I mean, what, I mean, you probably have strong views on that than I do on this.
It seems to me that the energy transition is people, you know, haven't, I mean, one can't
believe it, but the policy makers seem to make commitments that five minutes of analysis would
tell you are impossible to meet. In which case, I think that conventional energy is, you know,
remain, which has done well in the last couple of years, you know, will, is required and will,
is, you know, will deliver as it's done over last year or so, decent returns beating the market.
And I think that probably holds true for a broad sway of raw materials because of low
investment in recent years. So there is this, you know, during the German hyperinflation,
there was a saying that people, there was what they called it, a fluked in desac verten, a flight
into things of real value. So we've been living in a world in which things of virtue, you know,
that we've ascribed value to objects that are purely virtual, such as, you know, your
cryptocurrencies or your non-fungible tokens or rubbishy works of contemporary art.
And the, you want to position, to my mind, portfolios in assets of real value. And if
and if you can also assets, you know, that are robust and robust to questions of inflation or
rising interest rates and so forth. And I also, I'm going back, I, you know, I got, I think that,
you know, now that the Treasury inflation protected securities have a positive yield,
that's, you know, that makes them more attractive from an investment perspective,
notwithstanding the fact that the governments will be very low to pay you,
pay you the, if inflation runs out of control. But there's, I think, you know, I'd stay clear
of all nominal assets, really, and all purely financial assets, but that's my own preference.
So I'm sure we do have investors and speculators and asset allocators listening to this show,
but most people are pro-social thinking about themselves and their communities in
this time ahead of what I refer to as the great simplification.
Investments aside, do you have any personal advice on how to cope or prepare in these times?
Well, I always think, you know, it helps to live quite modestly. I mean, I, for years,
I just tell my wife, you know, whatever you think you're worth, cut it in half and live off that.
So now I was, don't over stretch yourself and lead, you know, and, you know, lead a simpler life
as possible. And in a way, you know, one can lead a reasonably good, and I'm living in the
country. I think I've seen anyone for four days. So you can lead quite a comfortable life.
And I haven't spent any money. You know, it's not, I just, you know, I think it's shoe
extravagance and luxury. And I do think, I think, I suppose, you know, this is what I've done
myself. I was brought up in the country. But I think that life will be easier in the country
than in cities going forward in the difficult times ahead. I think back to the hyperinflation
where the poor wretched Germans starving in these cities in Berlin or whatever, they would go out
in the middle of the night and steal the turnip. They would walk 50 miles to steal turnips from
the farmer's field. I'm not saying we're there, but the point is that you want, you know, there is,
there is actually a certain value in, in, in having a sort of sustainable, you know,
and quiet life and a rural, I mean, after this conversation, I'm going to go off and plant my,
my, my vegetable seeds. So we better, we better wrap up shortly. Otherwise the day will be done.
Yeah, we better, we better wrap up shortly. You could never guess what I'm going to do
after this conversation. I am going to get in my car. No, I did that before this conversation.
I'm going to rush down to the post office box where my 25 one day old chickens have been
FedEx to me, and I got a call this morning, and I have to go get them. And it's 18 degrees here,
Fahrenheit, and I have to immediately put them under a heat lamp. So it's my new, my new chicken
flock for this year. So another reason I'm wanting to, to watch the clock.
I hope you know that chickens attract rats as, as long as you're prepared for rats.
Oh, we have a huge rat problem. Not, not to give too much information, but my last crop of chicken
babies, the rats got like a third of them, they ate through the plywood. So now I bought some of
spray foam to cover the holes that is unappealing to mouse mice and rats. So yeah, too much
information, but I agree with you on the rural existence. Do you have any recommendations to
young humans that are learning about energy and the economy and, and Bitcoin and interest rates
and the world that they're inheriting with climate change and everything else? Do you have any
recommendations to young people? Well, I mean, I think you're, you're, if they're listening to you,
they're on the right line. So I think, you know, I spent the first, you know, decades of my world
thinking about finance and economics without taking on board energy and the role of energy.
And the more I think about it, the more important it is. And I, so I think that, yeah, I think
listening to your podcast, probably quite a good thing. I think, I think one of the things I find
nowadays is, and possibly among the younger people, I mean, not actually in my own family or among my
extended family, but one hears that younger people are less tolerant of argument and debate
and, you know, and perhaps prone to fixate on, on ideas that are quite, you know, scary
and therefore get a bit hysterical. And my view, and look, we've had been in a way, we've been,
you know, obviously a lot of thrust of our conversation has been, you know, worrying about
the state of the financial system. However, you know, I think that one needs to keep an open mind
and one needs to, you know, you cannot make any type of intellectual advance,
or you can't even really hold a decent view in your head unless you're prepared to be
skeptical. You can be skeptical of everything we've said, and that's absolutely fine. I mean,
it's a loss of skepticism in the current environment that really, and that, you know, obviously one
finds it a bit, you know, among the young, but in all these sort of hypercharged, you know,
ridiculous debates, which you already mentioned because you get head chopped off. The, the, the,
you need to be open-minded and skeptical. And I think also, I mean, again, I'm plugging a case
of being one of the ways of being open-minded is to read history. I mean, if you read history,
then you see, hey, you know, as Jim Grant says, your man keeps on stepping on the same,
on the same fork. So we keep on making the same mistakes and our behavior in the, you know,
in the past is obviously not being quite exemplary. And we can see similar patterns. And in a way,
that should also give you hope because however crazed we are today, both in our society and in
our finance, sort of some or other, there is an endpoint, you know, and at an endpoint, there is
a regeneration. And history, you know, history is in a way easier to deal with because it's past,
and therefore you don't have to live the pain or worry about the, the future. But I, so I think I,
so I, as I say, skepticism and, and some sort of historical balance is probably, I think,
most vital today. Otherwise you'll lose your sanity.
I like that answer. And in a subsequent email, I will ask you to recommend five or 10 of your,
your best history recommendation books. And I'll put those in the show notes for, for people to,
to check out. So we just met on this conversation. So hopefully this won't be too personal. But I'm
just curious, you know, knowing all this, living in the countryside in England, what do you care
most about in the world, Edward? Well, I tell my wife, it's my dog, but I'm really just teasing her,
aren't I? Not so much. I think the dogs would be pretty high.
Dog and wife. It's, I'm a wife and dog man at heart.
Okay. Excellent. I have four dogs, and they are very close to my heart. Second to last question, sir.
If you could wave a magic wand, and there was no personal recourse to your actions,
what is one thing that you would do to improve human and planetary futures?
Well, I, I suppose given what we're talking about is I would like to, I'm sure everyone
gets the same answer given where we are today, that you'd like a source of energy that was plentiful and,
and non polluting. But in my field, going back to what we were saying earlier, I would like
I think I would like a monetary, a form of money that couldn't be manipulated,
like the paper money is, and that therefore would be, would give us more stability, financial,
and social, social. I don't, you know, we haven't said so far, but you know, the social hysteria
that we see today, I think is actually linked in some weird way to the, to the lot, to the corruption
of values created by these monetary distortions. We obviously see that in times of high inflation,
because you know, obviously the Germans, as they keep on saying, went nuts during the hyperinflation
in its aftermath. But even with this monetary manipulation not associated with hyperinflation,
I think it sort of unloons the, the bonds as such. So I suppose that's one reform I would like to see.
We would need both, right? Because if we had energy, abundant energy that was clean,
but it was tethered to leveraged financial system that would allow it to happen faster,
it wouldn't work. So we would need both, we need the sustainable cleaner energy, and we need a more
hardened off financial rules system, I think. Excellent. This was a great conversation. What
are you doing now? Are you writing another book? What, what, what is, what topic is, is burning for
you? You know, I mentioned Jeremy Grantham. Well, I'm, I'm, my current project is to help Jeremy
write his memoirs. So in fact, actually, I'm speaking out. So I'm speaking, at the moment,
I'm speaking to him, and we're sort of gathering information. And then, you know, here, oops,
I've got all his quarterly letters in three volumes of these. And that's going to be my,
my project this year. Hope Jeremy doesn't let me down. And then I've got a couple of other ideas,
you know, in the pipeline. But actually, the Jeremy project will keep me going for the year,
at least. Excellent. Thank you so much for your time. And let us definitely stay in touch.
Okay, nice speech here. Yeah. And send me your references. I'd like, I'll read the stuff you
sent me. But the other thing, I'd like to read the thing about the interest rate, the interest in
trees. It's right up my street. Bye then, Nate. I will do that.
