Good morning and happy Thanksgiving.
The holiday with an inauspicious beginning
that has morphed into a couple days off of work,
a lot of food, watching football, spending time with family,
and then shopping for many on Friday.
We are thankful for these things
without recognizing the
finite natural resources that go into providing
the energy services that allow us
comfort, convenience, novelty, security,
heat. So I thought I would do
a little bit of energy gratitude, a whirlwind
in my own life.
I like food.
I drive to Whole Foods and I have to look away
and not go in because I'll spend and eat a lot.
But the average supermarket grocery store
in the global north is a cornucopia. Could you imagine
Genghis Khan or George Washington or Cleopatra walking into a modern
supermarket? The amount of foodstuff options
is unbelievable. The average food
in the United States travels around 1500 miles
to get to your plate. I'm grateful for
the food that has been available in my lifetime.
Then each of us have our own
temperature-controlled root cellars in the form of a
refrigerator. One American refrigerator
uses more energy than many countries in Africa, and over
150 million humans use totally in their lives.
Between my office and my house, we have
two refrigerators and a chest freezer. The amount of energy that
those devices use, just them, is more
energy than 650 million humans use
in their lives. That's food and preserving
it. What about heat?
My house is heated with wood,
which I chop with a chainsaw. The amount of human
and animal labor that a chainsaw with a little bit of gasoline
replaces is enormous. My office is heated
with propane, which, if you watch my recent podcast with Art
Berman, you know, is one of the first things distilled from a barrel of
oil. These energy services come from
ancient sunlight. I have a utility vehicle,
a little bit of gasoline. I can do a lot of chores around the
farm here, carrying wood and manure and
seeds and hazelnuts and any number of
water and other things. Pretty much does things
indistinguishable from magic, from what we could imagine a few
generations ago. I also
have a car. The average American
uses 400 gallons of gasoline
per year. That equates to around 10 barrels
of oil. That amount of energy, just
the amount of gasoline we use, equates to
a human being working for 45 years.
If you add this all up, it becomes
really a leviathan amount of energy that supports
our modern industrial lifestyle.
I forgot the internet. When I google something
I can access all of the accumulated knowledge
of mankind in a few seconds.
The energy workers that are invisible
to me, supporting this activity, use around
18-20% of all electricity with the batteries and the
components and the servers and the networks and the batteries and
everything.
We are energy blind as a culture
and on the flip side, the inverse of energy blindness is energy
gratitude. I was born in the 20th century
in the United States as a human. I have
deep gratitude for this.
There is a sliding scale between entitlement
and privilege and responsibility.
I think moving on that
scale is an awareness of the times we live
in and how fossil energy supports our lifestyle.
I am grateful for so many things.
Gratitude is, I think, a very important emotion
at this time. I am grateful for my family.
I am grateful for a vast network of friends.
I am grateful for my dogs. I am grateful for the nature that surrounds
my house, my state, my nation, and the world.
I love the animals that I encounter
and the birds and the fish and the ecosystems.
I am a grateful human being. While I have the mic,
so speak, I am grateful for you,
the community that has kind of coalesced around this
podcast. Earlier this year I decided to do a podcast
because I know a lot of scientists and people working on systems
regenerative activism towards better
future. I did not know how grateful I would be
for the community, the comments, the emails, the support
that other humans are recognizing, feeling,
striving towards a better future given what we face.
So, happy Thanksgiving everyone.
I am grateful for a lot of things,
particularly for energy. Talk to you next week.
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
