our culture is energy blind. I've been increasingly using this term to describe how our politicians,
our media, our universities neglect the fundamental importance of energy in our lives, our expectations,
and our future trajectory. So I would like to take this 20, 30 minute riff to describe
what I mean by energy blindness. So let's just start with a 15 second clip from a recent
movie we made, and I hope you can all watch the entire 30 minute film. But here's 15
seconds from the end of it. To our ancestors, the benefits from carbon energy would have
appeared indistinguishable from magic. And instead of appreciating this giant one time
windfall, we developed stories that our newfound wealth and progress had emerged purely from
human ingenuity. We had become energy blind. So what does this mean, energy blindness? So first
of all, everything in nature that moves or requires effort first requires calories. And
it's no different in human systems. Every single aspect of our society, every product,
every service that results in GDP first requires an energy conversion. So there's no exception
to that no matter what good contributes to our GDP, it required energy to develop, to
create, to run, to maintain, to deliver, to dispose of all aspects of our entire economic
system are moving things around and they require energy. We have everyday things think about
in your own house, the average American house has 40 items that are constantly plugged in
as a drain on power, that by the way, those 40 things that are plugged in all the time,
use 12 to 15% of our electricity, you plug them in and they're just plugged in overnight draining
like your toaster, your computers when you're not using them, etc. So we swim in a sea of energy
use, like a fish swims in water and we're largely unaware of it. The benefits we get from energy
are pretty much on human time scales, indistinguishable from magic, given how much
and how high quality the energy we get from fossil carbon and hydrocarbons.
A barrel of oil is 5.7 million BTU's worth of energy potential translated into work potential
at 1760 kilowatt hours. In contrast, a human healthy human worker generates around 0.6 kilowatt
hours worth of work, physical work in one day. So depending on the boundaries of analysis,
how efficient humans are, how much waste heat there is, a barrel of oil does 11 years of human
work, but humans are more efficient. So I've done the math and it works out to around four to five
years of human labor is replaced by one barrel of oil, which costs right now $110. Anyone, any
economist, any grade school college student can look this up and find it on the internet. This is
not controversial. What's controversial, of course, is the contribution that energy makes to our
societies. I have an MBA from the University of Chicago with honors. Three of my professors
there subsequently won Nobel Prizes. They were energy blind. I know this sounds hubristic,
but the word energy as a contributor to the market development, the market efficiency,
the productivity of our world, our wealth was never mentioned. Why? Because we've been growing
our energy supply, our access to buried sunlight throughout our entire lifetime. So economists
and financially minded people look at what's happened in this unique period of human history
as if it were normal when really what we're doing is finance is layered on top of ecology and energy.
And we are drawing down the principle of our main input to our economies and treating it in our
stories and our media and our universities as if it were interest. So how much does this impact
our economy? We use around 30 odd billion barrels of oil per year. And if you translate how much
coal and natural gas we use per year, it works out to about 100 billion barrel of oil equivalents
of fossil carbon and hydrocarbons every year added to the human economies at four to five years
of human labor per barrel. That's around 500 billion human labor equivalents
added to our economy with five billion real workers. So all we've had to do is pay for the cost
to extract this from the ground. That's what economists look at. How much does it cost us to
extract it? We don't include the tens of millions of years of creation, creating the resource,
nor of the pollution streams are not included in our prices. So what this has done is this giant
windfall of fossil energy added to human economies has boosted our wages. It's boosted
corporate profits. It's reduced the price of stuff that we order and it's delivered the next day in a
little brown truck. It's increased our population and it's dramatically increased our per capita
consumption in the world. So the average American today, and by American, I mean United States,
consumes around 17 barrels of oil per year in our footprint. And if you add coal and natural gas,
it's around 57 barrel of oil equivalents. The average American uses 3,100 pounds of coal per
year. But that's not all because we import stuff that's made from other countries, particularly
China. So if we add up how much energy is embodied in the goods that were created in China, but
consumed here, it's another 17 barrels of oil. So we use around 72 barrel of oil per person,
per year in the United States. And this has made us pretty much materially richer than kings and
queens of old. So the scale of this is gargantuan and we take it for granted because every year we
seem to have a little bit more in the world, but of course there's more people. And so we're
largely blind to this. We think of the world in terms of technology and in terms of money.
But as my friend, and he will be a podcast guest next week, Steve Keen likes to say
that labor without energy is a corpse. And technology without energy is a sculpture.
And I add to that and say a city without energy is a museum. Energy powers everything. Well,
what's the problem? We have all this energy and we invent technology and things are getting better.
Well, the problem is, is this stuff, we are drawing it down 10 million times faster
than it was geologically sequestered. So it truly is a bank account that we are
inherited and are burning through it as if a 10-year-old would burn through his inheritance
on video games or such. The global conventional oil, the high quality oil has been on a plateau
for around 15 years. The only reason that oil production in the world increased was because
in the United States, because of access to debt, both from oil companies accessing Wall
Street debt and from central banks putting in artificially low interest rates and other
access to quantitative easing to make oil and things more affordable, we went to shale oil.
And so we boosted global oil production temporarily. Right now, it looks like
oil probably peaked globally in production in late 2018. And what's happening is
the United States, Saudi Arabia and Russia, the three largest oil producers in the world,
I don't have accurate up-to-date details on Russia and Saudi Arabia, but the United States,
we've drilled and used all the good stuff. And now almost half of our oil is light,
tight oil or shale oil. This is the source rock where all the other oil originated from,
migrated from these deposits. And what we've done with fracking technology is we've widened
the size of the straw to access the same amount of oil. So it looks like there's plenty of liquid
coming out of the top of the straw and there is, but we're much closer to that slurping sound near
the end. After tight oil is gone, there's nothing left after that. And right now, if we were to
stop drilling for environmental reasons, for lack of capital, for complexity reasons, our oil
production in the United States would drop 40% the first year and around 22% the next year and
around 17% the year after that because the existing fields deplete much more rapidly than they did
10 years ago, 20 years ago, 50 years ago. So we have to drill more and more and drill faster
in order to maintain our production. The United States produces around 11 or 12 million barrels
of oil a day and we consume around 20 million. So as much oil as we're producing, we're still
a net oil importer, which is why President Biden is going to Saudi Arabia next week.
If you look at a 600 mile triangle around Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 60 to 65% of all the
remaining oil in the world is within this 600 mile triangle, which is why Biden is going to
Saudi Arabia and not Buenos Aires or Tasmania, etc. So oil really underpins the wealth of nations.
If you look at a logarithmic chart of oil consumption per country and GDP per country,
it's almost a 0.96R squared. Oil currently is the economy. So the other thing we are
energy blind about is this issue of energy quality. People naturally think that, oh,
a BTU of energy or a Joule of energy of one type is equal to another type, but there's huge quality
differentials in energy. First of all, there's the spatial distribution of energy. The United
States had a geographic birthright or a geologic birthright of being this place where many ancient
oceans resided, where the phytoplankton from prior eons was condensed and refined into liquid
hydrocarbons. The United States has used more oil in the last 20 years, in the last 50 years,
in the last 200 years than any other country on earth, partially because of where the United
States resides as a geological province and partially because we have the world's reserve
currency so we can print money and buy other people's oil. But a lot of people are talking about
renewable energy, and I am pro-renewable energy, although I tend to refer to it as
rebuildable energy because it takes a lot of materials and energy and infrastructure and
complexity to build, and we need to rebuild it again in 25 years. But most renewable energy
only produces electricity, and electricity is only around 20% of the energy we use globally.
So first of all, we can't just turn all the non-electric things into electricity. There's
heat, there's transportation, there's heavy bunker fuel, there's aviation. So there's that issue.
Then there's the intermittent issue, which is what Germany is struggling with right now,
among other things. You can't just build more solar and wind when you need natural gas,
when the wind doesn't blow and the sun doesn't shine. So right now, Russia has reduced, as of
this morning, this is June 17th, has reduced its natural gas flows to Germany by 25% from a couple
months ago. As it stands now, especially with the Freeport explosion limiting LNG shipments from the
US to Russia, Germany will not be able to fill its natural gas storage into the winter. So they are
already advising people and companies to reduce consumption, to turn off thermostats, to turn
down air conditioning in the summer. Many, many businesses are going to fail in Germany and in
Europe and in the United States for that matter. Because what we've done is we've built a civilization
around an expectation, even a naive expectation, because we didn't understand the impact that energy
has on our society of cheap energy going forward. And why is the price of energy so important? First
of all, energy is embedded in every single aspect of our cultural system. And all of the minerals
and materials that go into products also need energy to mine, refine, deliver.
But what ends up happening is the Industrial Revolution is a story of humans adding thousands
or tens of thousands of units of energy to tasks that humans used to do manually.
So we do that at a horribly inefficient energy payoff, but a hugely, since we extracted close
to no cost, a hugely economic and time benefit. So monetarily and time wise, we are getting huge
benefits from a huge waste of energy that we're adding thousands of units to each process.
But what ends up happening is if fossil carbon, well, if any energy gets more costly,
since we've leveraged the replacement of human labor with fossil workers,
the benefits we get decline rapidly when prices go up. And right now, Germany and Europe are
becoming less energy blind because of what the Russia and Ukraine situation. So getting back
to my point on energy quality, there are lots of different aspects of energy that we can't just
plug and play one type of energy for another. And I have to say, and I'll unpack this
more on a future podcast, our administration is saying some unbelievably energy delusional
statements. Gina McCarthy is now threatening wanting Google and Facebook and the social
media companies to crack down on anyone being critical of renewable energy. So I don't want
to be critical of renewable energy. We need to go to renewable energy, but we're not going to power
the same goods and services today with renewable energy and even with a combination of declining
fossil fuels and renewable energy. We're going to have to change our system. So where do you draw
the line on Gina McCarthy saying we can't be critical of renewable energy? Do we not talk
about population? Do we not talk about ecology? Do we not talk about overshoot? I mean, that's
worrisome. But also, Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm and Biden blaming our energy costs
increase on Putin trying to tell oil companies there's a windfall tax because you guys are
making too much money. But by the way, we're not going to want your fuels in the future,
so don't invest into refining capacity, etc. The amount of energy ignorance is appalling to me,
which is why I like to use the word energy blindness. We are blind to what energy does
for our culture. So another aspect is complexity. So a barrel of oil has 42 gallons in it.
Around 40% of that is gasoline. The rest is diesel fuel, heating oil, jet fuel,
bunker fuel, really heavy tar-like stuff that they make asphalt and roads out of. But there's
like 6,000 products that come from a barrel of oil. So there's this naive assumption out there
that if we somehow build electric cars that we won't need oil anymore. But gasoline is just one
of the components that come from a barrel of oil. There's medicines and petrochemicals and plastics
and all kinds of surgical devices and tents and football helmets and condoms and all kinds of
things come from a barrel of oil. Yes, it's true. We can use bamboo or some renewable crops to
replace some of these things. But again, it has a cost and the higher cost means less benefits
for humans. So why are we energy blind? To me, energy blindness stems from ecology blindness.
We don't teach about trophic pyramids and stocks and flows and the importance of energy and nature.
So energy blindness is a subset of ecology blindness. And I think we probably need to
be teaching about this much earlier in our school system. We need to teach great school kids K-12
about ecology and energy. We have kind of wasted the first half to two-thirds of our
oil inheritance. And I think it's really important that people start to appreciate,
recognize value and plan for a different energy future than we have. And I think
what's happened with Russia and Ukraine this morning, Putin is talking about the fact that
the unipolar world is over. And so the energy that they were exporting to Europe, they're now
sending to India and China. So at any time, I expect that the monetary claims that we create
every year, 95% of our money comes from commercial banks making loans to credit-worthy borrowers.
This is all predicated on a growth-based system. But it's all based on having more
and affordable energy every year. And so my thesis is that we're headed for a great simplification.
And that is when we have a recalibration with our monetary claims, with our underlying productive
energy and material capacity to support and maintain them. There are countries that are really
going to face this sooner than the US probably. Japan right now imports almost all of their energy.
They have had their government support stock and bond purchases for the last 20 odd years.
They have a stated cap where the JGB interest rate on the Japanese government bonds is capped
at 0.25%. And so the Japanese government buys bonds from the general public in order to maintain
that cap. Meanwhile, the yen continues to decline. And so Japan is a perfect microcosm of where the
real world runs on energy and materials, and they are creating monetary overlays that cannot be
supported in the long run. I think what happened in Ukraine is going to dramatically change the
power structure within Europe, especially within Germany, especially the satellite nations like
Italy. Italy's government bonds are 60 basis point above US treasuries. Italy also has to
import all of its energy at higher and higher costs. As of this morning, Friday, June 17th,
natural gas is the equivalent of $240 a barrel in Europe. And that's the market price in the
futures. That doesn't include all the taxes and everything that goes on. So we are in a serious
divergence between a monetary view of the world and a biophysical view of the world. And this
is because of our energy blindness. And so that's my rant for today on frankly. And I would like to
expand on this a lot more because what I covered today, each of these points has to be unpacked
with references and graphs and details. But I just wanted to give a flavor for how naive our
culture, our media, our universities are on the role of energy in our lives and the energy financial
situation we face to be continued.
