Is there any psychological trait that map with the ability of a
human to better understand models?
I mean, it depends what kind of models they are. So if it's a
climate model, then yes, you know, you have to be sort of
relatively numerate and have that kind of systematic approach,
and probably a sort of elite Western education is more
likely to give you that, you know, it's not just
personality, it's also how you're brought up. But more
generally, I mean, I think anyone can understand models
because models can be much more than just a, you know, this
numerical story on a computer, they can also be a work of
literature, you know, I think, if you want a different kind of
climate model, Kim Stanley Robinson's Ministry for the
Future novel, I think that that that is a different kind of
model, in the sense of being a sort of expression of
imagination about what a future could look like, generated
with some degree of internal consistency and logic about how
it might pan out and how the different elements would work
together to make that outcome happen. And in, you know, it
has the same limitations, it is somewhat contrived, and it
perhaps ends with an outcome that isn't necessarily one that
everybody would agree to be realistic. And it doesn't
represent certain things, and it spends too much time on others,
but that's exactly what all the other models do.
So Stan is going to be on this show in two months, we have a
podcast recording date, but you're talking about Ministry for
the Future is a book like that, also a model, because you read
the book and it's fiction based on science, tells a story,
changes how you think about the world. Is that a model as well?
Yes. So in in my conception of what a model is, yes, it is
absolutely. And it is something that helps us to think it helps
it's an aid to thinking it's a need to communication. It maps
out this future with a with some kind of systematic approach.
And in that sense, yes, absolutely, it's a model in just
the same way that the climate model saw.
So I care, as you and your husband, my friend Chris know, I
care a lot about the climate, other species and the
environment. But I know that the broader system involves things
like debt, and currencies, and aggregate human behavior, and
the metabolism of the super organism and geopolitics, and
all of these things are likely to play a larger role in our
future than concern and understanding about climate
change. So I'm just curious, other than perhaps hedge funds,
are there any meta models that incorporate not only the
complexity and magnitude of the IPCC climate model, but then
add on debt, oil depletion, geopolitics, and all that. Or
or does that become so complex that it's impossible?
I think it's impossible to do it in a in a sort of systematic and
quantified sense in, you know, in a computer and in that
conception of what a model is. But I mean, if we accept that a
novel can be a model, you know, then then your thoughts in your
own head can be a model as well, you know, you have some kind of
expectation or maybe a few different scenarios of how you
think the future might pan out and those can those could
incorporate, you know, maybe in different scenarios, there are
different emphasis on the the impact and the influence of debt
or of human behavior or geopolitics, you know, nuclear
exchange, etc. That all of those can be incorporated into your
mental model of what a future might look like. And you then use
that to determine how you prioritize what you do. And you
use that to think about how you communicate with others. And you
use that to to sort of structure how you behave and interact in
this world in the present moment, which was all that we're able
to influence. But with the aim of generating, you know, the small
butterfly effect, or the maybe the Hawke-Morth effect of looking
for a better future. And I think that those models that we that
we carry around with us in our heads, they are just as important
because they are part of the framing of how we think and how
we act. And the shared narratives and the shared
framings are also extremely powerful and the way that those
are then propagated through the media and social media, and the
way that they then influence how much larger numbers of people
think and act together.
