Okay, so let's expand on that topic of value judgment. Here's a quote from your book
in a section that criticizes the lack of imagination in modeling. The quote,
the whole concept of predicting the future can sometimes end up reducing the possibility
of actively creating a better one. If we want the future to look different than the present,
and not just a continuation of all of today's trends, then we have to construct models
that are able to imagine something more. Can you unpack this, Erica, and why it's important?
Yeah, so the example that I was thinking about here is integrated assessment modeling of energy,
the energy system, and the climate system. And so these kind of models, they put a price on,
nuclear energy, renewable energy, fossil fuels, all the rest of it, and the different sectors in
which that energy is used. And they sort of predict forward by saying, we're going to take a least
cost pathway. And so you make your assumptions and you put those in and you say, we expect solar
energy to decrease in price at the following rate. And we expect fossil fuels to become more
expensive because there'll be a carbon tax or something. And you put all of those in and
you project it forward. And it tells you what the lowest cost way of meeting your climate targets
is with the assumptions that you've made. And so I suppose my point is just that these are
incredibly boring because everything is based on continuation of today's trends. Everything
is based on pricing. Everything is based on that assumption about what the cost will be.
And there are choices about what we are going to cost into these models and what we're not
going to cost into them. So you can put a price on nuclear energy. You can put a price on carbon
removal from the atmosphere, somewhat speculative, but you stick it in. And if that price is high,
if you put it in at $500 per tonne of CO2 removed, then there won't be very much of it used. And if
you put it in at $2 per tonne of CO2 removed, then there'll be vast amounts of it in the model.
And so your choice of exactly where to put that price point, which is an arbitrary expectation
of the future, that's going to hugely determine what the outcome of the model is. And of course,
then there are other things which we might consider pricing in, but we don't. So for example,
what would be the cost of behaviour change? If you were willing to put 500 million pounds into
a behaviour change programme to reduce energy usage or improve energy efficiency of appliances or
something, how much would that, how much would the cost per tonne of CO2 avoided be? We don't really
put that in. If you wanted to consider geoengineering, for example, you know, this is, this is, I think
this is going to be the next big thing that comes into these models will be a cost, not per tonne
of CO2, but per sort of per tonne of CO2 equivalent by shading the atmosphere with stratospheric
aerosols. If we put that in, you know, that would probably be pretty cheap relative to the other
technologies. And so as soon as you start putting it into the models, I think we will see just in
the same way that we've seen models going from high dependence on renewables to high dependence on
carbon dioxide removal. They will go from high dependence on carbon dioxide removal. The next
step will be high dependence on solar geoengineering. I think that becomes inevitable. But the question
is, are you going to put it in or not? And what price are you going to put on it? And you'll get
the answer that you want. If you want, if you want to see a world that has these things, then you
put it into your model. And then it goes into the IPCC report, and it goes into summaries for
policymakers, and it gets taken seriously in the national media. It becomes part of the national
debate. It becomes realized in a way that it wasn't before. So carbon dioxide removal from the
atmosphere 15 years ago, that wasn't really being talked about. And now it is, and it's a major
plank of all of the strategies for reaching the two degree Paris Agreement target. And so
it's there and it has come into the debate through the models. And stratospheric aerosol geoengineering,
I suspect, is going to do the same thing over the next 10 years. It will start by being put into
the models. Then it will be talked about in the media. Then it will sort of become more of a thing
and people will talk about it. And then it will start to become policy.
I have several follow up questions to that. So there are people out there that say that the
predictive natural sciences and models are squeezing out the concurrent imaginative and
humanistic accounts of social life and visions of the future, aka climate reductionism. So
how do you think that that could be changed? Or is that an important issue?
Yeah, I think that's really true. And I think that this framing of climate as being a technical
problem and a sort of model problem that we must do all this prediction, and we must have these
massive computers to predict, and then we'll be able to take action to reduce all of the impacts.
It feels, yes, just unhelpfully reductionist that actually it's not just about climate,
and it's never just been about climate. If you could click your fingers and have an infinite
source of clean energy that didn't emit any calm dioxide, you wouldn't actually have solved the
problem. You'd have created a whole load of other problems. And so I think that's the difficulty
that we have that if we are siloed into climate and we say the problem is climate and we have to
solve this climate change problem, then as you say, we squeeze out all of those other questions
about what it is to be human and what the future is going to look like and what it ought to look
like, what we want it to look like and what society looks like and how we interact with each other
and how we relate to the natural world. And all of these questions are just kind of
shoved to one side in the focus on modelling and predicting and the physics and the technology
and the science of it. We ignore the fact that actually we are humans and this is a human problem
and a human question. And so I would like to see a working group four in the IPCC, for example,
they have three working groups and one is on the physical science, one is on impacts and one is on
well, I'm not quite sure exactly what it is, it's sort of technologies for mitigation.
But we need a fourth one, right? We need one on values and politics. Why don't we have that?
That would be wonderful. I mean, it feels so much more important than these other ones which get so
much traction and so much media coverage. And yet we're not talking about the ways that people
think about it and the framings and the way that people relate to each other and the
different value judgments and the different politics that allows somebody who has the same
facts available to them and is perfectly intelligent and has the best interests of
the future in mind, somebody like that to come to a completely different conclusion from mine
about what the solutions should be and how we should act and what we should do to get there.
