We need to have, you know, the graciousness to allow people who are coming in late to this
or don't have the skills. We need all these buffers around the transition.
Creating life, farming, growing food, planting trees, like it is a natural antidepressant.
The earth and people and farmers and the sick people who are suffering
are realizing there has to be another way.
We're coming into a period where we have to teach more people more things in a shorter
period of time than ever in human history. And the bottleneck is going to be,
how do we teach people to do this?
Greetings. Welcome to reality roundtable number six. I really enjoy putting these together.
I've had almost a hundred prior guests and I kind of mix and match them to create interesting
conversations. Many more very interesting conversations to come. The hardest part is
arranging people schedules. We have one coming on governance and another on plastics.
Another on what questions should we be asking in graduate school and postdoc to research on the
great simplification in the meta crisis. Today, I've invited four prior guests back to discuss
how could we or could we feed eight billion plus or minus people with de minimis fossil fuel
inputs? Is this possible? How might we go about it? What would the yields be? What sort of practices
would be needed? Joining me in this conversation are Daniel Zeta, a small scale farmer near me in
central Minnesota. Andrew Millison, who's a educator, storyteller and permaculture designer.
He has a popular YouTube channel making permaculture education widely available.
Jason Bradford, who's an academic biologist turned CSA organic farmer. He also hosts the
crazy town podcast from the post carbon Institute. And last but not least, Vandana Shiva, who is a
global champion on regenerative agriculture, biodiversity and nutritious food and many other
pro future concepts. She has a PhD in physics and founded the research foundation for science,
technology and ecology. And she lives these practices in northern India. I hope you all
learn and are inspired by this conversation with Daniel, Andrew, Jason and Vandana.
Greetings, my friends from around the world. Good morning and good afternoon.
Good morning. Good morning. Good morning. Andrew Millison and Jason Bradford joining me from
Corvallis, Oregon. Andrew, how are you? I'm doing great, Nate. Thank you so much for having me
here to have this discussion this morning. I'm really grateful and look forward to a good talk.
I've just watched some amazing videos of you with the Pawnee Foundation on your India trip and we'll
get into that. JB, how are you, my friend? I'm doing pretty well, Nate. Yeah,
had a good sleep getting ready for this. 7 a.m. your time. Thanks for joining. Vandana Shiva
in Europe today. Good to see you. Hello. Thank you so much for joining us. It's hard to coordinate
you bright agricultural, cultural minds around the planet, so I'm glad we're able to coordinate it.
Last but not least is Daniel Zeta, a local farmer, colleague, friend of mine. Daniel,
good morning. Pleasure to be back with you, Nate.
Okay, this is Reality Roundtable 6 and the topic of the day is growing food without fossil fuels or
with de minimis fossil fuels. So listeners of this show know that we use globally between 10 and 14
calories of fossil inputs to grow, process, deliver, and store our food. And this is the
first time in human history this has happened because we used to have farming and human input
was an energy source, not an energy sink. So people paying attention to the world know that we
don't have unlimited oil and gas to serve as pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers for our
crops. And that fossil carbon is also causing bad impacts on the oceans and the environment,
climate change, etc. And that sometime in the future, oil and its derivatives will become
more costly or less available or both. So each of you in this format, I invite to give
as creative a response as possible to the following question, what would it take
to feed a world of 8 billion humans without fossil fuels or with de minimis fossil fuels?
And then we will have a discussion. Let us go in alphabetical order. Jason Bradford,
you're up first. Easy question. I've got a simple three step program. And well, of course,
I'm joking here. But really, in some ways, it's easy, but it's also really difficult.
The first thing I talk about is depopulating cities and moving people back into small towns
and farms, and also breaking up large organizations into small locally focused ones. So that would
be like big farms into small farms, put people to work on on the land and farms that both feed
local communities and repair the ecology, redesign equipment and tools so they're much simpler,
easier to repair, and even build with local materials. So it's kind of the opposite of what
we've been doing for the last couple hundred years, it seems, in many parts of the world.
So now why do I say all this? It sounds out there, obviously, because it goes against
so many trends and what we think about is normal nowadays. But if you look at modern cities with
electrical water, transportation networks, they have this incredibly high built-in power demand,
and they're built and maintained with these highly specialized complex materials and expertise.
So in any future where energy is not as abundant as it is today, it's going to become increasingly
difficult to, and finally, maybe impossible to keep modern cities functioning.
So I imagine like a cattle feedlot, right? You see pictures of these things with animals
really tightly packed together. And Bill Reese, who I know is a friend of yours,
Nate, mine, and been on the show, he, Urban Studies' professional co-developer of ecological
footprint, he calls cities feedlots for people. And that sounds a little harsh,
but he's talking about this in sort of the structural way. Like, in a cattle feedlot,
water is piped in, feed is trucked in, and delivered to feed troughs. The waste has
to be picked up and moved off mechanically as well. And without the cheap energy we have,
especially diesel, this would all be ridiculous and no one would do it.
So we have created this absurd food system, especially I'm talking about in so-called
developed world, and it's an energy disaster. And people have in mind big tractors when they
think about energy in food, but so much of it actually happens afterwards as you talked about
with the processing and packaging. But all that is the requirement to get it into these cities,
so it stores and fits on trucks and in warehouses, et cetera. So this modern supermarket system
really just can't continue. So that's why some years ago, 2019, I titled this
publication I worked on called The Future is Rural. And prior to the industrial age,
most agrarian people lived in small towns and villages. And if you look at energy and nations
what happens when they urbanize, they become more energy demanding. Rural peasants are not
driving to the supermarket. And there are still places that are mostly rural because they haven't
had access to the same levels of fossil fuels as we have. So there are places in the world that are
still 75% to 95% rural. And they tend to use a 50th or a 100th of the fuel, an energy that we
would use in a place like the United States. So we could probably learn a lot from them
going to these places. There's peasant agriculture all over still. And I think you're
going to hear a lot more about that from other guests. So I won't go into it, but really locally
tailored systems like from wet rice agriculture in Southeast Asia to yak herders in Mongolia to
really diversify systems in the Andes with potatoes, but mixed farming with long rotations
integrating livestock. And they have giddy pigs in their homes as well as chickens.
So if you think about what's happened in places like say Detroit, Michigan or the Rust Belt,
we've seen a situation where cities have depopulated and thousands of acres in cities
now in the U.S. are involved in farming again. So things like this have happened. There's maybe
analogies there that we can learn from. So the other thing I talk about, of course, is the tool
set. So the tools we have are so complex, and complexity is built and supported by
high power throughput by globalized supply chains. I have trouble getting replacement parts for
equipment right now. It is a mess, I could tell you. Pieces of equipment sit around because one piece
is missing. So technology we use to support important functions need to get a lot simpler.
One thing I talk about is like the modern flush toilet, and compare that to what it takes to
manage a composting toilet. And look at also, you know, not only what kind of simple materials
you can do with a composting toilet, but that suddenly a waste, you know, something we consider
a waste product is now a recycled important resource. So I think we both need an appreciation of
historic knowledge that resides in people from around the world that are still using more
traditional methods. But we also have fascinating opportunities through education and modern
design and understanding, not just of like engineering, but soil science, breeding systems
are absolutely incredible right now. So there's a huge amount of creative innovation out there
that's possible to deal with your question. And I think we just have to, you know, if we had
people really looking at this, I'd feel a lot better about it. Okay, so that's me.
Thank you. Nobody covered it in five minutes or less.
I'm just visualizing homes in Wisconsin having guinea pigs in the kitchens, and I can't quite
picture that yet. Oh, yeah. Let's move on. They have a cute little chatter.
Until you eat them. Andrew Millison, what are your thoughts?
All right, thanks, Nate. Well, I feel like when we think about transitioning agriculture,
you know, we have this imagination that we're talking about farming techniques. We're talking
about types of agriculture. We're talking about labor distribution. And the thing that I think about
when I imagine this transition from industrial agriculture to and more, I mean, really, we're
talking about like subsistence based small farm, you know, small community family agriculture.
I think about a lot of places I've been around the world where the population distribution
is still spread across the land in a way where you have the people that are distributed around
to actually do the work versus the U.S. where, I mean, I know where we live in the Willamette Valley
here, I think the average grass seed farmer farms about 1400 acres, you know, so we don't have
the development pattern. We don't have the distribution of people across the landscape.
We don't have the transportation network that's conducive to this transition to a lower energy
footprint, right? So in a lot of ways, I agree with a lot of what Jason said about if you're
going to transition, say the United States, for instance, you're not just talking about an agricultural
transition. You're talking about a demographic transition, a development transition. I just
came back from Senegal about two weeks ago and I was in some really remote village areas, I mean,
that were very far off the beaten track. So just like dirt roads and, you know, really farm tracks
getting in and between these villages. So I was touring these different food forest sites and
the people were moving between these villages primarily through little tracks using donkey
carts. I mean, that was the main mode of transportation, right? So when you think about
relocalizing and shrinking farms and agriculture, you're also shrinking transportation networks,
you're shrinking commutes, you're shrinking the distance that people travels, and you're building
a new type of development pattern that is scaled to small scale agriculture. So, you know, in order
to inform that, we would look at some of the best, most enduring villages in the world. You
mentioned like the Pawnee Foundation, I've spent a lot of time visiting villages in India as well
that are actually positioned in the landscape based on their micro watersheds, right? So the
village is managing their watershed area. So when we imagine redeveloping places like in the US,
this landscape, and creating farming hamlets or creating areas that are now scaled to actually
small scale farming, we're talking about village design, we're talking about how do we place human
settlements in the landscape, you know. Now, contrary a little bit to what Jason was talking
about sort of ending cities, I would say that not all cities are created equal. And I mean,
permaculture has many different examples of really intensive urban agriculture, from scales, from
people's apartment balconies, to parks, to turning green spaces and city farms, and you know, many
cities are actually located in historically rich agricultural areas and places that are also very
important for trade, especially long rivers. When we look at the Mississippi watershed here, we have
the largest area of navigable river on the planet, and a lot of cities historically are placed within
that navigable water system based on trade, you know, moving food, moving goods via water is the
most energy efficient way of moving material. So I don't envision really the possibility,
say in the United States, of going to like a completely localized peasant based agriculture.
I mean, first off, that would be a little bit hard of a political cell in this day and age.
And then, you know, we have, I mean, we have rivers, we have, you know, people are used to
getting along around, we still have highways, and even if you had much less fossil fuels, or even
if you had other wheeled types of implements moving across the landscape, we have train tracks, I mean,
you know, pathetically less train tracks than we really should have. But to actually imagine
a country like the United States transitioning to a non-fossil fuel agriculture, we have to think
about the repurposing of our existing transportation system and the repurposing of cities, towns that
are located in strategic places for moving goods around the landscape. So, you know, I'm not sure
that the United States population is really suited right now to a sort of rapid transition to a
peasant based agriculture. I think that would be a pretty tough sell for people. And I think a lot
of people would have psychological and physical problems with that. So, you know, that would have
to be something I think that would have to happen generationally for it to really be effective and
not a complete shock for people. But, you know, we have a lot of models. There's a lot of places
that are still basically living in subsistence agriculture. And when we look at the development
patterns of those places, we look at the social patterns, we look at the family sizes, we look
at the housing distribution, you know, then we start to get a clue of how many people do you need,
how far apart on the land to actually hand and animal manage the landscape at the level we need,
including small scale livestock for recycling manure and urine into bio fertilizer and,
you know, all the things that we see in the best villages around the world.
Excellent. Thank you. Vandana Shiva, good afternoon. And what are your thoughts?
Well, I think the first thing we need to do is recognize that most of the world is peasants,
even today. And we need to defend them. We need to protect their rights. We need to prevent
their displacement, both by all the mega destructive projects, as well as an idea of
agriculture whose very aim is to squeeze the farmers off the land. I remember in the early days,
the US Secretary of Agriculture said, you got to squeeze the farmer off the land like we squeezed
the last bit of toothpaste out of a toothpaste tube. After all, not that long ago, America was an
agrarian society, not even a century ago. So recognizing that most people of the world are
farmers and recognizing that it is possible to make the transition in places where the farmers
have been pushed off the land to have farmers again. The second is the fossil fuel agriculture,
the fossil chemical agriculture is the reason we have monocultures. When you allow nature to work,
symbiosis allows different plants to work together. The movement has started. Navdanya means nine
seeds grow together, 12 crops grow together in Mexico, the milpa system of the corn and the beans
and the squash. But when you put an external input of fossil fuels, then just one variety,
one species can go. So the monocultures have been driven. And we've been misled by a very
false indicator, which I realized when I was studying the Green Revolution in 1984.
The indicator is called yield per acre. But yield merely measures the commodity that leads the land.
It does not measure the state of the land. It does not measure the state of the farmer.
It doesn't measure the fossil fuel inputs and the energy inputs. It does not measure the quality
of the food you're eating. So when we talk about feeding the 8 billion, we need to talk about food,
not the nutritionally empty commodities that are being traded. 80 to 90% of the nutrition
is gone in food because of chemical fertilizers. Because chemicals don't feed the plant, it's
the symbiosis between the soil organisms and the micro-risal fungi which feeds the plant and the
plant feeds the fungi. And that's how the constant sustenance of life carries on. And our research
in India has shown that because we save seeds, so we intensify biodiversity. When you intensify
biodiversity rather than chemicals, you actually increase nutrition per acre. And what matters
in food is not the weight, what matters in food is the nourishment and the nutrition. So we could
feed two times the world population by shrinking the acreage, but intensifying the biodiversity.
And further intensifying the nutrition in that biodiversity, which is what happens both when
you use biodiversity itself and diversity of native seeds, which were bred for nourishment,
as well as encouraging the soil to feed the plant. That's organic farming, that's ecological
agriculture, and the data is clear that 70 to 80% higher nutrition in plants that have been fed
by the fungi rather than the fossil fertilizer. So intensifying these relationships, intensifying
biodiversity and changing the measure from yield per acre to nutrition per acre to wealth per acre,
our farmers are earning 10 times more by using no fossil fuels. They're all fossil fuel tree farmers.
And now my next book is going to be care per acre, that how much do you care for the land? How much
do you regenerate it? And we've done this for pollinators. We are seven times more pollinators.
We've done this for soil health and nutrition. Over 20 years in our valley, the nutrition
in the organic farms has gone up for nitrogen 99%. Soil nitrogen has gone up. And in the chemical
farms, when the synthetic nitrogen is being applied, it's declined by 14%. People think by
putting nitrogen fertilizer, you give the soil nitrogen. No, you make the soil lose its nitrogen
because you make it lose its organisms. Organic matter up 99%. That's the key to healing the cycle.
Zinc, such a key element, 37% decline in chemical farms, 14% increase in the organic farms,
manganese, 70% decline, 14% increase. It's these nutrients that are the cycle of nutrition. That
is the food cycle. And no matter which element you look at it, whether you look at yield, or you
look at your nutrition, or you look the greenhouse gas emissions 50% or more from this same
destructive food system that's causing us, causing for us 75% of the chronic disease
pandemic. It's just not working as a food system. It might be working as a trade system, as a
commodity system, as an agribusiness profit system, but it is not a food system. So the most
important transition is get out of this fossil system to grow real food. Thank you. Rounding
out the panel, Daniel Zeta. Yes, hello. Thanks for having me on again today. So I would actually
like to just challenge the question itself because I hear the story of we have a moral
imperative to feed the world goes around a lot around these parts because I live in the Midwest
of America where we have three feet of topsoil and so we have a lot of industrial farming.
And I would actually say that we have to challenge the presupposition to that question because I
don't think that the current system with its fossil fuel reliant components is actually
feeding the world in a very good way. Like Vandana says, a lot of people are still malnourished. I
would say a lot of Americans are actually malnourished even though they're obese because they're not
getting the nutrition that they actually need. But I've been telling local farmers around here
for years that we need to look at the divergent equation that is we've got a population that
is going up and we've got a farming system right now, especially in the Western world,
that is degrading the landscape. And so every year that goes on as we plant and we grow more
food in this way, we are actually degrading our land base. And so at some point it's going to end
in tears. So I would actually, I look it back at the history of Minnesota where my parents grew up
in, they were born in 1937 in a very small community called Raymond, Minnesota and Western
Minnesota, which was in the Tallgrass Prairie region. And my parents, well, my grandparents
were farmers. But before, like my parents, when they were brought up in the 40s, like they,
and even in the early 50s, before cheap refrigerated transport came along, there was,
on Friday nights, all of the farmers from all around the area would bring all of their produce
that couldn't be transported. So like you've got cream, you've got milk, you've got eggs,
you've got all kinds of stuff coming into town, all of the people would come off their farms
and Friday night, they would sell all of their produce to cooperatively owned buying groups
that would distribute this produce back to the people in the town. And then they would,
they would take their money and they would go buy the very few things they actually needed.
And then they'd go and they might actually go have a drink, they might go to a dance,
and then they would go home, and then they would, they would start all over on the work week again.
And so like, like Vandana said, the peasant culture in, in, even in America isn't that far gone.
Like my, it's, it's two generations removed. So do I think that we could do it again? Absolutely.
The, so as far as I'm concerned, we're not feeding the world right now as it is,
other than the peasants that are still around on their land that are doing it around the world.
But can we feed the world without fossil fuels in a growing population with,
and, and this is another qualification, the question, can we do it in a way that
safeguards the remaining life on the planet at the very least, at the most, while regenerating
that life on the planet? And I think that the answer is yes, because I've been, I've been growing
with my wife Stephanie, we've been growing 85% of our own calories on our farm, our 117 acre farm
here in central Minnesota for the past six to seven years. And every year, because we are
planting perennial systems, every year, our workload gets less and our productive capacity of the land
goes up, our carbon and our soil organic matter goes up. All of the indicators of health and the
ecology and of the animals and the people go up every single year. So do I think that we could
do this? Absolutely. The question is, will we do it in a way that is reactive or proactive? Because
if we, if we make this transition in a proactive way, we can, we can do all of this no problem.
If we do it in a reactive way, probably not, because like, like the other guest said,
there's going to have to be such a demographic shift from the cities to the rural areas to be
able to capture low density energy flows across the landscape, that we would end up spending so
much of our time just trying to rebuild infrastructure to make that happen, that I don't know if we
would actually make that happen in a timely manner. So the answer, yes, is absolutely no doubt about
it if we do it in a proactive way. Thank you. Thank you all for your opening statements. I have,
as you might imagine, tons of questions and building on what you just said, Daniel, the whole
purpose of this podcast, the whole purpose of these roundtables is to pass the baton to more
humans to think and act in a proactive as opposed to a reactive way. We're trying to change the
initial conditions of events coming our way. So one thing that I would like to understand,
the four of you on your podcast with me in the past and many other people that I've interviewed,
David Montgomery and Beakley and others are confident that we actually can grow, as Vandana
points out, more nutritious food with less fossil input. But a common thing that is implied is we're
going to need a lot more human labor input relative to today. In the United States, 3% maybe of the
population is involved in agriculture. I think in India, it's 75 or 80% or something like that.
What are the labor requirements from such a shift? And maybe you could also add,
what are the land requirements? Daniel, you said you have over 100 acres. I assume that's
much more food than just you and Stephanie and the people working there. But is there enough
land humans together to pull this off? And what are the labor implications? Because I know
I'm running a podcast and an organization and I have a huge garden and I haven't had time to
weed my potatoes or do a lot of things. So my garden is suffering because of my job. So we
would probably need a lot of the discretionary jobs moving back towards labor in the land.
Can each of you weigh in on that? Who'd like to start? I would. Daniel.
So pre-World War I, the percentage of the American population that worked on farms and
lived and worked on farms was 30%. The latest statistics that came out a couple of years ago
was that it's less than 1% of the American population. Now, another staggering number is
of that 1% that is actually growing food in this country, 1% of that 1% is growing it organically.
And I would probably venture a guess that, again, of that 1% of 1%, I would probably say another 1%
is actually doing it regeneratively. And so that's got to reverse around. But the thing that we
have to remember is that it is a cultural situation. Culture is in the word agriculture.
Permaculture revolves around the concept of permanent agriculture. But if we can't get
the general population to get more involved in our food production, it won't work.
I think the tragedy of industrial agriculture and fossil agriculture is to constantly increase
fossil use, including for fossil chemicals and external input dependence, but never count
to these inputs in any productivity and efficiency calculus, 10 to 15 times more inputs to generate
one unit of bad food. Over the years in India, I have talked to every agricultural scientist and
every agricultural economics and said, what are the inputs you calculate? The only input
they take into account is the farmer themselves. And I've always said, but the farmer is not an
input. The farmer is part of the system that is the culture of agriculture. You can't take
an end, an object, something that is the purpose and turn it into an input. And through that
definition, every technology that displaces the farmer by itself increases food production,
even though it does not. Glyphosate and Roundup decreases the work of farmers,
but is defined as increasing production by destroying all the biodiversity that could feed us.
And, you know, Emery Lovins did this work years ago, and I think we need to update it.
He showed that for every American, there were 250 energy slaves, more than the Nigerian.
And therefore, this is in the 70s, instead of the 4 billion population, the population was really
200 billion, with most of the population not eating food, but eating energy fossil.
And if we were to take today's population, this would be 3.35 trillion people,
except that they are energy slaves. And I think the way to have enough food for all
is to do what was done during the Great Depression and the Great Dust Bowl. You know,
the two crises were one crisis, the collapse of the economy and the destruction of the soil.
And what was done at that time, he created a conservation core to put people to work on
conservation and regeneration of soil and also create employment. So in countries where the
farmers are still there, like mine, we need to defend them. And they've been defending them,
you know, 14 months they were on the streets to say we will not disappear. We want to be small
farmers, we want to be sovereign farmers. But for the rest of the world, given that 50% emissions
come from industrial agriculture, and you can actually have negative emissions with an ecological
agriculture and organic farming, having a conservation core would be the way to put more
people in creative work. But that means redefining work for the healing of the land as creative.
It's been too often defined as drudgery. I remember journalists asking me, oh,
but you promote small farmers, therefore you support the oppression of women because it's such
bad work. And I just asked this journalist, I said, do you do gardening? And he said, of course,
it's so beautiful. I said, the same activity when you do it is fulfilling and beautiful.
And when a woman does it for her food sovereignty, it's oppressive. This apartheid must end.
We must recognize that growing of food is the highest location. In India, we have
Anadev Thais, the person who gives you food is the highest location in life.
That's the big cultural shift. And then the big cultural shift of instead of $400 billion of
subsidies for industrial farming, we shift that to say, go to the land, take care of the earth,
grow more food, solve the climate problem, and become physicians, not just of the earth, but
physicians of the people. The evidence is all there. Right now, industry only has propaganda,
nothing more than propaganda. The earth and people and farmers and the sick people who are
suffering are realizing there has to be another way we go. And people have to work in care instead
of fossil fuels being energy slaves to displace us from work. So in India, the farming and providing
food is a high status profession? Culturally, civilizationally, yes. It says very clearly,
farming is the highest and the lowest is trading, making money by trading. And right now, we put
trading at the highest and the trading companies are wiping out the farmers and the earth.
So yeah, I get a news feed. The AI has figured out what I like to read. And so I get these
agricultural dumps and whatever is coming on the Reuters or whatever. And so many of it is
absolutely absurd, right? Because our world is so confusing and disjointed and doesn't hold
together. So robots and AI apparently are going to take over even more of the labor as sort of
one of the messages you get. But then on the other hand, you also get the news about the kind
of stuff that Daniel's talking about and peasant movements. So what is going on? It's a land of
confusion right now. Something that I've been working on is I'm in a sea of conventional
agriculture and I've got a farm about the size of Daniel's. But there's an incredible hunger
for people to actually do what we're talking about here. And I mean, Andrew has brought his
class out this weekend. And there are people who are just, they want an opportunity to get onto the
land, okay? Even though there's this chatter about robots and all this stuff, a lot of people don't
buy it and they care about food sovereignty. And so my property, I farm a few acres at a time,
but I've got over 100 acres here. And how do you then manage land nowadays in the U.S.,
where the culture is big machines just take it all over and there's hardly any people.
But people want to come back to it. There is a huge hunger, but we don't have the structures in
place, right? We don't have the culture yet. And so I've got like six different businesses on my
farm right now, small farming businesses that we're all managing land together. And I'm sort of
the manager of the system in a sense, but mostly I try to share responsibility because
it's a lot to do. We have this vision and Andrew and I have worked on this for my property here,
where we do the stuff that we're talking about. And like Daniel's saying, every year you can see
more pollinators, more habitat for other creatures, soil quality going up, more people showing up to
make the place better. And it is kind of a, it is kind of an interesting situation to think about,
where the old view of, or the modernist view of nature is that it's separate from humans.
And we have to protect the nature out there from humans where, and then we're going to have these
places where we're going to intensively like get meet our needs. And nature doesn't really matter
in those places. That doesn't work. And humans that are intelligent on the landscape do incredible
things. And so I've been really impressed by the changes that you can see in a relatively quick
time. And so I think we're all kind of singing the same song here. But yeah, creating new systems
that get people on the land in places where they've been depopulated is really important.
Thank you, Andrew. Thoughts on this? Yeah. So I wanted to bring another perspective in,
because you know, Jason's in the wonderful fertile Lambit Valley, and Daniel's in, you know, the
beautiful Midwest. And these are known as these abundant, temperate climate landscapes. And
a lot of people in the world live in really marginal landscapes, marginal climates. Again,
I just came back from Sub-Saharan Africa. So my mind is in the Sahel, right? In places where, oh,
there's, you know, two or three months of rain per year. There's not, you know, people are planting
with the rainy season. There's not really irrigation potential. Senegal, where I just came back from,
is imports 70% of their food. And a lot of people are eating baguettes, right? People, you know,
in the morning and you see people eating French bread, right? It's imported wheat from Europe,
from Russia, from Ukraine, from Poland, right? So there's a lot of places in the world that are
already, they're supporting, well, they have large populations on really degraded landscapes
and are surviving on the imported food of industrial agriculture. And it's a big leap
that, you know, we potentially face here with the collapse of global transport of food, the collapse
of industrial agriculture as we know it. And so when I think about how many people can be supported
on land, my mind goes to more marginal landscapes or landscapes that are in a high state of degradation.
And suddenly we get back to landscape restoration, ecological restoration,
water table restoration, reforestation, water collection, bringing organic matter back into
soils, not just for agriculture, you know, we're talking about like cropping agriculture,
but also improving the overall vast landscape for grazing. So when I traveled up to the border of
Senegal and Mauritania just a few weeks ago, went through the Sahel that is really for,
you know, time immemorial, people are moving grazing animals down as the rains recede from the Sahara,
down through, you know, from the north to the south. And like just looking at the health of
that landscape, this isn't a, you know, fenced off, sectioned off divided agricultural landscape,
but this is a landscape that's feeding massive amounts of people with the movement of grazing
animals. So I think it's important to look at when we look at the carrying capacity of land,
when we look at how many people can live off of particular landscapes, we need to see the
overall state of the ecosystem, you know, nature, most of the world, we don't have, you know,
separate forest areas like we do in the United States. I mean, you have grazing leases on
national forest, but we have like wilderness areas, we have agricultural areas, but most places in the
world, there is not that fine line and natural areas are periodically grazed and herders and
nomadic herders are moving through. And so really working on ecosystem restoration is a huge component
to actually trying to come up with the sort of carrying capacity of any particular area. And
also, I mean, I think we need to be really compassionate for the places that are very
imbalanced and are really importing a large amount of their food at this point and are very
much reliant on the current global trade system, even within the US, I think of places like Las
Vegas or something, right, you know, that really have very little agricultural potential based
on their population, like, okay, is everybody going to have to leave Las Vegas, you know, once we
start working out the carrying capacity of the great basin agricultural potential, you know, so
I think we get into very precarious territory very quickly when we start talking about
even local areas feeding themselves, because so much of the world is dependent on the Midwestern
US at current shipping corn and soy out or the, you know, or what we're seeing with the Russia-Ukraine
war, you know, and grain moving around the planet. So, yeah, that's what I want to say.
Yeah, there's, boy, there's so many aspects to this. So, roughly 38% of the viewers of this
program are in the US and the rest are around the world. And clearly, there is not a one size fits
all response to agriculture and fossil fuel depletion. I could argue that the US is 90%
energy independent. And even though oil is peaking and will decline soon, I could argue that the
United States might be one of the last countries that would urgently see the need to do some of
the things that you four are talking about. So, my first two part question, take whichever part
you like, how can we proactively change our culture, a culture where intelligent, pro-future
young people see the value in becoming a land steward instead of more temporarily economically
attractive career paths. And related to that, our countries like India that have not
partaken in the fossil fuel smorgasbord to the extent that the global north has,
are they actually real examples of forward looking methods that the rest of the world
can learn from? How do we fuse these two things? I'm curious as to your thoughts.
I feel like make, I mean, one thing that I try to do in my work with my video production is to
make land restoration sexy and fascinating to people where it's like, wow, this is amazing.
Right? To bring the wonder into taking a dead or degraded landscape, ecosystem, agricultural system,
and the magic and the inspiration of actually bringing the life force back into
a place where it's been depleted. And so I think for young people, I mean, the inspiration of,
well, the story of taking what is, you know, troubled and degraded and depleted and
bringing back to life. I mean, it taps into people's personal feeling of bringing life into their own
souls, you know? So I think that there's a lot of, I think there's a lot of potential with
young people because any young person is paying attention is scared right now about the future,
about what their generations are going to look like. I have daughters in their 20s and the son
and his teens and, you know, I see young people facing this in my students. So,
and I think that looking at places in the world that have actually made that transformation,
right? So like a lot of my video work, video work recently, just with the Pawnee Foundation
in Maharashtra, India, showing villages that were in a devastated and desperate situation,
just a handful of years ago with water depletion and the collapse of their agriculture. And then
showing those stories of transformation, showing that it is absolutely possible in a short period
of time to restore local watersheds and bring back abundance, both food and natural and cultural
abundance to societies. Like I think that, I mean, my hope with my work is that, you know, to spark
people's inspiration because ultimately inspiration is the thing that's going to get people up in
the morning doing this work here. So you said a two-part question inspiring young people and
how that relates to? Well, and the US is maybe arguably the psychologically we're going to get
the urgency last relative to the areas in India that you just mentioned. So how do we, you know,
get ahead of that? Or do we? Yeah, I would say that the US is also, we are really like, we're
probably leading the world in depressed young people, you know. So in permaculture, like to say
the problem is solution because people that are feeling depressed and despondent, if you present
a viable pathway to them, then they can jump right on that and become some of your most
dedicated, you know, dedicated, most inspired activists in that sense. So I think that, I think
that there's a lot of room out there to spark the passion of young people in land restoration because
creating life, farming, growing food, planting trees, like it is a natural antidepressant. I mean,
it's something, it brings like love and joy into people's lives. And so I think once people kind
of get tapped into that, you know, I mean, that's, that's my hope for how the wave happens basically.
I agree with that brings me a lot of love and joy, a little bit anxiety because I haven't
weeded my potatoes, but I started digging them last night and I still have like 80% of the yield
that had I weeded them. So it's okay. Who else would like to comment?
Vandana and then Daniel. I think the young people are facing a triple crisis.
You know, they're facing the lack of a future, ecologically, but they're also facing the lack
of future because of the economic system that is every day telling them 99% of you won't be needed.
The robots and AI will do your work no matter what the work, whether you're a nurse, you won't be
needed. A professor, you won't be needed. School teacher, you won't be needed. Farmer, you won't be
needed. And, and they're all worried about the ecological crisis in a very, very deep way.
And the third is this entire fossil path has been a fragmentation of society.
You know, it, it tore society apart. So what we have to offer to future generations is here's
the best work in the world. You know, if you were totally free what, you know, I'm in Florence
and my friends today were telling me, there's this former head of Pfizer who's bought an organic
farm here, a former vice president or someone of Cargen who's bought an organic farm. So they
destroy the world during their money making days. And then they want to come and be organic farmers,
all of them, all of them. I mean, we at Navdanya Earth University, we run this one month course
in September, October. And we get the people from the IT industry and the banking and financial sector,
you know, they want to be farmers. And we have to show it as the vocation. And that 400 billion I
was talking about, if during the Great Depression, resources could be mobilized to restore the land
as the way of employment. Today, there is enough money in the world, stop funding the wars,
stop funding agribusiness and subsidies for fossil fertilizers, start putting it
to the service of young people so they can be in service to the earth. That's the best use of
money today. And that public money is our money. We paid those taxes. I think the war against the
earth is being carried out at the same time when other wars are being financed. But we could end
this war through people turning to the land and seeing farming as agriculture, the culture of the
land, learning from the land, learning from the earth. And the second real issue is, I think
everyone is suffering the impact of the bad food system in terms of health. I know top doctors,
the top cancer specialists in Italy, cancer specialists in Hawaii, cancer specialists in
New York, I know them because they invite me. And they are leaving their hospital profession
to turn to take care of the soil because they've understood by the end of the day our health is
connected to the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome is connected to the soil microbiome. And if the
young people realize, my God, I'm in the health care system by taking care of the soil. It's not
just restoration, but it's regeneration of society and the earth at the same time. Because we will
not be able to achieve any of this separately. It's only when human beings find a new meaning in life
that we'll be able to get the energy, our auto poetic energy, our energy, that we're able to both
create another future for ourselves and regenerate the earth at the time where the young people are
just seeing collapse, extinction, collapse, extinction. They're all marching against oil.
I think I hope your podcast reminds them that the place to march against oil is get it out of the
food system. I would say that the veneer of the story of modernity is starting to peel,
and it's peeling badly. And most young people especially are seeing the fact that like everybody
just said, their futures are looking pretty bleak if we keep going on the path that we're on. So
there is a lot of people that are feeling depressed and they don't know what to do. And I feel like
what people are looking for is purpose and meaning in their life, and that is lacking in this current
culture. And so like Andrew said, we are a keystone species on the landscape. And when we can become
land stewards where we're actually, you know, we're controlling all kinds of inputs and outputs
and the variabilities of going on, you know, we're like a conductor of an orchestra when we're
actually working on the land. That is a sense of purpose and meaning that I've never felt before.
And I sleep soundly at night, ever since I came back to my family farm and started doing this,
you know, because I was an activist for many, many years. And I felt powerless a lot of times
because there was just this crushing weight of all of the problems in the world. But when I'm
out with my cows or when I'm working with my hands in the soil, I don't think about any of that.
I just I'm present. And I think that's what a lot of young people are missing. And that's what
we're trying to do. It's what we are doing on our farm. We're focused on ecological
restoration as the first and foremost food production is a distant second, probably a
distant third education is a second education for young people. We hold internships and
apprenticeships where if an intern wants to come for a month or two or three, or the entire growing
season, we have spots for like four or five people every year. We would love to have apprentices
that come for multiple growing seasons. I'm just finishing up a student accommodation building
on the farm that'll host. It'll have five bedrooms. And we want to see like we're coming into a period
where we have to teach more people more things in a shorter period of time than ever in human
history. And the bottleneck is going to be how do we teach people to do this? The bottleneck right
now is to find the young people that are willing that are willing to give up their their privilege
of living in this this wealthy, wealthy society that has these temporarily fleeting
views of wealth where they feel like if I oh, if I go to college and I can get this degree and I
can get a job, I can make this money and I can do these things. It's just that's just not the way
it's panning out. So yeah, I think we just need to get people to see the value of going back to the
land. And in backing up the walking the talk in your case, this is being recorded on a Tuesday
morning. Four days ago, the Israel Palestine thing happened and you emailed me last night
about this and you had no idea that had even occurred because you were working
dawn to dusk in your fields and not looking at email and such. And I think so many of us are
distracted by all the things going on in the world that were disconnected from the land. Jason,
did you have any brief thoughts on on that question? Well, let me just kind of, yeah,
summarize and what's what we're all saying, I think one of the things that's come up
repeatedly is that time is a time is really important. Like, how much time do we have to
make this sort of turn? And in some places, they're going to be up against the wall and they're
going to act fast and with purpose. And other places like maybe the US where we have more slack
and the population is more confused, it's going to take longer. This brings up also something
that Andrew is talking about where so many places are still so reliant. Like, if we don't,
if it takes a while to do the ecosystem restoration and get the population to have these new skills,
there's still some reliance on the current system. So is there some sort of hybrid,
hybrid path, you know, a transition path that maintain where you're maintaining this trade
and these cheap grains that can be moved while at the same time, you're aggressively trying to
wean yourself from that. So, you know, those are the kind of things I think about, you know,
and the idea of apprentice systems is really important. Like, how do we train people? I know
that my son is looking into electrical apprentice system and there's like a union and you basically
apply and that you just you're paid to work with someone who's an electrician and help them out
and over some years, you then get your license. So, we desperately in places that have been
so overwhelmed with modernity and deep, you know, depopulation of the
loss of peasanthood, we need that. I often joke that unfortunately, I did not grow up as a Romanian
peasant. And because, you know, I'm 54, I started doing this sort of work when I was in my young
30s. So, I've had over 20 years now of this and I'm starting to get okay at it. But, you know,
if I had been, you know, I played baseball, I wrestled, you know, I did all these other things
with my time and I realized, oh my gosh, if I had grown up and I, you know, I've been to these
places where the six-year-old kid is hurting the sheep, right? And we just, we are completely
de-skilled in the things that are going to matter. And so, we do need time and we need to have,
you know, the graciousness to allow people who are coming in late to this and don't have the
skills. We need all these buffers around the transition. And so, and I do worry about, you
know, the other thing was some places are going to have the caring capacity and it's going to be a
softer path, maybe like where Daniel and I are. In other places, it's tough. There are a lot of
people there relative to the biocapacity. And that's true for nations and that's true for
regions within the U.S. So, yeah, I don't know how Phoenix and Las Vegas fare in this. I don't
think they fare well. And so, are there places there that they should go? So, people always
talk about this. We're talking about this for species right now, for assisted migration,
all right? Taking trees and plants and moving them in restoration projects.
We probably need assisted migration for humans as well. And it's one thing to say that within a
nation, that's difficult enough. But I really worry about the implications of what happens
between nations and what this does to reactive politics.
What in a visualization exercise can you imagine where each of you live,
Vandana, either in Florence or in your home in Northern India?
What does, if humanity does get its act together in your regions, can you paint a picture for me
of what your location looks like with respect to agriculture, food, and community in, say, the
year 2050? What would it actually look like with some details if you could conjure up some
image of that? So, of course, here in Tuscany, in Florence, the agriculture around outside
where industrial agriculture is taken over, on the hills, it's like it's been for thousands of years.
And in my region in the Himalaya, in the central Himalaya, because that's where I started to work
with the Chippko movement in the 70s. And then when I started to save seed, I encouraged women
to save seeds and do organic farming. Today, we have brought back so many of the forgotten foods.
And this year, I'm so happy to say, is the year of millets. 35 years ago, I took a pledge.
We are going to make these forgotten foods, the foods of the future.
They used to call them primitive, they used to call them backward,
they used to call them inferior, and foods that had to be driven out.
And these are tiny little terraces in the mountains, and they grow diversity. And the women celebrate
the fact that they have knowledge, that they haven't lost their seed, and most importantly,
that they work with their bodies. They're proud women. And they understand the roots of freedom.
Our freedom today is beginning with freedom from fossil fuels. And freedom from fossil fuels
in food is where we can all start. Each of us can start that. And I personally feel satisfied
that 50 years later, our mountains are richer in biodiversity, the prosperity of our farmers is
better. And because we are connecting the growers and the eaters, we are connecting the health of
the earth and the health of people, and we are regenerating the culture of caring for the land.
So in your case, in 2050, you hope it's just an acceleration of where you already are today,
in where you live? Absolutely. For us, it's been protect the earth. And you know, in our
particular farm, our water level has come up 70 feet. The difference in the peak heat wave last year
between our farm and neighboring farms was 25 degrees centigrade in the soil,
and 15% moisture in the soil. These are the systems that make living systems. And
we should not see the crisis as one dimensional. It's not just temperature. It's not just water.
It's just not malnutrition. All of it adds up together. A healthy food system is a solution to
all. And it's a luxury we cannot afford to ignore. There is, you know, a many people mentioned
modernity. Modernity assumes farmers must disappear farming without farmers, food without farm.
There's a gang called post eco modernists, whose job is to keep modernity alive while it's dying.
And they are pushing fake food and lab food, very tiny three or four of them, but huge money behind
them. And that's why all of us, both creating future options and remembering ancient options,
you know, 10,000 years of farming in India, 60,000 years of farming in Australia, 10,000 years in
by the Native Americans, across the Americas, not forgetting, not forgetting our rich
knowledges and not allowing the extinction of our rich biodiversity. That to me is the future
and the present for us. Thank you. In so many ways, this all reminds me of the fable between
the tortoise and the hare. And the hare is focused on efficiency because of this shiny energy surplus
that humanity found 100 years, 200 years ago. And the tortoise is working on the land and resilience
and protecting the land. And it just seems that that's so apt to our situation. Anyways,
I digress. Who else wants to answer that question? All right. Well, that's an easy question because
I moved to this area specifically because I could imagine a viable future in this particular
geography. Right. So, you know, here we are in the heart of the Willamette Valley, a large
temperate valley not far from the coast here at around 45 degrees north latitude. And the thing
about Oregon is it has really great urban growth boundary laws. So, they draw a line around the
urban center, the town, and you cannot have sprawl past that line, basically. So, you know,
where the town ends, the farms begin here. Also, the forest comes of the coast range,
comes right down here. So, I mean, I can imagine this still being a viable town because you can
have people living in this population center that's centered around rivers with a good gravity-fed
water source. And it's in very close biking or walking or, you know, horseback proximity to
wonderful well-watered farmland all around. So, I can see a thriving town that is recycling the
wastes of a human population center within an enclosed proximity around that town without,
you know, large transport. I could see a move to tree-based agriculture, which is so appropriate
in a place like this where we get enough rain to basically grow all sorts of trees. So, I could see
instead of having these vast, plowed, you know, conventional agricultural fields, I could see
the easy integration of perennials, trees, and other perennial crops into this type of system.
And I could see this really transitioning to a lot of the places that are analogous climates,
like places in Europe where a lot of the silver pasture, agroforestry, you know,
annual mix with perennial systems were so successful, like Vandana was talking about the,
you know, thousands of years of agricultural legacy in these places. I mean, a lot of it
has to do with your geography. And what is, you know, does your geography, is your geography
conducive to a future of downscaled fossil fuel use and more, you know, hamlet, village-based
lifestyle? And so, I mean, I would invite all the listeners of your program to do your own
analysis of your location and be like, is this a place that would have survived 500 years ago
and could survive 500 years in the future just based on the resources and the geography of that
place? And of course, we get into the complexities of like, and what's it going to look like in a
warming climate? And what are the risks? And, you know, for us, it's fires, right? So, and possibly
flooding. So, you know, there's all those considerations, but geography, you know, location,
location, location is a huge influence on what your future survivability and thriveability is
by 2050. So, just to say that in the future is rural, which you can get at postcarbon.org,
I actually have a whole worksheet where I try to help people assess their geography
for a future like this. So, how a food, energy, fiber, cover crop system, let's say integration
of crops and livestock in your region. So, okay, Nate, you had a podcast recently about the Lord
of the Rings. You kind of use that as the analogy. Remember that? I kind of, I kind of had this in
my head as well. So, this is going to maybe sound a little cheesy, right? But we've kind of got the
eye of Sauron, which is sort of, you know, represents this industrial age, which is very
destructive deforestation, you know, armies of orcs. And then we have the Shire. Okay. So,
in some ways, I'm envisioning kind of a shire future. And I'm going to get a lot of grief for
this because it's so corny. But I have been in places like this, though, this is what's interesting,
is that, you know, a lot of people can't imagine this, but I can because I've been in places where
imagine the most beautiful garden, you ever go to somebody's house and they have, they have just,
you walk, you walk in their backyard or whatever, and they've got the most incredible garden. You're
just like, everything is amazing. Just the flowers and the bees and the birds and the,
and you're just like, you can smell maybe the moist soil. And you're like, are you kidding me?
You created this? Well, there are parts of the world where you can go and it's, and it's also,
this is, this is the history of the Mediterranean Europe was, was like this in the 1800s and in
parts of Italy, for example, in Spain, where you could be on the top of a hill. And as far as you
can see, it was just this incredible landscape of garden. And there wasn't the metal there, you
know, people were using wood. So trees were the, you know, trees were, were grown so the,
the grapes could go from one tree to the other, you know, the arbor vita kind of thing.
I've been in a place where somebody's milk, you know, milking cows and then they're handing me,
handing me a cup of milk. And this is this beloved, beloved animal that has kind of the walk of the
village. I can imagine that here, where, and also where, you know, nobody is lonely. Houses are,
houses are going to have to be smaller. People are going to have to go outside and do a lot
of work. And you know, when I go out to the farm here, I meet, I meet the people that I'm,
that are out here also, like I say, I'm farming with other people. And, and so it's, it's kind of
fun in some ways. It's hard to, you have to sort of like put your shoulder in it once in a while.
And it would be nice to have more people to help out with certain tasks. So, and then I also have
friends who, who are like makers, the craftspeople, they make clothing, they make, they, they, they
know how to felt, right? And that's from wool and, and make, make clothing, vests and hats and stuff
like that. And, and leather work with shoes and housewares. I have a friend who, who's, who carves
bowls and stuff and useful things out of, out of local maple and madrone. And the other thing,
the thing that kind of still bothers me now is I'm in this sort of like, you know,
preshire existence in my head sometimes where things are just aligning right even today. And
then, you know, the plane come flies overhead or I hear, I hear some, some, some guy, you know,
revving his engine on the road a mile away and it breaks it. And so imagine that's all, that's all
really diminished. And in the spring here in May, the birdsong, you go, you get the dawn chorus.
And it is just, it's ridiculously loud. So what if that's more of what we hear as well?
So anyway, that's my corny, shire, shire vision. I knew you were corny and I invited you just the
same because you have a pure heart and a lot of agroecological wisdom, my friend. Daniel.
So what I envision is, I mean, first off, I want to talk about where I live, where my farm is in
south central Minnesota is a place it's very unique in the fact that just to the west of us,
it was tall grass prairie as far as the eye can see. And just to the northeast of us, it was the
big woods. But right where we are, there was a band of oak savanna tall grass prairie before white
people came and destroyed it all. And every single city park that you've ever been to around the world,
as far as I've ever seen around the world, they're all patterned after that oak savanna.
And it's a beautiful landscape, just grasses rolling hills and grasses and large spreading trees.
And so what I could see is, I could see the trees that we've already planted, the hundreds of oak
trees, the hundreds of hardy pecans and chestnut hybrid chestnut trees and hazelnuts. I could see
those dotting the landscape as far as the eye could see instead of the corn and soy that's
all around us right now. And not only the landscape would be beautiful, but what I'm most excited
about is all of the people. When I was young, there was still a small enough small farming
community where if I rode my bike up our gravel road, every single farm site had people on it.
There was kids my age, there was people working the land, they were always home. If they needed
help, they just came over, they asked, you know, can you come give me a hand? Now they're all dead.
And all of their kids that inherited the land rented it out to one farmer that owns like
5,000, rents 5,000 acres and has a combine that's worth more than our entire farm
that doesn't he doesn't grow one calorie of food that he can eat. And so I just I love the idea of
relocalizing and repopulating the rural areas where there's there's life again. Not only is
there life in the ecology, but there's life in the culture. Thank you. I am going to ask a difficult
final question, given how far away we are, at least in the global north from your your visions,
what do you each think are some important first steps to get in that direction, either at a national
governmental scale, or in communities, localities and even from individuals to get started on the
path that that each of you are are charismatically outlining in this conversation.
And agricultural subsidies.
Like that's got to be the first thing we are right now in America, we spend $182 billion on
agricultural subsidies that has directly destroyed or greatly diminished the agricultural capacities
of other foreign countries, because they cannot compete with those cheap, imported grains that
are actually not good calories. They're just they're just hollow calories. But,
but yeah, if we if we end that, and that would actually let the market change a lot of this for
us, like we in America, we talk about we live in this free market economy, but we don't we live in
this weird corporate subsidized and corporate welfare state that's greatly skews the outcome
of what our cultural desires and wants are, but also to reframe the cultural question of
what do we want? What do we want from an agricultural system? What do we want from a culture?
Those that those have to be part of it. I totally support Daniel about ending fossil
subsidies, because all the subsidies in agriculture are for fossil inputs. And when I did my book on
the Green Revolution in the 80s, I realized that the chemical agriculture could not have been introduced
in countries like mine without subsidies, because it is so unviable. Farmers know it destroys the
soil, it takes 10 times more water. Now we know it is a big contributor to the greenhouse gases.
The second is I really do feel and this has been my life's work, is we must end patterns on seed
and patterns on life. It is ecologically, ethically, epistemologically, a fraudulent claim. And it is
pushing farmers into debt. It is pushing farmers in my country to suicide. So no subsidies to make
an unviable system work and no patterns to claim we are the creators. I think we need to do some
ecological gerrymandering and we need to redistrict our political boundaries to correspond to watershed
boundaries. So a voting population is also a has the same lines of control as a watershed population
as a catchment basin. And I think that if our political will was aligned with ecological
boundaries, then we would be able to start to look at this land in a way that would give us the basis
to create this regenerative agriculture, regenerative culture that we're talking about.
And the first step ahead of that is to explain to people ecology and what a watershed is,
perhaps. JB. Take interest class. Take interest class. You can get it. OSU has it online.
So permaculture online, one of the best online permaculture classes you can get. Okay,
enough sales. All right, so a few things I've got kind of broken up into four categories.
Laws. Land use laws. Andrew talked about how like in Oregon, you've got this boundary around
cities. In many ways that's good. It's protecting the land so developers don't get it. But it's also
keeping the land from being redeveloped in ways that are supportive of what we're talking about.
So we're kind of in a catch-22 here. And so there are models though that allow for
easing that. So Wales has what's called the One Planet Development Program. And if you can
basically go to your local land use commission or whatever and say, hey, I need to repopulate this
land because I'm going to live there. I'm going to be an ecological, agroecological farmer and
have livelihood based in that place. Then they will allow you and you've got to make like an
eco home. So it's really interesting. So anyway, we need creative ways so that we can get more
people onto the land in places like the United States that have been depopulated. India's fortunate
that it still has this village system. The other thing is private networks. So we talked about
like apprenticeships and internships and farms that provide land access like I'm trying to do
for people. A lot of people want to have, you know, a few acres or if they have livestock,
they want 20, 30 acres for a small business. The local landscape is not set up in those
kind of units. So how do you take these big farms that exist and the larger parcels in places like
the US and manage them in smaller units? I think we need more models like that and demonstrations.
Local nonprofits do an amazing amount of work, amazing work in ecological restoration.
There are local watershed councils, soil water conservation districts, land trusts.
They all are hungry for funds, volunteers, landowners willing to work with them.
And there's a lot of support for these programs at state and federal levels. There's funds available.
It's a grant program. A lot of cases making those easier, more people can go and help those groups
in any way possible. Come out and plant, you know, native prairie, for example,
as happens around where I live. And the other is getting into education and open source knowledge.
So Bandana was talking about patented knowledge and stuff like that.
It's amazing how underfunded our universities are for basic crop breeding. They've outsourced
that to private industry. And I know of all these amazing plant breeders that struggle to get funding
to breed the locally adapted varieties for dry farming, for example. And then think about also
technologies, patenting of equipment. We need an amazing amount of new set of tools that is amenable
for this future. And again, you could go to other parts of the world where they make stuff at the
right scale. And we don't in places like the U.S. anymore. And getting access to these tools is
actually difficult and expensive. So those are the kind of things I see that would really be helpful.
Excellent. This has really been informative and inspiring. We just have a few minutes left.
I would ask each of you for any closing words of wisdom for the viewers and listeners of this
program. JB, start with you, then Andrew, then Daniel, and then Bandana.
Well, I hope you've been inspired. I go between when I'm not actually outside looking at birds or
working on the farm, I can get kind of depressed and upset by the state of things. But I am so
lucky that I have this opportunity to be out and moving and creating and seeing how the
Web of Life responds. So it gives you a sense of purpose. It's good for your body and you get good
food into your body. And so really, everybody, the greatest antidote to what you may be feeling
might be getting out and participating in any way you can like in what we've been talking about.
Yeah, the thing that keeps coming up for me in this whole conversation has been mentioned a little
bit, but is just the migration of people. It's happening right now in the U.S. and other places
in the world. It's a huge political flashpoint. But I think that the migration of people and the
redistribution of people from places that can't support populations to places that can support,
that are supporting agricultural surpluses, I feel like that's going to be a really big trend in the
coming decades. It's going to be something that dominates many of our lives. And I invite people
to have compassion and to kind of step outside and think of the movement of people going on as
a necessary, like Jason was saying, a necessary redistribution of resources. And I hope that
the new cultures that emerge from this redistribution, this inevitable redistribution of
people can be flourishing and can work on, can create new patterns where humans can actually,
like we can be at peace and actually thrive with these new formulations of cultures and
populations that are that are inevitably going to happen. So I invite people to be brave.
Right now, we have a helper on the farm named Victoria. She called us up about three months ago
from Southern California. She never done anything like this before. She grew up in a city,
large town, and she's just never been on a farm really before and just knew that looking at her
family and looking at everyone that she knew that was firmly in the hamster wheel of modernity,
that they weren't happy. And she's 26 years old. She's like, I don't think I want to do that.
And so she didn't know where to look, but she found us the first thing she found on Woof,
which is the Willing Workers on Organic Farms website. And she called us up. She called us three
times just like, you know, she really wanted some reassurance that this was all going to be okay.
I'm like, yes, it's going to be okay. Just jump. And she did. She drove all the way out and she's
been here for two and a half months now and she's here for another month. And I've it's just been
great to watch her blossom and like learning all of these skills and learning the interconnectedness
with the nature and with with with working with your hands. It's it's just that's what makes it
worthwhile for me is to watch the young people come and actually understand this and and viscerally
understand the connections. So yeah, I just invite everybody that is watching this that's confused
and doesn't really know what to do with their lives. Take a chance and jump and you will not be
disappointed. And no matter what you're concerned about, could be climate havoc, it could be species
extinction. It could be the fact that people are hungry, or it could be that everyone around you is
sick. If we turn to a food and farming system that takes care of the earth and through that care
addresses all of these problems, we realize that it is time to stop eating oil and taking care of
the soil. Thank you and thank you all for your bold and visionary work on these issues.
And I'm I'm proud to call all of you friends and colleagues and to be continued. Enjoy the rest of
your week and good luck working in the soil and thanks a lot. Thank you. If you enjoyed or learned
from this episode of The Great Simplification, please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast
platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com for more information on future releases.
