Greetings. May we live in interesting times. World events are occurring faster than my
ability to opine on them. Things are very busy. This podcast is growing. Relationships.
I'm about to be hiring Chief of Staff. Some communications help. I have a lot to say about
the world. And I really today just wanted to do a brief update. Very brief on what's
going on in the world as well as the purpose of these frankly reflections and what I have
planned for the near future. And I have no outline here. This is just a complete off-the-cuff
riff Friday afternoon, October 27th. And hopefully my team can get this out later today or tomorrow.
Israel situation. To be blunt, the purpose of this podcast is never going to be to give real
time intel and analysis on what's going on in the world to make better investment decisions or
advise people on portfolios. The entire purpose of this podcast and this work is to inform humans
around the world for the broader systemic picture of what's coming. Now, of course, real world events
can change what the distribution looks like. So in Israel, my take, they don't have the manpower to
do a full ground invasion of Gaza and protect their northern border. They are probably going to
continue, unfortunately, pushing the citizens of Gaza towards Egypt and Jordan will probably
continue to be a growing humanitarian disaster. The United States is moving a significant amount
of our defensive military capacity to the region. This morning, there were a drone and airplane
attacks in Syria. We announced we're putting troops in Syria, logistic troops, the real troops
are probably much more than that in an attempt to cut off supply of military equipment from Iran
to Hezbollah in the north. So this all has the earmarks of a broader
unfolding conflict in the Middle East with no easy outcomes, as I mentioned last week.
It does seem, especially with new House Speaker Johnson being elected yesterday, that
Ukraine may be thrown under the bus with military aid and support because
he's going to separate funding for Israel and funding for Ukraine. And this puts a very real
risk of the desperate situation in Ukraine for them to do something to call attention back to
that arena. So there are all these things that are unfolding and I'm not an expert on that other
than to say a lot of energies in the Middle East and a lot of the world is watching the United
States and this is the first or the second or third of many
battles that are defining the transition from the unipolar to multipolar world order.
Simultaneous with this and not completely unrelated is a growing financial crisis in the
United States. We have added a trillion dollars of debt in the last three months and the next
trillion will happen even faster because of social programs, because continuing the guarantees
that were made in prior years, because we're adding all this military support to the rest of the world.
What's happening is historically interest rates were of U.S. treasuries, which all the other
interest rates are pegged off of have been a representation of how strong the economy is
and people's inflation expectations. That is still the case, but increasingly there is the
who will buy this stuff and what are the risks of buying in a biophysically constrained world.
Would I want to hold U.S. treasuries or gold or oil or Bitcoin or land and around the world,
people are starting to ask that question. As the interest rates approach much higher levels,
like 5% on the 10-year note, what ends up happening, many things, but briefly,
lots of regional banks especially have huge mark-to-market losses on their fixed income
investments that they bought when interest rates were one or two or three percent and now they're
five percent, so there is a solvency issue looming in the banking system. Additionally, the higher
interest rates bleed into mortgage and car payments, house payments, things like that,
that people have to pay eight percent or something like that when our cultural expectations were
in a much lower interest rate environment. I'll see if Lizzie can find the reference for this,
but approximately 50% of U.S. citizens can't afford a car payment right now, so forget about
the whole electric car argument. People can't afford cars, period, and part of that is due to
interest rates. By the way, higher interest rates will also crimp the scaling of renewable energy
because interest is one of the largest expenses of renewable energy. This is all happening together,
and I don't want to give a play-by-play on this other than to say that the great simplification
runway is getting shorter. The reason I wanted to do this frankly today is to reflect on why I'm
doing these franklies and what I want to say. What is the purpose of my work, the organization,
the Institute for the Study of Energy in our future, our growing organization work, our networks,
the podcast, the frankly? I think broadly it is to build broader awareness to the scout team of
humans, that's you, watching this, seeking out the signal to noise, wanting to play a role in
their own lives in their community in the broader world. The second purpose, not so much the podcast,
but with our work, is to change the consciousness of those in power, because those in power have
the optionality to make outsized choices on our institutions, our goals, our policies,
and really outsize movements. That's the goal of my work, to change the initial conditions
of the things coming our way. I thought I would instead of have one of these fleshed out because
I've been so busy with other things this week, and I'm ashamed to admit that after two weeks ago
about taking a knee and doing my own tasks, I have someone delivering firewood to the house
this afternoon. I wasn't able to find time to do it myself. It's a mild insult to my manhood,
but it's a greater insight, insult, demerit to my trying to live more holistically on the land and
do things at a human scale pace. Well, I'm too freaking busy, so I'm buying firewood.
Without further ado, I would like to give a 30-second each overview of some of the
franklies I plan to do between now and the end of the year. The first one mentioned last week,
I'm going to title artificial intelligence and real ecology, and in that, I'm going to
steal man, the argument from those who are advocating that AI can solve our climate problems
and many other problems and boost productivity in the world, but compare that to real ecology and
what the rules are of nature and how artificial intelligence at best will be intelligent but
not wise, and I'm going to expand on that a little bit. I also want to talk about something
like the flowchart of the future and show how all these things, interest rates, governance,
social inequality, poverty, nuclear power, debt, all these things are relevant to our future,
but certain things are more important and certain things shout louder to our brains,
and it turns out that the things that are probably most important, the biosphere, the oceans,
biodiversity, are going to be least important in the political and individual responses,
so I'm going to do a choreography of how these different topics relate.
Next up, in rough order, I don't know yet, I would like to offer a framework for philanthropy,
given the great simplification overview that we're unpacking on this site.
What are seven or eight categories that philanthropists around the world are missing,
given the systemic overview, and what are two or three ideas in each of those categories?
And I think I also, though I don't have this planned, do a similar thing for governance,
for communities, and for individuals. Another, frankly, I have planned a title,
Renewable Energy, right answer to the wrong question, and give a very detailed overview
of what renewable energy can and can't do, and the punchline is that I am pro-renewable energy,
eventually humans are going to use predominantly renewable energy, but it's the size and the
scale and the complexity of what that looks like is very different than most of the pro-renewable
crowd is portraying. A related, frankly, I would like to do is what if solar panels were free,
and the punchline is that not much would change, and especially with regard to our
environmental situation, it would probably make climate change, and plastics, and biodiversity,
and all that worse. You'll have to stay tuned for that. Another thing that I'd like to talk about
is the seven lenses with which we view the future, and we start from the individual emotional
response that we experience every day, all the way through economic and cultural, all the way to
universal, which is the pale blue dot perspective of this blue-green earth that we live on.
I have some thoughts there. Another, frankly, that's long overdue is what about nuclear power?
AI and nuclear, nuclear fusion, what role does nuclear power play in a energy constrained future?
What does this mean for the environment, for safety? I'm working up some thoughts on that.
Another that I should probably do sooner or later is the relationship between debt
and oil. Specifically, we are raising our debt at almost a billion dollars an hour in the United
States, and we're also drawing down the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and the relationship between
those two is never connected. The amount of debt that we have, which is now 34 trillion dollars,
is more oil probably than is left extractable in the earth. A long time theme here is that
money is a claim on energy, and debt is a claim on future energy, and this will not end well,
but I want to explain the relationship between those two. I also want to talk about something
I'm learning from my coach, which is a behavioral stack of modern humans. We have
our cells and our organs. We have our enteric or our digestive system. We have our reptilian
fight or flight system, our limbic system, and on top of all that is our cognitive system,
where we look at facts and charts and data. That little tiny piece on top, we think controls
all of it, and that is not true. It's more like a pyramid shape. If you don't have a vertical stack
of alignment between these things, your enteric system, your parasympathetic, your limbic system
is satisfied and not dissatisfied, the cognitive thing ends up being the tail wagging the dog.
I have personal insights in this, and I will never be anyone's guru. I'm an analyst that's
trying to describe the systemic overview, but as I've said previously, I'm not only an analyst,
but I'm a client, and so I'm learning about this stuff as well. Related to that, and I'll stop this
non-exhaustive list of ideas I'd have to discuss, is something that my coach has advised me to do,
which I'm doing half-ass because I'm so busy, is the concept of becoming less focused on productivity
and more aware, as shifting from focus to awareness. I'm trying to do these things
called silent Saturdays, where I don't look at email, I don't look at social media, I don't make
phone calls on Saturdays, and I should take that time to reflect on what I learned and slow down
and get back to human scale. Of course, given the demands of this job, especially when I'm talking
to people in government and people that have deadlines, I can't do that per se yet, although
I aspire to, but I have had these timers set so that every hour on Saturday, I check for five minutes
on things that I might need to do and then nothing else for the next hour. I have been able to manage
that, but I think at the core of everything we face is humans in our culture that are watching
this podcast. We can't not have trauma from what we're experiencing in this culture,
and we suppress a lot of it. I think at the end of the day, the more humans we have that are healed
and not riding the one-legged stool of dopamine, but have a more balanced portfolio of
serotonin, oxytocin, endorphins, and have a quiver of arrows of activities that we can get these
evolutionary neurotransmitters without being hijacked by networked tribalism and everything
that calls the siren song of our immediate attention, the better off we'll be to meet the
future halfway. So with that, I'm going to do some chores outside and shut down for the day,
and hopefully my team can get this out soon. These are my thoughts. I have a lot more to share.
I'm on to use Douglas Rushkoff's term team human, and more to say soon. Be well, everyone.
