So how does wealth and equality interact
with the planetary limits we face
and our ability to develop responses?
And how do we overcome that?
And what are some primary challenges you see
with eventually implementing those type of solutions?
Yeah, you know, there's been a lot of research
about income inequality, some excellent research.
So we know Piketty, but we have so many people
at the World Bank and OECD and everyone looking into this.
And it's just always the same conclusion.
It's this, what you see with empirical data updates
is for example, is that this idea of trickle down economics,
it's hard to find in the data.
There's not really empirical evidence for it.
And what you do see is that there are actually
a lot of negative consequences from it.
So there's a lot of reduced trust between citizens,
from citizens in their government and their institutions.
And there's also environmental impacts,
which is very interesting.
Because there's more income inequality,
people have a way stronger drive
to display a certain kind of lifestyle
because you can fall so deeply on the social ladder.
And so the environmental impacts,
there's a lot more conspicuous consumption.
As I think Thomas Veplen, an economist, coined that.
So if anybody, I'm sure you're familiar with these drops
and these long lines around stores.
And you always wonder, who stands in line
for shoes for five hours?
And that's that kind of thing,
like the status, because it's rare.
And so you go there to impress other people,
even though they're just shoes
that are ridiculously expensive.
Or handbags or any kind of stuff.
Really, t-shirts.
But so what you see is that income inequality,
first of all, you see a relation with,
like I said, there's reduced trust.
There's also a worsening of social inequality.
So you also see a propensity
for more racism, sexist behavior, that sort of things.
But you also see that because of that reduced social capital,
so to say, people can come together much less easily
to demand these changes that they wanna see.
The majority of the population wants the government
to act on climate change.
And the fact that it doesn't happen also
is in that sense related to income
and wealth inequality.
Except if they really knew what true action
on climate would entail,
which is less material consumption around the world,
then maybe fewer people might advocate
for doing something about an open question.
I don't know if that's true.
So first of all, I think on a global scale,
yes, much less consumption, very obvious.
I would say that most of the consumption,
the luxury consumption lies in the West.
So in the rich world, so in developing countries,
in let's say new economies,
which is basically most of the world,
growth makes sense.
Also in material use,
their carbon footprints per capita can increase
because it goes towards meeting their basic needs.
I think it's a very different story
for the richer economies.
But again, I don't know if that is such a loss.
I don't know about you.
I think a lot of people on this podcast,
and I think in general,
they just do these things because they happen.
I think a lot of the things,
when you look at the circular economy,
it's just the new ways of doing things
that really aren't that hard.
And I think there's some really interesting research
in how to do these social needs
that we have met today, what we're doing,
and we're meeting our social needs
through quite resource-intensive ways.
And you can do them differently.
And what it would take is way more labor intensity
in exchange.
And I think that's a win-win
because we are already craving that.
Sorry?
Like food, for one example.
We could grow good, healthy, nutritious food
without a lot of fossil inputs,
but we're gonna need a lot more hours
and percentage of population
working on regenerative agriculture,
spending time in the garden and the fields
rather than on the internet
or whatever else they're doing.
Local, locally produced, that's an excellent example.
There's even a gender angle.
I spoke to a couple of people at the UN
and we were looking into that and asked,
especially lower income men,
because income inequality is affecting men
and women differently.
So the income inequality,
it's about basically you're eroding the middle, right?
And so for women, it's about 50, 50.
So women end up in the upper class about 50% of the time
and the other 50% is getting poorer.
For men, it's 30, 70.
So it's lower...
70 being what?
That's going to the lower class.
Yeah, so the impact inequality is impacting them more.
Some experts at the UN said that they were looking into,
well, what if they do this growing food locally?
Because that's something that is very valuable.
You can distribute that.
It's something that you can produce.
You can do that with your hands,
not everybody likes sitting behind a computer all day.
So there's even a gender angle there
that could be very interesting.
Well, this gets back to your Thorstein-Veblen comment
about conspicuous consumption and status,
is right now you don't get status from being a farmer
in the United States like a local regenerative farmer.
You get status from being a computer programmer
or a developer of shopping centers or whatever else.
And that ultimately has to change, I think,
before we're going to have a big cultural change.
