You recently wrote, co-wrote a paper underestimating the challenges of avoiding a ghastly future,
which cataloged a lot of risks to biodiversity, species, ecosystems. Could you just give us
an overview of your general findings, either in that paper or generally,
you know, what percent of natural ecosystems have been lost in the last 50 years, animals, etc.?
Well, I think one of the most important contributions I have done in science
has been to try to understand what is the magnitude of extinction crisis. And I was
fortunate to go to Stanford to go to a sabbatical and meet Paul Ehrlich. And talking to him,
I developed these ideas and in where I was, I wrote the first paper on extinctions,
species extinction in Mexico in 1992, something like that, when there was the first president
in Mexico who was very neoliberal. And at that time, I thought, I wrote that being so neoliberal
could be really good. We will take care of the important thing of the environment,
but also could be the tipping point to make humanity in really bad shape. And then I went
to Stanford and I got exposed to so many people and so many ideas. And then one of the first
questions that I wanted to answer is, at that time, many people would think that extinction was bad,
but it was part of evolution. Let's remember that evolution works with extinctions and
speciation and that's one of the basic processes of evolution. So working there, first of all,
I was one day listening to Paul Ehrlich talking about a population's extinction,
and it occurred to me that that was one of the critical points. We were not understanding the
magnitude of extinction because we were looking at the species that become extinct. It's like,
if you go and see the problem of a big pandemic like they were having now,
just counting the people who died. Obviously, this is just the final end and a tiny part of
the whole problem. So at that time, I wrote a paper with Paul Ehrlich on what we call the
wave array for the first time, what was the magnitude of population extinction in a whole
group in the planet, in this case mammals. We were able to gather a database with the
distribution of species in the 1900s and the current distribution. That was around 2000.
And what we saw is a brutal, literally a brutal destruction of populations of many species.
The range was very big range. 100% was contracted to 2015, 50%. So the range
contraction obviously implicates the losing the populations. That was the first time I could see
that the magnitude for what we were doing to the planet and biodiversity in terms of extinction
was really big. So you're saying that if you just count the extinctions like the Dodo bird
or the Tasmanian tiger, that you're actually underestimating the magnitude because there's
a difference between population extinction and species extinction? Definitely. That's
definitely very important. Let me give you an example. If we have jaguars in Mexico,
it doesn't matter if they become extinct here, if there are jaguars in Brazil in terms of the
role and function they play in ecosystems and in the provision of environmental services
that is all the benefits we get from nature. So the local disappearance of populations
are basically like extinctions called extinction. Is that what's called an ecological extinction?
Yes, it could be. It's an ecological extinction. It is similar. Ecological extinction is when you
have a species in an area, let's say first of all population extinction, all species are made up
by several populations and when the species become extinct we have lost all the populations.
But those populations at the local and regional level are so important that when you lose them
you lose the value and it's like it was a whole extinction. Can you give an example of
one of those species and that that happened? Just as I said, the elephants, if you see the
distribution of the elephants, they were just at the beginning of this century almost one million
elephants. 20 years ago. 30 years ago there were one from one million and now there are 250,000
elephants in the whole world, in the whole world, in whole Africa. So if you see the map of the
distribution you will see an area most of Africa will be covered by the distribution of elephants.
Now you will see just dots, dots in the continent, small populations dispersed throughout the
continent. So it means that we have lost elephants in most of Africa and by losing them we have lost
the role, what they do. And there are many roles that the elephants have and clearly give you two
examples. On the one hand for instance they disperse lots of plants that they eat and then
maintain the savannah because they destroy trees to eat the bark. So the savannahs when you lose
the elephants are invaded by scrups and trees and eventually you lose the savannah and you lose the
grasslands with so many animals. So the elephants are critical to maintain the savannah.
But recently other scientists have shown that when you lose the elephants and other
ungulates and other species of larger mammals that feed on plants, the grasses grow more
larger and on those grasses the populations of many rodents exploit, become very abundant
and those rodents have many diseases that affect humans. So by losing the elephants you are losing
the composition of the plants and then this is causing a massive increase of rodents and those
rodents transmit diseases to humans, to domestic animals and to wildlife. So who will think that
the elephants, the presence of the elephant will be linked to the presence and the abundance of
rodents in Africa? A conservation biologist might think that but you're right, we don't normally
think in terms of systems. There is that story I don't know how true it is about the elk and the
wolves and the ecosystems in the Yellowstone, similar sort of thing. It's very similar and
it's basically correct. Yeah, so in the case of the elephants just to
highlight that, what are the main reasons that we've gone from a million down to 250,000 in the
last 25 years? Well, basically it's poaching and we are losing habitat, they're losing habitat more
as more humans, there are more human populations, we need more food so more habitat of the elephant
is being destroyed to plant crops. But basically the main problem is we're still killing elephants
for their ivory. Just to give you an idea, 15 years ago an elephant was being killed every
15 minutes, an elephant was illegally killed. Right now, even now an elephant is being killed
every 40 minutes illegally to take their tusks to the markets, especially in China.
What is really incredibly surprising is that the tusks are useless, they use them for
ornamental and for some crafts, but we're killing the elephants because this huge appetite for
ivory. And now the the mafias in China and in Africa and Mexico, everywhere in the U.S., the
mafias dealing with the trade of animals and in this specific case of African elephants
have more power, more money, more guns than the guards and many times that the local government.
It's a real, real bad problem.
