So in your writing, Giorgio, you use a French word,
des punts. Could you describe what it means and why it's important?
Yeah, that's okay. That's as wild as our ideas go. It's ideas that we've developed here in group
with Giacomo D'Alissa, my colleague here, my co-author, another Italian scholar,
sociologist and author, Romano, that recuperated this idea from a strange French philosopher,
Giorgio Battaic, who has written very crazy sexo-sazomadoschistic
novels and philosophies, etc. So a very strange and controversial character, Giorgio Battaic,
but a very original and unique thinker. Some people are appalled by what he wrote, others,
like one of Romano from whom I took this idea, say that there are things from Battaic that
are so brilliant they can be useful even if there are many other ideas that one wouldn't share.
So one core idea of Battaic is that societies make meaning and find joy, if you want,
by expanding their excess. So rather than thinking in terms of societies being in a constant battle
against scarcity, have to think like, okay, what is it that gives us pleasure? And at the end of the
day, the pleasure and where we make meaning as societies is in expanding whatever surplus
we might have, surplus of energy, surplus of human labor. And if you think that, I don't know,
ancient Egypt was expanding this surplus to make pyramids and create a meaning as trying
to reach the goal with the pyramids. In a modern capitalist society or in the American dream,
you might say, you know, you're expanding it in the shopping malls and in the...
The cornucopia of plastic things around, et cetera, and the gas bustles, the cars.
But we are expanding and it's important to understand that, let's say, diagnostically,
analytically, that's where societies make meaning and where they find joy, it's in their expenditure.
So we're trying with this idea to say, to break a little bit the mold that a society of the
growth is only a society of restriction, of confinement, of doing less and less, you know,
and think like, where would we expand our extra energy? What sort of joy would we create by expanding
the surplus? Less as it might be, there will still be a surplus above our immediate basic needs.
Where would we expand it and how? And we take there the ideas of expanding it,
that the importance is to expand it collectively, you know, in collective fists,
in collective knowledge, humanities, curiosity, but it's important to keep in mind these
demands, these unproductive and non-utilitarian expenditure, that you are not expanding in
order to produce more in the future or do something else, but you are simply expanding
and that's the moment, actually, that you're at your happiest, if we might put it this way.
I love that idea for two reasons. First of all, as we have, you're a biophysical economist, so we
have resource and energy inputs and resource and energy outputs that give us brain experiences.
And right now, a lot of that energy input, we always look at it as, what does it produce?
So, this is, you know, you and I and people in our network are, in some ways, peddlers of fear,
because we're talking about limits and that society's going to have to change,
because for climate and energy reasons and many other reasons, including equity and some of the
things you're working on, what we're doing now cannot continue. And that is a fearful thing,
but we actually need to lead with a carrot or something creative and hopeful. And,
de Ponce, to me, my quick take on it is, it's where can we imagine that we could expend our
surplus in the future, even if it's a smaller surplus. And I often say that after basic needs
are met, which for many humans, they're not, but after they're met, most of the best things in life
are free or close to free from a biophysical perspective. So, is that kind of what you're
getting at there? Yes, yes. And it's important, these things that they are free, to remain free
and expend them free, because this is where pleasure is coming. So, this yesterday, you were
saying it's two hours, but you're being very unproductive now. You could stay and work and
check emails, et cetera, et cetera. But you're being unproductive, sleeping for two hours,
doing nothing. You're basically nothing. But it's also like a huge bonus to your quality of life
and your well-being. And it's precisely things like that, that we need to recover the capacity to
expend things that they are for free and expend them for free, because we think capitalism is
the opposite. It's like everything is squeezed in order to use it, in order to produce more. So,
it's like, how can we squash the siesta, so these two hours that they are lost, no? Come back in the
machine, in the form of human energy, and human energy is also fossil energy, because these two
hours, I'm probably in my office with the lights, et cetera, in order to produce more. So, we're
saying, no, just let it be, release it. We are happier, and we are also using less of our human
energy and of our fossil energy.
