Georgios Kallis is an ecological economist and a political ecologist working on environmental
justice and limits to growth issues.
He is a professor at the Catalan Institute for Research and Advanced Studies in Barcelona,
Spain.
In this conversation, Georgios and I discuss the science and philosophy behind the degrowth
movement and some of the challenges behind implementing such an enormous task within
nations and globally.
As viewers of this show know, I don't believe mankind is going to plan for degrowth, but
that post-growth reality is coming to a nation near you very soon.
So in my opinion, the larger purpose of degrowth scholarship is to act as like an overton window
to get more people thinking about planning and maybe reconsidering their trajectories
into what will eventually become a post-growth world.
I am pleased to introduce Professor Georgios Kallis.
Let's get to it.
Kallimera Georgios.
Kallimera.
Hi, man.
How are you?
Good.
Yeah.
I only know a few works in Greek and most of them are swear words.
You are Greek living in Spain and doing this podcast in English.
Yeah.
How many languages do you speak?
Three, actually.
These are very three.
Greek, Spanish.
These three.
Yeah.
In preparing for this, we're going to talk about degrowth and your recent book and your
recent papers and your work, but related to degrowth, I had a thought that the United
States has the richest geological province in history and we have the world's largest
economy.
We have the seniority from the US dollar, but there's also this lingua franca that it's
a novelty that I took French and Spanish in college, but people in Europe, they speak
multiple languages all the time.
What's that like having to do your work in your papers in English, which is not your
native language?
I mean, it's like an extra burden when you're growing up and working or how do you all manage
that?
Yeah.
When you grow up, it is a problem.
It's also a class thing.
If you're from a high class in your country, that somehow English will arrive naturally
to you.
The lower you go down in the ladder, the more of an uphill struggle it is.
I was in the middle, so let's say it wasn't easy, but it wasn't also very difficult.
That's difficult as it is for other people I encounter here.
For me, I did private classes.
I wasn't very good until I studied abroad, then I started practicing, but I don't think
it was until after my PhD that I went to the US and I met also my wife and I kept talking
more and more English that my English improved, so it took years for them to improve.
And are you teaching your children all three languages?
Yes, so I speak to them strictly Greek.
My wife, she's Mexican, but she grew up in the US, so she speaks to them English.
And then our caretaker that helps us speak Spanish, and then in school they're going
to learn Catalan, so they're going to beat me by one language.
I love languages.
If we weren't facing a post-growth world, I think I would have been a linguist.
I studied Chinese and then had some French and Spanish, but I just think the evolution
of human language is fascinating.
So let's get into it, Georgios.
Many previous guests on this platform have covered this topic, but could you articulate
your flavor, your assessment of the linkages between energy, materials, technology and
growth?
What's your overall world view on that?
For me, it's quite straightforward and it's the basis of ecological economics that we
understand the economy as a process of converting resources into useful goods and into waste.
So in that sense, the more the economy grows, the more resources in one way or the other
it's going to need.
Technology is mediating this relationship, but there is up to a certain extent that
it can be mediated.
At the end of the day, a compound growth, which is 3% per year, which means an economy 19
times bigger within a century, will use more and more resources.
So we see a direct link between the growth of the economy and the need for fresh and
more resources.
So you're not a devotee of the decoupling camp?
No, I don't believe, I mean, I do believe that certain resources or certain pollution,
certain forms of waste can be reduced while the economy grows, but the more fundamental
these goods are for, or these resources are for the economy, the harder is this decoupling.
Fossil fuels is a border case, I mean, it's super fundamental, the whole industrial revolution
happened because of fossil fuels.
Fortunately, there are renewables or other forms of energy, but the economy is quite
coupled with fossil fuels.
I think there can be some form of decoupling, absolute decoupling also, but I don't know
if it can happen fast enough in order to avoid catastrophic climate change.
Now if we talk about energy or resources in general, I don't think that absolute decoupling
is possible.
So the more the economy grows in one way or the other, it's going to use more energy
and more resources.
Using better forms of energy or better forms of resources is possible, but again up to
a limit because if the economy is 19 times bigger within a century, and then I don't
know how many times hundreds within two centuries, even a relatively benign form of energy starts
having a cumulative impact.
I agree.
Later in this conversation, I'm going to talk about something that you and I both agree
on, even though we haven't spoken about it, which is we can and hopefully will decouple
our well-being and our experience of life from energy and material use, and I know in
your new book you've written about that.
But first, let me continue to set the table here.
You are known in the degrowth movement and the degrowth movement is diverse.
Can you give me your own interpretation or your own definition of what degrowth means
when you say it?
What does it mean and how might it come about?
We can think of the substantive definition, which is on the one-handed points to a process
and on the other-handed points to a critique.
So the process it's pointing to is an egalitarian, a just social and political transformation
that its end result is a radical reduction of resource use, and by resource I mean material
resources and energy.
But the important is to put, how do you say, the horses before the track, so the horses
are that we need a social and political transformation whose result is going to be this dramatic
resource and energy reduction.
Apart from that, degrowth also is pointing to something else.
It's like the word decolonization, which is D, it's against the idea or the ideology
of growth.
So it's also a set of ideas that are coming together and to launch a very strong critique
against the social and material effects of growth.
But more than that, to the very ideology of economic growth that we argue is something
like what religion would to be for religious society.
So it's like a kind of taboo to attempt that cannot be questioned, that everyone has to
agree that it's good and it's not to be challenged.
So degrowth is both this challenge of the ideology of growth and it's also pointing
to a particular process of social transformation towards much less resource use.
So speaking about the religion part, degrowth is a word that post-growth, market, technology,
focused people really dislike.
Why do you think that is?
Yeah, post-growth, post-growth we are doing well, I mean, I just got a big project with
a word post-growth in it.
So we are using it.
Yeah, I saw that.
Congratulations.
We are using it every now and then when we want to be a little bit less confrontational.
By the way, I'll chime in and say from my perspective, I see it as degrowth is what
we should do and post-growth is what we're going to have to do.
That's a good way of thinking about it.
I mean, that one way or the other we'll have to manage without growth and degrowth is also
in a way it's a harder challenge.
But speaking about why would techno-files or green-growth people would not like degrowth?
Because they're in the general imaginary, in the general common sense I would say of
all of us.
Now, economic growth, we tend to think of this process that happened after the Second
World War, mostly bridges, highways, spacecrafts, airplanes, so we have associated that as
being an economic growth that came up with an explosion of new technologies and new ways
of doing things.
So in their view, to criticize that and go against that sounds like back pedaling, like
retrogressing, saying no to all this and saying we're going to leave some simple ways
that they were before industrial revolution and that this is wrong.
Well, of course, that's not what we are arguing, but I can explain their reaction to that in
the sense that they feel that we are challenging all that and that a different form of all
that being renewable energies, geoengineering or other forms of technologies that could emerge
now that they believe it would be the salvation and that we are turning our backs to that
for something that is untenable politically and socially.
That's what I see as the criticism.
So when most people hear the word degrowth, there's kind of a connotation that happens.
What do you think the average person gets wrong when they hear the word degrowth or
see a degrowth article or something like that?
Yeah, I mean, it depends on what article they see and how the author of this article frames
it.
I mean, if they just hear the word, again, it depends always on context.
Words never work on their own outside of a particular context.
It's always a person saying something.
So it's one thing if I say degrowth and they hear it, and another one if a generalist says
it dismissively on the TV or another, if I don't know, someone from a think tank or
a professor who wants to completely rewrite what we're saying says it.
So the context of how it would present makes a big difference.
But let's say a negative reaction to it can come from what I said, to the extent that
we associate growth with a good period in the global north, in the Europe and North
America after the Second World War, where growth has generally been perceived as elevating
people from low incomes to a middle class.
And if this was growth and you want to reverse that, you want to go back, then you want to
do something bad.
No, so it might sound as something negative.
Or if you understand degrowth as the period where GDP declines or when the economy has
recessions and depressions, again, within a growth economy.
Growth based economy, periods of no growth are very problematic, they are very unstable.
So for all of us, there is the association of where the economy is not doing well.
We don't want to be there, that these are not nice years.
So if that's what you mean by degrowth, the reaction is, I don't want that, no, I'm not
part of it.
I think both reactions are misplaced.
When I am the one explaining, I can explain in the sense that first of all, the glorious
period of the 30 years after the Second World War has come to an end, 30 years after the
Second World War, more or less, with the 1970s crisis, and we are 50 years after.
And for these 50 years, growth has not been a marvel or a miracle.
On the contrary, we've seen increasing inequalities and no improvement in the quality of life.
So if growth was good for a particular period of time, which could be, or it could be other
things that coincided with growth, but it no longer is.
And about recession, again, I would respond that, yes, of course, we are not calling for
recession.
We are calling for a different way of organizing the economy around human needs, and obviously
a model that would have to be stable in one way or the other.
No one wants instability, unemployment, poverty in the name of degrowth.
No one would advocate that.
So how do you or we as a society implement degrowth in praxis, especially in a geopolitical
context, possible loss of hegemony for the United States and maybe wars?
And also there's a financial aspect.
The moment degrowth is implemented or happens, there's financial market crashes and leaving
less stability for society.
So in the degrowth movement, are there two questions really, which is what would a landing
spot look like using degrowth research?
That's question one and question two.
How do we get from here to there, given the financial overshoot and the complexity in
our current world?
Do degrowth scholars separate those two questions or is it all kind of one?
No, we start separating and you are asking actually the best questions right now, you
know, like we've finished the best people on this field.
We've finished writing a literature review article on the 50 years from the publication
of limits to growth.
And two of the most important questions that we think are underexplored that we identify
there are the ones that you very nicely highlighted.
Some concerns the geopolitics and what room if any there is for these type of futures
that we advocate within reemergence of spheres of influence of a sort of Cold War and geopolitical
competition that has always been there.
But I think now it's more evident.
There's very little thinking on that, but I know that there are international relations
scholars that they now start grapple with these questions.
And the other concerns financial stability and includes financial stability again in
a geoeconomic context of if any country was to face prolonged stagnation or go in the direction
of degrowth, there is always the, especially if it goes, let's say intentional in the direction
of the growth, there is the real fear of capital exodus of punishment by international economic
institutions bringing back in line and all these things that can make a process that
could be in principle or in theory smooth or stable can make it unstable within a matter
of days.
So these are like hard questions.
I don't have answers to them and I would be hypocritical if I said I have answers to
all that.
But I think these are the questions we should be asking and because you know the opposite
is okay.
This sounds like almost insurmountable, impossible.
So let's try to think that we're going to do some technological miracle.
I'm saying if we start from the premise that the technological miracle is not in the cards,
you know, like how do we start dealing with this type of questions?
One potential first answer to what you're saying is that the system is already unstable
and it's not because of degrowth.
So geopolitical competition, possibilities of wars, worst wars than we've seen for a
while, etc. are re-emerging and that's again within the contours of the current system.
Also the financial system is in many ways has been unstable and many people keep telling
us that it's a piling pyramid waiting to collapse.
So again, there's a question of how unstable- It's waiting for collapse, it hasn't collapsed.
Yeah.
Yeah, okay.
And many people might have said the last 50 years that it's waiting to collapse and doesn't
collapse.
But I mean, the amount of debt, the public and private right now is on a record level
in comparison to what we are producing.
So there is a question up to when we will be able to produce so much debt without.
Because all that debt is a claim on energy one day.
Yeah, it's a claim on energy.
It's a claim also on human labor.
It is a claim on future generations.
So I don't know that you've read my papers and work, George, but how I see it is we won't
voluntarily contract and we will continue to kick hands financially, rules everything
to keep the financial system growing because of the necessity to pay back prior debt and
the interest isn't created when money is created.
But eventually we will run out of ways to do that and then we will contract involuntarily.
So the reason that I'm not directly in the degrowth movement is because I am trying to
prepare society, individuals, nations globally for this smaller economy.
I call it the great simplification.
But the reason I'm a fan of the degrowth movement is because you are expanding the
overton window of the ways that we might choose to live differently using less energy,
less materials, more social interactions and things like that.
So to me the degrowth, degrowth isn't going to happen the way that it's prescribed, but
it's a good advertisement for researching and people thinking about living possibly substantially
differently.
Yeah, I think I agree with you.
I mean, I don't think that it's going to happen smoothly and intentionally and voluntarily
and somehow avert climate change.
I think it's going to happen through conditions, if it were to happen, it's going to happen
through conditions of partial collapse and partial forced simplification.
And I think it's important always in the face of historical changes to know what is
it that you're proposing and what you're envisioning so that it becomes part of the reality that
it's unfolding.
Because if you don't have this counter narrative, so yes, my narrative is positioned within
an understanding that the scenario you are describing is quite likely.
So let's get into that.
You recently are a co-author of a paper in Nature, congratulations on that, called Energy
Requirements and Carbon Emissions for a Low Carbon Energy Transition.
Can you give our viewers and listeners an overview of the purpose of that paper and
the general conclusions of that paper?
Yeah, that paper was written by a PhD student of mine, Alyosa Slamersak, who developed like
a hunch and idea that I had that no one has calculated how many emissions and how much
energy we're going to use in order to make a transition to a low carbon system.
Because building windmills, continuing to get oil in order to build solar panels, etc.
is going to burn carbon as long as we still use oil, gas, etc.
So no one had calculated that and no one had seen how much energy we're going to use in
this process and how much energy will be left for other societal users along this way.
So we thought about calculating it, we followed one approach, I mean there are many different
approaches one could get to that, but we took the scenarios that the IPCC has produced,
which are quite unrealistic, let's say, by now scenarios of how we can stay within 1.5
degrees Celsius by 2050.
So we looked at, okay, what sort of energy trajectory do they foresee these scenarios,
and then based on that and based on some calculations called energy return on energy investment,
where it's calculation of how much energy you need in order to produce a unit of energy
by fossil fuels, by gas, by windmills, by solar panels.
Alyosa did very complicated calculations that I can't, I don't know what he did, but he
did it well, the reviewers also he did it well, so he did an amazing job there.
We calculated that.
What are the core findings?
I mean there is a good side and a bad side.
So I was, at the beginning I was very, I was more in a catastrophe mode than I was saying,
just trying to do the transition, we're going to burn all our remaining carbon budget and
we're going to overshoot limits, so it's not that bad, you know, and it's definitely
much better to burn this carbon to decarbonize than not burn carbon ever again, to put it
simply than to prolong this thing and go slowly and keep burning carbon for everything you
need to do.
So in one sense it's not catastrophic these numbers, but they are quite high, you know,
so we see that a substantial proportion of what we can emit and what energy we're going
to use in the next decades is going to go purely for the energy system.
Nothing less for the rest of society.
This is in a best case scenario that we really do something about climate change, know that
it's not at all the case right now, but we are saying, okay, even in this best case scenario,
what would that mean?
And it would mean, I think, that's what our research is showing, that we would have to
use less energy for other things, which is manageable, is doable, but I don't think
it is, there is awareness around it in the dominant green growth narrative, which is,
you know, we can use more energy, do more things and at the same time, do this energy
transition, clean energy transition.
I have a lot of questions.
I read your paper and I think it was a real novel approach, but you're basically saying
is that if we are going to optimize for climate and somehow culturally, we think that's important,
which I'm skeptical that we'll do that.
But under that scenario, we have to massively increase the energy used to move to a different
energy system and that move itself will require a lot of hydrocarbons.
So my first question is, you're actually asking the second of two questions, which is what
would be the biophysical map if something would happen?
But the first is the governance and market related question and I know that's not your
expertise, but I'm just curious, because right now, we are growing renewables quite
rapidly globally, but we're still growing fossil fuels.
So from a climate change standpoint, we're just extending the use of the fossil fuels
because then we need a little bit less natural gas because we have more solar and wind, but
the total emissions are high.
But how could we stop Disneyland and Las Vegas and Ryanair and all the other aspects of society
that are using energy in order to invest that into a lower carbon energy system?
Like what would be the mechanism that would allow us, I think in your paper, you talked
about 15 to 20% or something like that of current energy needs to be directed towards
this plan.
Is there any suggested pathway that that could happen politically and economically?
It wasn't part of this research, but it's part of the big research project we start
now, the one we called Post-Growth Deal and it's going to be for six years.
So there we are asking precisely the question you said.
So one, we want to think of policies of doing something, let's say, that happened during
the lockdowns, but doing it in an organized way, definitely in a more participatory way
and a more accepted way, which is to prioritize essential from non-essential activities and
use the power of regulation, of policy, etc., to restructure the economy towards the activities
that we consider essential rather than the ones that are in an essential context of climate
change and energy transition.
Now, that's the idea and that's the scientific part.
The political question is very difficult.
How would you imagine closing down Ryan or Disneyland?
That's not in the safe cards right now.
It's not going to be anytime soon, but I think it is important to think of the processes
and the mechanisms through which every allocation of energy to the important factors are going
to be.
But I don't know if you have thoughts on that, on these hard political questions.
I'll say this.
I have a lot of questions for you, Georgios.
They're going to sound like they're critiques or hard questions, but they're under an umbrella
of deep respect and thanks for your work because, as you just said, we need to understand this
and ask these questions, kind of like passing the baton to more people to get them involved
because this is what we face.
I don't see an easy way out of this, so you have to be doing the research and asking the
questions.
I think we'll keep kicking cans and then respond and hopefully there's models and pilots of
living differently, using energy differently, which brings me to my next question.
Does this have to be a global thing or could Spain or Greece or New Zealand do their own
kind of degrowth, move towards more renewables, less fossil fuels in tandem with a smaller
economy?
I want to think that each country can do something to the extent also that, as you said, in a
post-growth context, they might be forced to adapt to that.
You have Japan 30 years without growth.
This becomes the new normal, so one way or the other, countries have to find accommodate
the fact that they might not be able for their economies to grow, and at the same time accommodate
the fact that they have to do something about climate change unless the whole world comes
to ruin, which is a very possible scenario, as you were saying.
But this combination, I think, forces even individual countries to think differently.
Now, for something more organized and more like a development of a different economic
model or a different social organization model of reorganizing activities, et cetera,
I think it's to go really outside of the main path right now.
I think you need regional clubs or associations.
So I think the EU could potentially do something like that, as the US could do something like
that as a big country or US with Canada.
Greece alone, I doubt it.
Greece alone tried not to pay its debts and was brought in line quite quickly, so I don't
think a small country can do it alone.
Just as an aside, last night I discovered the analytics for this channel, and of the
15 most popular cities with people watching this podcast, seven of the top 15 are in New
Zealand or Australia, and from a population standpoint, that makes no sense.
But I think it's because they are at the end of the supply chain and they recognize emotionally
the things discussed on this podcast with respect to climate change, degrowth, energy,
scarcity, and so I don't think the United States is going to take the lead on anything
degrowth ever.
But I do think smaller countries could act as models.
I gave a presentation to government of Sweden last week and a couple months ago, government
of Finland, and I think the Ukraine-Russia situation has all of a sudden put energy and
the future prominently into many minds, especially in Europe.
Have you noticed since the Russia incursion into Ukraine more interest and intensity and
urgency in your field, or other people outside of the field suddenly paying attention to
it?
Yeah, I've seen, but I wouldn't put it to the Russian invasion.
I mean, I think it starts with the pandemic and the lockdowns, and also in the context
of complete stall in relation to progress with climate change.
So I think it's many things coming together.
I think the pandemic psychologically had an important effect in the sense that we show
like, okay, the biophysical world can hit us.
It's not just scientists saying like out of their minds that, I mean, I was someone who
never cared about pandemics, right?
I was saying, this is one problem too many to worry about, you know, and so in that
sense I was a denier in something that hit us, people were saying it's very likely it's
becoming more and more likely.
I was like, well, yeah, okay, it did happen.
We live, we saw our fragility and we realized more and more how fragile we're going to be
to climate change, which is an even bigger thing and how little we're doing.
So I think there is recognition, even by those who deny or want to delay that there is a
recognition that something is not going well.
Now then on top of that you have, there is an invasion, then you have prices going up
the roofs.
You have like a resurface of nuclear threats and potential nuclear war.
So the whole thing is like coming to an explosive mix.
And in that sense, I think people right now are a little bit lost of certainties and this
has opened up space for ideas that they were considered to heterodox to be given space five
years ago.
In the same way that Australia and New Zealand are paying, or at least the people following
this podcast, paying attention to energy, economic decline sort of scenarios, do people
in Spain get the immediate, it's called an availability cascade, the salience of climate
change because it's so hot there?
Are people, and plus when you had the limits this summer where you could only have the
air conditioning to a certain level, does the general person in Spain absolutely believe
in climate change and is worried about it and wants to do something about it?
I would say believes, I wouldn't say he wants to do something about it and I don't know
where would it rank in terms of priority of problems.
But I say like the common sense now is that the climate is changing and that's among
everyone independent of political beliefs, at least in Greece and Spain that I talk.
It's very hard to deny it anymore, like the summers are much hotter than you have some
freak events and here it's December and the first cold days were two, three days ago.
So people see that the climate is changing.
It's still not a devastating change.
It's still something that seems manageable if it were to stop here.
But people understand, more or less understand what we are saying that it's not going to
stop here.
We haven't stopped emitting carbon so this is going to get worse and worse.
So I think there is an understanding of that, that it's quite assimilated, but I don't think
there is an awareness or an acceptance that something radical has to be done and I don't
know, that's my hypothesis.
But my hypothesis is that most people are aware of that tension, you know?
So if I want to use a metaphor, it's like, you know, when you know you're still sleeping
and you know that you have to wake up seven o'clock and do something terrible that you
don't want to do, but you know it's coming, you know, but you're still sleeping a little
bit and you wish you could sleep forever, but you know that at seven you have this terrible
wake up.
You know, it's this feeling and then you don't feel well about it, you know, but you don't
want to think about it also.
Well, right now it's metaphorically 6.30 am, Georgios, and we want to hit the snooze
for ten more minutes, but seven o'clock it's coming soon.
I'll point out, I can't move my camera at the moment, but it's negative 20 Celsius here
and people might say, oh, see what climate change, but that too is probably caused by
climate change with the polar vortex letting the Arctic air come down here.
So getting back to your nature paper, that paper outlined three EROI energy return on
investment scenarios, high, medium, and low.
Some would argue that even the low EROI scenario is optimistic, first of all, because it starts
with an average of already calculated current EROI figures for renewable energy.
The higher end figures in that batch are disputed by some as unrealistically high, so that would
skew the average of the low EROI scenario into optimistic territory.
Even the low EROI scenario projects a rising energy return for all renewable technologies,
but what a rising EROI for renewables actually happen under conditions of global declining
resource quality and declining fossil fuel EROI, considering, as you said earlier, that
fossil fuels will be supplying energy for the construction of renewables throughout
most of the transition.
So my question is, why didn't you include a truly pessimistic or some would say realistic
EROI scenarios more in line with your colleagues 200 kilometers to your west, Kapilan Perez
at Valladolid University?
I can never pronounce that name.
Any comments on that?
The technical details of that, I just could better say it, because he's the one who really
studied the EROI numbers, the literature, and he thinks our scenarios are reasonable.
But behind every paper there is also a story, and the story of that was that one of the
reviewers was very strong, that our low EROI scenario is not...
We had one low, basically low was taking the lowest estimates of the estimates of EROI
right now as the basis for the low EROI scenario.
But then one reviewer was insisting on the point that even the low right now have been
proven wrong and it's better to take the median, and we had a long debate about that.
It's almost a religion, right?
There are pro-renewable fanatics and there are anti-renewable fanatics, and I believe
the truth is in the middle.
Renewables have arrived, they're robust, they're scalable, they are incredibly EROI positive
relative to energy sources that humans have used in the past, but they're not going to
power this civilization.
I believe you there's a huge politics behind the paper.
No, there was a politics, and no, I mean one of the reviewers, I don't think he was a
renewable energy evangelist, but just thought that the low EROI values are unrealistically
low, so insisting on the point that we should have the median once for a low scenario, and
at the end, you know, it's not a politics, but it's like, okay, do I want to risk the
whole paper not being published, and or am I fine to do with the median?
And we were fine to the extent that also when we were including the low EROI values, it wasn't
that the result was very different, you know, so the scenario was not changing, so it wasn't
a dramatic change given the low EROI values we had, so it's not that we diluted our findings
or our methods for that, so it's always a give and take in these processes of publishing.
You know, there is this nice cartoon which says, my paper before and my paper after,
it's a car, and then the paper after is like a car with the exhaustion up in the window,
et cetera, you know, unfortunately it's a little bit of that, but yeah.
Believe me, I know my super organism paper had much the same feedback, so here's how
I see it.
Tell me what you think of this.
So all of these prognoses and forecasts and technological predictions happened during
a time when our energy was growing every single year.
We use 100 billion barrels of carbon every year, coal, oil, and natural gas, and that
roughly works out to around 500 billion human laborers added to the economy.
So now we can use some of those laborers and invest them to make new low carbon laborers
in the form of solar, wind, geothermal, et cetera, but very soon, for the first time
in the last century plus, that 500 billion of laborers is going to be declining.
So as it declines, then we have the financial overshoot question, but setting that aside
for the moment, how can, as that declines, the EROI of those other things go up enough
to offset it, and then another thing we haven't talked about is complexity and the six-continent
supply chain of how everything is fit together.
And I know you're just trying to set the table for these questions, but I am curious about,
as the total amount of coal, oil, and natural gas declines pretty much year over year, at
some point in the future, how renewables can fit that gap, even if they are, let's say,
into one wide boundary EROI, something like that, which arguably on the surface is higher
than some fossil fuels, but then there's the energy quality differential as well.
So do you have any thoughts on all that?
No, I mean, there is a huge transformation.
I mean, what you said at the end is really important, that also the energy productivity
of the EROI of fossil fuels right now, it's probably lower than we thought, and it's close
to renewable energy.
So in that sense, it's not as fundamental the problem as we thought before, when we
thought that, okay, the EROI of fossil fuels is much higher than renewable.
So if it's close, the transition is probably easier on that side, but then there are all
the problems that have to do with the quality, the reliability, the intermittence of the
renewable energy, all these problems that people are talking about, and the overall
problem, which is that we have to use generally less energy for other environmental reasons
and also for making this transition possible.
So there I follow the type of work that my colleague, Julius Steinberger, is doing and
with whom we're going to collaborate, which is trying to think, how can we secure 9 billion
dignified lives with a fraction of the energy that we use right now?
Is it physically possible biophysically, and I think a research demonstrates models that
it is biophysically possible, but then once you get into the political questions, how
do we get from here to there?
It starts getting tricky because probably there's no space for...
Can you link your project with Julia and the post-growth with some, like do your work,
link it and form alliance with some political sort of scholars on governance questions and
how this might unfold, or is that too complex?
No, I would like to, and I'm open to suggestions with whom to link it.
I mean, I'm responsible for the package on politics, I'm not a political scientist.
I call myself a political ecologist, so I'm interested on how power relations govern access
to resources and resource distribution, but yes, it's a huge challenge, and it's more
like I'm jumping into water without knowing what I'll find, because I don't think there
are many people thinking about these governance and political questions.
I know that they are the most important questions, so it's an important, exciting, but also frightening
research on how we're going to grapple with these questions without saying something either
trivial or completely utopian, you know, because we have to say something that it's also action
able.
Yeah, I love that philosophy, I have to say.
I agree with you.
This is really, really hard.
I'm going to ask one more hard question about this paper, and then I'm going to move on
to your new book, which is kind of the meat of this conversation, I hope.
I doubt you read my PhD thesis 15 years ago, but I wrote a paper that was an ambio about
psychriteria analysis on EROI, that when you just focus on energy, sometimes you neglect
other important natural resource inputs like water or materials or copper or things like
that.
So in the various EROI scenarios, did you look at the potential, if we have enough energy
from renewables, does something else potentially become limiting, like copper or lithium or
cobalt or nickel, and at the levels required to feed 9 billion souls in some sort of a
reduction of our material energy footprint, do some other elements become limiting?
Is that a question you've thought about?
No, it's a great question.
It's not something we looked at in this paper, so in this paper we just stayed on energy
and emissions, but the group you mentioned from Valladolid with a different model that
it's also designed to ask these questions.
I think they're addressing precisely these questions.
What material requirements are going to be in these energy scenarios and also the geography
of these materials?
Where are they going to come from?
Because one question is the scarcity, whether there's going to be enough of these materials.
Another, that it's very close to home here because a big group with which we are in the
same institute and with which I'm collaborating under John Martin as Aliye is looking at all
the conflicts and the violence that is taking place in these so-called commodity frontiers
from the places that we don't see and where all these resources are coming from.
I think it's a super crucial question and it's one that should be on the front of any
program for just energy transition, but just that has to think also of the implications
of where these resources are going to come from.
Yeah.
This gets back to the morality of all this is if all of a sudden the global north decides
we must continue to grow for the next 30 years and that growth is going to have to come from
as we decarbonize, we're going to have to rematerialize as Olivier Lazard says and a
lot of that rematerialization is going to be from countries that are in the global south
have climate impacts, have civil strife and what are the ethics of that and hardly anyone
is talking about that.
Yeah.
What are the ethics and what are also the geopolitics and the economics of that because
it seems that they might also not be willing to stay as cheap as we want them up here and
then what's happening.
So that's also for me what's frightening because if you read the whole discourses about the
new realignment now and Europe and the North America versus China and Russia, et cetera,
you see that on the back of the mind is unfolding more over access to resources.
So I mean it might come the other way up to the north, it's like the global south is
not just anymore in the subservient position used to be and it might demand its use for
releasing these resources.
Yeah, so many questions.
Okay, you recently wrote a book called Limits, Why Malthus Was Wrong and Why Environmentalists
Should Care.
What were the core messages from this recent book, Georgios?
Yeah, we are turning page because you know in this book-
Well, there's a lot to cover in a short conversation, I know.
Yeah, I like that.
It makes me reflect on my fragmented and not call it the worst name, personality and
intellectual interest because I'm very much into ecological economics, biophysical economics
like working with Ayosa calculating, you know, this and that era of that energy source.
But then this book was quite a philosophical exploration, you know, so some people sometimes
are surprised that I'm the same person, you know.
And then I have like even discussions with people that they are very studious scholars
of Malthus and then they ask me all these questions, did Malthus really say that?
Why do you think that Malthus say that, you know?
So it's very different worlds from calculating energies to arguing whether Malthus said this
or that.
What are the core messages of the book?
Let me put it in a direct way, you know, so I don't like Malthus, I don't like what
he wrote.
I thought they were very problematic in ideas that he wrote and I think these ideas have
been carried to our days partly by the environmental movement that I see myself as part of.
But I never associated with these ideas, so I was always surprised when people would
tell me, you're a Malthusian because you're in favor of the growth, you know, I was like,
I'm definitely not a Malthusian, you know, I've read Malthus and there's nothing more
distant from me than an English aristocrat who was against the French Revolution and
wanted the poor people to rot in their poverty, you know.
So that's the initial reaction, but then you might say I'm not a Malthusian and people
would tell you still, no, you are a Malthusian.
You don't know it.
So I was like, okay, if I'm not, not because it's personal, no, because if the ideas that
we are talking here are not Malthusians, why are they not Malthusians?
So I went a little bit more in depth to study what Malthus has said, how his ideas have
traveled over time to make an argument that within environmentalism there is another strong
notion in defense of limits, that it's not like, oh, we are running out of things and
we should do something about it, but it's an idea that we are destroying the planet,
we are destroying our own liberties, we are destroying our own quality of life and we should
organize in order to put a limit to ourselves, to limit our activity, to limit and channel
our desires to paths that they are more constructive than destructive.
And I tried to separate two different ways of understanding limits and reclaim and defense
this, may I say it's social, but it's not social because it also has a very strong
bio-physical component, which is, you know, we are destroying the planet and we should
stop destroying it, but that puts the emphasis back on us, you know, as agents of limiting
ourselves and understanding that what you are calling a great simplification, simplifying
the way we're living, living with modesty, is also what the good life is about.
I call that self-limitation, collective self-limitation, I could call it also simplification, but I
wanted to play a little bit with the idea of limits and limits to growth, so I'm saying
about we want to limit growth, we don't care if growth comes to an end and it's limited
itself, you know, we want to do that.
Does collective self-limitation start from self-limitation of an individual and then
scale or is it collective imposed on the self?
No, I think it's co-evolutionary.
This is a term I learned from my mentor Richard Norgaard at Berkeley who had written about
co-evolution.
I think in many ways this dichotomies we make in a modern science way of thinking very often
are because we are caught in egg and chicken situations that they're better thought as
co-evolution.
So you need one in order to feed on the other in order to feed the other.
So to build in this way, unless you have people who want to live a simple life, you will never
have a collective structure or a state that would promote a simple life.
Now, unless you have a state that opens pathways and lets people live in simple life instead
of force them going in a particular way, you would never have the people who would be able
to live a simple life and wouldn't be like just the marginal radical ones, you know?
So you need the two and the one is feeding on the other and egg and chicken that is getting
bigger and bigger, you know?
But you need both.
I agree with that.
So if our needs, reproduction and consumption can be internally limited, then nothing is
scarce because we'll always have enough.
What does it look like?
What might it look like to internally limit resources?
What would it look like personally?
I think personally its person of us can't say what would it look to live a simple life
within the contours of the life now and then there is the question of what would it look
like to live a simple life or a limited life, self-limited life within the context of a
system permitting you to live in a different way.
So it's one thing if I live in California and I say like, okay, I could leave it myself
and not have a car, but then I would probably die in my house now because I couldn't go
to the hospital, I couldn't go to work, I couldn't go anywhere, like just walking outside
of your house is you need to walk like 50 kilometers to reach the grocery store, right?
So there, like this self-limitation is not possible.
Of course, if the city is organized to have the public transport, etc., then more self-limitations
become possible.
So I think there is the question of which one of us can, within the current life and
within the context and infrastructure that we operate, what would it be to live a modest
life and know how to put limits to what we want and do what we truly want rather than
what we are pressed and forced to do?
That's one question.
And then the second question is like, what would it look to organize things differently,
to allow us to live even more modest and simple lives in a good way?
And I think this is where Julia's work comes that tries to quantify and try to give a little
bit of picture.
Okay, what would it look like a world where we consume 20% of the energy we consume now?
What kind of houses would we have?
So here too is a chicken and an egg.
We need to, each of us as individuals, move a little bit in the direction of simplification
and consuming less.
But in tandem, we need the culture to move and the infrastructure and things like that.
And the more that the culture and the infrastructure is aligned to smaller material throughput
future, the easier it will be for the chicken, us, to live in that environment.
Yeah.
And very important, there is public infrastructures, you know, so speaking of car, for example,
if you have a good public transport is one thing, or if you have proximity to your workplace
is one thing, then if you don't have it, then the car becomes almost a basic need.
No.
So car, a car, you can say car is a basic need in one context, but in another context,
it's not.
And it's a huge difference in terms of energy emissions, everything.
Right.
So I am fortunate to have traveled a lot in my life and of all the European countries
I've been to, Spain is my favorite.
Can't say why.
The people, the foods, just there's this vibe there.
Now, Spain, to my knowledge, uses half the energy per capita as the average person in
the United States, better healthcare system.
If I got sick or injured when I was in Spain, I could go one of the Spanish hospitals.
And I'm not glorifying poverty or anything like that.
But Spain seems to be closer to a degrowth model than the United States for sure.
Why do you think that is?
And are there any examples in Spain of active pilots or communities that are at least going
in the path that you and Julia are describing?
I mean, Spain is a general difference of Europe compared to the US and the way I think they're
the big energy use.
I mean, I studied as a water scholar and I was always, water studies, you know, and
I was always surprised why is per capita water used in the US two or three times bigger than
in Europe?
What can you do, you know?
And then of course it's a whole arrangement.
A lot of flushing toilets.
A lot of flushing toilets, a lot of toilets that use more water, lots of gardens, a lot
of houses that are big and then you have also the garden, et cetera, et cetera.
And then when it comes to energy, again, it's the same, you know, the way the cities are
structured with a lot of private personal commuting with cars.
These are like fundamental different structures that explain the different energy use.
Now Spain has very nice things in terms of urban model that they weren't done in the
pursuit of degrowth or anything.
That's how the system has evolved, but you probably what you're so describing as a positive
social experience, you know, which is like pedestrianized centers of cities with good
public transport that you can access them, walk around, you know, and have like a pleasant
beer out in a plaza.
This was not part of the growth or it hasn't been part of the growth of post growth, but
I think it is a model upon which you can build and at least a model that we can mobilize
to resonate with people and say like, I mean, look, you can have pretty nice things for
for very little and you don't need much more, much more than that.
So there is a good basis here.
That's what I meant.
I just, I know that you're not pursue Spain is not pursuing degrowth, but there's it's
easier to do and say these things in a country like Spain, degrowth.
The words are kind of anathema to the United States experiment, at least for now.
I mean, there are pockets of people if it's easier anywhere, I don't fully agree with
that.
I understand what you're saying about the U.S., but the U.S., if we say the ideology
of growth, the ideology of growth, we can call it also the American dream in the sense
of the American dream of the 1950s of, you know, the suburbia, the cars, stuff.
So this, this dream is quite prevalent everywhere, you know, so it's not, even if in Spain,
you know, it didn't take hold as it took in America itself.
It's still an important part of the imaginary and it's still an uphill battle to challenge
that and to challenge the idea of growth.
So don't think that we have an easy task here.
What I can say is that there are real lived experiences, so there is the square now.
Not everyone spent their time in the shopping mall, so there is the square and you can mobilize
this experience to say, you know, there is something upon which we can build, but there
is quite a lot of reaction here.
There is reaction in Greece.
There is reaction everywhere to this, to our type of ideas.
There's one Spanish cultural tradition that I wish the United States would adopt and that
is the afternoon siesta.
It's a nice one.
So in your writing, Georgios, you use a French word, debonce.
Could you describe what it means and why it's important?
Yeah, that's a very, okay, that's why, that's our ideas go, it's ideas that we've developed
here in group with Giacomo D'Alessia, my colleague here, my co-author, another Italian
scholar, sociologist and author Romano, that recuperated this idea from a strange French
philosopher, George Bataig, who has written very crazy sexo-saso-madoschistic novels
and philosophies, etc.
So a very strange and controversial character, George Bataig, but a very original and unique
thinker.
Some people are appalled by what he wrote, others, like one of Romano from whom I took
this idea, say that there are things from Bataig that are so brilliant they can be useful
even if there are many other ideas that one wouldn't share.
So one core idea of Bataig is that societies make meaning and find joy if you want by expanding
their excess.
So rather than thinking in terms of societies being in a constant battle against scarcity,
you have to think like, okay, what is it that gives us pleasure?
And at the end of the day, the pleasure and where we make meaning as societies is in expanding
whatever surplus we might have, surplus of energy, surplus of human labor.
And if you think that, I don't know, ancient Egypt was expanding this surplus to make pyramids
and create a meaning as trying to reach the goal with the pyramids.
In a modern capitalist society or in the American dream, you might say, you know, you're expanding
it in the soaping malls and in the cornucopia of plastic, things around, et cetera, and
the gas bubbles, the cars, but we are expanding and it's important to understand that, let's
say, diagnostically, analytically, that's where societies make meaning and where they
find joy, it's in their expenditure.
So we are trying with this idea to say, to break a little bit the mold that a society
of the growth is only a society of restriction, of confinement, of doing less and less, you
know, and think like, where would we expand our extra energies?
What sort of joy would we create by expanding the surplus?
Less as it might be, there will still be a surplus, you know, above our immediate basic
needs.
Where would we expand it and how?
And we take there the ideas of expanding it, that the importance is to expand it collectively,
you know, in collective feasts, in collective knowledge, humanities, curiosity, but it's
important to keep in mind these, the pants, these unproductive and non-utilitarian expenditure
that you are not expanding in order to produce more in the future or do something else, but
you are simply expanding and that's the moment actually that you're at your happiest, if
we might put it this way.
I love that idea for two reasons.
First of all, as we have, you're a biophysical economist, so we have resource and energy
inputs and resource and energy outputs that give us brain experiences.
And right now, a lot of that energy input, we always look at it as what does it produce?
So this is, you know, you and I and people in our network are in some ways peddlers of
fear because we're talking about limits and that society's going to have to change because
for climate and energy reasons and many other reasons, including equity and some of the things
you're working on, what we're doing now cannot continue.
And that is a fearful thing, but we actually need to lead with a carrot or something creative
and hopeful.
And de Ponce, to me, my quick take on it is it's where can we imagine that we could expand
our surplus in the future, even if it's a smaller surplus.
And I often say that after basic needs are met, which for many humans, they're not, but
after they're met, most of the best things in life are free or close to free from a biophysical
perspective.
So is that kind of what you're getting at there?
Yes.
Yes.
It's important, these things that they are free to remain free and expand them free
because this is where pleasure is coming.
So this yesterday you were saying it's two hours, but you're being very unproductive,
no?
You could stay and work and check emails, et cetera, et cetera.
But you're being unproductive, sleeping for two hours, doing nothing.
You're basically nothing, but it's also like a huge bonus to your quality of life and your
well-being.
And it's precisely things like that, that we need to recover the capacity to expand things
that they are for free and expand them for free because we think capitalism is the opposite.
It's like everything is squeezed in order to use it, in order to produce more.
So it's like, how can we squash the siesta so these two hours that they are lost, no?
Come back in the machine in the form of human energy and human energy is also fossil energy,
no?
Because these two hours, I'm probably in my office with the lights, et cetera.
In order to produce more, no?
So we're saying, no, just let it be, release it.
We are happier and we are also using less of our human energy and of our fossil energy.
I did want to offer my analytical take and also philosophical take.
I have not been a mouth of scholar.
I know that he predicted that exponential growth in demand would outstrip the geometric
growth in food production and that we would have a problem.
Well, he was wrong in my book because he didn't know about fossil fuels number one.
And then Paul Erlich and others, 170 years later, wrote a book, The Population Bomb,
and Paul was wrong because he didn't know about debt and globalization.
And then we hit another wall in 2008 where the central banks took over the role of commercial
banks in propping up the monetary creation.
And then COVID, and we had this massive control of governments to stabilize the economy, we're
running out of cans to kick in my philosophical observation, which is why I agree at the core
of your work is the next can to kick is in our minds, that we don't need all this energy
and stuff to live good, meaningful human lives.
Most of it is wasted.
In my movie, I say we're turning billions of barrels of ancient sunlight into microliters
of dopamine.
And I think serotonin and oxytocin and other of our evolved neurotransmitters have been
de-emphasized.
And so to go into the dpense or the siesta or other things, that is the stakes where
we're at is how can we culturally recognize where we came from, what we're doing and where
we can go.
And it's not going to be using more energy and stuff that gives us meaning.
That's my personal view on that.
What do you think?
No, 100% agree, but I mean, I have a different interpretation of what Malthus said.
So but I don't think it's so important.
So I wouldn't stick with that, but I can tell people to read your book.
Yeah, read my book because Malthus didn't predict that and he was actually much closer
to how economists think nowadays than we tend to think.
I mean, the way you described what Malthus thought is the way Elrich recovered him in
the 60s.
But I think it's interesting, and that's what I saw in my book, to go and read Malthus
without the glasses of Elrich in the 1960s and the debates we have now and read him in
his own terms.
And then you see something much closer to an original economic argument about arguing
in favor of growth in the name of limits and in the name of scarcity, which helped me locate
it there.
And I think it's a problematic trap that we still keep falling in as environmentally.
So quickly to summarize that, you think that my take on Malthus is popular and simplistic
and probably incorrect, that there's a deeper nuance there that most people don't understand.
Yeah, there's no problem.
I mean, in what you said, I agree in everything.
So the way you said it, there wasn't any problem with that.
And I'm not like scholastic to say, oh, no, but you shouldn't say that Malthus said that.
But there is a bigger problem to the extent that there are certain environmentalists that
reproduce a certain type of thinking that stems back to Malthus and to the way Malthus
framed these ideas that can be problematic.
So there it gets important to see what Malthus precisely said, which is different from the
way we often tend to think is what you said.
Claro.
Okay.
Final question before I get to my closing questions.
And again, probably each of these questions could be an entire podcast.
I noticed that one of your ideas is to eventually somehow tax resources instead of labor.
This is something I've looked into quite a bit, because I think that's one of the only
viable long-term pathways.
Can you just briefly expand on how and why this would work and how it might come about
and any other summary thoughts on that concept?
I mean, in this question, they have developed quite a lot of thinking.
I was in the PhD thesis of a student here from our department who was doing a new type
of models around this idea and the implications and the different designs.
It's a pretty simple idea right now.
The majority of tax revenues coming out of taxing our work, our salaries, etc., a different
way of doing it.
Like 95%.
95%.
Yeah.
I think we should tax also wealth a little bit more for equity purposes and redistribution.
But apart from that, we can tax our energy use or our carbon use in order to raise revenue.
And in this way, thinking now as an economist, you would incentivize activities that they
are high in terms of their human energy or human value, but low in terms of their carbon
contact because you would tax the carbon contact and you would tax the human labor.
So in that sense, it's a simple, intuitive idea.
There are questions then of design.
So how would you do it in a way that it's also socially progressive and not regressive?
There are different designs.
Whether you would give money back as tax cuts to everyone, only to those working, whether
you would give a basic income or a dividend, and there you enter into models, you can study
all these things.
The basic idea is very intuitive, very strong, and very correct.
The next question is why it hasn't caught up because it has been around for 20 or 30
years now.
And it's not also like a radical idea.
Let's say it's an idea that even mainstream economists have toyed with, but still it has
been difficult to push it.
Well now people are recognizing the validity of it, but every year that goes on, the haircut
that would have to happen on a financial system gets larger.
So it becomes politically harder by the year, even though it cognitively becomes more relevant
by the year.
So I hope you and your new project can work on that.
So do you have 10 minutes or so more to do some final questions?
Excellent.
These are more on the personal note.
So given your lifetime of scholarship and reflection on these issues, do you have any
personal advice to the listeners of this show going into this time of global polycrisis
potential, post-growth, living, et cetera?
The advice I have to give them is the one I try to tell myself too, but it's like leave
the way you want the world to be.
So try to be consistent.
In our book we joke, in the case for the growth book we joke, we say less than four contradictions
if you have in your life, you're a hypocrite, right?
More than...
Antonio Turiel has said that here in Spain also, more than 10 you're a hypocrite.
More than 10 you're a fanatic.
No, less than four you're a fanatic, more than 10 you're a hypocrite.
So in between you can have...
I didn't know that that came from Antonio.
Pedro Prieto uses that quote all the time with me.
People here in Spain use it and I think it's a good one, which is within the limits of
knowing that you're going to have some contradictions, try to leave the change you want to be and
try to come together with others that they want the same change and organize and associate.
I think that's the main advice I give and that's the best or the first step that all
of us can and should do.
Not to sidetrack the conversation so much, but on the de Ponce topic, Spanish phrases
are the most colorful, interesting, coolest phrases ever.
There's so many of those little things like, I am not really from Bilbao, if you're from
Bilbao it's like you're a tough guy and there's some joke about shaving and I've heard hundreds
of them, they're hilarious.
We don't have that in the United States.
This one with the contradictions we have to find the originator because I keep saying
some of these people are citing one another but I don't know who coined it first, it's
a funny one.
Well, I'll have Lizzie the podcast curator look it up.
So Georgios, you are a college teacher and also a champion in the de-growth movement,
so you're teaching these things to students.
What specific recommendations do you have for young humans who become aware of our climate
energy, equity, biophysical constraints to the human enterprise?
I would say don't depress and act, you know, live your life and organize to act.
I hear a lot about climate anxiety, climate depression, I fully understand it but I have
to say that most generations living in this planet lived in pretty difficult times, so
in bad times.
We live in quite bad times in some ways, in other ways those of us living in the global
north live also in quite good times.
The future is gloomy but the future is always open and many terrible things have happened
for humans in the past but people have come together and they have overcome them, walked
through them, created new things, so my main advice would be don't depress and act, you
know, do what you can and organize with others to bring change, now is not the time for depression.
Do you have a good response from your classes at the end of the semester with your students
learning all this stuff?
Yes, our students are quite a self-selected sample of people coming here to learn about
the growth, etc., so they are there.
So I do get good responses.
I did get a response from a student that she told me that after taking our masters, probably
she didn't know that much about the growth before, so she interacted during our masters.
She told me after I got the masters I developed very high levels of anxiety and depression,
you know.
So this has struck me a little bit as a challenge, you know.
How is it, why is it that, yeah, our material, I can understand why, because the reality
is hard to stomach and for us because we work with it and we keep talking about it, it's
like being in psychotherapy all the time, you know, you keep talking about it, so you
neutralize it.
If you first encounter it, it can be like a difficult encounter.
That's exactly right.
Two quick thoughts on that, one, not everyone is the same, so there will always be a distribution
of responses for humans coming across this.
My reaction to a lot of my students, they found more depressing things in my Reality
101 course, but they didn't find them depressing because we processed it as a group and to
know the landscape to see how these things fit together is actually really enlightening
and helps with your neurochemical response to these things.
So I think it's a combination of having a community to discuss, like you were saying,
we're working on this all the time, and an understanding, a clarity, it's comforting
in a weird sort of way.
So Georgios, what do you personally care about most in the world?
Yeah, right now I care for my daughters, they have two twins that they are three years old,
so I really care about them.
But I think also caring about them fortified my feelings of caring about the rest of the
world because it's a great gateway to empathy, you know, like feeling about how much I care
for these two human beings and how much other cares equivalently for their human beings
and how much we have to care for one another, so it kind of strengthens my feelings of care
and empathy for others and for the future, especially of the young ones.
That's beautiful.
Of all the issues we've discussed or any other issue in your mind, what are you most
concerned about in the world in the coming 10 years?
Yeah, I'm concerned about nuclear war to be honest, or a war between US and China, I'm
concerned with the faster collapse and climate, you know, that the climate would come on top
of it on a ruin.
I'm concerned because I see like, you know, like in Greek tragedy they say what's the
form of a tragedy?
The form of a tragedy is two actors, each one looking at their own rationality and their
own logic without any limit and then pursuing it to the very end, to the common ruin, you
know, to the ruin of both actors, of both protagonists and there are elements in the
current moment that you can see the superpowers pursuing particular logic to which one cannot
see an easy way out of it, so that's what concerns me for the next 10 years.
Dude, we got to talk more often, I only know of your work, we've never spoken before this
and we agree on almost everything you've said today, so I agree with you on that.
So in contrast, what brings you hope in the next 10 years or so?
What are things that you're hopeful about?
I think there are openings and I think precisely because it's not a comfortable conformist
era of things are more or less fine, why should we rock the boat?
The boat is rocking a lot, so people are moving around and trying to find new meanings and
new senses and I see more and more young people coming here, abandoning careers in
comfortable jobs, in marketing, etc., because they feel they have to do something.
So I feel something unexpected and big, politically interesting will come out in the
next 10 years. I don't know what form it will take, but I'm pretty confident it will.
If you were benevolent dictator or something similar and there was no personal recourse
to your decision, what is one thing, one policy, one thing that you would implement
to improve human and planetary futures?
I would abolish dictators and resign myself. I'm a very staunch Democrat and I'm not saying it
like that, I was reading about Solon, who in my book about limits, I try to explain the logic
of self-remitation and then go back to ancient Greece. Solon instituted democracy in ancient
Athens. He said these are the rules, so he was the most powerful person at that moment
and then he says like I'm exiling myself, so he got self-exiled and he said because
precisely me accumulating all this power that I have right now and I could use it
benevolently to say I'm going to stay here forever to protect democracy and to let it have
its first steps and you really need me because I'm the mastermind of the whole constitution.
He said no, if I stay here I'm accumulating power which is precisely what I try to institute here
again, so he left the city, he said exiled. I'm not waiting for you to exiled me, I'm exiling
myself and I think it's a great metaphor, we need politicians like that. I keep saying politicians
that they say I'm really important for the movement, I'm not going to step down. Get out,
step out even if you're very important democracy and people need rotation, they don't need
the benevolent one person figure. So that kind of links your idea of de Ponce and the chicken and
the egg of collective versus individual is we have to advocate for an open society and use less
resources and kind of expand awareness to others of that and our society on the growth
upswing is focused on monetary power which leads to political and absolute power and
there's going to have to be some sort of different arrangement if we're going to make it through this.
Yeah, exactly, exactly. Thank you so much for your time, George. Is there anything else you'd
like to share to those listening? No, thank you. It was a wonderful conversation, we touched on many
topics and I really enjoyed having someone with whom my ideas align and asking, let's say,
very early important questions. To be continued, my new friend. Thank you, mate.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
