Any interesting stories about your experience at the World Bank?
Oh, well, yeah, there are a number, probably the one which is most relevant to what we've been
talking about. Well, the reason I ask the question is in heterodox economics, which is
non-traditional economics, you probably rose higher in the conventional power structure
than any other heterodox economist being a senior economist at the World Bank. So that's,
it was quite a dichotomy. So sorry, keep going. Yeah, I should say senior economist sounds pretty
exalted. But in fact, it's a fairly low ranking within the World Bank, just to point out. But
a story that I think is very instructive in the World Bank. Yes, you probably know the World Bank
comes out with a world development report every year or sometimes two years. Back in 1992,
a couple of years after I had just gone to the World Bank, they were going to do one on sustainable
development, which at that time was the big new concept that had just come down from the UN and
they had to deal with it. I was not on the team which was going to write the report,
because I was too low in the hierarchy. But because I was environmentalist in the environment
department, I was on the review panel to comment on the successive drafts of the report. And I
thought that was very important. Here's something really, the World Bank comes out and says,
okay, first draft comes, I eagerly start reading it. In the first chapter, there's a diagram,
which is titled, the relation of the economy to the environment. And it consisted of a rectangle
labeled economy and an arrow coming in from the left labeled inputs and an arrow exiting to the
right labeled outputs, nothing else. That was a relationship of the economy to the environment.
So I said, okay, so I wrote a comment. I said, this is a really good beginning here. We've got a
picture of the economy. It depends on inputs and it generates these outputs. But the caption says,
relation of economy to the environment, where's the environment? These inputs are coming from
nowhere. The outputs are going nowhere. So let's draw a big circle around the rectangle and label
that environment. And then we'll see that the inputs are coming from the environment. We could
talk then about depletion. The outputs are going back to the environment as waste. We could talk
about pollution. We can talk about the capacity of the environment to regenerate the waste so that
they might, some might be reusable again. We can talk about the balance between the two
inputs and outputs in terms of the loss of thermodynamics and the size of the subsystem
relative to the total system. How big can the subsystem be relative to the total system? We
can talk about the entropic nature of this throughput of matter energy, et cetera, et cetera.
We can really develop this picture and into something important. And so I sent that back
in as my comment. Here comes the second draft of the thing. I look at the diagram again. There's
the same diagram, but this time with a great big rectangle drawn around the original rectangle
as basically a picture frame. You just took the same picture and put it in a frame. No labeling,
no change in the text, no discussion of anything. So I said, well, okay, I said this is really the
same thing. I repeated the things I'd said before, tried to be more diplomatic, sent it back in.
Here comes the third draft. The third drafts I looked. No more diagram. Completely abandoned
any attempt to draw a diagram of the relation of the economy to the environment.
Now, that was that really, I said, well, you know, that's something, isn't it?
That's not hard to do. I mean, this is kindergarten, you know, you got a large system and a smaller
system inside it and a relation of dependence. Why won't they look at it that way? Why do they
not want to do it? Well, I realized slowly, the reason is that picture threatens you with questions
to which you cannot give a good answer within the context of the World Bank, because it immediately
says if the economy is the subsystem of a larger system, the larger system is finite,
non-growing and materially closed, how big can the subsystem be relative to the total system
before it just disrupts it? Oh, limits to growth. Holy cow, we can't talk about that. Entropic
relation to pollution, laws of thermodynamics, hell, nobody understands that. There nobody's
going to listen to that. We don't understand it either. It's going to limit growth. We understand
that much and we can't do that because the World Bank is in the business of growth. So, better to
abandon it.
