We didn't vote to have GDP as our goal.
It started out as an econometric measure
that wasn't ever intended to be a goal around 1930s
or something, right?
That's right.
GDP started out as a way, really,
I think it was more a way of trying
to have a measure of how much of productive activity
of the economy could be diverted into the war effort.
And still, and what would you have left over
in a way of just keeping account of what was going on
in the economy.
It was never intended as a measure of welfare or benefit
or something to be maximized.
And indeed, economics itself, if you look at microeconomics,
this is where that idea of equating marginal cost
with marginal benefit, the whole idea of microeconomics
is not for a firm to grow forever.
It's to grow to the point at which they're maximizing profits.
And when do you maximize profits?
You maximize profits when marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
And so you grow up to that point,
and then that's sort of what's been called
the when to stop rule in microeconomics.
You stop growing a micro entity
when marginal cost equal marginal benefit.
Okay, jump over to macroeconomics now.
Well, where's the when to stop rule?
Well, it's not there anymore.
So we just keep on adding more and more micro activities
with no notion or counting of the limits
of the total scale of the system.
One way I like to say is we don't have anything
in economics currently, which is analogous
to the Plymsaw line on a ship.
You know, the Plymsaw line is a mark on the hull of a ship
and when the water level reaches the Plymsaw line,
that's the signal that the ship is fully loaded.
And you don't go beyond that for dangers of sinking.
Well, I mean, we can allocate weight in the boat
in the optimal manner.
If you put it all in one place,
you'll sink the boat faster.
And you can distribute among the passengers
in all sorts of different ways.
So you've got the distribution of the load among passengers.
You've got the allocation of the load
in different parts of the boat by efficiency.
And then you've got the total limit,
load limit of the boat, the Plymsaw line.
Our economy doesn't have any Plymsaw line.
We talk about allocation among different parts of the boat,
different commodities.
We talk some about distribution.
We ought to deal with that a whole lot more.
And we don't talk at all about the total load limit
of the scale of the economy.
So I think that's a major effort
or contribution of ecological economics
is to build that into analysis.
So let me ask you about that.
If we were to have a Plymsaw line,
would that have to be global?
Because if, for example, the United States
created such a limit and lived within our limits,
then other countries would outcompete us,
at least economically,
though maybe that would no longer be our goal.
But does such a governance potential structure,
even theoretically, have to be global?
I would say that in maybe thinking really logically
in the long run, yes.
But I think if we try to go directly first step global,
we won't get anywhere, in my opinion.
I think you can do a lot at the local level.
And you can live within the confines
of your national geography and have a Plymsaw.
You can consider that,
what's the carrying capacity of our natural ecosystem
within our country and try to live within that.
And then, but that does mean you'll have
to control international trade.
You will not be able to really have free trade
with that kind of system.
So I think then eventually you might broaden
the area to the world.
But I don't have any faith whatsoever
after six years working in the World Bank
of going to a global control policy of a Plymsaw.
I'd be very happy to see it's approximated
at a national level and then gradually attempt
to influence other nations to do similar things.
I mean, my belief is the boat is gonna have leaks
and have to go to shore and be rebuilt or things like that.
I mean, as you know, when I called you a few weeks ago,
I was in DC.
What I'm trying to do is work with politicians
and future politicians, meaning current staffers
and analysts and such to understand
the systemic predicament that we face
to build in a Plymsaw line, break glass
in case of emergency plans for when there is a crisis
because I just don't see all the things that we need to do now
to make our future more sustainable
are gonna require pain in the near term
that no one is gonna vote for.
So we have to anticipate that on mass as a society,
we are not gonna keep the carbon in the ground
we're not gonna constrain our consumption
as individuals we can, but as a society,
I just don't see that's gonna happen.
So if you understand that,
you know that eventually there will be a crisis
and we wanna build in as many possible speed bumps
and metaphorical parachutes, et cetera,
to prepare for that moment.
And I know on your long list,
you have a ton of big ideas,
one of which overlaps with a big project we're working on.
I'd love your input on it.
You talk about changing the prices via taxes.
And given that we've underpaid for the main input
to our economies for the last century,
you know, well, just for an example,
a barrel of oil does four and a half years of my work.
The average American at $50,000 a year,
four and a half years, that's $200,000 worth of productivity
in one sense that you get for $60.
So if we were able to put a tax
on non-renewable inputs to our economy
and remove a tax on labor,
which is 95% of what's taxed right now.
So that if you make $50,000 a year,
you get to keep all $50,000,
but a lot of things in your life
are substantially more expensive.
You might have to do without some things.
You might have to repair things
and have them last longer.
And such a tax would spur innovation
tethered to our reality and it would spur conservation.
So what do you think about that?
What work have you done on that?
And I mean...
I think that just, I agree with you.
That's a very important and obvious thing to do.
And for the life of me,
cannot understand the fixation economists
and others politicians have had
on the so-called value-added tax.
Because what I would, I want to tax...
What is that, Herman, the value-added tax?
Yeah, I'll get to it.
You've got two things.
You've got the flow of matter and energy
through the economy, which we call it the throughput.
Now that is what we're adding value to.
What is it when we add value,
what is it you're adding value to?
You're adding value to the natural resource energy
and materials going through the...
What is adding the value?
Labor and capital are adding the value to...
Now, what is the limiting factor in the long run?
Well, back in the old days, in the empty world,
the limiting factor used to be labor and capital.
We had a whole lot of natural resources,
very little limit, that was the limiting factor.
And so, that's where the nowadays,
the limiting factor is natural resources,
energy and structured materials.
So, let's raise the price,
let's tax the limiting factor, raise its price,
use it more efficiently,
garner our public revenue,
which we need in any case from that, largely.
And let's ease up on taxing value added.
Actually, we want to add more value,
the more value we can add, the better, you know?
So, that's almost the definition of efficiency,
to add more value to what's basically scarce.
So, I would like to, as you outlined,
shift the tax burden, the tax base,
away from value added
and onto that to which value is added, the labor flow.
I think that would help.
So, that would indirectly help the environment as well
because we would be using less,
and therefore, there would be less waste.
But what would be,
are there any other wider boundary recommendations
that you would have?
Well, as you know, there's this sort of a debate
about the carbon tax versus cap and trade sort of things.
That, I think, is a difficult debate.
And I personally think that quantitative limits,
theoretically, are better than price limits, taxes.
If you limit that quantity,
then given a demand curve, you'll determine the price.
But demand curves are really not known.
You can draw one on the blackboard,
but they're shifting all around
and there's errors and omissions.
And so, if you fix a price,
then a shifting demand curve will result
in quantity variations.
The ecosystem cares about quantities.
The ecosystem doesn't really care about prices.
So, it's safer ecologically, I think, to fix the quantity
and then let the variations in errors and omissions
work themselves out in price variations.
That would be my preference, theoretically.
Politically, there's a good argument counter to that,
saying, yeah, but that's complicated.
You have to set up all these auction systems and so forth.
And the carbon tax is much simpler.
In fact, all you'd have to do
is just change the algebraic sign
of the depletion allowance to the oil companies,
change that from a subsidy to a tax
and you're almost there.
So, I could see that being an immediate policy,
a first step, something that's easier to do right now.
And you can do, you can try them both out,
but I do think, I do prefer limiting quantities
and letting the price work itself out
rather than trying to limit the tax, increase the price
and think that that's gonna control the quantity.
