Greetings. Hello, everyone. I'm just back from a trip. Frank and other dogs very happy to see me.
I was in a Bioneers conference, found many new speakers for the podcast in the future.
I wanted to quickly give my thoughts on the Jeffrey West podcast, which aired yesterday on
metabolism and the hidden laws of nature. I hope everyone can watch that
before they watch this, frankly, because I would like to offer some brief summary of what Jeffrey
said and also outline seven key questions that emanate for me from thinking about humans and
societal metabolism. So, real briefly, Jeffrey outlined that Kleiber's law, which is that animals
and ecosystems have their energy use or their metabolism scale to the three-quarter power of
their size, and that this also applies to humans as individual animals, and that this three-quarters
is called a sublinear scaling because we get more efficient as we get larger, like an elephant
doesn't use 10,000 times the energy of something it's 10,000 times larger than,
but something less, approximately three-quarters power. So,
we also discussed that when humans meet each other and live in villages and towns and cities and
countries, there is a supra-linear scaling. The exponent is above one on the products and the
innovation and the technology and things like crime and patents and things like that. So,
the products of our social interaction, which is probably engendered by status and dopamine and
drive and incentives are something above one, but what ends up happening is if you look at the
total human, Frank, you want to get down, if you look at the total human global economy,
it also follows Kleiber's law and the GDP, the energy use scales to the GDP to the three-quarter
power, which is freaking amazing that our global economy is growing and the energy use is around
the three-quarter power, which actually is demonstrably true. We've grown our economies at
around 3% a year the last 40 years and grown our energy at around 2.1%. So, for every 100 units of
GDP, we need 70 new units of energy, so it tracks. Now, what's even more interesting is if you look
at the scaling laws of population versus energy is that exponent is around 1.4. So, if population
doubles, our energy use would be 2 times 1.4 is 2.8 times as much. So, this is all a fascinating
topic which underpins my work and what I think society should recognize more broadly and incorporate
into our decisions. Here are seven questions I came up with based on Jeffrey West's podcast.
First of all, is capitalism in service of this metabolism, this metabolic law of nature?
I read this comment in the conversation with Jeffrey and I'll reread it here because it's
one of my favorite quotes. From Ronald Wright, a short history of progress, what took place in
the early 1500s was truly exceptional. Something had never happened before and never will again.
Two cultural experiments running in isolation for 15,000 years or more at last came face to face.
Amazingly, after all that time, each could recognize the other's institutions. When Cortez
landed in Mexico, he found roads, canals, cities, palaces, schools, law courts, markets, irrigation
works, kings, priests, temples, peasants, artisans, armies, astronomers, merchants, sports, theater,
art, music, and books. High civilization, differing in detail but alike in essentials,
had evolved independently on both sides of the earth. Also, Jeffrey West had a graph that he
sent me that showed, over time, that unbounded growth, which means the pursuit and achievement
of growth without any bounds or limits, requires an acceleration cycle of innovation
to avoid collapse. One could argue that the agricultural trajectory from 12,000 years ago
until 500 years ago had started to reach into those limits. Maybe capitalism and colonialism
and how we organized in the face of energy surplus was what put us on one of these next curves.
My question is, is capitalism in service of the metabolic laws of nature? Second question,
would these things happen without the presence of energy surplus? We can't really know tens and
hundreds of thousands of years ago the scaling laws of human settlements of the past,
except that they were hunter-gatherers for 99% of our history because there wasn't enough energy
surplus to scale beyond nomadic tribes. The question is, does the presence of energy surplus
create the exosomatic economic social organization, or does the social organization
create the incentives and the discovery and the methods to access more energy?
I'm inclined to think that it's the energy surplus, the presence of energy surplus,
that is primary, and the other stuff flows downhill from that, but I think it's an interesting
question. Would a culture of educated, behaviorally stacked hominids who had a wider definition of
self than our current dominant culture, would those humans construct a society of a lower
metabolism? Maybe they did, and maybe that was the indigenous cultures, and they got outcompeted
by the energy-hungry amoeba. I think it's an open question what education and a zen attitude
towards life and our interconnectedness with nature, would these metabolic
supra-linear scalings apply to such a society? Open question.
Next big question is, right now people are recognizing what carbon is doing to the atmosphere,
the finiteness of fossil carbon, and so we're building a lot of renewable energy devices,
solar panels, wind turbines, geothermal batteries, etc. Given the viewpoint of Jeffrey West and
societal metabolism, are renewables part of an energy transition, or are they just
a kind of a protuberance on the massive amoeba that is growing, and they're not separate. They're
just like a shark that grows an extra fin using that extra energy, but it doesn't change the
entire goals, nor the metabolism of the entity. Next question. Jeffrey and I discussed the fact
that cities become more efficient as they get larger. If you extrapolate that forward,
if we had towards a decentralized world, which many are advocating, doesn't this imply that
let's say if New York City's population was evenly distributed over 5,000 smaller cities,
that the environmental and resource impacts would be not only larger, but significantly larger?
And so I think an open question is, given the metabolic scaling laws of nature and human systems,
is decentralization from a population standpoint, is that a good thing?
A sub-point there, a sub-question there would be if our economies grow globally at a sub-linear
scale energy-wise, but our populations use energy at a super-linear scale, does it make sense to
organize society in two different realms, like have all the production thing
scaled in cities and have the population elsewhere? I don't know the answer to that. I need to think
about that more. Next key question, number five out of seven. Recently, the Wegovi and some of these
weight loss drugs are based on something called GLP-1, which originally was thought to
modulate gut hormones, but now it's been known that it actually is in the hind brain and it reduces
a person's craving and demand for food, for entertainment, for novelty, for gambling,
for alcohol, and other things. So this chemical that is being produced in the lab
actually has the ability to change a human metabolism. Any of you that have tried to lose
weight or live healthier lives, you can potentially change your metabolism on your own. But the key
question is, what is the societal equivalent of Wegovi or GLP-1? Is there some sort of thing,
whether it's a policy or a drug or a cultural movement that is able to
do the cultural equivalent of what these weight loss drugs are doing? A speculation.
Question number six. In each of the transitions that humans have had so far to more innovation
that put us on another curve in Jeffrey West Graff, the externalities or the impact on the
biosphere was relatively small, except the next one, if we're able to jump to another curve with
artificial intelligence or the like, will the waste products from our metabolism suddenly be a
larger limiter on our prospects than our pool of energy availability? Because any, and I'm going
to be talking more about this in the near future, that AI, if it manifests as some people are saying,
it will improve and scale across all domains, which will function like a larger straw,
and it will be a death now for many of the tipping points already nearly being reached
or surpassed in the environment. Which brings me to the final question, which I asked Jeffrey on the
podcast, is can knowing that we have a social metabolism change our social metabolism?
And I think this is just an absolutely central question to the work of this podcast, to the
work of the world. I mean, we are approaching, this is what I refer to as a species level
conversation, is all the things that happened in the past are informing the moment we're alive now.
And we have, we are biological organisms, we're primates, we're predators, we're extremely social,
like other organisms, we have a metabolism. That metabolism has taken over and spread
all over this blue-green earth. Can understanding that change our culture? So I talk about the
great simplification, what about a great sophistication, where instead of just following simple
organismic rules, we integrate our knowledge kind of like in a Heisenberg sort of way
to alter our path forward, a species level conversation. And a subset of that is what if
a town board or a city council or a county commissioner truly understood the scaling
trajectory of growth and what humans are doing, would they make different decisions
about their town? Would they say, oh my gosh, our things are scaling at 1.15 super linearly
and our energy use and environmental impact are also scaling? Maybe we should anticipate 10 or 20
years might that look like in Red Wing, Minnesota or Topeka, Kansas or Johannesburg, South Africa
or whatever it is and make decisions today using our cognitive mind that trump the emotional
decisions of the future. So Jeffrey West is a really interesting fellow and I've learned a
lot more from reading his PowerPoints in the last few days. I believe Lizzie posted one of them
in the show notes of his episode. Metabolism, scaling and humans is a very interesting question.
I'm going to return to this and keep thinking about it. Thank you. I will talk to you next week.
