Human beings are not just the squalid, competitive apes that we're made out to be.
We have many, many interesting traits. We are social animals. We know how to sacrifice for
another. And indeed, the history of evolution is as much a history of cooperation as it is of
competition. Competition is very important, of course. But the cooperation has been neglected.
And we do know how to cooperate. And when we're working well, both the hemispheres cooperate
with one another, and we cooperate with one another. So the history, I mean, the history
of the West is the one that I know best. I haven't attempted to write about the history of the East,
though I suspect it will tell a different story until very recently, when it seems to have become
occidentalized in the most lamentable way, taking all our worst sins upon it. But anyway,
yeah, I mean, I think that is right. Wisdom is always going to be relatively rare.
And involves a lot of things. It involves the putting together of a life well lived
and the experience that comes from that, with an understanding of history, a sense of the spiritual
and an ability to aggregate information. But at the moment, I'd say that information
is triumphant over a true understanding. And an understanding is what intelligence
requires and means. So that much of the time we're amassing information, and we kind of know in a
technical way certain things, we probably know more in that sense than than humanity has ever known.
But we're also, in my view, less wise than humanity has ever been. This fact that we can
know things and can do things has gone to our heads and made us hubristic, vain, and ridiculous,
because we think we can solve everything, but we don't understand a half of what we've got
hold of here. So I think AI is a problem. Yeah. How does that map from an individual to a culture?
Because as individuals, we have left hemispheres and right hemispheres, and we have a corpus
colossum that divides them and is getting larger over time, implying that there's some narrative
control going on. But our culture doesn't have a left or right hemisphere. So is it just the
proportion of the population that is kind of tilted in one direction that periodically you
said there were a couple of historical cultures that flourished because they had more of a balanced
context? What's the difference between individuals, population, and the whole culture with respect
to this phenomenon? Yes, it's a reasonable question. Of course, I'm not suggesting that
physically the brain has changed enormously since 2000 years ago. It will have changed a bit,
because it's always involving, but it's not that I'm referring to. It's that we use the brain in
different ways. We can choose to listen to one part of the brain more than another. And I think
that what happens as a society becomes a powerful civilization, a number of things happen. One is
that it overreaches itself, either in terms of its territory or its military and economic power.
And in doing that, it needs to be able to control or thinks it needs to be able to control.
A vast panoply of elements in human life. And to do that, it needs to simplify to roll out,
as we say, a bureaucratic system and so forth. So as a civilization becomes too large and overreaches
itself, it moves more and more towards a kind of left hemisphere thinking that helps it with the
map, the theory, the diagram of life rather than the actual business of life. And I think the other
thing that happens, well, there are many things that happen. I think there are about half a dozen
that I refer to in the preface to the matter with things. Sorry, the preface to the Martianism
industry and take much further in the matter with things. But one is something that the great
philosopher A.N. Whitehead said, that a civilization thrives until it overanalyzes itself. And I think
that what's happening in our world is we don't really live connected so much to nature. We don't
live connected to a spiritual tradition. We don't live connected to our history and culture. Our
art has become too intellectualized. It's become too conceptual, not powerful, visceral and metaphoric
in its nature as most great art is. And so we've been cut loose. And we're all kind of at a loss.
And when we try to talk to one another across these spaces, we tend to talk in very theoretical
terms. So people talk about a theory of politics, a theory of economics and a theory of how people
behave. And so usually this is inaccurate, oversimple. And so it's that that gets us into this
frame of mind. Because the left hemisphere's message is money for old road. It's incredibly
simple. We're just apes that compete for territory, money and power. That's the left hemisphere's
knowledge. Because let me put it this way, the left hemisphere's resolve debt is to make us
powerful, to help us grab things. It controls the right hand, which for most of us is the one
which we do the grabbing and the manipulating. And it helps us maintain power. But all the
rest of the understanding of everything else that humans are capable of, the life of the spirit,
the life of morality, of beauty, of goodness, of truth, all these things are somehow left out of
this picture and become somehow marginalized or trivialized, as they have done, I believe,
in our culture at the moment. And so why I wrote the matter with things was because I could see
that we all agree there is something that is the matter with things. Very few people think
everything's going fine right now. But it's also a notice of the fact that we overvalue matter
in the most simple sense. I actually say that materialists are not people who overvalue matter,
they're people who undervalue matter, because matter is a very extraordinary thing. Matter is
wonderful. But this kind of simple idea of matter is what we tend to overestimate the power of,
the consciousness and the spirit, the mind is somehow a secondary secretion of matter,
which it cannot be. And that we've made a world up out of things, which is how the left hemisphere
puts things together. Whereas I believe the importance in everything lies in relationship,
not in what we call the things themselves that are related.
