Greetings, friends. Oh my gosh, I have so much to say on so many different topics, and topics
come up during the week that push my plan, frankly, to the next week. This keeps happening.
I would like to talk about information in our modern world, and what I'm about to say
is a riff, a reflection that was initiated by the response to last week's special episode
on NATO, Russia, Ukraine. I'm not going to talk about that episode, but I'm going to talk about
the role of the different bifurcations, the different lenses with which information is offered
and information is received. And I think I'm not an expert on this topic. I've got people in my
network, Jonathan Haidt, Douglas Roshkov, Tristan Harris, and others who are. But I increasingly
feel like this is one of our greatest risks, is how we receive information and where the
information comes from and how we respond to it. If we can't have conversations about,
we won't be able to deal with reality. So here's a bit of a extemporaneous reflection on this topic.
I've come up with 10 different dichotomies with respect to information. The first is speaking
versus writing. If you think about it, when you speak in a podcast on television, in a presentation,
that has a higher bar for novelty, sensationalism, attention getting things than writing does.
Writing, you can take your time. There are references. It can be a little bit more boring
and bland. So the actual media itself in a Marshall McLuhan sort of way, speaking, which
many popular podcast hosts and other flashy video today, is actually pulling us away from straight
facts and references and education because it hits our human evolved neurotransmitter buttons
in a more aligned way than writing. So that's the first pairing. Building on that is sensational
versus educational. A lot of our quote unquote information these days
is edutainment as opposed to purely educational. Educational things are by definition more dry,
more boring, more nuanced, more uncertain, more caveats, and a sensational binary. This is the
way it is. Sort of information source will outcompete the educational, more bland, but referenced
source. Another lens. A third lens, for lack of a better word, is simple versus advanced or complex.
The simpler the story, the more that fits again with the way our brains are wired because
nuance and uncertainty costs us energy and brain space, whereas simple yes or no,
us versus them, binary choices are more efficient in our brain. We don't have to allocate a lot of
uncertainty and things working in the background to decide the nuance and such.
We live in a complex system though. Single issue things are difficult to really understand
without the complexity of how everything fits together. So this issue is difficult to convey.
I think on this podcast, we like to be able to zoom in and zoom out and zoom back in and zoom out.
So we try to simplify things, but also as a part of the broader picture. Most media, most
information sources today tend to be on the single issue or simple side of things. Another category
would be the fourth estate versus the fifth estate. The fourth estate is journalism and media writ
large. The fifth estate is podcasts and blogs and substack and independent media of sorts.
Unfortunately, the fourth estate is increasingly dominated by well-resourced interests,
and it is getting very powerful, as can be seen by many of the narratives that are prevalent in
our culture. The fifth estate is under-resourced and very scattered, but a lot of people, including
me, get most of their information from the fifth estate. Then there's another subcategory,
which I'll label the fifth category. There's fifth estate crazy versus fifth estate reasonable.
The fifth estate crazy are all kinds of independent media things out there, touting various
conspiracy theories or sketchy, unreferenced things that people want to hear, and they get
confirmation bias from that. I still think that those podcasters and video bloggers that were
****** was the response to COVID should offer the public apology three years on,
now that we know the science. I think the fifth estate also has a bifurcation in it.
Beyond that, another filter is agendic versus authentic, and a lot of new sources
ultimately have an agenda. Whether it's a political agenda or a monetary agenda,
there is an unspoken agenda that supersedes the personalities of the people involved who are
writing or speaking. In contrast to that, I think authenticity is lacking in our culture with people
without an agenda or whose agenda is just the truth or a better future, and those are
increasingly rare. Building on that, the seventh category that I came up with is acceptable versus
cancelable. I don't even like to use that word cancelable. In fact, in all these categories,
I am describing things as nouns, and when you describe things as nouns,
they create a life and an identity of their own, which can get you in trouble.
But I think increasingly as events accelerate and become more chaotic and uncertain,
the socially accepted ceiling of what can be said on a podcast or in a public conversation
is going to diminish because you will invariably offend or pose a risk to more of these
resourced interests or more of a captured audience. The social institutional pressure
is going to narrow the ceiling of what is acceptable to be said. The seventh category is
what is socially acceptable to convey as information and what can get you in trouble,
even if it is true. Speaking about what is true, let's move to another lens on this bifurcation,
and that is publicly available information and privately sold information. I think I've already
witnessed this since COVID and what's going on with Russia and what's going on with Bitcoin
and money flows. I increasingly see the best analysis not being on the public media,
but sold by consultancies or hedge funds or special groups that for $20,000 you get to see
this super high-level recent synthesis of information that's in articles that aren't
through peer review yet, and we've summarized it, and this is what's going on with, for instance,
COVID and other things like that. As events accelerate and wealth inequality and income
inequality accelerate and as AI becomes more prevalent, I expect there will be a bifurcation
of information availability that is quite different than the Walter Cronkite era,
and this is a problem. Now, I'm not saying that the private information is always right,
but increasingly understanding and knowing what's going on in the world may come with a price.
The next category of information or information reception is there's a difference between what
is heard and what is said. What was said in my episode last week with Chuck Watson on NATO and
Russia was that the war is hurting the West, is a disaster for Ukraine, and increasing yards of
escalating beyond the region. What was heard, at least by reading the YouTube comments, was
Putin is great, so the problem is that propaganda and indoctrination are especially insidious in that
not only did they displace neutral information, they predispose the listener to react and reject
even uncontroversial information or points of view that are threatening to the desired narrative.
So it kind of preloads the listener to not just reject, but to attack anyone who disagrees.
Another example is that the people of Gaza
as an example, so we imply that war is bad and that is heard as support for the other side.
So this gets to the 10th and final bifurcation is a lot of information has to do with someone's
identity versus someone's learning. And here is an example from last week, again from this
Chuck Watson podcast. This is a comment from YouTube. I've watched 20 seconds, no thanks.
So what does that say about the viewer who has not heard any of the analysis or facts or context,
but the first 20 seconds were enough to put him or her off because it didn't conform with their
existing identity or beliefs. In contrast, here is another comment and there were several,
but I'll just share one from Twitter. So this episode took me on a little bit of a ride. I
could not believe what Chuck was saying. It went against my mental model of what I thought is true
and it made me feel very uneasy and even angry. But then I listened to the episode again today
and this time was different. Listening to the arguments Chuck gave, it occurred to me that
I need to question more what I read in the media about this conflict, Macron, US, Poland, Poland,
Romania. The reality is much more complex and harder to navigate than the media is able to portray.
This is an example of metamodern thinking, someone that's mature enough to be self-aware
of their own reactions and still try to glean what they could from a conversation. Again,
I don't want to overly focus on last week's episode, but I do think writ large, this is
where we're at. Can we as a species suppress our identities, suppress our built image of the world,
which is of course influenced by our own background and by the media, to suss out what is true,
what is false, what is important, what's trivia, what's relevant, what's a side story.
I think, and again, I'm not an expert on this, I think we have to rebuild the fourth estate in a
way that works for the crises that are ahead. We need a new information infrastructure in our
society, but along with that, we have arrived at a point where we, some of us, have to evolve
beyond the tribal single issue binary thinking that was adaptive in the past. We have to evolve
how we approach information, how we use information towards discourses, collaboration,
and a broader discussion on how we engage with the events of the day.
More to come. Thanks for listening. I'll see you next week.
