Please welcome in ego kaplan parents to the great simplification in ego is an industrial engineer currently doing research at the group of energy economy and systems dynamics at the university of via doleed in via doleed spain.
He holds a master's in electric energy and sustainable development as well as a phd in economics.
I have met with him and his team who are working on systems integration of energy climate renewable energy fossil fuel depletion and technical and social transformations towards sustainability.
We talked about your eye and the importance of a wide boundary perspective on bio physical analysis.
I hope you enjoy this conversation with an ego kaplan parents.
In ego good to see you hello.
Welcome to the great simplification podcast the last time I saw you was in via doleed when we had a one day seminar on bio physical economics at your university six years ago or something.
Yes for sure yeah you know it's interesting I don't know why this is and it might be a small sample size but of the really bio physically aware humans it seems like like one in ten of them live in spain do you have any idea why that might be.
I don't know maybe because you are more familiar with spanish people maybe and then you know one person and it's easy to know the rest of us I don't know.
It could be so I think this is your very first podcast and I've selected I invited you because we met but because.
You are why energy return on investment is what I wrote my phd thesis on and there's a lot of BS and ideology in today's you are why analysis and your paper which we're going to talk about is probably one of the best clearest in my opinion most accurate birds I views of the situation so I really want you to explain a little bit about that but before we get to that could you introduce me.
Introduce yourself what is your work what are you generally working on and how did you arrive at this place in your life and and your career now I am a postdoctoral researcher at the university by the leaf in a research group called.
Group of energy economy and system dynamics of the university and well what we are basically doing because we work really in team experience team work what we are doing is to try to build a system dynamics models that.
Cover all the relevant dimensions in the interface between let's say natural and human systems know.
So these type of models they have a name in the literature they are called integrated assessment models.
But I can say that we are trying to do modeling which is let's say quite different from a standard IPCC integrated assessment model, so we are trying to address some of the limitations that this model have.
One of the main objectives is to bring more biophysical realities because we think that they are not so biophysically grounded so they come conclusions they extract they are not so reliable.
Well that's been my experience to is is the climate modelers themselves are doing the best job they can.
With a very complex situation which is the global climate but then we add energy energy systems money the economy individual and aggregate human behavior geopolitics and it becomes really complex really fast.
But at a first order I think to have the climate scenarios.
Better tether to our energy reality is a first step.
Well I think here there are several problems know with the existing let's say more classical models know that there are some things that maybe are scientific other things that are maybe related with the scientific paradigm that that we have so the scientific scientific paradigm and then even if you have dozens of hundreds of Internet assessment models and you notice that many of them have the same.
Founding hypothesis no so you have a false sense of diversity in the sense and then also you have the problem or they issue the issue that.
The IPCC sorry they the Internet assessment models from the IPCC we don't have to forget the IPCC is a United Nation.
Process so it is embedded in current institutions we have the government's there and there are research there is the research that has so have shown hope.
The government had influence the scientific outcomes because the IPCC reports are not purely scientific outcomes so it's a mix of them I can maybe enter into the title of some of the most important things.
So what you're saying is there's there's two challenges one is there's group think in the integrated assessment models themselves because they all rely on standard assumptions and two is there's a political ceiling on what might be said and understood which I think applies to a lot of the things in the current.
Human predicament is that correct so I am going to give a couple of examples not to remain so abstract no from the point of view of the scientific or general paradigm.
The current general paradigm is that energy is very abundant in the world I'm not now referring to specifically fossils of renewables both of them are very abundant no.
And we had this debate some years ago with the peak oil no and now that maybe then especially in Europe where I am more familiar with the politics and now climate policies are being taken seriously and climate problem.
So the issue is a bit less important because we want to get rid of it anyway.
But for renewables we have the same thing no so that we always see this figure of one square in the Sahara that is enough to power all the world no.
And which gives the impression that we have a lot a lot of affordable energy.
So this is one scientific paradigm which has not so much interference I will say with the institutional framework.
But I'm going to give an example where the institutional framework is key and for anybody familiar with the IPCC scenarios IPCC framework.
We all know that the GDP per capita in the IPCC scenarios is a exogenous assumption.
So the models need to be a build design in a way that GDP per capita let's say it's given and then the models reply the question what is the energy mix configuration I need to have to be able to grow at this rate and so on.
So for example we build models in which GDP is endogenous which is what happens in reality the GDP is the addition of the all the consumption of goods and services blah blah blah.
So it's endogenous in reality.
But because of institutional framework for which growth is not negotiable because even if they have several scenarios in all of them the GDP per capita grows in all the region.
So it's again a false let's say diversity.
So they're building the house which is the integrated assessment model from the roof instead of from the floor foundation.
In some sense yes.
They are fitting the the request from the from the institution who wants to use that so it's true that in the last day IPCC report the I mean the especially the mitigation report the framework and how it is explained and the topics they cover has changed a lot.
I can also feel that there is a generous generational I don't know in English relief and any generational shift with more young people interested about more I would say modern topics but still the classical IPCC the classical integrated assessment models are there.
These are models very complex you need decades to build them so it's difficult to let's say from one day to the other change them or there is a enormous inertia in this scientific process.
So my understanding is that in the integrated assessment models there is not a single scenario that has economic growth declining from your perspective.
Declining from here until 2100 there are one or two scenarios where growth peaks in 2070 in 45 years from now and then declines into 2100 but still all of it is is growth net growth from here to 2100.
What would happen if the United Nations IPCC or any global governing body produced research that showed declining GDP wouldn't that be so politically huge of a line to cross because then the question becomes oh.
If that's going to happen then maybe energy security becomes more important than low carbon progress what are your thoughts on that in ego.
Well.
This decline in GDP could happen because of two different things it could be the reflection of a recession.
Let's say a catastrophe or a crisis scenario and for example our models typically are able to produce this in baseline business as usual scenarios in which there are no strong actions to try to avoid the ecological collapse.
Then you get this recession scenarios so this will be one one one option and the other one will be to have a reduction in GDP because there is implemented an idea of post growth or the growth.
Scenario in the sense as I understand it in the sense of a plan reduction of the size of the economic of the economy to reduce the environmental footprints but trying to maintain or even increase well being so.
I think on the one hand politicians in general want to show that they have the control of the situation.
So maybe they will not be willing to show these recession scenarios because then people will say would be afraid no and then if they are afraid they could do things that they will be less controllable.
I think this is one part of the story.
Another part of the story could be that it is also I think that the mainstream is dominated by the idea of getting growth.
So this last week was the conference beyond growth.
I think what is the official name in the EU in Brussels.
I don't know if the news went to the other side of the ocean but several of the presentations.
OK so this is not the first conference about this.
There was at least one more.
I was present.
I don't remember now the year.
But this year it seems it's bigger.
There was the president of the Commission von der Leyen in the opening and it's very interesting that there were several high rank staff from the EU Commission in the Beyond Growth Conference saying that we need more green growth.
So I think this is very paradigmatic.
I think also the growth ideas are not well known in the mainstream and also they are very easily misrepresented and they don't distinguish sometimes the growth and recession.
So I think there is a lack of awareness of these ideas in the policy arena.
Your papers clearly imply that a degrowth scenario is going to happen from your first scenario because of energy and biophysical limits not a political choice.
And I'd like to get to the one paper that I'm referring to.
But maybe as a biophysical analyst you could first explain because I don't think I've actually had a guest.
You know you're going to be my 80th episode.
I don't have haven't had anyone that specifically talked about energy return on investment and how important it is or how not important it is.
Could you just explain to a layperson that isn't aware of this.
What is the ROI.
Why is it important.
How has it been an important indicator for the prosperity of societies.
And as it declines what it will imply for societies.
OK. Yes.
I think it's a good idea because this is a concept that sometimes it looks a bit abstract for people who are not familiar with it.
So yes.
Basically ROI is the acronym for energy return on energy invested and the name is trying to to refer to the return of investment from the financial world.
And it is basically a ratio between how much energy do you invest to have an energy system providing you energy back.
So here the idea is that you want to build an energy system that is going to provide you.
I don't know.
Let's say 100 energy units over each lifetime.
You should have.
You I mean this to set up and to build and to manufacture and to run and so on.
This energy system should require much less than 100 energy units because if not then you have a net loss.
So this which I think for one energy system is very intuitive.
We can extrapolate throughout the full society because it's true that we know that not all the energies have the same quality.
So if we have in the society an energy which very high quality which a very high ROI.
We can somehow help or allow that other energies with low ROI can enter into the system.
I think the classical example for this is biofuels biofuels have an energy return on an investment which they are between one two three.
Of course it depends on climate in the pensong agriculture management practices but very very low ROI.
This is not a scalable to replace for example oil know that it will make it will reduce a lot to the ROI of the society.
So there are basically an indicator of efficiency also.
And why is this important because basically the current society there are there is uncertainty in the estimates because it's very difficult to calculate.
Also say societal level but basically we need between five and fifteen ROI standard in let's say industrial modern societies as in USA or Europe.
So we need to be able to get for each energy investment at least five or fifteen units back.
What happens if this ROI reduces.
And it's important here to have in mind that there is not a hard limit for ROI because there was also a debate about which is the minimum ROI to sustain our society.
So my understanding or our understanding in the group together with Professor Carlos de Castro which by the way I forgot to mention because all the ROI work we do together in the group.
So so it's just to mention him also our idea is that I know I know Carlos and but your English is much better.
So I invited you but please give him my regards.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I will.
So what I was saying.
I guess so the idea is that there is not a hard threshold because different societal configurations can work.
With different ROIs know for example if you if we have a system of I don't know private transport with no public transport at all then we are going to spend much more energy on sustaining this network of private transport that if we have a solid private sorry public transport.
So with less energy we provide the same energy service so there is never here a hard threshold but of course there are thermo dynamical limitations which are important.
So if the ROI tends to decrease if we want to maintain the same amount of net energy which corresponds with the consumption of goods and services food cooling and heating our houses producing goods and services in the industry blah blah blah.
Then we will need more primary energy and more because we have more losses know so for the same amount of net energy we need more primary energy and if we need more primary energy this needs to see two things more environmental impacts if we are talking about fossil fuels more missions in particular and if we are talking about renewables this means that we are eating a higher part of the cake of the techno sustainable potential.
Which is also one of the topics that we work in our team that is very important because if we have a sustainable potential for a renewable 100 units of energy if the right decreases a lot then the primary and we are going to need a lot of a lot more of it.
And if we cannot increase the primary energy then the amount of discretionary uses for energy the amount of goods and services that we can enjoy decreases and this in a growth dominated system is recession in a deep growth plan system we could deal with it.
Thank you that was clear so you said that the year why of society not of an individual oil or solar or geothermal technology but for society needs to be five to 15 so let's just talk about the five.
So if the year why of society was five that would mean that if we had 100 units of energy for society or a million or whatever it would be that 20% of that energy would be used by the refining discovery extraction distribution of energy to the rest of society.
Meaning that 80% of our total energy only would be available for hospitals and air travel and shopping centers and universities is that right.
Yes the interpretation is correct the only thing maybe I forgot to mention before is the issue of boundaries because I'm talking about a right but a right.
We need to specify which boundary when I mentioned five to 15 it will be a right standard which is the energy return on any investment at the at the generation plant.
So it does not include transport for example transport of energy which is a very relevant part of the cake also.
What does that mean.
If we will take as reference the error point of views then the thresholds reduce it will be five 15 but I don't want to say numbers because we don't have the calculation but it will be much lower.
It would be three to nine or something like that who knows.
Yes we will need to do proper calculation but but yes it will be lower so here I'm talking in a very standard terms.
Okay so in the year I have five.
In the standard terms actually a greater percentage than 20% would be allocated to the energy sector if you include transport and distribution and everything.
This is what I refer to as a more door economy is as we grow our gross energy and our net energy stays flat or declines it's good for GDP.
But our entire system ends up being increasingly allocated to the energy and materials sector to power the rest of the system.
And increasingly we'll have to use some energy to mitigate environmental damage from the use of so much energy.
Yes.
It's a it can understood can be understood as a loss of efficiency.
We are less efficient we use the resources in a worse manner.
So so let me take a side step there and I want to get to your paper especially a particular graph but there's efficiency at three levels.
In this is I'm just thinking out loud here.
The first is the efficiency of the oil.
Oh well the the energy source at its point of extraction like you invest one barrel of oil and you get out 100 barrels of oil from under the earth.
So that process gets more or less efficient over time.
Then there's the efficiency of the point of use like driving an electric car instead of internal combustion car or you are more efficient by using electrical energy than waste heat.
And then the third would be the human choice efficiency.
I drive a big car by myself versus fitting five people into a small car.
That that has nothing to do with EROI.
That has to do with the human choice of of what they do with the energy once it's at their car.
Does that make sense.
And are there models that include all three of those steps.
Well almost no model includes EROI at all.
So the question about the levels is it's a very broad question in general.
This is I mean when I mentioned at the beginning that why we are developing a new integrated assessment assessment model when there are already I don't know hundreds maybe out there.
There are some reasons why and one of the reasons is that we want to be able to understand what are the implications of a changing EROI in the whole system.
Because one another of the paradigm paradigm thinking is that especially from green growth from the mainstream is that in general we can do the energy transition.
Plugging out some sources of energy and plugging in the renewables.
And they say that the rest of the system economy society cities whatever will remain the same.
But our understanding is not is that the transition is going to imply changes in the society and the economy.
So we need to have these feedbacks feeding from the biophysical dimension to the economy.
And for that we need to design models that from the start from the core they are thought to take these these relationships.
So with that let's let's go to your your paper.
The paper is called Dynamic EROI of the global energy system in future scenarios of transition to renewable energies.
Can can you give a brief overview of the paper but specifically explain what the figure nine is is attempting to show.
So this paper is the result of a lot of years of work I will start saying.
Our idea was because as you have mentioned the ROI literature and debate is many times many confusing.
There are many people doing estimates obtaining very different numbers.
The processes are not always clear.
There is this lack of transparency.
So we know we knew it was a world how to say especially for us that we never studied before ROI.
Difficult let's say.
So our idea was in a model in an integrated assessment model we built for a European project called Medeas.
So we had different levels of Medeas we had Medeas war Medeas EU and then Medeas country level.
So here we were interested into looking at the problem at the global level because now with the global trade and so on.
I don't know in Spain we are installing a lot of PV but if this PV is made it's manufactured in China.
But then the investment is done in China and we so we wanted to have the global the global picture not to have to deal with these trade effects.
And the idea was to see what will happen with the ROI of the system in a dynamic way if we do the transition to renewables at different pace at different rhythms.
So in this figure in this figure we have three lines.
We have GG corresponds to a green growth and the percentage refers to the amount of renewables in the system in the year 2016.
So for example the thick solid line is a green growth scenario which attains 100 percent renewables in 2016.
And the other two scenarios are let's say less stringent and we wanted to see the difference.
So what we see basically here is that if we do this fast transition which in fact is a transition we should do if we want to if we want to avoid climate change.
All the time thinking in green growth perspective we were interested into assessing the feasibility technical feasibility of green growth.
We were not interested into proposing a workable alternative in this paper.
So we saw that the ROI of the system will decrease a lot and very fast.
So from the level we were talking before know something between 10 and 15 we will be something in the minimum because there is like a rebound.
I will explain now why this rebound three four.
Just to be clear this is the standard EOI not the wide boundary.
So that like you said before things like transportation and the ultimate distribution of the energy is not included in this.
Well yes here the thing is that we we use something in between a standard and point of views but we are much closer to standard because we don't we didn't compute all the all the energy embedded in the.
In the in the in the grids which is the enormous.
So we only took some effects related with the general system.
For example we took into account transmission losses we took into account everything related with the management of variability.
So if we need to put more storage and if we have some curtailment because the system depends has a very high share of renewables variables.
So it's something in between but I think we are closer to standard.
And you were about to explain what what happened in 2055 the rebound.
Yeah. So the rebound why is this rebound.
Because the renewables have a pattern of investment of energy and money very different to the pattern of investment of fossil fuels.
In general fossil fuels.
You have an investment at the beginning but then you have also significant investment that you need to do all the time to extract this energy.
Basically for oil you need to be pumping all the time and this to pump these you need energy.
But for renewables the investment the big investment in terms of energy money and materials is at the beginning is up from investment.
So you spend a lot of money materials and energy even your plan has not started to provide you one unit of energy.
And then in terms of operational maintenance it's much lower.
So what does it happen that if you do all the you need to do the transition very fast you need to put all the up from investments now.
And this is what the drugs the the ROI of the system.
And this is the reason it recovers because when you reach 100 percent you arrive like a stationary state with where you only need to replace the capacities that are being the commission.
So you don't need to expand the system but maintain.
And that is the reason that after the minimum it is stabilized.
I think it is stabilized at around seven or eight.
I'm not sure now in the in the paper we didn't show because we were focusing on the two thousand sixty.
But I think we explain in the paper so we recover because this paper or our paper has been criticized.
Well first ignore I will say and then by those who were ready for who didn't ignore it they criticized.
And the main criticism all you in your group you do aero estimates that are very low.
And the bad estimates are not reliable.
But the thing is that we use aero high levels that are within the range of the literature.
So the the problem the thing is that they didn't got the point that we are using a standard arise from the literature.
But we are capturing the dynamic effect because the right literature is dominated by static assumptions.
What does what does that mean dynamic effect dynamic means over time variation over time.
So if you are analyzing a problem related with the energy transition the energy transition is inherently a dynamic problem because you are increasing.
The share of some technologies at the expense of other technologies.
So there are dynamic effects.
And what I explain the pattern of investment you will have the lifetime of 25 years.
It is not the same if you need to do the investment in the year one or if you need to do it over the period distributed.
No. So most aero analysis made by the teams that say are more influential.
They use static assumptions and they don't see these dynamic issues because their methodology is not is not able to see it.
So I have a lot of questions here.
This may be esoteric to a lot of listeners but I see why this is important.
This is the whole story.
This is building the house from from the foundation.
First of all I forgot to ask you this earlier.
Why should people use EROI analysis or net energy analysis or bio physical analysis instead of just looking at the market prices and using dollars.
Well this is the question will be asked as why is bio physical economics important.
The basic idea is that economics understood in a constrained way just looking at dollars.
It's a very partial and incomplete view of economy.
So it's true that it is the dominant way of looking to the economy but if you go to ecological economics or bio physical economics.
The idea is that in order to have the complete picture you need to have physical dimension also you need to have kilos you need to have a cubic cubic meters of water.
You need to have tons of resources you need to have joules of energy because with the money you can do things that are a bit you can trick a lot.
You can give subsidies you can put taxes you have inflation.
The government can get in depth but the physical reality is like the foundation.
So our idea is the opposite.
Let's represent the foundation and let's try to let's try to capture after what are the impacts in the monetary dimension which is also important.
I don't want to say that it's not important the economy.
It's very important that in our models is one of the most important modules.
As you said before how we manage the consumption and the production is critical.
It's critical and we need also to deal with it but it's not the only thing we have.
Carlos if he will be here he will say that these models that only have dollars are flat earth models.
So he would also say that Gaia might have something to say about these models.
I'm kidding.
So here's another question.
I used to love EROI because it made so much sense to me as you just described.
But now I think it's often used as an ideological tool to represent fossil fuels favorably or to represent renewables favorably.
Without a lot of standardization.
So one of my many pet peeves is EROI standalone for a technology is mildly useful.
But what we really need is what you did in this paper which is an EROI of the system.
Because if you add a little bit of a solar panel solar photovoltaic to a system.
The EROI of it as a standalone is probably accurate.
But as you increase it to 10% of the system or 30% or 50% or 80% the cost to the system with the backup and the transmission and the distribution and all those things reduces the EROI of the system.
So can you talk a little bit about the importance of using a system EROI of the entire I guess it would be a grid in a region or a country or a world.
I really like your question because I go to the heart of the problem.
Precisely what we wanted to avoid when we were doing these research is to avoid these never ending debates about the EROI of solar solar is intermittent.
Then I need to assign backup how much backup.
Then there are so many assumptions that as you said you can get what you want.
So our idea is we are not interested into allocating energy costs to any technology.
We are interested in to have the complete picture and know what is the energy cost of that energy mix.
And if I can get a better energy mix this combination is better.
And also we have to be aware that the energy mix is going.
I don't want to say the word optimum but the best energy mix is going to be different in each region because it's not the same the sun we have in Spain that the sun they don't have in Denmark.
So I mean this is there are a lot of things with a right that have not been done properly.
So why is it important there of the system in order to have the full picture and to avoid to focus in the trees and to see the forest.
I will say.
Well speaking of the forest one could argue that in your solid line scenario the green growth of a hundred percent.
You're treating energy as the limiting variable but if we were to scale renewable energy to be a hundred percent or anything close to that.
We would then run into water and mineral and material and land and maybe forest limitations.
So E.R.O.I. focuses on energy as being the most important variable and I would argue that other than the ecosystem services of Gaia it is the most important.
But there are other limiters too so that would be an additional layer of complexity to your model right.
Yes when we give when I give talks about this I generally start by the general picture.
I mentioned the planetary boundaries framework definitions of sustainability and then one of the elements.
Because we have to distinguish between renewables and sustainable renewables.
Not all the renewables are exploited in a sustainable way.
So as you said we need to have in control consideration a lot of things.
And then for the technical feasibility of the system the E.R.O.I. is something important but the E.R.O.I. is not the perfect indicator.
Maybe it would be good to insist on this not to give this impression.
The E.R.O.I. captures very interesting characteristics but does not see many others.
So yes renewables, limits to renewables.
There are different limits also different limits depending on the technology.
For solar and wind I would say some materials could pose a problem.
For land I think it depends a lot on the region so we have done some research about potential land constraints for solar.
And for example what we see is that it depends a lot on the country because let's take a couple of examples.
It is not the same Australia with enormous size.
I mean a very little density, small density of population and a lot of irradiance than I don't know UK.
UK low irradiance, high density population, high energy consumption.
So in some northern European countries it could be a problem.
But of course they are already trying to find a solution through trade.
But I don't know it's a topic which is very broad and yes the renewables will have different problems.
So back to your graph again.
You had real data through 1995 to 2018 or so that the EROI of the system declined from 16 to 12.
So can you speculate or did you do the analysis and I think renewables system wide right now are around 5% depending if you include hydro or not.
But it's already declined 20% in the last 25 years.
So what if you didn't have a green growth scenario and you just continued the current mix.
Will that EROI also continue lower or didn't you do that analysis?
Well the Medeas model is not ready for this I will explain why.
This data from 1995 until 2010 I think in the case of Medeas are derived from historical data basically from the international energy balances.
So what the model is capturing there is something that is not new.
It's something that has been found in other studies by for example Paul Brockway team or there is also a team in France that has published some EROI estimates which are showing that the EROI of fossil fuels over time in the last decades has a declining trend.
So I think the EER data captures this but in Medeas for the sake of simplicity we did not consider that the EROI of fossil fuels declined over time which is one of the optimistic assumptions we did in this work.
I think we have a full paragraph about the limitations and we took a lot of care that all these limitations would be biased towards overestimating the EROI because we knew we were going to receive critiques.
So for us the EROI of oil in 2010 and 2016 is the same so this is our own assumption but it was very difficult for us to project that and we decided we already had interesting results without it and we kept it like this.
As a human you're a scientist and a human but as a human when you saw these graphs when they first came out of your computer and it showed that the EROI which you just said is probably a little overestimate from reality.
Got down to three in 2055 before rebounding what was your reaction I mean I can't imagine our society could function at an EROI of three not remotely how it looks today.
Well I think as a human I first thought that there were some errors because to our knowledge no one has done this type of research so you are blind.
So I don't know my intuition or my bias was telling me that it was not going to be so strong so you'll try to find errors.
You always find some errors but in this case I remember they were not relevant because many times you find two errors and they compensate one with the other especially when the model is already very validated.
And then the second thing I think and this is how I interpret this is that the green growth story for the whole world is a story they are telling us.
Do you think they're lying or trying to trick or do some political thing or do you think they're energy blind they just don't understand the biophysical ground up.
It's ignorance I think in my opinion maybe I cannot talk for 100% of people but for the most I think it's ignorance.
There is a status quo a mainstream scientific paradigm and it's one of us saying this against ten others saying other things.
Ten other well funded well funded and supported people by the way.
So what would be I assume the objective of your group at Viadolid would be to integrate graphs like this and the numbers that support them into the integrated assessment models to have more accurate portrayals of net zero
and some of these scenarios that are very popular.
Yes.
Well that will be one option.
The maybe the our group is really small.
So it's like it's an enormous task for one group.
I think we should maybe devote more time for this type of strategies.
But here we have to talk about how science is financed because our group is very reduced amount number of professors.
Most of us are our contacts are attached to projects.
So if the European Commission or the Spanish Ministry is not interested about their eye we don't get project about their eye.
So we do this on the side or we try to do it as a sub task of a big project.
So what I want to say is that we have small capacities in the group to do this type of how to say to be influencers to say in modern terminology.
So do you think the Ukraine Russia situation has accelerated interest in this sort of realistic energy a future scenarios.
No I don't know.
I think I think the European Union had a green sorry a green deal package with a lot of investments for the transition.
And I think this has distracted because of you know you cannot have many main goals.
So this has distracted the attention.
I don't know to some point I imagine also the budget because all the military budget has now is now skyrocketing.
So what is this money.
If we spend on this we would not spend on other things.
What is that maybe it has accelerated all the issue of hydrogen in Europe because of as you know know the problem with Russia Russia is that we were concerned with a problem.
The situation it was that Europe was very dependent on Russian natural gas not only natural gas metals nickel also fertilizer etc.
But natural gas is a bit the most famous.
So now there is this idea that which was already on the table but now I think they are trying to boost it.
So the south of Europe and the north of Africa Morocco and so on produce with a lot of renewables produce hydrogen that is then transferred to the north of Europe synthetic fuels or whatever to replace gas.
So this is another research challenge which in the research team we were very some of us are very motivated to analyze.
There is no almost no error on hydrogen fuels and so on.
This is a blind spot and they are putting the European Union millions and millions of euros and something that in our opinion is quite immature.
This reminds me a bit the biofuel story you know when the issue of picoy started to be a bit relevant then they started to invest a lot of money in biofuels.
People were some people few people were warning take care this is doesn't make sense.
And then they realized when because this is one of the maybe personally I find a bit frustrating that for me science about environmental problem is about anticipating.
So with this simulation models you detect some issues that now are not a problem but that could be a problem in the future.
You anticipate you foresee them and then you tell people take care if you continue like this you will face this problem.
But the problem is that we say things and they don't listen and then they only realize that this is a problem where they have already made the mistake so it's a bit useless.
With biofuel it's the same.
Yeah I agree with you.
My actually my only article ever in science was about corn ethanol like 20 years ago.
You know on that note and ego are you afraid of science and the scientific process as we approach tougher economic times that the actual science about scenarios realistic scenarios about the future politically within the peer review and institutional funding process
will start to be different.
Do you have any fears about that.
I'm not so pessimistic in the sense that we don't think that I don't think personally that this is totally now subjective opinion.
No, we have enormous challenges.
There are some people who think that we are doomed to chaos or to really bad bad times.
I'm not so pessimistic.
I think this comes also with your character.
But for I have if I can bring some elements rational elements.
We have if you look to the history.
The history is full of events of with situations very very bad for people very bad times that they managed to overcome it.
Of course also there is a plenty of situations where they did not manage to overcome and it was very bad.
This is my situation.
My opinion that the human the humans we are if you are aware of the problem and you are motivated and you understand and you have a sense that you can achieve.
We have an enormous energy to mobilize.
And as we say the arrow is determined by social decision and economic decision.
Nothing is written in stone.
So I don't know.
I'm in the sense I'm not so pessimistic but I'm aware that we need our change a radical change in the sense in terms of energy.
I another strand of research which I have is related with energy communities energy cooperatives and this type of projects even if they are small.
For the moment they don't have most countries and impacting the macro view.
These projects give hope.
They are examples of what can be done.
And I think they are very very like seeds of change.
What does that mean energy communities.
I think it's maybe more you term in the legislation but basically is the idea that historically the energy has been supplied and managed by very large companies private companies or state companies is the same.
It's something outside of the control of the citizen.
So all this also they call energy democracy or energy cooperatives energy communities is the idea that people lay people.
You can make an association for I don't know for getting your food locally and sustainable.
You can also make an association to install some PV panel somewhere and then share this energy.
So this is the idea.
So decentralization you're talking about kind of decentralization but also decentralization in the ownership and the management of the resource because if you can have decentralization decentralization for a technical point of view all the panels are on or everything is controlled by big large corporations.
No.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Well this has been a helpful glimpse into a biophysically plausible green growth scenario.
If you don't mind I would like to ask you some some personal questions since I've known you for six or seven years.
You have thought about your why biophysical economics peak oil climate change these things as an individual and as a career choice.
Do you have any personal advice to people watching or listening to this at this time of global metacrisis.
It's difficult because this is so far from our daily life especially in Europe.
I know.
You're a scientist.
So it's it's totally disconnected.
No.
So for normal for for lay people who are not interested about this or have no information.
The the message is hard because the message is the life we have now is temporal.
It's not sustainable.
Maybe if you are down 30 40 years you will see these problems.
Your family will see it.
So that will be maybe my message that don't give for granted what you have.
This is sustained.
We say in Spanish is a giant of of with mad feet.
I don't know if English you have such an expression.
A giant of a piece of clay.
A giant with a mad feet.
So it looks normal but it's very unstable.
Yeah.
Well I agree with you.
So you teach at a university.
You're a postdoc.
What recommendations do you give to 18 19 20 year old humans at Valladolid University or any young people listening to this program.
I will say that everybody should when we make plans for the future big things for example buying a house or I don't know this type of things.
You need to carefully think if this is really going to be a good option in the this context.
No.
So to try to be more resilient also I think there are two things here.
There is the structural change and there is the personal change.
I think I'm not naive to think that if everybody changed our behavior then the world will be perfect.
This is totally naive but it's true that this is one of the of the of the pillars of the transition.
So I think we have a process especially in rich countries where we are surrounded by this super abundance and over consumption and so on that we need to learn to live ourselves with less.
We have I insist the structural constant but as a way to be good with ourselves I would say.
So if in the future there is some bad situation we already understand what happens and know and be used to that.
What do you care most about in the world and ego.
I think values values of I think freedom and autonomy.
So if people are really free and autonomous in the way that they are not manipulated I think that can save us from many things.
And of all the issues in the world could be biophysical analysis or anything else.
What issue are you personally most concerned about in the coming 10 years or so.
I think my main worry is that all these problems will be too much and it will be a big mess.
And in contrast to that what what gives you optimism what things have you witnessed or small examples give you optimism and some inspiration for a better future than the default.
Examples that are happening now.
I would like to highlight this this group of people who gather together in small cooperatives for providing themselves not only with energy but by your food finance.
Even we have now in the city a cooperative for transport with electric cars which are shared.
I think this gathering doing projects in common is the is very good.
And then in the history I for example I really always recommend the book from Jared Diamond Collapse which is a classic now which gives these examples of societies which fail and societies which survive.
So I think there is a list of historical cases.
There is the case of Iceland.
There is the case of Japan which managed to survive.
It's true that in some cases with authoritarian rule this is maybe not optimal but there are there are situations.
If you could wave a magic wand with no personal recourse to you or your reputation.
What is one thing you might do to improve human and planetary futures.
Well I think I will maybe repeat but I think for me it's very important this idea that everybody.
We try to be or we are non manipulated with that we transparently see when someone is cheating on us someone or the system that will be magic.
Like a red light in your brain when someone is trying or a situation is not true and they are manipulating.
That will be like a semaphore very useful.
Full behavioral transparency.
Excellent.
This has been great in ego as usual when I have my first guest the first time on the program.
I'll ask you if you were to come back in six months or nine months what is one topic that maybe we didn't cover today that you are very passionate about interested in that is relevant to our future that maybe you could come back and do a deep dive on that topic.
I will say that the two things for me are very key one thing will be all these net energy assessment of the hydrogen.
And the other thing will be the what are the sustainable potentials of renewables or to try to understand a bit more the situation.
Do you think that a group of researchers either at Viadolid or 10 other universities.
If they very convincingly came up with research and analysis showing that the net energy of hydrogen system wide was a bad path to go on.
Do you think that politicians and and you know decision makers would actually heed that advice or is the momentum too strong to change that.
The problem I think are delays because we have not even started.
So that means that we will get results not before two years in two years the amount of investments done is going to be enormous and this is going to be for me like stranded assets.
And this is what happened with biofuels.
Now we are consuming in Europe biofuels because we build some refineries 20 years ago and these refineries have a lifetime of I'm not sure how many years but we need to use them until the end.
So maybe there is a risk that again we arrive late and then they cannot undo what they did also not to acknowledge that they did an error.
Because for example about hydrogen I can give an anecdote a couple of weeks ago I was in a debate about hydrogen with some people who are working with hydrogen.
And well they call me a bit to be the opposite side of these people who are working with hydrogen and think that they cannot be applied in many things and say let's say more the most typical view.
So the debate was very good.
I think it was constructive and we were listening to each other and I think it was very respectful and so on.
But at the end hold the debate finish.
There was an intervention from one person from the research center who said anyway the European Union is putting a lot of money in hydrogen.
So there's going to be a lot of job and money there.
So when the debate finishes like this then I can go out because I mean we have different priorities and we have different ways of taking decision.
Well I wish you luck in your work on that.
I do think more broadly we need massively more education on how important energy is to our lives.
How our fossil energy is depleting.
It won't be here forever and the importance of energy quality and energy properties that not all jewels are created equal.
We can't just create these hydrogen cars and scale renewables and continue to power a 19 terawatt society.
We are energy blind and thank you and your team at Valladolid University at least trying to build the analysis from the ground up.
I'm a big fan of your work and ego.
Thank you very much Nate for your words and we welcome everybody interested in this type of research in our group.
We will be very great to host anybody for short time or long time.
To be continued.
Saludos amigo.
It was a pleasure to be in the podcast was very very fine.
So thank you again and see you soon.
