You can have the greatest rules in the world, if you're not enforcing them, they're worth nothing.
And I think that is the biggest challenge in Europe right now with food packaging,
with food contact materials. There are progressive rules to a certain extent,
but they are not being enforced. And so I don't feel that European citizens are better protected
from these chemicals than people elsewhere in the world, to be honest.
I'm pleased to welcome my friend Jane Munka to the podcast. Jane is the chief scientific officer
and managing director of the Food Packaging Forum in Zurich, Switzerland. Jane holds a
doctorate degree in environmental toxicology and a master's in environmental science from
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. If you recall from a month or so ago, Jeremy Grantham
on this show said that he believes toxics, especially endocrine disrupting chemicals,
are a larger threat to humanity's future than climate change.
Quite a big statement. Jane and I unpack this as it pertains to food, how we heat our food,
the chemicals in the plastics that are in the packaging in our food, fruits and vegetables
that are sprayed, and how this story is still underground and is starting to percolate into
more people's awareness. Please welcome Jane Munka.
Hi, Jane. Great to see you.
Hi, Nate. Thanks for having me.
How are you, my friend?
I'm good. I'm good. It's busy times, but I'm excited to chat with you today.
Let's start at the top. If you include Jeremy Grantham, whose episode will be out, I think,
next week or the week after, you will be my fifth guest on the program to talk about plastics
and their impact on humans and the natural world. That's a pretty large amount of coverage for this
topic that a lot of people are unaware of. You and I have a lot of colleagues and friends in common
that are deeply, deeply concerned about not only climate change and biodiversity loss and
those other things, but as plastic pollution as one of the key environmental risks.
Could you maybe start with your opinion on that big picture?
Well, I mean, the way people are talking about plastics is almost as if it's the plan B for
the fossil or carbon industry. What I learned from you, Nate, one of your, I believe it was a
frankly on the just stop oil, is that if we stop using fossil carbon as fuel and invest into
expanding the use of plastics, it means that we will continue to pump fossil carbon from the ground.
The heavy fractions, which today are used as fuel, would be a waste product. I'm feeling that
this whole investment into plastics is just an excuse to keep pumping fossil carbon from the
ground and to keep using the fuel. Well, it's kind of a modern, much dirtier, technologically
intensive version of Native Americans killing a buffalo and using all the parts of it. We are
killing the barrels of oil plus other things with their burning just to use all of it. It's
like we're using all of the barrel of oil. But I think most people are less aware of the plastic
pollution aspect. So maybe you could start by telling me what it is that you do professionally.
And how did you first have an aha moment that plastics were a real issue and dedicated your
career to this? So I'll start with that because that's maybe a fun story. So I was a PhD student
working in an ecotoxicology lab. And my job was actually to set up a fish facility in our
lab with zebrafish. This is around the 2000s. And zebrafish were at that time already being used
in sort of developmental biology, but not yet in ecotoxicology. And so my PhD was to look at
using zebrafish for ecotoxicology. And I was the first PhD student. So I had the task of setting
up this fish lab. And everywhere I looked, people were saying, oh, zebrafish, fantastic model
organism, because they produce so many eggs. And, you know, you can harvest eggs every day. They're
tropical fish, so they don't kind of live by seasons. And my fish were not laying eggs.
And I kind of, I got desperate because it just didn't align with what everyone was saying
about this animal, the species. And so we tried all kinds of things. And one of the things that
we looked into were the aquaria that we were housing the fish in. We'd gotten those from a
colleague in neuroscience who was using plastic, polycarbonate plastic mouse cages that he had
converted into aquaria for these fish. And so I was thinking, you know, wait a sec, there's plastic
in contact with my water and that the fish are swimming. And there's something leaching maybe
out of the plastic that is preventing their fertility. And so I started this whole study
into looking at the chemical used to make that plastic, which is bisphenol A. You may have heard
of that. And yes, lo and behold, we found large levels of bisphenol A in the water that our fish
were swimming in. Bisphenol A is an endocrine disruptor, interacts with the hormone system.
And so my hypothesis was that this bisphenol A from the plastic aquaria was preventing
fertility. And I was about to publish my first paper on that one. Fred from Sal, a good friend and
colleague, actually published the very same paper looking at bisphenol A in mouse cages.
So that was that. And later on, it turned out it actually wasn't the bisphenol A that prevented
the fertility. It was something else. But that was kind of my first contact with it.
And from there, you are now doing what? So now I am the managing director of a foundation
in Zurich, Switzerland, called the Food Packaging Forum. And the Food Packaging Forum, or FPF,
as we lovingly call it, is a charitable organization that does science communication and
scientific research, but desk based scientific research. So I'm not in the lab anymore. I'm
looking at the data and studies that others have published. And together with my fantastic
colleagues here in the team, we're a team of eight, we do systematic reviews. We've put together a
whole bunch of resources that are all freely available to anyone. You can access them on our
website. For example, we've got a database on chemicals and plastics, and more specifically
chemicals and plastic packaging. So that's kind of the first publication we did back in 2019, I think,
where we compiled this inventory of chemicals that are used or thought to be used to make
plastic packaging. So assume that I know close to nothing about this topic, which is pretty close
to the truth. What role does food packaging play in our modern lives?
So the way I look at food packaging is it's an enabler of globalized food systems.
So a lot of the food we consume today is not grown in the communities where we live, right?
More and more people live in urban environments, and we shop in supermarkets. We don't have time
to cook. So oftentimes we buy heavily processed foods, a lot of it ultra processed foods, as we
call it. And the vector for getting these foodstuffs onto our tables is food packaging.
Sometimes food packaging even is so advanced, so highly engineered, that you just kind of
leave it in the package. You leave the food in the packaging, stick it in the oven,
heat it up, and then you eat it directly from the packaging. So it's really a wonderful
product to help us live our modern lives.
You and I talk quite a bit, and so I'm going to go on some tangents here.
How much of that? I think it was Robert Lustig on a podcast that said that part of the reason that
preservatives and processed and ultra processed food evolved was to get food across the country
to where the people were from where it was grown. And I'm just wondering if in the last 50 years,
as human population has exploded, that we traded not in a planned sort of way, but just in an
emergent short term focus sort of way. If we traded human health for efficiency of getting the
food to where it needs to be, and at the time the packaging, oh, we can create these packages
from waste products of this oil that we're taking, let's do that. Without thinking about the long
term, and like you said, the ecotoxicology aspects of it. Is there a history there, or what is your
opinion? So I think it's really interesting to look at the history of food packaging.
Before the mid-19th century, we have to go back quite a long way. The only way to preserve foods
was either through fermentation, or drying, or smoking, or some people bury stuff in the ground,
you know, and so on. My god does that still. Yes. And I think in Sweden there's a type of fish that
is very much sought after, and that gets processed by burying it in the ground. But anyway, so we
as being, you know, humanity had to work with the sort of tools that nature offered us.
And then mid-19th century, there was a breakthrough, and it really was a disruption,
a disruptive innovation, namely the invention of food packaging to preserve foodstuffs,
fresh foodstuffs. And that gave humanity a certain kind of independence of the natural
harvesting seasons, you know. And I believe that this development kind of also, in a way,
enabled industrialization, because then less people had to produce food, more people could kind
of rely on other people. I never thought about it that way. So food packaging is almost a stabilizer
of intermittence. So in addition, we also need energy storage, which I had a podcast guest on
that, but this is a subset of energy storage because food is energy. So if we store it and we
can eat it a month from now, that changes our whole society's makeup, yeah? Yeah, a month or
three years, you know. So it kind of helped with this huge issue of food security also,
because if you had a harvest that failed, then if you had stocks packaged appropriately, you could
consume those and hope that next year's harvest would be better. But you said this discovery
happened in the mid-19th century, that was before fossil fuels in a big way, wasn't it?
Yeah, well, I'm not too certain what happened when, but it was part of the whole industrialization.
And it was Frenchman Nicolas Appert, who's kind of quoted as being the person who invented
modern food packaging. But of course, at the time, the function of food packaging really was
to conserve food stuff, to store food stuff, prevent food waste, prevent pests from getting in.
And then gradually, as human society changed with industrialization, food packaging got new
functions. For example, think of the iconic Coke bottles. Those kind of were used, that the shape
of that packaging was used for marketing. Or you got the function of preserving the crunchiness of
biscuits and keeping the fizziness in your drink and so on. So really, the way that packaging
affects the quality and taste of your food. And in today's food system, where everything has to
be, as you said, hyper-efficient, and it's all lean production and at scale, because that makes
most sense economically, food packaging has to work in highly centralized food processing facilities.
So the big food companies in the world, they produce two, three thousand different types
of products, and they produce those in less than 20 maybe food processing centers for the global
market. So it's all very efficient. Wait, there's 20 food processing centers in the whole world?
No, no, per brand. I'm not sure if I'm allowed to say the name of this brand, but there's a very
large Swiss food brand. You can guess, you don't have to say. Less than 20 production centers,
globally, for over 3,000 different products. And so you can imagine what the equipment,
what the machines look like, that put the food into the packaging. They're running 24 seven,
seven days a week. They're shooting out products, you know, hundreds by the second.
And those machines cost a lot of money. So you have to run them for, I don't know, 20 years maybe
to amortize them. And that's the key point. They only work with a very, very, very specific type
of food packaging. And so that's really one of the big problems for these big food brands right
now, because their packaging waste is found in the environment. You've got a whole bunch of NGOs
that are doing these audits, and they sort of report. And that's, it's, I believe it's Coca-Cola,
it's Nestle, and I'm not sure who's on number three, probably Pepsi or Unilever, one of those.
Their products are, or the packaging waste of their products are most frequently found in the
environment. So they've got a huge image problem. And it's oftentimes plastic, they'd like to move
away from plastic, but they can't because they've got this technological lock-in because of how
their business models work. So we're going to talk about food packaging specifically. But can you
just refresh my mind and that of the viewers? Like, what are the categories of environmental
concern from plastic pollution? What plastic pollution is of, of increasing environmental
concern, because it is persistent. Plastic is a synthetic man-made material that cannot be
metabolized by nature. And so if plastic packaging becomes waste and then is not managed as waste,
but is littered in the environment, then it just accumulates there. And so since the 1970s,
people like Charlie Moore and other scientists who've been going out to sea have been reporting
on this, that plastics are accumulating in the oceans, in the gyres. But there's also a couple
of sad examples from remote islands like Midway Atoll, for example. There's these famous pictures of
sea albatross that are found dead on the beaches there. And their stomachs are full of plastics
because they mistake the plastic for food. And I think that's the point, that plastic is organic,
chemically speaking. I mean, you know, it's made from fossil carbon. And fossil carbon is basically
converted algae, right? So it's, you always say, how do you say it, the sunlight?
Ancient sunlight. Ancient sunlight stored in plants, sunk to the ground, and then through various
geological processes, change into oil. And so the point is, it's organic. And so these birds
mistake it for food. And they're filling their stomachs with something that cannot
be resorbed, that doesn't biodegrade, and then they eventually they die.
And if I recall my factoids correctly, plastic on the earth now outweighs all living animals.
And at some point in the next 20 years, it will outweigh fish in the ocean at current pace.
Yeah, there's some estimates like that out there that I've also heard of, yeah.
So that's one thing. The birds and ocean creatures are consuming plastic and dying and
getting sick. But what are, just give me a real brief overview of some of the other
categories of plastic concern. There's endocrine disruption, drops in sperm count,
yes, what are the broader categories? Yeah, well, I mean, plastics, as we said, are
manmade synthetic materials. And the feedstock to make them is the waste product of
fossil carbon refinery for fuel. And this waste product kind of gave rise to this whole
chemical industry. And plastics are incredibly useful. I don't want to let there be any doubt
about that, including for preserving foodstuff. The problem with the material is that it's not
inert. So that means that chemically it can interact with the environment it comes in
contact with or with the foodstuff in the case of food packaging. And we call that migration.
So migration, chemical migration basically describes the transfer of chemicals from the
packaging into the foodstuff. And that happens for smaller molecules. I don't know how much
chemistry you want to go into. But basically, when you make plastics, you polymerize these
molecules that we call monomerase. So this is these waste products of our refinery.
They're small molecules. And with a very clever, complex, aggressive chemical reaction,
a chain reaction, we make big polymer molecules. So that's up to 10,000 repeats of your monomer
unit. It's one big molecule. And that's the polymer is what gives your plastic its moldability
because it's kind of, it's a big molecule, it moves slowly, it's waxy. And that gives you this
formability, moldability, incredibly useful property of plastics. Now, when you make plastics,
you have the monomerase, you have a couple of catalysts. And those chemicals are not
pharmaceutically pure grade, right? So you buy whatever you get on the market at a good price.
And so maybe you've got 80, maybe 90% purity. And the other 10 or 20% is gunk. But that gunk
will also be part of your chemical reaction. And that will also be present in your finished plastic.
And so you actually have a lot of different chemicals that make up plastic. And this is
what fascinates me about this topic. And it has for the last 16 years that I've been working on this.
Even the people who manufacture plastics don't know the exact chemical composition of the finished
material. And so we're putting this material in contact with food. We know that its chemical
constituents can transfer from packaging into food. But we don't know exactly what those chemicals
are. I mean, a lot of these chemicals are invisible. And if they're toxic or produce
cancer or reduce sperm count or those sort of impacts, we don't know that for years or decades.
So is this at root kind of a natural thing that humans would do because the cost is way in the
future and someone else's problem and the profits are today? I guess so. I'm not an expert on those
things. But I do have a hunch that that plays a role. Yeah. I mean, if we've optimized our economy
in such a way that we look at the next quarter earnings, then you would care about what happens
in 30 years time. And I think speaking to the health impacts, it's very, very, very difficult
to study the health impacts of plastics and chemicals and plastics. For one, because of these
long time spans from exposure to effect, of course, it's not the only sort of chemical
exposure that we have to deal with or our bodies have to deal with. But also, there's no control
group. When you do these kinds of studies like with smoking, for example, back in the 1950s,
it became clear that it was a doctor's study. The doctors who smoked had a higher risk for
cardiovascular disease compared to the doctors who didn't smoke. So that kind of became clear. But
find a control group in today's world of people who are not exposed to plastic chemicals.
Right. It's not as easy to test as your fish in an aquarium because you might be exposed to chemical
A because of your TV dinner. But then some people in the control group might be drinking from plastic
bottles or whatever. Yeah. So let's get into this on migration. So if you had to imagine the
universe of problems that we have from plastics, what percentage of them would you attribute to
food packaging versus other packaging, plasticizers and other things?
Yeah. So the data we have there, and this surprises me as a natural scientist, the data we have,
they are from the market, they're kind of self-reported. So that's very hard to have exact
absolute numbers. So take this with a pinch of salt. But of the, I don't know, maybe it's 400
million tons of plastics that are being produced today or roughly around that,
about 10 to 20 percent are for food packaging. So 40 percent of the overall plastic production
is for packaging, we say, and about half of that is for food packaging.
Okay. And I know that, or it seems that in the entire world, Europe has taken the lead on these
initiatives with glyphosate and with single-use plastics and all kinds of things. I'm going to
get into specific policies, et cetera. But why do you think Europe is ahead of the rest of the
world, including the U.S., on caring and researching and changing policies on plastics?
So I think there's been a lot of movement here, grassroots movement. So I think the
ban that we have on single-use plastics, that was thanks to really well coordinated
campaigning. But I have to say that the first country in the world that banned plastic bags
was not in Europe, it was Rwanda, actually in Africa. So I think shout out to my fellow Africans.
I'm South African originally. So Europe often gets sort of touted with being very advanced on
chemicals. And there is a good reason for that. In 2020, we got the European
Chemical Strategy for Sustainability, which is a great document. It's really, I would say,
addressing key issues. It talks about removing the most harmful chemicals from food contact
materials, like we call food packaging. The point is, you can have the greatest rules in the world
if you're not enforcing them, they're worth nothing. And I think that is the biggest challenge
in Europe right now with food packaging, with food contact materials. There are progressive rules
to a certain extent, but they are not being enforced. And so I don't feel that European
citizens are better protected from these chemicals than people elsewhere in the world, to be honest.
I was in Europe earlier this year. I can't remember what city it was, but I went to a grocery
store and they had two sections of fruit and vegetables. And one of the sections was wrapped
in plastics and little protective things. And the other wasn't. So in the United States,
you don't have that. It's all like one section. And also, what's the deal with like the shiny
apples that like they're so, is there a film or is there some sort of treatment with that?
Could you explain? Oh, I don't know, Nate. I mean, that sounds a lot like a Swiss supermarket that
you're describing there. Yeah, it was probably Switzerland. So the reason for some produce
being wrapped in plastic is actually that that is organic produce. And in Switzerland,
we have very strict rules on the pesticide content for organic foods. And so if you have
a supermarket that sells both conventional or pesticided produce and organic produce,
and you have supermarket staff or customers touching first the pesticide
produce and then touching the organic, you get carry over. And then your organic produce would
not comply anymore with the regulations. But what about the migration from the plastics?
What if you had organic produce and you packaged it in plastics? Would then there be,
well, I guess fossil, I guess plastics are organic, as you said earlier.
Yeah. Well, I mean, organic. But is there a migration is my question?
Yeah. So maybe just to sort out the terms there, we're talking about organic chemistry,
which is called organic chemistry because it's made through living organisms. So it's the algae
that fixate the carbon from the atmosphere using the energy from the sun, right? So they take
inorganic carbon, CO2, use sunlight energy, fixate that, turn it into their own little leaves or
trunks or fruit, or if it's algae into whatever the algae have, cells. And so that's why it's
called organic carbon. Anything that's made from fossil carbon is organic chemistry, for that reason.
It's a miracle of photosynthesis, right? Organic farming is called organic farming
because you use manure as a fertilizer. In conventional farming, you use inorganic
fertilizer, which is derived from the Haber-Bosch process that was developed in the early 19th
century by German scientists. And there you use a lot of energy, fossil carbon energy,
to fixate nitrogen from the atmosphere. So our atmosphere, the air that we breathe,
consists mostly of nitrogen, right? 80% is nitrogen. And so you just basically suck
the nitrogen out of the air. Nitrogen is what plants need as a fertilizer. And so that's why
conventional farming, industrialized farming today, uses inorganic fertilizer, whereas biological,
environmentally friendly, regenerative farming uses organic fertilizer. And so that's why it's
called organic food. It's got nothing to do with organic chemistry. Very different concepts, very
confusing. So how does your refrigerator and pantry look different than most peoples?
So maybe just to quickly go back to your question about the fruit and veg wrapped in
plastic and the risk for migration. I think it's a really important question, and that will also
answer part of how my fridge and kitchen looks. So there's certain risk factors,
we can call them, for increasing migration. And the most important one is heat. So if you
put hot food or beverage into plastic, you get much faster and much higher migration. So fruit
vegetable is not hot, right? It's always at ambient temperatures, oftentimes refrigerated. So I'm not
so concerned about that being a risk for migration. The next risk factor is long storage times.
Hold on, back on the first risk factor. So no, no, you should never heat
food in plastic in the microwave. You should always put it in glass or something, yes?
Yeah, exactly. So if you use a microwave, don't put plastic in there.
I'm also, you know, now we get these Christmas markets here in Europe, and people love to have
mulled wine or hot teas that they buy at the Christmas market. And oftentimes they come in
these polystyrene cups, and I always cringe when I see that. It's so bad for health because the
migration is just so high. Polystyrene contains carcinogens and contains endocrine disruptors,
and if you put a hot beverage in there. So those are migrating from the cup into the hot beverage,
into your stomach, into your bloodstream. And help me, because I remember reading this, and
you and I are on a similar listserv, and there's just so much to read. Of course, we can't keep up.
But I read that recently people's blood is testing positive for plastics in the blood.
So what's up with that? So that's the area of micronana plastic particles. So there's kind of
these two different types of plastics contaminants that we are concerned about. One are simply the
chemical constituents, which can migrate at high temperatures and a couple other factors that we
can go into. And the other are micronana plastics that can be generated. For example, when you tear
open food packaging or you unscrew a cap, but also from the environment you're sitting in,
if you have a plastic material rug in your house or you have plastic clothing, like a fleece
and so on. And the fibers, you can inhale those or they can get into your beverage and then you
ingest them. So it's kind of two different things we're talking about there. So I know that there's
no discreet answer to this, first of all, because no one knows, and second of all, to know we would
need decades of research. But can you speculate, based on what you know, that if someone regularly
drinks hot beverages from a polystyrene cup, what might be the long-term health impacts of
such a practice? Yeah, that's a tempting thing to answer, but I think it would be
damaging to my reputation as a scientist. I mean, as I say, you know, there's some endocrine
disrupting chemicals that we're concerned about present in polystyrene. Endocrine disruptors
interact with the endocrine system, the hormone system. And as you may know, the hormone system
controls so many different functions of our bodies. It's not just reproductive functions,
it's many, many, many other functions. And so if you have chemicals that can disrupt the
hormone system, you can get lots and lots and lots of different kinds of effects ranging from
diabetes, obesity, cancers, infertility, other reproductive issues, neurological effects, allergies,
cancer, cardiovascular disease, and so on and so forth. So not to put you on the spot, but take
your scientist hat off and put your human pattern recognition, looking at all your research hat on
how many or what percentage of those things you just mentioned, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, all the other things, do you suspect could be somewhat or a medium amount linked to
plastics? I don't know, Nate. That's really hard. Anywhere from 10 to 50 percent.
Yeah, definitely. I think even greater than 10 percent. I mean, we don't have the data to prove
it, but that's my gut feeling. Well, it's just like climate change. By the time we have data to
absolutely prove, it's like, oh, 50 years ago, we shouldn't have used plastics to wrap our food.
Yeah. Well, I mean, I can tell you this. We know that all of these chronic diseases,
these non-communicable diseases, are increasing globally. It's not just in Switzerland and in
the US, but it's really globally. We know that chemicals can affect these diseases,
and we know that some of these chemicals leach from food packaging, they migrate,
and so that's really an easy place to start. I think it's a huge, huge opportunity for prevention.
I don't know how many cases exactly you would prevent. I hope someone can work that out,
but I think it's something that should be looked into. And as well, I think we do need to have a
much better understanding of what the chemicals actually are that transfer from food packaging
into food. As I said before, even the companies that make these materials, the companies that
put their foods into these materials, they don't know exactly what's migrating. And I find that
morally really problematic. They make a lot of money with these products, and they're putting
all the risk on the side of people who buy these products and who think that it's a good, healthy
product. I probably have too many questions for you, Jane, that you don't know the answer to,
but I'll ask them nonetheless. There is research showing that the top social media CEOs and execs
Facebook and others don't allow their children to use social media on their iPhones.
Do you think the plastic execs at DuPont and other places, do their fridges and pantries
look similar to yours, or do they just eat the same way as everyone else does?
Probably. I mean, they also know the impacts of ultra-processed, heavily plastic packaged foods.
I hope for their own health's sake that they are not consuming those foods, as no one should.
And I think here's the other moral dilemma that these food companies, these business models,
they have created a want for these products, and they continue to create it with very clever
marketing. And I'm very concerned about this marketing of food products, because it kind of,
it eats its way into people's subconscious, and it affects the purchasing decisions that people
make. And we often hear that, you know, we need people to be more responsible about what they
consume and so on. And at the same time, we have all this marketing continuous marketing, not only
in social media. And oftentimes also people's behavior is blamed for a lot of food waste,
you know, they say, oh yeah, we need more packaging to prevent food waste, and people
shouldn't be throwing away so much food at home. But at the same time, then you're marketing,
like mega super cheap deals, buy this pack of 100 different cookie packs, you know,
and get it now. And then of course the stuff, you can't eat all of it, so you throw it away.
So there's kind of an evil vicious circle going on there, which I'm very worried about.
So getting back to the, we were talking about the heating food, and what were some of the other
categories that you were going to. So another risk for migration is long storage time. So if you
have food stuffs that you're storing over a long time, and that's especially the case for
paper and cardboard food packaging, you know, people often think paper cardboard is,
it's got to be better than plastic. But I'm really concerned about migration of chemicals,
especially if it's recycled paper and cardboard. Those you shouldn't store for, you know, like
two, three years in your pantry, packaged in paper or cardboard, it's better to,
once you've bought them, put them into a glass container or ceramic or stainless steel container.
Here's another unanswerable question. If everyone in the world did what you just suggested,
we wouldn't have enough glass, would we? I don't think so, Nate. I think there's
plenty of glass to go around. I mean, the benefit of glass is that it's truly circular as a material.
You can recycle it. If you have the collection and the sorting done well, if you have separate
collection, I know in the US that's a challenge because you co-mingle, which means you throw all
the materials into the same bin and then the glass breaks and it contaminates the paper and so on.
So co-mingling is not a good idea. But if you have separate collection of your materials,
glass is very well recyclable. You need a lot of energy to melt glass, of course. So it's better
to reuse it before you recycle it. Sometimes, like every Saturday, I go to the dump here
and they have the cardboard bins and the plastic bins and then the garbage and then the metals.
And it is just astronomical the amount of waste that we produce. Me, even, and I'm conscious
of these issues. But the living in the modern world and leading busy lives and going to the
store and buying food, I mean, the consumers don't have the intelligent environmental
ecotoxicology approved options, right? Unless they do a lot of work and pay a lot of money,
probably, and spend a lot of time. Yeah, there's a really nice scientific publication that I like
a lot by an Australian group where they looked at the drivers for single use packaging, food
packaging. And the drivers there are the food, the big food business model, globalized business
model, the supermarket business model, which is increasing, increasingly prevalent, and the
lack of time that we and we are called consumers. I don't like that we're citizens. I don't either,
I know, we're humans. But consumers have less time to peel potatoes and put them in the oven.
And you know, so because we're always running around and looking at social media, so we run
out of time to eat real food. And we have to shop at supermarkets. Okay, so what are the other
problems that food packaging oppose? There's the storage, long term storage. There's the migration
that happens when heating. There's the damage to the landfills and the oceans where a lot of this
waste ends up. Is there anything else? There's interaction with the food, for example. So if
you have food stuffs that are very acidic or have alcohol content, for example, that will
lead to increased migration, fat content, of course. One of the properties of plastics is that it's
what we call very lipophilic. So the many of the constituents in plastic are really
nicely dissolved in fat. And so if you've got high fat content foods, you can get a lot of
migration. So the worst would probably be high fat content, high acidity, and hot food stuff.
There you really max out migration. So you wouldn't want to drink a hot buttered rum in a plastic cup?
No, exactly. Mild wine or coffee even, you know. I mean, coffee where you put a bit of milk.
Yeah, I don't do that. So the Starbucks model is a problem?
Of course. I mean, not only Starbucks, but other fast-serve food restaurants
that depend on single-use food. I mean, not to single out Starbucks. There's tons of
similar companies. But put on your scientist hat again.
Could there ever begin to be a scientific study that would say, let's look at this control group
of people that drink their coffee out of ceramic or glass mugs versus these people that drink two
Starbucks a day in the plastic cups that are heated and look at the chemical load that comes from
that. Is that something that could be studied? I think so. I mean, I think there's also a lot
else to be said for having a ceramic mug and sitting down and having a conversation with a
human being while you're enjoying your coffee, you know, instead of grabbing it, dumping in your car,
staring at social media while you go from A to B. Right. So there's multiple behavioral
downsides of plastic because plastic impacts your health due to drop in sperm count, endocrine
disrupting, hormone mimicking, all that stuff. But it also is part and parcel of the just-in-time
frenetic culture. So using glass and ceramic not so metaphorically would be kind of like the
slow food movement. Yeah, exactly. And I mean, that's why I say plastic enables this
overconsumptive lifestyle. We're overconsuming as human beings. We're overconsuming our resources.
We're consuming more stuff than we need. Almost 40% of the global population today are overweight.
You've got more people that are overweight than people that are underweight. You've got more than
10% of people globally that are obese. 40% in the USA. It's globally. It's 39% globally. 40%
obese in the US. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, not overweight. 39. something percent are obese.
It's not. And that we don't know if that's, clearly that's due to many things, but it could be
endocrine disrupting chemicals, changing our metabolism and other things. Yeah. So there's
a fantastic book that came out earlier this year by Chris Fantalicum, a British scientist,
medical scientist, and it's called Ultra Process People. And he breaks down different reasons why
people are overconsuming foods. And again, as you say, it's multifactorial. It's not
the one single reason. It's the marketing. It's the ultra processing. It's all the
emulsifiers and things that you covered that nicely in the podcast with Robert Lustig.
But I think what they're missing in that analysis is the role of not just food packaging, but also
the food processing equipment, because food processing equipment also oftentimes is made
of plastic or it's got like lankers and garnishes. And so there's migration from the equipment to
the food. There's migration from the equipment. So the more processed your food is, the more
chemical, synthetic chemical contamination it will have. So some people that we know
keep telling me that plastics may be as big of a crisis for humanity in the future as climate
change. What are your thoughts on that? Well, again, I mean, it's maybe almost academic to try
and rank these. I do think that we have a huge health crisis. And I really believe people
should have a healthy and happy life. And if you're born with obesity, and if you're born
into a community where you can't get real food, where you just get, as Chris Fantellican says it,
edible substances. He doesn't even call it food. You know, it really impacts your quality of life.
And what I'm really worried about on a population level is that all of these people will not be
contributing to our community of human beings that want to solve the climate crisis and that
want to solve all the other crisis, because they are too sick to contribute, you know. So it's kind
of these aspects they reinforce themselves. And, you know, we haven't talked about impacts on the
brain. I mean, that's also that's a huge concern. And when we know that there are chemicals like
perchlorate, which we know affects brain health, and they're legally used in food packaging.
It just I can't get my head around this. It's I just find that really, really, really disturbing
or organophosphates, you know. Tell me what the impacts are on the brain. You mentioned some of
the chemicals, what would be the impacts on the brain? Well, I mean, I'm not an expert on the brain
impacts. But I think, first and foremost, it's IQ loss. So, you know, on an individual level, maybe
that doesn't kind of have such a dramatic effect. But if you look at a population, a whole human
population that has two or three or four IQ points less than it should be having, that has a huge
impact. That's that's going to impact our societal problem solving capabilities. But it's also
behavioral impacts. It's things like autism. It's things like ADHD. It's all kinds of mental health
issues, which we are seeing more and more of. So you've told me some stories where you've gone
to some international plastics, I don't know what they're called, the conventions or the UN meetings.
And there's a real filibustering going on with the corporations and stuff. How are scientists that
are studying hazardous chemicals and working in your field in nonprofit, pro environment, pro
future in food packaging? How are they being excluded from joining the policy conversations
that involve regulations on this stuff? I can tell you an anecdote that goes back eight years,
2015. I was invited to an expert stakeholder group at the European Commission on food content
materials. And I'd been going there for a couple of years. And this was sort of around the time when
the European Union was talking a lot about endocrine disruptors and B's phenyl A repeatedly was an
issue. And the France at the time had banned B's phenyl A for use in food packaging, which was a
really great progressive move. And but it was in conflict in legal conflict with the European
Union, because the European Union actually has the authority over chemicals and food contact
plastics. And so I had asked my contact at the European Commission what if there would be providing
an update on this BPA issue in the next stakeholder meeting. And then I got an answer. We've changed
the rules for participation participation in this meeting and you no longer qualify. So you're not
invited to come. And so what had happened was I'd booked, I took the plane to Brussels, I have to
confess, and I booked kind of overlapping flights because you get cheaper deals then. So I booked a
trip from Zurich to Brussels, and then like four weeks later, so a return trip and then, you know,
another flight from Brussels to Zurich and so on. So in order to be able to go to Brussels the second
time, I had to take that first flight to Brussels, right? Otherwise I would have lost both tickets.
So I thought, okay, I've got the invitation letter, I've got the plane ticket, I'll just go see what
happens. So I got through security. I was a bit late because my plane had had a delay. So I got
late to the meeting and I walked in the room. And immediately as I set foot in the meeting room,
someone from the commission got up and ran over to me and said, you are not welcome here, leave,
please leave. I'm like, okay, well, you know, let's go outside and have a conversation. So I had a
conversation with this person that I hadn't met before. And I showed her my invitation letter and
I said, look, I have an invitation. I don't know why you're asking me to leave. And then after arguing
for a few minutes, she said, okay, I will let you back in the meeting room now because I don't
have proof that you're not allowed to be here. But and then she said, as we were walking back in,
we don't want people making trouble from the back rows. I guess that simple question had, you know.
Let me let me ask a follow up to that. So if we might say that regulators aren't doing their jobs
because they're overly influenced by industry, but what if limiting change on these issues
so as not to cause a fuss from the back row and disturb key industrial interest is their job?
What what if that is the job of regulators in kind of a plastics version of the superorganism
outsourcing our decision, our wisdom to the market? Because I know at least in the United States,
I have some friends of mine that have been toxic activists for decades fighting regulations. And
there's like almost nothing to show for it. If you if you measure the total tonnage of toxic
chemicals being released. So what are your thoughts on there and what is the potential for
like real change on this issue realistically? Yeah, I mean, that's a very deep philosophical
question. I've asked myself that question as well. I think I mean, I do want to defend the
regulators a little bit. They they they have a hard job. In my understanding, their job is to
look out for the citizens of the country where they are working because we pay their their salaries
right from our taxes. But at the same time, of course, and especially when it comes to food,
you don't want to risk any food shortages on the shelves. And there's there's the scientist
Jean Switzen, who does enforcement, he works or he used to work for the local food control
authority. And he once said to me, if we would truly enforce the rules that we have on food
packaging, we'd have to go to the supermarkets and clear out the shelves. It's so bad. And then,
of course, you have a huge riot because people aren't eating, right? So, so it's difficult also
for regulators because they've been allowing these products on the market for 40, 50 years now. And
and then to stand up and say, you know what, actually, with there's a few problems and we
haven't been noticing them. So now we have to change the whole system that is face space as well.
You know, so it's kind of complicated. So given that shortening global supply chains and relocalizing
is something that I think is inevitable and is one of the the implied themes of this this channel,
could we short circuit this problem by opting out of big industrial food and how like how
much of this could be solved by just shortening food supply chains and eating more local?
I think part of the problem is that these ultra processed foods
are very cheap because they've been they work in these highly efficient economic business models,
you know. So there's a there's an inequality issue at play here too. Exactly, exactly. And
and it's more than that. I mean, what we say time is money, right? If you don't buy these pre-processed
or ultra processed foods, you need a lot of time to source your foods and to prepare them and to cook
and and so it's almost a different lifestyle. I mean, you know, in my family, we love to cook. We
spend a lot of time cooking and, you know, enjoying meals together because for us that's quality of
life. But yeah, for some people, it's just easier to buy the deep frozen pizza and chuck it in the
oven and, you know, do something else with the time then. And they don't, you know, necessarily
appreciate the value of cooking foods yourself. So I think it's an economic issue. It's a time issue.
It's also, you know, maybe an issue of being more humble with with what you eat. If you want to
eat seasonal locally grown foods in Switzerland in winter, you're eating potatoes and cabbage and,
you know, some cheese, some dried meat. It's not a kind of rich variety of foods that you have
then through the winter month. Well, I have to say this, and this is off topic kind of, but
when you stay at a hotel in Switzerland and maybe elsewhere, the breakfast buffets are
unfreaking believable relative to what you get staying at a hotel in America. You get these
formed hash browns and a hard boiled egg and a granola bar in Switzerland. It's like
nine kinds of cheeses and different types of muesli and all kinds of organic yogurt. And
oh my god, it's so good. Well, thanks. Thanks for advertising for my country.
Well, I mean, where does that come from? I mean, part of that's culture, but I think it's time
is money. I mean, you stay at a Hampton Inn or a Ramada or a Holiday Inn Express and it's just
crap. And then you start your day off with this ultra processed. We don't even have an option.
What would it take to just change the breakfast options at hotels? I mean, literally, what would
it take? Would it take a subsidy from the government to give healthy options or would it be a boycott
by consumers to say, I don't want that crappy breakfast. I want a Swiss breakfast and I'm
willing to pay $10 more for that. I mean, what would it take or would it take people getting
sick and scientific reports coming out and saying this is due to ultra processed food and the
migration from the plastics into the food that you're eating? I mean, you're having this conversation
about breakfast with probably the worst possible person because I'm not a breakfast person. I often
do intermittent fasting in the morning, so I skip that meal. But I do want to say this. In his book,
The Ultra Processed People, Chris Fantalic gives this recommendation to start with your breakfast
because that's a meal that you can actually have control over. So don't have like this fancy
cereal ultra processed stuff that colors your milk and funny colors. Eat muesli, yeah? Swiss
invention. Have yogurt? That's what I eat when I have breakfast, yogurt and fruit.
I have started eating breakfast at 10 or 11 in the morning, so it's pseudo intermittent
fasting and because of where I live and what I do, I often have eggs and potatoes because
they're both from the farm here. Not always, but most days. So, Jane, what coalitions and
partnerships in your work at the food packaging forum have you influenced or created? Anything
that our viewers might be surprised at? So, yeah, I mean, mostly we work with academics
because, you know, for us, that's really important as part of our work to be very science-based.
But we do have an ongoing collaboration with the Swiss Organic Farming Association,
BioSwiss, where we're working with them on their packaging recommendations. And there we've got,
I can share that with you, we've got a sort of detailed risk framework for migration,
which may be useful to some people, that's published in English. Another collaboration that we have is
with the Understanding Packaging Scorecard project, and that's a tool, a freely available
web-based tool, where you can compare different packaging options for the food service industry.
So, it's for cafeterias, restaurants and so on. It's not the retail industry. And you can compare
them according to six different metrics. So, it's chemicals, but it's also impact on climate. So,
CO2 emissions, CO2 footprint, fresh water use, and there's a couple others. And that is a
collaboration where we work with big food service providers, big companies, you probably don't know
them because they're not B2C brands. But we've got Compass Group, which is the largest food service
provider, operates cafeterias across the world, Sodexa, Aramark. And that collaboration was
actually initiated by Google. So, that's maybe quite interesting. And then the last one, which
wasn't so much an active collaboration, but I know that we did inspire that work. In the US,
there's an organization called the Food Safety Alliance for Packaging. And that's big food brands
like Nestle, for example, Mars Rigley, a couple others. They put together a list of chemicals
that they do not want to see in the packaging that they procure from their suppliers. And
that's called the packaging stewardship considerations. And I do know that our work was
really pivotal and informative for that. That's great. So, when you say that you interact mostly
with academic researchers and institutions, would that be in the discipline or field of
ecotoxicology? Is that what it's called? Yeah, so that's my background. But no, we really have
very interdisciplinary interactions. So, we work with economists as well. We work with public
health experts. We work with people who are focused on obesity and nutrition.
So, other than you, I don't know anyone that has that
PhD background in ecotoxicology. Relative to 20 or 30 years ago, are there a lot more
people studying that at universities today? I don't know, Nate, because I'm not
really active in the academic environment. But I do see younger colleagues coming to the
conferences. So, I guess it continues to be a popular field. I mean, like all the environmental
science disciplines, it's very interdisciplinary. I think people don't understand that. Why? But
the environmental problems that we're dealing with are very, very complex. And so, environmental
scientists often have a really good overview of many different areas, but they often don't have
sort of very in-depth detailed expertise. So, for me, my in-depth detailed expertise, of course,
is chemicals and free-contact materials. But I'm also trying to sort of at least
superficially understand different disciplines. And so, we're almost like translators or
interpreters between the different disciplines. And we kind of take this role of enabling
dialogue and collaboration between the disciplines, which I think is going to be
increasingly important if we want to solve these environmental problems.
I totally agree. So, with global heating,
with the exception of half of the United States population, most of the rest of the world
now understands what is happening to the climate and why. But there are
very well-funded and high-paid, organized communication efforts against that to cast doubt,
et cetera. Do you see that at all in plastics? Are there people saying, well, plastics aren't a
problem and you're a chicken little and I'm going to drink this glyphosate? And is that
happening in that arena as well or not? I don't know. Oh, yeah. Big time. You make it sound cute.
It's actually really rather unpleasant to be at the receiving end of that kind of manufacturing of
doubt. But it's part of my daily work, almost. So, when I go to conferences, when I speak on
panels, I always brace myself for that one question that will come and try and discredit
me as a person or discredit my organization because of the funding that we get, the donations that we
get, or then there's this whole playbook of manufacturing doubt. Then they'll say, yeah,
well, we know that also caffeine is an endocrine disruptor. So, why are you worried about these
chemicals? And it's like the whole plethora of, it's very creative, originates from the tobacco
industry. So, some very clever public relations people came up with this, you know, doubt is
your product slogan. And hence, we call it manufacturing doubts because, as you know,
as a scientist, there's no such thing as absolute truth. You know, there's always that little,
little tiny probability that it could be something else. And we saw that with climate change,
you know, where 99.9% of scientists working on it with with topical expertise said, it's a real
problem, we should do something. And then they found one or two crazy people who said, no, no,
it's all good, don't worry about it. And it also has to do with media reporting, I think,
unfortunately, because the media, they love stories and stories always have to have conflict.
And so, if you say, okay, all scientists agree, that's a boring story. So, you'll say,
most scientists agree, but some say, you know, and then people will kind of focus on that and
just gives much more attention to people who should not be covered in the media.
So, what would be the steelman argument on the other side that would take the point that plastics
are essential, they're not a problem at all to human health?
Could you easily debunk such a statement?
Well, I think one of them when it comes to food packaging is food waste. You know, we need packaging
to prevent food waste. And the prime example that I always get pestered with are the cucumbers,
fresh cucumbers in December when it's not cucumber season in Switzerland, and they import them from
Spain or even Morocco, even worse. And in order to prevent those cucumbers to waste before they
get sold in the supermarket, you have to wrap them, shrink wrap them in plastic, right? The point is,
making cucumbers in Southern Europe or Northern Africa during our winter is not sustainable in
any case. So, that's a product we shouldn't be buying at all in the first place. The second point
is we have all these subsidies into overproduction of foods. We don't need to overproduce foods.
We really don't. We shouldn't be subsidizing industrial agriculture that overproduces food
crops. We shouldn't be having sales at supermarkets where people kind of get nudged in a bad way to
over-consume buy more food than they actually need and want to eat. So, once you've dealt
with all of that, including the marketing, then let's talk about food waste and the necessity
for food packaging. I actually like those English cucumbers that I hadn't thought about until now,
but they do come shrink-wrapped. I like the taste of those better than the other ones,
but I shouldn't be buying those, right? The ones in the plastic.
Well, I mean, if you want to continue to feed the beast, you know, which is the unsustainable.
No, no, no. I'm learning from you. I want to make changes. I just took that for granted,
because I have a slight taste preference for those, but I have a large life ethic
that if I stop and just think for a second, that life ethic outweighs my slight preference for
the wrapped cucumbers. I think you shouldn't enjoy food by all means. I love eating, but I think,
ideally, you will enjoy the food that is seasonal and locally grown and preferably
organically grown. And if it's seasonal, you don't need to buy shrink-wrapped food.
So, building on that, before I ask you some questions that I know you listen to my podcast,
so you may know what's coming. But what can viewers and listeners of this program do in
addition to eschewing the English-wrapped cucumbers as conscious consumers to protect
themselves in the absence of large systemic change and regulations and policy and rules?
Um, what can people do to eat healthier from the perspective of migration and other problems
with packaging into their food? Yeah, I think the first thing that's easy, go into your kitchen,
make sure you don't have black plastic cooking utensils. Really? Yeah, I hate those. Get rid
of those. You mean like a black plastic spatula? Yeah. I have one of those. Yeah, black plastic
is terrible. Why? Because they contain many known carcinogenic substances and they're one of the
products that are actually enforced in Europe and oftentimes they don't make it through the
enforcement. And let me guess why I have one and why other people use them because they're cheap.
Yeah, but you just get a wooden one, you know, or use a stainless steel one. I mean, not if it's
a hot, hot soup because it'll burn yourself, but wood is fine. I mean, use the black plastic one
if it's not hot food, but I got rid of all of those. And then just, you know, follow the rules.
Don't have hot acidic fatty food stuff in contact with plastic. We have a wooden chopping board at
home. We have glass or stainless steel storage containers for the foods that we keep in the fridge.
I eat foods. I don't have a microwave. I eat them in the saucepan on the stove.
So, you know, I really try and minimize plastic and hot, fatty acidic food stuff contact.
And then I think other than that, don't drive yourself crazy over it. I think you,
at a certain stage, you have to just accept that it's something that, you know, you just have to,
to a certain degree go with the flow. And try and eat real food. Cook your own food. Buy ingredients
from scratch and embrace making your own food. We just, you know what, we just got at home. My
family eats a lot of ice cream and I'm really worried about ice cream. It's always comes in
plastic packaging. It's got a lot of emulsifiers. It's ultra processed food. So we just got ourselves
an Italian ice cream maker. So we make our own ice cream and it tastes so much better.
I think, I mean, this is like with everything else. You have to,
and my coach is talking about the difference between productivity in my own life and awareness.
And you just need to, with all these things, just have a little bit of a conscious reality check
of your behaviors. Like after this call, I'm going to go look in the kitchen and see,
just take a census. Like what is the plastic that I have here that I just blindly assumed was fine
because it was sold to me. Beyond plastic, you are a colleague of mine in looking at the broader
meta crisis. So broadening your plastic hat to being a human alive at this time hat. Do you
have any advice to listeners who are becoming aware of climate, plastics, energy depletion,
everything else? Well, I mean, I think it's a lot of the things that we've touched upon.
It's really becoming a conscious consumer. There it is again, that ugly word. But yeah,
in this case, it's fair. I think it really helps to understand that you get side effects if you
try and cut corners somewhere. If it's too convenient, if it's too cheap or whatever,
it's probably not going to be so good for your health. And I think,
yeah, just be kind to yourself, be kind to others, socialize with good people,
be careful of what you eat in the sense of where does it come from? How was it grown?
How was it processed? How was it packaged? But also, who are you sharing your meals with?
You know, I think those are all things that affect a good life. So
the answer in my case is most often of the time is my dogs.
They lick the plates afterwards. Yes. So what about young humans? I know you have teenage
children. How would you extend that advice to young humans who are listening to this
and thinking about their own future in this amazing and perilous time?
I think, you know, we have a brain for a reason. And as much as I love all these digital tools
and devices, I think you should actively use your own brain, like learn how to read maps.
You know, I love all these navigation tools and so on. But it's also helpful to
not turn off your own brain as you're making your life easier with these digital tools.
And so learn how to cook, you know, something simple as that. Learn how to make a good meal
from scratch that you don't get dependent on all these too good to be true products out there.
Do stuff yourself, go out into nature, read as much as you can, have discussions with people
that are smarter than you. But I find that very rewarding talking to people like you and all
of our colleagues who I incredibly admire. And actively reflect and learn to become critical
thinkers. I think that's the most important because, you know, when I look at the future with AI and
all these fake videos and images and so on, that really terrifies me. So I think that's really
important to have a good common sense, like what actually is real, what's our metaphysical reality,
you know, and what's the fake world, the metaverse.
That's very good advice. And I am not a good cook, but I can cook like three or maybe four things
really well. And those things I know, but I should probably add, I can make a Thai curry.
I can make spaghetti with mushroom and red sauce, mostly from the garden.
I can make fried fish. And I make really good hash browns with garlic and onions from the garden.
Sounds delicious. I'm getting hungry. I mean, one of the tricks for making sure your mental health
is good is to challenge yourself, you know, you have to challenge yourself, don't get too comfortable.
So maybe I'll send you a few recipes and then you can challenge yourself and add a few more dishes
to your repertoire. Okay, good. A few more questions, Jane. What not to put you on the spot,
but what do you care most about in the world? I care most about relationships. I think relationships
are what make us human. I think relationships are the most important thing for a functioning,
healthy society. And I think relationships are important to maintain a peaceful world, you know?
So I think I'm incredibly blessed. I have such a wonderful family, my husband, my children,
my dad who's still alive and kicking at 83, who's a great source of inspiration for me.
But also my colleagues here at work, people like you in my wider network, I'm very, very
grateful to have that. So I think people should invest more time in their relationships.
I've never said it the way that you just said it. I just took it for granted, but you're absolutely
right. Relationships are at the core, including our relationship with the natural world in our
individual ways. Hey, I talked to my plants, you know. I've got some plants that I've had for
more than 20 years, pot plants that, yeah, anyway. Yeah. If you could wave a magic wand and there
was no personal recourse to your status or anything, what is one thing you would do to
improve our human predicament and planetary futures? I would have fully safe food packaging
and food contact materials. So that means materials that do not contain known hazardous
chemicals and that do not contain untested chemicals because for untested chemicals by
logic, you can't say if they're harmful or not. You don't know. So if you take a precautionary
approach to life, which I do, you would have to assume they're hazardous. That's a bit boring.
Maybe a more creative answer would be, I would make everyone go work in a field or in a garden,
at least one or two days a year to produce their own food. Just to get in contact with nature again
and to have an appreciation of how hard it is to produce food, but also how beautiful it is
then to eat your own food. And then after one or two days spent in the fields, they should go for
one or two days to the food packaging factory and see how it all happens.
Thank you very much for your time and your continued work on this. Jane,
sorry I missed you on my last trip, but we will definitely be in touch and thanks for all your
work. Thank you so much, Nate. And thank you for all your work. I just admire what you do. It's great.
Thanks. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No
Troublemakers Media and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
