We wrote a paper, Time to Wake Up, the age of plentiful and cheap resources is gone forever,
in which we made the case that, of course, in a finite world, you would eventually expect
that to happen. And there were now finally signs that it was happening. But the final push over
the edge had been the amazing and accelerating growth in China's demand for important resources.
For the last four years, they accelerated to double digit. They were increasing at over 10%
a year in their demand for cement, iron ore, coal, and one or two other things, but not oil.
So you have earned deep respect in the financial community for your long-term success as an investor.
But I think I suspect many of your peers still look at money and technology as the driver
of the human experience and may look at your views on commodities and energy and the environment
as somewhat Malthusian. What are your thoughts there?
Well, my thoughts are that Malthus and what he said is a nice complicated
topic that we could discuss for a minute or two, that for a year or two after our paper in 2011,
as we hit the temporary cyclical setback caused by China slowing and global grain
weather improving, everyone thought we were entertainingly wrong. And it took a few years
before the long-term trend line to clearly be different. The long-term trend line,
we keep a very interesting index at GMO, 33 important equal-weighted commodities.
To study the question, what is happening to commodities, not what is happening to
oil and iron ore? And those 33 declined by 70% in the 20th century. And yes, there were three
spikes, World War I, World War II, and OPEC, of course. But in between, they dropped back to the
trend line, which was declining at just over 1% a year, which accumulates pretty damn fast over
100 years. So a drop in the average price of important commodities of 70%, enormous help
in getting rich. And then in 2002, it shifted. And the index that had gone from 100 to 30
is back over 90. It has tripled since 2022. This is not the trend that we all grew up on.
This is a new world in which we are going to have to come to terms with the finiteness
of almost everything. I think for reasonable purposes, there's enough aluminum and iron ore
to get the job done. But everything else, most of the metals we think of on the same level with
iron ore, 100 or more often a thousandth as frequent in the Earth's crust as aluminum and iron. I
think aluminum is about 7.5%, 8% of the crust. Iron ore is 4.5%. And copper, cobalt, lithium,
nickel that we use for batteries and so on, they range from 0.002 to 0.006. That's the range.
And you can take 30 of those important chemicals like nickel and copper and add them all together
and they are 1%. They aren't a tiny fraction of iron ore or aluminum. And nobody really gets that.
And there are no reserves anymore. China pretty well bled the last great minds of these important
but actually rare metals. Well, in a convoluted way, the 70% drop in that commodity basket
in the 20th century was due to an expansion of fossil armies of hydrocarbons that did the work
for us and all those extraction industries, the rise of the machines. So we had more access to
oil and that oil and the machines that had powered gave us more access to get the overburden from
the mines for copper and nickel and all the things you were mentioning. But you said that that
change in 2002, I think 1999 was the all time inflation adjusted low for oil and we've been
going up since and the extraction costs for oil have tripled since around that time.
So we are in a new paradigm. There's just maybe a two decade lag before
people start to notice it and puzzle it out. I agree.
