Today's guest is John Kitzhaber, a former emergency room physician and also the former governor of
Oregon. John and I discussed the medical and healthcare system in the United States,
which may seem tangential to the great simplification, but healthcare is over 20% of the
size of our economy and we get lower health outcomes than many other developed nations.
In the future, we're obviously in a resource and growth constraint and complexity constraint system.
We're going to have to create medical systems that use less energy and money while keeping people
healthy. Dr. Kitzhaber has a unique perspective on healthcare policy and its real-world applications.
He's credited with some of the most outstanding reforms in the nation's healthcare system,
including some that are still in effect in Oregon, including the Oregon Health Plan
and Coordinated Care Organizations. John is currently active in healthcare reform advocacy,
fighting for a system that prioritizes better health outcomes that meet the triple aim of better
health, better quality and lower cost, with a focus on community and population health.
Please welcome Dr. John Kitzhaber.
Governor, great to see you. Yeah, Nate, thanks for having me.
You are welcome. You have been a governor in the state of Oregon. You've been an emergency room
doc. Now, among many of your other pursuits, you are working on trying to help the United
States have a more sane, sustainable, viable healthcare system. It's quite the trifective
experience. I'm happy to have you here to share your wisdom and insights.
Maybe we could just start with an overview of the U.S. healthcare system. In prior conversations,
you and I have talked about this. How much of U.S. GDP is the healthcare sector and how does
this compare to other countries? Yeah, we're getting close to 19% of the GDP committed to
healthcare. It's about twice the average of the rest of the OACD nations. We're definitely an
outlier. We spend about $12,900 per capita per year. I think the second one is Germany,
at about 7,300. There's a huge gap there. The troubling aspect of this is not just the amount
of money, but is our health outcomes. We have the highest infant mortality rate among those
nations. We're about three years lower than the average life expectancy for the OACD nation. We're
spending a lot of money. We're not getting the population health outcomes in return.
Why is that? I think it's due to a number of things. One of them that doesn't get much play is that
in a zero-sum budget, money that's spent on one set of services is not available to spend on
something else. We spend a huge amount of money on an acute care medical system that essentially
fixes broken people. It addresses problems after the fact. We spend almost nothing on early childhood,
on children, families, and communities, on those things that could actually reduce the disease
burden in the first place. The more we spend on medical care, the less we have available to
invest on the front end. It's just this vicious cycle. The USA is approximately 4% of the global
population, but I've heard that we write around 50% of the world's medical prescriptions. Is that
because we're sicker, we're less tough, or because doctors too easily write scripts or some combination?
Well, I do think there's a cultural aspect about America. It's the
fast food, quick return, instant gratification. I think there is a belief or a culture to some
extent that says, well, we can just fix it with a pill. At the same time, we've got very limited
price regulations on pharmaceuticals. We are one of only two nations in the OECD that allowed
direct-to-consumer advertising, a very low barrier in terms of getting new drugs on the
market, and it's just incessant advertising. Ask your doctor whether this drug is good for you,
and then on the end is this long list of potential complications that they run through so fast that
you can't actually understand them. Yeah, but they scare the crap out of me when they say
that you could result in liver failure, all this other stuff. How can people actually be marketed
after all those warnings at the end? It sounds horrible. Yeah, I'm not an advertiser, but I
think the primary message is visual. It's the happy people suddenly recovering from rheumatoid
arthritis or some kind of skin disorder, and I don't think they pay much attention to the tag
line. If you've got a problem and it's a real problem to you and you think that there's a way,
some simple way that you can cure that without actually having to make much change in your own
lifestyle, you're going to go to your doctor and you're going to ask for that medication.
So I didn't know this, what you just said earlier. In all the nations in the OECD,
we're one of two nations that even allows television marketing for pharmaceuticals,
the rest, there's no advertisements allowed. That's my understanding. My understanding is that the
direct-to-consumer advertising is allowed in the US and in New Zealand, but I've adventured a
guess and I have to check this, that the New Zealand healthcare system has more stringent
price regulation. And because the US market is so big, because the direct-to-consumer
advertising is allowed, a lot of these drugs are marketed first here in the US because the
profits can be astronomical. If you compare the price of the same drug in Canada and the US,
there's just a stunning difference in price. Then why is that?
It's because we don't really regulate drug costs. We allow the direct-to-consumer
advertising and most other nations restrict the price of medications. They have more
stringent controls over the price of medical goods and services.
So last year we were involved in this survey in the state of Wisconsin where we asked people
about their well-being and what well-being meant to them. And they ranked like 10 different things
in their life. And a very common response from people was, I'm afraid to get sick because if I
get sick, I won't have the money to pay for the healthcare costs. And I read somewhere, John,
that it's estimated that almost half of cancer patients in the United States will have to file
bankruptcy in the process. Is this an extrapolation of what you just said between the US and Canada?
It is. I think the actual number of percent that actually go through bankruptcy is much smaller.
I think it's 4% or 5%. But over half of them have actually been in collections. And I think the
second leading cause of bankruptcy in the US is inability to pay a medical bill right after
unemployment, which is to me just unconscionable in a wealthy nation like this. The fact is that
the price of medical care is becoming increasingly unaffordable for individuals, for government,
and for businesses. Okay. So you've long been a champion of this issue. In 1994, you got primary
legislation implemented in Oregon that was a different way to provide healthcare called the
Oregon Health Plan based on ranking health services by their necessity and their effectiveness.
And when the budget wasn't enough to cover all of them, only to cover
whatever was the most effective on the list rather than pushing out coverage
for entire people in an effort to increase coverage and accountability.
Can you give a breakdown of the thinking behind this plan? Was it politically difficult to implement?
What were the major setbacks? How did you get it pushed through? Were there a lot of compromises
that had to made? What was the the public largely supportive of this or what?
Well, it's an interesting story. It actually started earlier than that. It started when I became
Senate President in 1986. And those days, the Oregon legislature met every other year. And in
between sessions, there was this thing called the Emergency Board, chaired by the Senate President,
the Speaker of the House that managed the state fiscal affairs. And Oregon, like all states,
has to operate on a balanced budget. We can't deficit spend like the like the US Congress can.
And about halfway through the interim, the budget went out of balance and a big chunk of it was in
the Medicaid budget. So we gathered together and we took a few votes. We rebalanced the budget.
And one of the things we did was drop 4,300 people from coverage. Now, to me, it seemed like kind of
an sterile accounting exercise. None of us really thought much about it. I went back home to my
town, Roseburg, and began practicing again in the emergency room. And about six months later,
I started seeing some people in the ER who'd lost coverage because of that accounting decision we'd
made in Salem. And one of them was a middle-aged man who'd suffered a stroke because he could no
longer afford his blood pressure medications. And I remember thinking as I walked his wife
up to the intensive care unit that I was just as responsible for his stroke as his hypertension
because I'd made this decision to drop him from coverage. So what I realized at that point is the
way we manage cost, at least at the state level in the healthcare system, when the cost gets too
high, we drop people from coverage. In other words, we ration people or we cut what we pay
providers and at some point they stop trying to see people who are on Medicaid in this case.
Or we increase co-payments and deductibles to the point that they're really no longer covered.
So we came back and the next year, Oregon stopped covering Medicaid transplant program.
Very small part of the budget. It wasn't an intentional decision. It got lost, I think, in the
larger budget for human resources. And six months later, this little boy named Kobe Howard showed up
who had acute lymphoblastic leukemia and his doctor wanted him to get a bone marrow transplant. And
of course the state was no longer covering the procedure. So he was eligible for Medicaid,
but the program didn't cover that particular service. So they went to private fundraising.
This became front-page news, not just in Oregon, but around the country and even abroad.
And he eventually died tragically. He was not in remission. He hadn't found a match yet,
so it's questionable whether the procedure would have saved him. But it was a very legitimate
in moving human tragedy. So in the wake of that, there was an emotion made to refund the transplant
program for eight people who had applications pending. And I opposed the motion. Not because
transplants don't have merit, which they do, and not because we couldn't afford it. But at the same
time, there were 300,000 Oregonians who didn't have any coverage at all. Many of them children.
They weren't eligible for transplants. They weren't eligible for immunizations.
So it seemed to me that we needed to be more accountable in the way we made these resource
allocation decisions. So that led to the Oregon Health Plan, which did a couple of things. It
prevented the legislature from rationing people. We put the eligibility in statutes, so we couldn't
do what we had done in the emergency board of the year before. Secondly, we prioritized health
services from the most important to the least important in terms of the health benefit to the
entire population being served. And then we estimated the cost of each element on the list
with an independent actuary. So we couldn't manipulate payment anymore. So the legislature
just had to make a resource allocation decision and decide how far up or down the list they wanted
to fund. Now, it's important to note that we didn't prohibit doctors from providing things
that were below the line, if you will. It just made it more clear and accountable
connection between the cost of health care and the benefit. It was not particularly
controversial inside Oregon. It was wildly controversial in Washington, D.C. We needed
a waiver to pass it. Some of the biggest opponents were Senator Al Gore, Henry Waxman,
the Children's Defense Fund, who cried rationing, right? As though the 300 kids who couldn't get
access to anything weren't being rationed. And if you looked at the list, services for children
and maternity care were very high because they're very effective. In any event, we finally got a
waiver. President Clinton gave us a waiver. We implemented it in 1994. We increased payment a
bit. So we had a lot of people vying for that population. We've used that list now for 30 years.
It's updated every two years. When we, the vote to pass this in Oregon was 30 to 0 in the Senate
and 57 to 3 in the House. So we had broad-based support inside the state. And I think it was
more the sensational nature of an individual in need rather than the needs of the entire
population that drove the opposition in the nation's capital. So that was quite successful in
both keeping people covered and saving money. But as you point out, it would be highly controversial
nationally because our culture doesn't like the concept of rationing. Rationing is kind of
against the American narrative personally. And you and I have worked on some other fiscal cliff
and other issues. I think the concept of rationing is unfortunately going to become more necessary
in the future. What are your thoughts on this and what sorts of imaginative ways could there be
to make rationing of basic needs more fair and effective?
Well, a couple of thoughts. First, conservatively, 25 cents on every dollar in the health care
system is wasted in terms of it does not produce a positive health outcome over pricing, over
utilization, poor care coordination, unnecessary care, etc. So I think there's more than enough
money in the U.S. health care system to provide everyone in America with all the services they
need that could possibly actually help and improve their health. I don't think that's the
problem. I think the problem is that we've got a hyperinflationary delivery system that spends
almost nothing on prevention. And we need to reform the system and reallocate those resources.
The fact is we're always going to, we have always rationed care. Usually not intentionally,
the man that had the stroke, we rationed care for him. He was never on the front page of the
newspaper, so no one really cared. He was invisible. What the legislators, what legislative bodies do
is they focus on the immediate and the visible and the dramatic. And they do it at the expense of
needed services that aren't being delivered to many other people. It's just a crazy and
unaccountable way to develop public policy. Is it possible to host a space where all the
interlocking agents and aspects of the health care system, payer, provider, labor, long-term care
sectors come together to coordinate and have a real conversation about the whole system and how
it works and this 25% overage that you described and what would be the first step towards doing that?
Well, I've done that twice. I've had two direct experiences. One was with the Oregon Health Plan
where we convened after that emergency board debate about the transplant. I gathered together a group
included hospitals, doctors, insurance companies, organized labor and consumer groups. And we
developed a set of principles that we all agreed to. They were fairly broad principles. I wrote a
couple of them down here for you. All citizens should have universal access to a basic level of
care. There needs to be a clear and transparent process to determine what that basic level of
care should be. The health care delivery system must encourage the use of services and procedures
that are effective and appropriate and discourage over treatment. So we had a set of those that we
all agreed on. They're fairly broad, fairly general, hard to disagree with. And then the condition
for being at the table is that you couldn't just say no. If someone proposed a way to reach those
principles and you didn't like it, you had to offer a couple of other suggestions that worked
for your particular industry that still fit in those principles. And we met twice a month in my
office for about a year. And it's very interesting as people began to get to know each other, as
trust began to build, things that were hard lines began a little bit softer. And then you could almost
feel a point at which people thought, wow, we're going to really do something important here,
something big here. And at the end of the day, we produced Senate Bill 27, which created the
Oregon Health Plan and had that broad bipartisan support. We did the same thing in 2012 when we
created what's called coordinated care organizations, which actually did change the delivery model and
try to reduce the total cost of care. And how effective has that been the coordinated care
organization in increasing community health outcomes and reducing long-term medical inflation
since that time? It's been quite successful. I mean, it came out of the depths of the great
recession, where if we wanted to maintain coverage for everybody on Medicaid with no new
resources, which we didn't have, providers were looking at a cut of around 17, excuse me, about
37%. So we sat down and figured out how we could look at the delivery model to get more value for
each dollar spent. And the result was these coordinated care organizations, which are
community-based organizations with local providers, a local governing board. And their goal is to look
beyond the narrow clinical model and focus more broadly on community health. They operate within
a global budget, a fixed budget that can grow at only 3.4% per member per year. And they have to
meet rigorous metrics around quality, outcome, and patient satisfaction. So in the first, we
operated under waiver. We needed another waiver, which we got under the Obama administration.
In the first five-year period, all of the coordinated care organizations
operated within the 3.4% growth cap. They all met the quality and outcome metrics stipulated by the
waiver. We enrolled an additional 380,000 people under the Affordable Care Act. And we saved about
$1.1 billion over that five-year period. They're still up and running. And it's a marvelous change
in the delivery model. Is this in good part due to your political civic acumen? Or is it also
related to the fact that Oregon is a relatively low-population state? So relative to California
or Illinois or New York, there's a lower threshold to get something progressive like this through.
You know, I think it's a little bit of both. There's no question that being a medical doctor,
it gives you a certain credibility, I guess, in the debate. And being a governor also helps
you convene the parties. I mean, you do need a convener. And Oregon is a small state. I mean,
you can list on two hands the number of people that have to agree on any given issue to actually
get things done. I would argue that it is progressive in the sense that it expands coverage and
manage, but it's also conservative in the sense that it manages costs, but public sector expenditures.
And Medicare Advantage, not perfect, but it operates on it, which is in almost every state,
right? It's becoming the majority choice in Medicare. It operates on a very similar
manner. It has a fixed budget that's given to determined by counties. And then they're rated,
it's called a Fyrester rating system that measures quality. It's got some real problems.
You're able to go in there and game that system through what's called risk adjustment and
charge more than you should be getting. And there's been a couple of lawsuits on that. But if you
could fix that part of Medicare Advantage, it's not dissimilar to the coordinated care organizations.
So it's not like an unknown entity in red states and blue states. They're all doing it.
So healthcare is a big drain on our national budget. And we're going into more and more debt.
We're over $31 trillion already. But I think healthcare, just like climate change, to address it,
we have to deal with the corporate and moneyed interest. I assume there's a lot of lobbyists
in the healthcare thing in DC. Yeah, I think of the top six lobbies, four of them are,
I think the National Chamber of Commerce is number one, but Pharma Pharmaceuticals are next.
I think the American Hospital Association is in there, Blue Claw Spruce Shield, the AMA. Yeah,
it's a huge lobby organization for sure. So technically, smart policies, such as the ones
that you described that reduce the cost spent on medicine, or whatever other industry, actually
decrease the contribution of that industry, healthcare, to GDP. And so in a culture, in a
global culture, but particularly the United States, where we measure our success solely
through the metric of GDP, these health efficient policies that you're describing actually look
like it's making the country worse. So how do health, healthcare and well-being fit into the
growth model at the core of the entire system? Well, first, as you know, I disagree with the
validity of using the GDP as a sole measure for, you know, success. And you went to Bhutan back
in the day, right, to look at Nepal, to look at alternative metrics. Absolutely, right.
So a couple of comments on that. First of all, the healthcare system has very little to do with
health. As I mentioned earlier, it's an after the fact acute care system. I prefer, I wrote this
down here, the World Health Organization definition of health, which is a state of complete physical,
mental and social well-being, not merely the absence of disease and infirmity. So the healthcare
system doesn't produce much health on a population basis, as we've discussed earlier. It's reflected
in our population health outcomes compared to other industrialized nations. A lot of the new
technology actually just takes money that's being spent on medical care and takes it as a profit.
A lot of these are publicly traded companies, venture capitalists, private equity funds,
so it doesn't really reduce the cost of medical care. It just takes more of the profit out and I
would argue drives up the cost of medical care. So the way you deal with the question you're talking
about, if we're going to continue to use GDP as a measure of success, is you reduce the spending,
the waste and inefficiency in the healthcare system. We need a healthcare system. There are
acute problems that need to be addressed. There are chronic conditions that need to be addressed,
but you take the difference and you spend it on the front end. You spend it on primary prevention
in the very earliest years of life where the seeds, most of the seeds for chronic conditions are
planted. So you are doing two things. You're spending the money. It's running through the
GDP, but you're spending it in a different way. It's like comparing the cost of college education
with cleaning up the oil spill in the Gulf. They're not the same and I would argue that spending on
primary prevention and health is not the same as spending after the fact on illness. Secondly,
if you begin to make those investments in primary prevention, you will reduce the cost of medical
care in the long term and you can use those resources to invest in a transition to a cleaner
economy, for example. Boy, it's really overwhelming. Yesterday, I did a podcast with Dr. Robert Lustig
and he said that 97% of Americans have some sort of metabolical dysfunction in their mitochondria.
He blames it on sugar and processed food as the core culprit, but what a mess because not
only is it the monetary drain on economies, but it's the physical and almost psychic and spiritual
drain. If people are sick and not well, we're not as creative or pro-future or able to work in our
communities and also, you'll know the answer to this. I heard somewhere that 50% of an individual
American's lifetime health care costs are in the last six months of their life. Is something like
that true or not? Yeah, obviously, we spend a huge amount in the end of life care, if you will,
on the complications of aging, but the metabolic issue is very interesting. One of my projects
right now is looking at primary prevention. We know there's a new field called epigenetics,
so it's about a decade old, maybe a little older, that has demonstrated that poor nutrition
and toxic stress from housing insecurity, from economic insecurity, from unsafe neighborhoods
alters the genetic expression in the unborn child, which dramatically increases their risk
of risky behaviors, of addiction, of behavioral problems, mental health disorders, learning
disabilities, and that's passed from in utero. Then those problems are either amplified or modified
based on the environment in which the child lives. If you want to really bend down the curve
and improve the life expectancy and the full participation of people in our economy,
you begin to invest in the first thousand days of life. You begin to identify the conditions of
a justice that exists before conception and during pregnancy, and that's where the resources need to
be spent. It's been estimated that 70 to 80% of chronic illness, including addiction and behavioral
health problems, are planted, are set in place in those very early years.
But if we were to care about that, and if we were to prioritize that, like many other things that
you and I have talked about in the past, it would require a longer-term horizon because
any politician that would vote for what you just said, we're not, as a nation, going to see the
benefits of that for 10 or 20 years from now from the babies are just being born, right?
That's absolutely right. One of the problems with the political system is it does operate on a
two-year event horizon, and you can't grow a tree or raise a child in two years. The project I'm
working on right now is trying to figure out a delivery mechanism. It's not just about money,
it's taking that money and making sure it gets to the right children and families at the right time,
the right amount for long enough to make a difference. What does that delivery model look
like? We're calling it a child success model that we're trying to design, and it needs to be nested
in the community. It needs to be owned by the community so it can outlive changes in the executive
branch of the partisan makeup of the legislature. It's a governance issue as well as a resource
allocation issue. But if we can crack that nut, the human potential and the downstream cost savings
in social services and the criminal justice system and health care could be staggering.
Are there other countries that are doing that sort of investing in child and in utero in the
first thousand days? Short answers, I don't know. I know most other OACD nations do a much better
job of spending on the social determinants of health, if you will. If you look at the OACD
nations and you look at their total spending on health, which includes medical care and social
investments, we're all about the same, roughly. But the U.S. spends vastly more on medical care
and far less on social services than these other nations. And I think that is one of the reasons
that we see those poor population health statistics that are rather embarrassing.
So one thing that I learned recently is that processed food with fillers like corn syrup and
sugar and things like that is cheaper. And that real food, which is healthier, that's not processed,
if you ate your entire diet with real food, it's like three times more expensive. So there's an
income and wealth inequality aspect of food, which leads to the health issues you were just
describing, yes? Absolutely. And when you bore down, and we're going to get to this point here in
Oregon, if we're able to continue this project, we're going to discover that economic insecurity,
poverty, along with racism, is a major driver of this problem. If you don't have enough money,
you don't have access to healthy food, affordable housing, childcare, a safe neighborhood,
those are all factors that drive stress and cortisol levels in the pregnant woman.
But we're going to have to step back and if we can get consensus that we need to make those
investments, we need to do more of a full cost accounting look at this problem. Over a 10-year
period, if you made those investments, they are going to pay for themselves six, seven to one,
in terms of reduced costs in the healthcare system or in the social support system or the
criminal justice system. So the solution is there, right? It's a matter of taking a 10-year view
and I think budgeting framework, developing a process to reallocate resources from the back
end of the front end and an effective system to actually deliver those resources to get the
outcomes that you want. So I don't know if you've followed what's happening in the last month or
two with advanced artificial intelligence. What about all these new tech venture capital ideas
of using tech and AI to squeeze the current inefficiencies out of the healthcare system
and in turn boosting their returns? Isn't this an inherent problem that if these companies are
successful, they're still taking more money out of the system and not prioritizing the health outcomes?
Yeah, I think that's right. And I think if you stop, step back and ask yourself what
produces population health, only about 10% of your lifetime health status is the result of
involvement with the US medical system. The rest of it's your behaviors, it's your environment,
physical environment, it's the social determinants of health, right? And that AI doesn't address any
of that, right? And it doesn't really change the underlying incentives inside the delivery system.
In fact, if the US didn't spend so much on healthcare, there wouldn't be so many companies
involved in startups that are trying to grab a piece of that pie. I'm not saying that these
technologies are amazing, but ultimately, they don't have much to do with health. They have to do
with changing the way we're making, maybe making an inefficient system, making a hyperinflationary
system no less hyperinflationary but more efficient. So you know a bit about my work
because of our interaction in the past, and I'm anticipating this is a little bit of a
rabbit hole off of the main thrust of our conversation. I'm anticipating a tougher
times economically. Our energy and material throughput in coming decades will not follow
the same trajectory of the prior 50 years. And when I think about doctors and nurses and healthcare
with that alone, irrespective of the things you were just saying, I think we're gonna have to get
80% of the medical health benefits with 20% of the resources. I mean, I just went in for a little
procedure last week and there was disposable plastic and all these fancy machines and just
tons of stuff that was single use and gone. And I just wonder, and I'm not talking about a dystopian
future, but I wonder if, A, can we get a majority of our health benefits with a much smaller input?
And B, is the emergency doctor or the medical version of MacGyver going to be a really,
really valued social skill in coming decades? You have any thoughts about all that?
Ah, where it began. I don't disagree with you and I don't know the percentages,
but let's start with this. I think you can actually do it in healthcare. So let's say 25%,
I think it's higher than that, 25% of the healthcare budget you could get rid of and it would not affect
the health of the population, right? Then you go to the fact that 40% of Americans,
adults have one, at least one chronic illness and 60% have one and 40% have two. And chronic
illness accounts for about 80% of the healthcare budget. So if you begin to make early investments
and reduce the incidence of chronic disease, childhood obesity is a great example. Those
kids are going to grow up and have type 1 diabetes, which has huge co-morbidities,
right? Retal problems, strict laboratory problems, etc. So you take the 25% out,
you begin to reduce the chronic care burden, and you can probably get there.
Right? I mean, it requires systemic change. And you know, I don't want to
leave your listeners with the idea that I'm not a big fan of entrepreneurship or private equity
or innovation. What if we could say, if you can figure out a way through technology to actually
reduce the cost of the healthcare system over time by 6% a year and you get 1% of the savings?
What's 1% of $4 trillion? It's a lot. I just think that the investments in R&D in this
country are not on prevention. It's not under delivery system reform. It's on new fancy medical
interventions to deal on the back end. So reforming an entire health system is obviously
an enormous undertaking. I mean, how do we even begin? Is it something that needs to be addressed
from the bottom up, top down, or both? And do we first start by thinking about the goals of
the healthcare system? I mean, what if we publicly stated the goals aren't to generate GDP, but to
have an outcome of healthier populations? Is it possible to have this conversation? I remember
the vitriol when Obamacare came out in our public conversations. I mean, how do we even begin to
start this process, John? I don't think you can do it in the United States Congress today. I think
it has just become too dysfunctional and truly about the next election cycle. So I think the
approach needs to be at the state level. What we need from the federal government is flexibility
to innovate. And let's say a state like Oregon makes some coordinated care organizations, for
example. If you could seed that to Washington and California and have a regional approach
to healthcare, you've got, just think about it for a second, you've got three governors,
six U.S. senators, 68 members of Congress, either the third or fourth largest economy
in the world. I mean, you can reach a tipping point that way. And I think the question we
should ask is, is this one, is the purpose of our healthcare system to finance and deliver medical
care or is it to keep people healthy? There are two completely different things. And most of the
things that keep people healthy, most of the things that drive longevity and quality of life
are not in the healthcare system. They're established much earlier. And that's the
conversation we need to be having. Yeah, the tentacles of the superorganism are just embedded
throughout various sectors of our society. I've read that more than a quarter of FDA employees
that approved drugs in the past now work or at or consult at pharmaceutical companies.
So how big is that conflict of interest within the higher echelons of the healthcare system?
It's a big problem. It's not just restricted to healthcare. I mean, I think I read an article
recently. I think it was two thirds of the members of Congress who in 2019, the class of 2019,
who either were defeated or retired, went to work for some DC based lobby company.
So that revolving door, I think is a real problem. It's a problem in the financial industry.
It's a problem in the healthcare industry. It is a real problem. That's why I think
that the reform is going to have to start at a local or regional level. I just don't see how it's
going to get through Congress. So we started at a local and regional level and come up with
pilots of examples that work and then other states or other communities say, hey, look at what they're
doing in Roseburg. Let's try that because, well, here's another way to frame it. We can either
change the healthcare system and then that rolls over into maybe changing GDP or we change GDP as
a cultural goal and then fix the healthcare system of all the things that we might be able to change.
I think healthcare actually might be one because it affects all of us every day and a lot of people,
like you said, 60% have one chronic disease and 40% have two. Is that possible?
Yeah, I think the healthcare system is the avenue into addressing some of these larger issues. It
affects every single person in the country. For the vast majority of people, it's increasingly
unaffordable. If you're a small business, it's almost totally unaffordable. In Oregon, it is the
single largest all funds expenditure in the state budget and it is the second largest general fund
expenditure. It's huge, right? So I do think that's the place and if you look at the healthcare
industry, it reflects the corporatocracy that we see across the nation that's causing all sorts of
problems and people want to be healthy. They don't want to be sick. No one wants to end up in an
acute care hospital. So I think it creates a space for a different conversation. Not that it's going
to be easy. It is a big industry now, but I do think that it offers a much more personal
entree because health is ultimately intensely personal. Sickness or death occurs one person
at a time. It occurs to you, which makes it different than almost anything else.
Well, on that note, take off your policy and politician hat and put on your ER doc hat for a
moment. For those listening or watching this podcast, what are three personal recommendations
you would give to people who live in this society for their own personal health? I know there's not
a one size fits all, but do you have any general advice? Well, I can think of two and these are
from, I guess, partly experiential. One of them is I think cardiovascular exercise is really
important. I run at least three hours a week or inside outside of like growing up in the woods.
Recently, I've been attacked by a barred owl who thinks I'm... Seriously? Oh, yeah. He's actually
very cool. I know right where he is. I wear my hat and watch for him. He comes. Do you think he's
protecting his family or something or he's just playing or what? After the first time,
he went over and just brushed my hat with his wing and he landed and I thought he was maybe
going after a mouse or something. And then I read this article about this increase in owl attacks
in the Northwest. Apparently, they're very territorial, but he's pretty cool. He's a giant,
beautiful. That's awesome. Anyway, exercise I think is really important. It has lifetime benefits.
The other thing, and this may sound a little soft and fluffy, but for the last 35 years,
every morning, I find 10 minutes no matter where I am and I just sit and I try to just be aware of
my breath. I try to be aware of my surroundings. I try not to think and just sort of center. And I
think that my days are always better when I have that opportunity just to kind of let go of things
that I think are really important and just take that time. You can do it anywhere. It doesn't
require resources. It just requires a little bit of discipline and I think it's a marvelous
contribution to your long-term health status. You're like the 10th or 12th of my guests that
have mentioned something about the benefits of slowing down and meditation. Okay, tougher
question, Governor. If you were granted, you've already said that you think this needs to start
at the community level, including some of the initiatives that you're working on. But if you
were suddenly health czar of the United States, what would be a couple of things that you would
try and implement right away if there was political support? Yeah, I think the thing
that I would do immediately would be to move away from fee-for-service reimbursement,
which is volume-based. The more you do, the more you get spent to what I call value-based
capitation. That is a global budget that can grow at a fixed rate that is linked to quality
and outcome metrics. That is the future. That is the way we need to go. We need to change the
incentives so that you get paid more by keeping people healthy rather than being paid more by
doing more. It forces efficiency in your supply chain. It just changes the whole dynamic. That's
what we saw with the coordinated care organizations. So, John, I hope I can ask you a few more
personal questions here. Given your lifetime of working with citizens on these issues,
do you have any personal advice to listeners, not necessarily on the medical front, but at this
time of global economic inequality, economic environmental problems, what do you recommend
to people? I recommend that they don't give up. I mean, if we give up, it is an admission that
we're powerless, and I don't believe that. I've seen over and over again people coming together
in remarkable ways. I saw it. I was governor during 9-11. I've seen it during mega-wildfires
and floods. I saw it during the Great Recession. I was in Central Oregon, where the unemployment
rate was 20%, and I saw an extension cord, two extension cords, running from one house
across to a neighbor's house whose utility had been turned off because they couldn't pay the bill.
We have that in us, and I think we just need to tap it now and recognize that these are
problems that we created and these are problems that we can fix. So, don't give up. Be hopeful.
And how would you change that advice for young humans who are teenagers or in their young 20s,
who are learning about climate change and colonialism and inequality and this healthcare
system that they're young people paying into? What recommendations do you have for young humans
or young Americans? Well, I guess it's sort of the same thing. I mean, I think that if you were,
you know, my son's 25 and he looks out at the world that we're leaving him and is pretty stunned and
not entirely delighted by the prospect. But you know, we deal with the cars we've been dealt.
And I think the fact is that we may not be able to see the solution, but that doesn't mean we
shouldn't strive towards it. I'm struck by a quote from the Vietnamese monk, Thich Nhat Hanh,
who said something to the effect of, when I lose my direction, I find the North Star and I go north.
It's not that I expect to reach the North Star, but that's the direction I want to go. And I think
we need to have a picture in our minds and in our hearts of what the world should be like, right?
And then our compass during our lifetime is to continue to move towards that vision. And
over the generations, we have done amazing things and we'll get through this. I don't
think we know exactly how it's going to require the new thinking, the new tools, the new ingenuity,
the new perspective of the next generation. But they need to engage in this fray, for sure.
I like that. John, what do you personally care about most in the world?
Well, I guess I care. I want to know in my heart that I have done everything that I could possibly
do, no matter how small, to leave a healthy planet and a healthy society for my son and his generation.
Well, you've been working on all these things, ecology, climate, inequality, GDP, health care,
for a long time. So you've certainly been walking the talk as far as that North Star.
If you could now we're stepping outside of just the health care system, no longer health czar,
but if you could wave a magic wand, there was no personal recourse to your decision. What is one
thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures?
Well, of course, there are always consequences of your decisions.
Well, I'll tell you what it is. If I could wave a wand, I would have everyone be able to for just
a moment move beyond the polarization and the partisanship and all the real and imagined
differences we have and the voices on both the left and right that are exploiting them.
And remember that we have two things in common. The first one is we share a common mortality.
We're all going to be born. We're all going to die. That's the reality of our existence.
And between those two events, we all walk a path, very individual path, but it goes to the
same destination. And I believe in my heart and from my experience that all of us in our own way
want the same things as we walk that path of life. We want to find meaning and purpose and
satisfaction. We want to be valued. We want to add value. And we want to all believe that we have
an equal opportunity to succeed, to reach our dreams, not no guarantee of equal outcomes,
but an equitable opportunity to try. If we can remember that, if we can remember those common
attributes of being a human being, I don't think there's anything we can't do.
That's well said. Thank you so much for your time today, Governor. Is there anything that
our listeners could do in their own lives, in their political decisions, in their communities,
to help the kind of the efforts that you were talking about, your community models,
or how can they learn more about it, or get engaged, or what can people do listening to this
that would like to contribute to changing the healthcare system?
Well, I don't have an organization. I've got a blog that I could send you the link to
where I post on periodically. But I just think we're much more empowered than we think.
But we do have to get to root causes. And we've talked to some of them, about some of them today.
And I think it's an exciting time to be alive. And someone said once that there's no survival
value in pessimism. And I believe that. Yeah, I feel the same way. I mean, this podcast and talking
to thinkers like yourself and all the projects that you're working on is exciting. It's daunting,
but it provides meaning and direction. Thank you so much. And good luck with your projects
in Oregon. And we'll definitely continue the conversation.
Great. Thanks very much for having me, Nate. I appreciate it.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
