I'm interested in social evolution, and if you look at the world, the other kinds of
animals in the world, there are three kinds of organisms that dominate the planet.
Those are humans, ants, and termites, more than any other.
People are obsessed with primate behavior, because they're our closest relatives genetically.
There's this finding that came out showing that, I think, it was a chimpanzee.
They observed one chimpanzee actually using insects to treat a wound on another chimpanzee,
and that's pretty incredible, it's a kind of behavior, wow, look at that.
But if you look at ants, and termites, and humans, those are the only three animals that
live in city states of millions of people.
They're the only animals that have agriculture in the sense that they produce their own food
supply, which of course gives them a tremendous advantage.
So they dominate the planet.
Ants actually, they have warfare among ant colonies, very organized warfare.
There's a group called a very large colony in California that's been in this horror with
another group for decades, and millions and millions of ants are killed in battles each
year between those two kinds, those two colonies.
The Pentagon actually studies these ant warfare for tactics, they use them in training, so
it's pretty amazing.
Yeah, the ants even have suicide bombers, they have these ants that go into enemy lines
and blow themselves up.
They're the only other animal ants and termites with complex divisions of labor, dozens and
dozens of different occupations geared to certain tasks.
For me, when I stumbled on this stuff, it was just amazing how can we, every little
tiny little behavior as a primate, we oo and ah, but all around us are these things that
really operate just like human societies, I mean broadly speaking.
Another sociology, this came from work I did with Lisa Crohn, a colleague at SUNY Cortland,
and we started this stuff I guess maybe 12, 15 years ago, and it turns out her background
is very similar to mine, she also has an undergraduate degree in anthropology.
She's very sympathetic to hunter-gatherers, so about the same time I started working with
David Wilson and we had a grant to do a series of workshops at Duke University, so I met
a lot of biologists, including some ant biologists that sort of turned me on to this stuff.
But ultra-sociology, the way Lisa and I define it, we sort of center on agriculture.
These are societies, and sort of the pioneer, this was a guy named Donald Campbell, who
was writing most of the work of his, I know, started in the 70s.
But so ultra-sociology, as we found, again, we focus on agriculture and cultivating crops.
So as hunter-gatherers, we lived off flows from the environment, you know, day-to-day
flows.
So if you did something wrong, say the economies were sustainable because they had to be.
If you over-harvested or over-hunted, then it became right back to bite you.
It was clear what you were doing.
It also kept the population stable.
It also encouraged egalitarian societies because it really was a knowledge economy.
Growing up in one of these cultures, you had the knowledge you knew to make a living, the
plants gather in the seasons and all that.
So ultra-sociality with agriculture, we broke out of that and started, instead of living
off flows, we started producing for surplus.
So we took control of the production of food, you know, from beginning to end, clearing
land, tilling the soil, planting crops, eliminating species that threaten the crops, and so on.
It led to an incredible explosion and division of labor.
And also with ultra-sociality, let me just throw this in, we'll probably come back to
it later, but humans have casts and ants do not, which surprises a lot of people.
Cast meaning hereditary wealth that's passed on.
Only the queen breeds in ant colonies, so the workers are sterile, so they don't have
descendants.
So that makes human society different, and it's also created a lot of problems.
