So do you think, and I assume that you wrote that book and are doing this podcast that you do
think this way, that there is a chance that a broad swath of our culture can sufficiently
understand and value nature and fairness and the sacredness of life and the ecosystems of our
one planet and living differently and incorporate those things ultimately into our choices, our
behaviors and our prices and assuming you believe that how might that come about or at least have
higher chances of coming about? I am a hopeful person by my nature. I think most humans are.
I think that ultimately it's going to probably be a little bit of both preparing
for the kind of future we'd like to see but also having alternatives in place for when the
crashes and collapses and pain happens, right? Whether that pain crash collapse happens
one massive storm at a time or one credit default at a time or one toppling of a dictatorship at a
time, I can't predict the future. In fact, people who study paradigm shifts say that you can't predict
paradigm shifts, right? You never know when they're going to come. They come out of left field
but the elements of paradigms are always in place. Well, I think we have to affect things in
parallel at multiple scales and there are no solutions to what we face but there are responses.
So there's a global conversation, there's a national one, there's one in communities
and there's one in individuals listening to this podcast and those things hopefully will all
converge somewhere towards some more benign system in the not too distant future.
In this book, in our conversation, we're not talking about economy or economics. We're
talking about political economy. That's an important distinction, right?
What's the difference? Well, we're talking about the political economic system, right? Who's in
charge? Who has power? What kind of choices it make? What are the desirable ends of the system?
And we don't teach political economy on university campuses by and large. We don't
teach history of economic thought. We don't teach alternative economic paradigms, right?
Except for the few little courses in ecological economics or feminist economics that are squirreled
away in, I don't know, whatever, I'm a studies program. Like they are at the University of Vermont.
It's the political economy, the political change. We're working with the next systems project
to puzzle through the idea of what would a next systems curriculum look like.
And there's this great new next systems reader that's out there that I used in a class of mine
last spring, and students were blown away that there were these alternatives to
market-based capitalistic systems, right? What's the quote? People can more readily imagine the
end of the world than the end of capitalism, right? And that was my students like dead on.
They were like, we can't imagine a different system. And we worked through this next systems
reader and we talked about cooperative economies, sharing economies, caring economies, gift economies,
and we showed them evidence that these aren't like wishes that they're all around us.
And they were freaking flawed, Nate. And they were like, why don't we learn this in our classes,
right? So that's the preparation. That's the preparation.
It's so true. I read a paper on altruism and how when people were shown an example of someone
else being altruistic, they were like 300 times more, 300% more likely to do altruistic acts
themselves. And I think maybe in these alternative economic systems or alternative ways of interacting
with others and commerce and trade and barter and gift economies, we lack imagination. We don't see
what's possible. So if we can see other people doing it, it's like Josh Farley says, just when
you go to the health club, you lift weights to flex your muscles and tear down your muscles a
little bit and they build back stronger. The same thing is with cooperation and community
and sharing and interacting with others. You have to flex those muscles.
Yeah, yeah. I often ask in my classes, like, what's the purpose of the university?
And I get answers like, well, it's to train us to get jobs and be successful people and economies.
And I'm like, let's read the charter of our university together, right? It doesn't say
anywhere about getting you a job, right? Universities higher education educational
systems are at the basis or the kind of base of democracy, right? The ability to think freely and
to challenge each other and to build scientific reasoning. And that's the purpose of the university.
And our students have become so indoctrinated, the idea that universities are to train workers
and consumers, not citizens.
