The flow that I've always been interested in professionally is this Niagara of oil
that feeds our global metabolism, because indeed man, unique among living species on earth,
is the only one who has managed to create a metabolism outside of his own body.
Today's guest is Dutch energy expert Joris van der Schot currently living in Switzerland.
Joris worked at Royal Dutch Shell for over a decade as a refinery expert, an executive at Shell.
Before turning his attention to the clean energy transition, he now works for a French
scale-up energy pool, providing flexibility services to the electricity grid with a focus on
energy storage. We today talk about oil refining, this incredibly complex process that is in between
the oil from the ground and the gas at the pump. How flexible is it? How does it work? We used
his son's Legos to demonstrate the cracking and distillation aspects. This was a very
interesting conversation. Please welcome Joris van der Schot.
Joris, Gretzi, what do they say in your part of Switzerland?
Yeah, so I'm actually just across the border. I'm in Jurassic Park, can you believe it?
And they say bonjour in this place here.
What's Jurassic Park?
Well, the Jurassic was named after a mountain range where they found these fossils, and that
happens to be the Jura Mountains, which are, if I look out of the window this way,
and they face the Alps, which is, if I look out of the window that way.
Okay, I didn't know that. I'm sorry I missed you last week, but it was a hectic trip through
Geneva. All I saw was the airport, so maybe next time.
Pleasure.
So you are the first guest on this show who is an expert in oil refining and hydrocarbon
refinings. You had a career at Royal Dutch Shell. Now you're working at an electricity,
renewable, grid-balancing outfit, and we can talk about that later. But let's take a deep dive,
because I want to really understand, personally and for my viewers, the refining
process and how central it is to our modern world. But let's first take a step back. You
mentioned Jurassic. How did you become interested in energy? And I know some of your writings,
you talk about humans as pyromaniacs and the importance of fire in our evolutionary trajectory.
Why don't you give us a kind of an opening overview?
Yeah, sure. Nate, so maybe just for the background, I'm an engineer. I'm just a very
simple engineer, and I like to understand the world in simple engineering terms.
I specialised in something that you'd recognise as system dynamics, probably, you know,
stocks, flows, feedback loops, which is of course a science that underpinned limits to growth,
the report to the Club of Rome. And the flow that I've always been interested in professionally
is this Niagara of oil that feeds our global metabolism. Because indeed, man, unique among
living species on Earth, is the only one who has managed to create a metabolism outside of his own
body. There are the calories that we eat, like any other animal, but there are also a lot of
calories that we burn outside of our own bodies. And this started with a simple campfire where we
cooked food, really, which is partly reason why we're in a kitchen here. But it kind of turned
into something that has really been powering modern civilisation. And these little campfires
today have really grown in scale to what I refer to as a Niagara of oil. And maybe it's helpful
for people who know Niagara Falls to kind of picture yourself standing there. I was there as
a kid, I lived in Woodstock for a year, and we drove up to Niagara Falls. Yeah, like people with
crazy ideas. I get it. And we drove up there. And when you stand next to Niagara Falls, I don't
know if you can imagine it, but you see this enormous mass of water flowing across the edge
second after second after second. And I'm talking about the American Falls, not the horseshoe ones.
And you could actually feel it in your gut and you're here to thunder of this thing. Now,
maybe I was little, but I think it's still like that. And when I looked for an image to convey the
scale of our world energy system, I thought, you know, if you can imagine Niagara Falls flowing,
not with water, but with oil, then you have a very good sense of the size of the world energy
system. That is the size of our global metabolism these days. 247. Yes. If you're in Europe,
Rhine Falls is something similar. I visited this summer, actually. Now, it's not all physically
oil. It's oil equivalent. It means if you add up all the energy we use in the world, like they do
at the International Energy Agency in Paris and convert that to oil equivalent, then you find a
flow rate that's very close to the flow rate of Niagara Falls. 90% of that is stuff we burn.
Mainly coal, oil, gas, a bit of biomass. 5% is nuclear. 2.5% is hydro, mainly large-scale hydro.
And about 2.5% is all other renewables combined. So how much is coal, oil, and natural gas?
I'd say about 80%. And there's actually a small 10% of biomass, like, you know,
just firewood and other biomass. So where do we burn this, generally, globally?
That's the interesting part. Actually, this IEA website is very helpful for that,
although it's down temporarily. They break down this energy flow in a Sankey diagram.
I must be the name of the inventor of that type of diagram, where, you know, you have the sources
of primary energy on one side, and the end use on the other side. And the end use will be transportation
and industry, other and non-energy use. I think that's the way they kind of cut it.
And then you have these flows that connect, you know, oil goes into this use and gas goes into
that use. And the width of each of these lines is proportional to the importance of that flow in
the world energy system. And what you see is that the vast majority is indeed these hydrocarbons.
And there's a very thin line, which is renewables today. And of course, that's the part that's
growing that we need to grow. But in between these two, end use and source, there are like
two little boxes of transformation. And those are actually quite interesting. And we don't think
about them very often. There's about one third of this energy goes straight to the end user,
generally fixed sites. So let's say natural gas into a home in Holland, where we heat our homes
with natural gas. There's one third that goes through power stations, all the world's power
stations, typically coal, you know, few people have a direct use for coal, it's mainly used in
power stations to generate electricity. And then of course, you have some losses.
But there's one third that passes through refineries, oil refineries. And I think we don't
talk about those too often, they're not very sexy. But they are actually quite important for the
world energy system. Because these oil refineries function in a similar way that mitochondria
mitochondria would work in the cells of your body and every life form. So these oil refineries
are like the mitochondria of the, I think you call it the amoeba or the superorganism
that is our global society, in the sense that they provide the energy molecules to society.
The mitochondria provide the ATP, it's a special molecule that is like the energy currency of life.
And these refineries, they provide liquid fuels. So it's not a single molecule, it's a
collection of molecules, but it has the same kind of function.
So between extracting the hydrocarbons out of the ground and
them becoming the ATP for our global society in the form of diesel and gasoline,
they need to be transformed. Oil is not gasoline. Can we use oil directly out of the ground for
anything? Is some percentage of it used just straight as is or not?
No, I think maybe in ancient history, people may have used oil that just was seeping out of the
ground just to light some fire or something. I've heard, but it's a tiny amount that there may be
the odd power station in the world where people burn oil directly. But really,
there's a lot of value add in separating out the oil into different products. And then
each product goes into a particular end use. So I'm quite likely to ask you some naive questions
in the next 30 minutes. If you pulled some oil out of the ground and spilled it on the floor and
struck a match to it, would it light on fire the same way that gasoline would?
Look, I've never tried, but it would light. Yeah, definitely. But oil is a very,
how should I say, is a very diverse term, almost like coffee. If you have a coffee in one place
or in another place or in one country, another country, it's the same name, but it's not like
McDonald's hamburger that is rigorously the same everywhere you go on the planet.
Except in Hong Kong, the ketchup is green on Big Max. And the French have their own version as well.
So oil is different, and why is that important? Well, look, it's got to do with the way actually,
it's just the way nature is, right? So it has to do with the way that these oil fields
have come into existence. And I'm not an expert in geology, but basically, of course,
oil is a fossil sunlight, right? And under the influence of pressure and temperature
in the Earth's crust, these old plants or dead dinosaurs or whatever they are,
transformed slowly, they're kind of decay into oil. And that's the reason that
we talk about hydrocarbons. The thing about carbon is these things are based on carbon,
because life is carbon-based, right? And our economy is carbon-based.
Our economy is carbon-based, yeah. And so that is the reason that these different oil fields
are just at different levels of maturity, so to speak. And I think I'm not 100% sure,
but I think actually the latest stage of this is natural gas. That's like the furthest form of
decay. Once you're there, you can't decay anymore. But all the others are like intermediate forms.
There's actually one interesting thing in Holland that really caused a big economic boom in the
17th century for us, which we call our Golden Century, which is peat. I don't know if you've
heard of peat, which is dead plants, but only a few thousand years decayed. So they still look
like rotten plants almost. And if you do that for 100 million years, you get oil.
So is it fair to say that of all the different grades of oil and hydrocarbons from oil shale,
which is uncooked oil to peat, to tar sands, all the way to light sweet crude, their mother nature
has spent various times refining that. And human oil refineries around the world
transmute those substances into uniform products that are used in the world's machines.
Is that fair to say? Yeah, that's pretty much it. So what the function is of these refineries is
to say these oils are very different from one side to another. But the end use is actually fairly
standard. A car engine needs to accept the product. And so our job as refiners is to make products
that are on spec for the customer and that meet certain specifications. And within that spec,
there's still quite a lot of variability between whether your base oil came from the
Belize or from the North Sea or something. But it's all kind of fit for purpose for the customer.
And there are stringent specs that you sell against. But the interesting bit is,
when you buy oil, there are no specifications. Can you imagine that? There's no specifications.
So you write a check for, well, you know, what's a big VLCC, two million barrels,
let's say $100 a barrel. So you write a check for $200 million to some guy saying, well,
look, here you've got a ship of oil, no guarantees. Wait a minute, those ships,
VLCC, what's that stand for? Very large crude carrier, crude carrier. They carry around $200
million each of oil on one shipment. Oh, yeah. Well, they carry two million barrels.
So, well, you're an economist. Yeah, two million barrels. And so when you buy that,
when Royal Dutch Shell, where you used to work, buys that, you could get it from the Urals or
Brent or West Texas or refined tar sands or whatever you have agreed to purchase.
And then it comes into the refinery, and then experts like you have to figure out how to make
that grade of crude oil, which is very different from around the world into the very specific products.
Yeah, indeed. And many refineries kind of specialize in treating certain types of crude.
I would assume that the refineries specialize in crude that's more available in their region.
Yeah, for example. But it's a whole kind of economic trade-off.
For example, so I worked in a rather large refinery in Rotterdam. So Rotterdam is a good
place for a refinery because it's one of the biggest ports in Europe. And we had an advantage
of scale. It was a big refinery. I think we transited about 0.1% of global energy use went
through this single refinery of two square miles or something, 25 gigawatts of energy products,
with molecules. So not electrons, but molecules. And yeah, that's quite sizable.
So if you have size, you can take different types of crudes, for example. And you can say,
well, my base diet, we call it a crude diet, by the way, my base diet is going to be Middle East,
Arab light or Arab medium. We took in some Arab heavy as well, the odd Kuwait. But I'm also going
to take the occasional crude from Russia at the time. Can't do that now, but at the time Russia
was still a trading partner. So you can buy crudes or maybe some other crude that comes
from Brazil. And that is a bit of an odd quality. And that other refineries can't take because
it doesn't fit their kit. And you can just blend it away at 5% or something. You can blend anything
away just as in the kitchen. It's the same thing. Okay, so when we first met, I don't know when that
was a year or two ago, you, in a very informative way that I hadn't seen before, you showed me
some Legos that represented what happens in refinery. Did you set those up today?
Yeah, yeah, I went back to my youngest room and plundered his store of Legos to talk a little bit
about oil. Yeah, so why don't you break it down for the viewers, Joris, on how oil gets refined
using your son's Legos. So here we have an example of the different molecules that are in oil,
physically, and I've already sorted them to make things easy. So oil is basically carbon-based.
And here, every Lego that you see, every little round dot is one carbon atom you have to imagine.
And by default, every carbon atom will connect with four other atoms. So on each side, you have to
imagine for this particular one that there's a hydrogen, but I'm not showing the hydrogen. So
I'm not showing hydrocarbons. I'm just showing the carbons because it gets messy otherwise.
Now, and oil is a mixture of different chains of carbon, change of hydrocarbons
that can be in any shape or form. I mean, the ones I'm showing here are mainly linear,
but that is not necessarily the case. So there are millions of alternatives to the ones that I'm
showing here. And well, we could say hello to a couple of them. This very simple one, you may
recognize it, Nate. It's what we call C1, so one carbon atom. It's methane, natural gas. So when
you heat your home with natural gas, this is the thing that you're actually burning.
With four hydrogens, so you would need tinker toys to demonstrate it correctly.
Yeah, exactly. And then, actually, when it's in the ground, that natural gas
actually comes generally with a couple of the longer ones. That's what we said previously,
right? It's never completely pure. So it comes with the second one, C2. This is ethane. It's
called ethane. And that's not very well known. So in a refinery, if we go to that, these are
nuisance. So they're generally burns. They're used for, as refinery gas, we call it, so to
heat the refinery itself. Here we've got C3. We call it propane. Maybe your house is heated
with propane if you live out in the countryside. It is. C4 is butane. And yeah, as soon as you get
beyond four, you can see that there's two options to combine four carbon atoms, right? You can do
a linear chain or you can do this little tetris form here. And that can happen for all of these.
So that's where you get the complexity. And that's actually why life is carbon-based,
is because you can make all these complex molecules with carbon atoms.
And why does that mean life is carbon-based? Because other types of atoms wouldn't have that
flexibility and Lego-like... Yeah, indeed. If you take oxygen, for example,
life is not oxygen-based, or not primarily oxygen-based, because oxygen can only make linear
chains, right? So you can't create DNA out of oxygen. Here's another naive question.
So a low-carbon future, based on what you're saying, implies a lower-scale energy future
and a lower-scale consumption future more than likely, right? Just based on first principles.
Well, you can find alternative sources of energy, but yeah, a low-carbon future means
burning less of this stuff, because this all becomes CO2 when you burn it.
Right. Okay, we'll talk about that later. Keep going with your example.
Yeah, sure. So here you've got a range of molecules, and maybe... Let me just quickly finish this. So
here in the middle, you've got things that go into mo-gas, so gasoline, sorry. This would be
something that goes into kerosene, jet fuel, and then a bit heavier is diesel fuel, typically,
right? I'm just schematizing. And then here, over here on the right, you'll see I took two
big ones that have a lot of carbon atoms. They're not actually arranged like that,
and I made them black, because when you distill crude oil, this is the stuff that is actually
black, these very big molecules, and all of these become transparent, or they are transparent. It's
just when they're mixed with these guys, the oil overall is black. So when oil comes out of the
ground, it's black, but when it's refined, there's a bunch of products that are clear or transparent,
and then the black color stuff sinks to the bottom and is asphalt or... Exactly, yes.
Got it. And so a refinery basically has three functions, and the first one is just sorting
these molecules. The second one is cutting and pasting, and the third one is treating the molecules.
If we start with sorting molecules, we basically call that distillation. It's done with heat.
You can imagine if you have a pan or a distillation tower with all these molecules
kind of mixed up and you heat it, then the lightest ones are going to evaporate
first, and there's actually a heat profile in these columns, which causes these
fractions, as we call them, fractions of the barrel to separate into different cuts,
and you extract them from the distillation column in different cuts.
So typically, for example, these two guys, they might go together, C3, C4,
they can be sold together as LPG, and then maybe in the next column, they're separated out into
propane and butane because we want to sell those separately, for example.
Now, but the most important cut is on the heavy end, where you separate what we call the residue
from the transparent products. This stuff is generally worth less than crude,
and these molecules are generally worth more than the crude oil that goes into your column,
so that's the basic economics of this. So what does the yellow represent on the diesel?
The yellow ones here are sulfur atoms, and they're considered as impurities that need to
come out of your fuels for different reasons, and so the third function of the refinery cleaning
the molecules is mainly about removing these yellow bits that represent sulfur. Now, they can
be attached to all of these. I just had an example here in the diesel one, and it's roughly
proportional, so this would be a medium sulfur crude with about five atoms of sulfur for,
well, I haven't counted it, but something like 200 atoms of carbon.
Is the sulfur in all oil, or does some oil have a lot more sulfur?
It's a very big difference. It's a main differentiator for crude, and it's a main determinant of their
value, because not all refiners have the equipment to remove the sulfur.
And why do we need to remove the sulfur?
Mainly two reasons. Historically, it's been about acid rain, and actually, I think that is a pretty
nice example of how regulated capitalism can work, at least what I've seen in the Netherlands,
is your company goes out and delivers some product, and at some point society finds that
there's a problem with your product, and then you sit around the table and say, look, this
sulfur is causing acid rain. We've got to do something about it. We realize you can't do it
tomorrow, but let's start a plan to reduce sulfur over time, and so that's what has happened
in European refineries, and I'm sure it's the same for American refineries.
I'm not expecting you to be an expert on this, but I have heard that one of the explanations for
the record temperatures this summer and yesterday was announced that September was the all-time
hottest September in recent times was because of the lowering of sulfur content in marine fuel
due to environmental regulations has reduced the masking effect of sulfur particles, and therefore,
in the short term, boosted global warming. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Oh, yeah, sure. Marine fuel is the black stuff. We hadn't quite finished our distillation,
but this residue is not thrown away. It's going to specific uses, which are bitumen
and marine fuel, basically big ships. They have engines that can handle this black stuff,
and as you can see- What is bitumen?
Sorry, asphalt. The stuff you make roads with? Right, but isn't tar sands also called bitumen,
and does tar sands not need to be refined as much and can be used as asphalt?
So I'm not an expert on tar sands, but by the name and by its reputation, it's extremely heavy
crude, and it's mixed with sand, right? So you're going to have to separate out particles of sand.
I don't know how they do that, but the other thing is it's got a huge proportion of this black stuff,
and not much of this white stuff, right? So maybe only this much or something.
So what you then have to do with tar sands, and that brings me to an intermediate
function of a refinery, we said the refinery needs to sort these molecules. It needs to treat
the sulfur, but it also reforms molecules. It cuts and pastes molecules, and this guy,
in particular, it goes with the residue. It's called vacuum gas oil.
It's distilled out in a separate column, and then it can go into what we call a cracker.
In America, you have cat crackers, which means catalytic crackers. Hydro crackers are more in
Europe, or you have thermal crackers. All of those, what they do is they just cut these large
molecules into smaller ones, so that this guy can now go into diesel, and maybe this guy can now go
into gasoline. So how do they cut them mechanically? How does that actually happen?
So the brute force is temperature. You heat it up enough, and at some point,
they will crack. They will just break. And then there are smarter forms. If you use certain
catalysts, that's cat crackers. Another form to do it is you do the same thing in a hydrogen
environment, you know, catalyst and a hydrogen environment, and then you get a hydrocracker.
And one will crack it more into diesel components. The cat cracker will make more gasoline components,
for example. Now, the tar sands that you were talking about are a lot of this very heavy stuff,
so they will need a lot of cracking. Upgrading, they'll probably call it.
To come back to the sulfur, though, the marine fuel you are asking about,
it used to have a specification, and I must say, I might be slightly outdated,
but there were two specifications on the ocean, because we get the sulfur out for acid rain,
but out on the open ocean, sulfur is less of an issue, right? Because there's no forests.
Yeah, but those clouds eventually make their way to land somewhere.
Yeah, so look, I'm not the right person to have the exact rules on that, but unlike CO2,
because people mix up CO2 and sulfur very often and get it completely mixed up.
So unlike CO2, sulfur is more of a regional problem, right? So if you have a ship
out sailing in Antarctica, the sulfur it emits is not going to be a problem in forests.
So for a long time, these fuels have admitted quite a high percentage of sulfur.
I think it was 4.5% or something. And then the regional seas like the North Sea,
so around the continents, started implementing low sulfur bunkers or enforcing low sulfur bunkers,
because they found that the ships that were sailing close to the shorelines did actually
impact acid rain, and there's a couple of other environmental issues with sulfur as well.
So they started regulating this to 1.5%. But now the global specification has been lowered.
I don't know to what level, but I'm pretty sure that that is the reason why there is now less
sulfur emitted. And these sulfur emissions, they cause particles up in the atmosphere
that partly reflect sunlight, which is why they depress temperatures.
You know, there are these geo-engineering schemes where people want to inject particles into the
atmosphere to reflect sunlight, so we're all less warm. But sulfur does some of that by itself.
So if you remove the sulfur from your fuels, I can imagine that you have a temporary impact on that.
Yes. Great. Let's reduce the temperature and kill all the trees.
I'm partially kidding. Okay, so let's get back to the big picture here, Joris. I'm sure you've
watched my frankly series on Just Stop Oil on refining, and I made just a
not a detailed, but just a general observation that if for some reason we didn't need gasoline,
because we had all electric cars, for example, I argued that at least in the near term, it would
not significantly change the demand for oil or the need to extract the same amount of oil,
like 30 billion barrels a year that we're extracting. Because of what you just illustrated,
that gasoline is but one of those white series of carbon atoms that we get from a barrel of oil,
and if we still had the demand in the global economy for all the other things, we would
roughly need the same amount of oil. What are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, so look, I think on the short term, you're right, these refiners, they have what we call
the butcher's problem. A butcher cannot only sell t-bone steaks. He has to buy an entire cow,
and he's got to sell every part of that cow. So if there's a reduced demand for one of the
elements, he still has to sell these other elements. But I think what happens in the oil
industry historically is that if you give it enough time, on the very short term, like today
or tomorrow, there is flexibility in these refineries to some extent. So for example,
there are molecules, let's say a C10, the one that's 10 long, it might go into gasoline,
and your car works fine with it if it's a part of it, but you can also cut it into the jet fraction.
So these are distributions, right? These cuts of the barrels are distributions,
and so you can play a little bit with those distributions.
I read a Conoco PowerPoint a couple weeks ago that said that there's like three or four percent
flexibility currently like that, but it's not 30 or 40 percent.
No, you're right. This is on the margin. And then with a little bit more time,
so sorry, there's a possibility also for different uses, of course. So in Europe,
for example, we send molecules to the chemical industry that in the US might go into gasoline.
So you can just route things to different uses, but of course, you have to have the use for it.
But on the medium term, I think if you reduce the gasoline demand fairly intensely,
refineries will start adapting and will use their flexibility. And on the kind of 10-year term,
they will be able to invest in units that just make different products that are more suited
to your new situation. So over time, the refineries can adapt.
But we would still need diesel and bitumen for roads and naptha for plastic precursors and
all those other products unless those demand for those products goes away as well.
Oh yeah, sure. But in the end, it's a mass balance thing, right? If you have less demand,
even if it's just on one of your products, in the end, you're going to need less crude oil.
I don't know the situation in Europe, but in the United States, they're not building any new
refineries. And I know that the majority of our crude is shale oil, light oil, and we have to pair
it with our existing refineries with heavy oil from somewhere else to get the portfolio of
atoms or of molecules that you just described. Is that a risk to the global refining industry
as the world has more geopolitical instability and different existing built infrastructure
refineries require a certain caliber of oil? Or how much can we MacGyver the existing refineries to
adapt to a narrower portfolio of inputs to their refinery?
I think we have quite some flexibility, but overall, I'd expect at least in Europe, we've
seen refinery closures. So the smaller ones and the simpler refineries that have less upgrading
capacity will close first because they're the ones that make the least money. And the larger ones
are able to mix, as you just described, maybe a very heavy crude and pair it with a very light one
and then you just make a 50-50 mix so that you have your distillation column kind of nicely
balanced and all your subsequent units. So you can do quite a lot. I think if you're talking about
more and more high-sulfur crudes, for example, it needs investment in desulfurization capacity.
So you may see an ongoing need for investment in these assets so that they can treat
the increasingly difficult crude oil because I think the stuff we're getting out of the ground,
especially in the States, becomes more and more complex. And this is why for tar sands,
for example, the overall CO2 impact is also a bit higher than for regular crude because it's
so much more difficult to refine and upgrade. So what about and just feel free to tell me
if this is a question you don't have expertise in, but there is the chemistry of scaling and
overbuilding solar, wind, and other renewable technologies combined with hydrolysis to create
zero carbon or low carbon fossil fuels. We can create some of these chemical chains
with technology at a higher cost. What can we do and what can't we do and what are the trade-offs
in that? Yeah, so I'm not the best expert to ask, but on a conceptual level,
there is carbon around and you can shape that and create your own molecules, but it's going to
take you a lot of energy and equipment to do that, right? So I've seen some schemes to pull
carbon out of the air, for example. That doesn't sound very efficient to me. I mean,
it seems crazy, to be honest, to me, to build machines to get carbon, to get the CO2 out of
the atmosphere, given the concentration levels in the atmosphere, right? You're going to burn
a lot more carbon with the energy that you use in order to do that. I've not seen one of those
schemes that works. And unfortunately, some of the IPCC scenarios fully build in developed
global technology that pulls carbon out of the air that way. Yeah, to me, if you're talking,
reducing carbon levels like that, the only thing that makes sense to me, but it's more of an
intuition than I've done any sums, is to use nature, right? Nature, a tree pulls carbon from
the air. So plant trees, or maybe some of the more, let's say, novel things that might be to
stimulate algae growth in the oceans or something like that. But I'm sure that has its downsides
as well. But nature can do things for us like that. Or I think there's some people looking at
enhanced rock weathering, but building machines to pull out carbon doesn't sound very promising to me.
So what does sound promising to you in your history at an oil refinery? And
what do you think about our future on energy depletion, climate change, technology? What are
you thinking? Right. Well, I kind of think in scenarios, right? And I think there's
one scenario, which is by far the most likely one, is that we're going to transition away
from using this solar capital that we have in the ground to using solar income in the form of
photovoltaics, wind farms, and the likes. I don't think that will be overnight at all. So I'm not
very optimistic about the speed at which we can actually transition, because the investment you
need to do is, or the results are linear with the investment that you have to do, right?
Sometimes people say, oh, yeah, it's all going to be exponential. And they cite the
equivalence of the microchip revolution. But I think the big difference with that type of
exponential growth in the microchips was actually that it was an exponential shrinkage, right?
They just managed to edge more and more circuits into a fixed amount of material. Whereas if you
want to grow solar PV exponentially, it means you just have to cover more and more square meters
or square feet or whatever you want to do, you call it. And I think that is going to take
a lot of time and time we may not have. But even that isn't an energy transition. It's an energy
addition to the global superorganism, which is totally dependent on hydrocarbons. It's more
like building a protuberance on the body of the superorganism that might end up as a fin
or a wing or something, but it's not replacing the whole body. For the moment, we aren't. You're
right. For the moment, it's only additive. So we're maybe avoiding, we've avoided further growth,
but for the moment, fossil fuels are still growing. And so that's a real issue. And the
underlying issue is, of course, that we're from a kind of energy concentration perspective. We're
going back to being hunter-gatherers. We're chasing the wind and the photons
that you have to catch with these giant nets we call PV panels or these blades we call wind
turbines. Well, I think you said it aptly earlier is we're trying to shift from using solar capital,
our stored sunlight bank account, to living on solar interest, which is the daily, weekly, monthly
flows of the sun and the wind, plus technology. So usually when people start living on interest,
instead of drawing down capital, they have to consume less. So I don't see a way that we can
have a 19 or 20 terawatt society with renewables, not even close. But I do think in tandem with
declining oil and gas and hopefully not much coal with solar, like you point out,
there is some intermediate landing point for society. Have you done the numbers on that?
Or do you have any opinions on the size or how that might look like?
No, I haven't done the numbers, but I've seen different scenarios. I don't think there are
many scenarios that see this 20 terawatt going up, but there is a lot of room.
Other than the IMF and the World Bank and the United Nations and most of the international
authorities. Yeah, well, we'll see about that. But I think there's a lot of room in efficiency,
though, because the 20 terawatt is primary energy and you don't have to replace about,
I don't know, 40% of that is just waste heat. And so you don't have to replace the waste heat,
of course, when you install your solar panels and your wind farms.
So what ends up happening is if we stabilize and somehow are able to keep the financial system
intact is turning a larger percentage of our machines to motors that are more efficient.
It's kind of a reverse Jevons paradox that on the flat to downslope, that efficiency will soften
the blow if more of our machines are electric as opposed to wasting most of the energy just to move
a 3,000 pound vehicle powered by gasoline or diesel. Well, yeah, it should be a combination of a lot
of things, right? So the switch to electric for vehicles is part of the answer. So I'm Dutch,
so I think we should cycle more where possible. I'm Dutch too, and I cycle every day.
How are you? Oh, good. So, you know, a lot of our movements are luxury movements.
Let's face it, you know, I see it everywhere. We drive our kids to school. It's just crazy
when you think about it. So I think there's a case for more simplification and also,
you know, smarter use of heating heat is a big part of the equation. And I think, you know,
for a house, if you through smart design, you can really bring down the amount of calories that you
need to keep a comfortable temperature in your house. So to totally put you on the spot, Joris,
if you were advising the EU on energy policy, given what you know, with your refinery background,
and obviously, you follow this podcast and are fluent in these systemic issues, what are some
of the things that you think the EU and the world are doing now in the energy space that are likely
dead ends? And what are some things that should be expanded and looked into? And what are some other
possibilities that should be researched even if they're not on the radar right now?
Look, I don't have a strong opinion on what the EU is or isn't doing at the moment. I think
there's a lot of professionals in the fields that see the future. And sometimes, you know,
there may be a bit of hype around this or that. But I think we should try a lot of things and
also see what works. You don't always know from the start which technology, for example, is going
to work. I think it's well possible that there may be a lot of advances, for example, in energy
storage technology still, where you might say, well, yeah, the lithium and the this and the that.
Actually, contrary to the PV panels, where I see this linear relationship between, you know,
if you want more power, you have to install more square meters. I'm not sure we've hit the
bottom yet with energy storage technologies. And maybe we will find novel chemistries
that are much less of an issue in terms of resources and that could really give us a
performance boost. So I'm pretty sure that there's a lot of upside in that.
Well, there are things that are more simple chemistries like sodium batteries that aren't as
good as lithium batteries, but are still pretty good. And salt is eminently more available than
lithium. Yeah, for example, and I think there's, you know, multitude of examples. I hear in the
States, there's this startup doing storing energy with rust, right, just iron rust. And
yeah, it's not as compact as other batteries, it maybe takes up 10 times more volume.
But if it's based on iron, and it's for a great scale battery, maybe that's a good solution.
So I think there's a lot of room for innovation on that particular front still.
Nor do I think that, you know, batteries are the only solution to energy storage,
by the way, especially in my current role, because we also see a lot of room in terms of
managing flexible energy demand with the end customers, right? I think historically,
industries have always kind of flocked around places where in space and in time,
energy was concentrated and thus fairly cheap. And maybe we've had this period where we could
freely ship energy and have it on demand all the time. But it may not be all that bad to go back
to the old days. So where I live in the Alps, there used to be a lot of aluminum smelters,
right? And you think, well, why in the Alps? It's because there was hydroelectricity, right?
So they just installed the industry where the energy was. And it was the same thing in 17th
century Netherlands, where we had this peat, which virtually nobody had, at least not available
at water level. So it's easily transported by boat. And this gave a significant energy
advantage to the Netherlands and so to the Dutch economy. I think half of the world's sugar refineries
were in Holland at the time, just because energy was cheap there. And that's the reason why Iceland
is attracting certain heavy industries. And maybe we'll go back to something like that where we
concentrate industries, not only where the energy is, but also when the sun is shining or when the
wind is blowing. Well, that would mean that Switzerland and surrounding areas could be one of
the richest areas in a post fossil fuel era, a century from now or whatever, because you have that
height differential and can store water and release it whenever you want, natural batteries.
But look, I was looking at the electricity prices in Norway last week. And they've virtually been
at zero and Finland, by the way, they've virtually been zero, because apparently it's rained a lot
and all the dams are very, very full and they just have to produce. So indeed, yeah, specific areas
will have definite benefits. I think Canada has a lot of hydro as well, so it could be developed.
I want to ask you a few personal questions. And you listen to my podcast so you know what
I'm going to ask you. What advice do you have being a macro observer, being non energy blind?
Do you have any personal advice to listeners at this kind of moment of human predicament and
global poly crisis? Yeah, read your book. Reality blind? Yeah, look, I think
nobody knows about your book, to be honest, that your podcasts are fairly well known.
But it was a real discovery for me. And it was an amazing thing because apart from being
pretty new for me, and I learned some things that I just never thought about, but it's also hilarious.
And so my kids would see me laughing out loud on the couch, literally, because of the way you
structured with your co-author. Yeah, my co-author. Most of the funny parts were DJs, but...
Well, like you guys have done a fantastic job. So I'd recommend anybody who's remotely interested
and if you want to have a good time, that's a good book. Thank you. Anything else?
No, that's it for me. And what about young humans? What recommendations do you have for teenagers
and 20-somethings who are coming of age at this moment of the carbon pulse?
Yeah, well, you can probably note I'm not much into saying people how to behave, but I'm again
going to recommend reading 80,000hours.org. And it's a wonderful website that sets itself a goal
to find out you've got 80,000 hours in your career. How can you do the most good in the world?
And I think that's a fantastic question to ask. And these kids, there's some young people from,
I think it started at Oxford University, have just kind of fleshed it out and said,
well, what's the way to think about it, about your career choices and what you want to do
and how you want to contribute to society? And of course, there's a lot of thinking about
contributing to environmental causes, etc. So I'd recommend anybody to check that out.
I have not heard of that or seen it. I think it's a great idea. I think education is first
and foremost, and I think asking questions rather than having answers is the way to go.
I will check that out and we'll put it in the show notes.
Joris, what do you care most about in the world?
Yeah, that's how many answers can I give?
Well, as many as you want.
Now, I think we humans, we care about things we spend time on and we probably spend time on
things we care about. It's like a feedback loop. There you go. So obviously, your family and friends,
but kind of at a macro level, I think I feel a very close connection with nature, as in
just life other than humans. I mean, I like humans as well, but I think we're
under appreciating the rest of the biosphere. And yeah, I care about maintaining a livable
planet and about conserving nature, I suppose. So I know that you are working on some
very interesting things. I'll give you a chance to maybe give a teaser of that. But if you were
to come back on the podcast, what is something relevant to our futures that you're passionate
about that we could take a deep dive on? Heliomimicry, emulating the sun.
So when you say heliomimicry, are you talking directly about nuclear fusion or are you thinking
other things? Yeah, so that's the reason I coined this new term is,
I think it's wider than the types of fusion that people generally consider.
So most of the work today is done on what I'd call high energy fusion. So you've got to make
things really hot or very high pressure with lasers or with millions of degrees like they do
in the south of France. And then there's a range of startups that tries to do the same thing, but
you know, more agile and smarter. So there are billions flowing into startups, all in the high
energy fusion part. And the part that I actually am most interested in is the low energy fusion,
also known as cold fusion. And this is much more uncertain, right? There may only be a percentage
chance that it actually works. But it's a risk reward thing. And that's why I find it so interesting
is if that type of fusion works, you may be able to get on a cost curve much earlier and much lower,
because those are compact devices that you could do fusion in. Whereas the other ones,
you're just creating new nuclear power plants, so to speak, that are going to take decades and
billions of dollars to develop. And so yeah, I'm actually quite interested in really testing the
edges of science to see if there's a mechanism to do fusion at low energy. And that's not very
common. But it happens to be the field that I've kind of investigated over the past decade.
And you say there's a percentage chance, as in like 1% chance in that ballpark of this happening?
Yeah, that's my view. And the reason for that is that there are so many
results coming in. Now, there's a problem with repeatability, reproducibility.
But there's a research group at MIT who published about this. And they compare it to
the transistor development in the 1930s and 40s. In the beginning, we saw effects
of the transistor type that we couldn't place. We didn't understand what was actually going on.
And that took decades. And it was only when we actually understood the mechanism
that we could develop the transistor and that gave the microchip industry.
And I think something similar may be going on with all the cold fusion initiatives.
And this is why, for example, Google put 10 million into it a couple of years back.
They didn't find anything, but it was a good science. They published in Nature about it.
But I think there's possibility that one of these groups will break through. And of course,
there's also an overwhelming possibility that they won't. But it's worth looking for.
I have two general replies to that. One is most of the titans in AI believe that AI will solve
the heliomimicry challenge. I think 100 terawatt society would destroy the earth and pull in
so many non-carbon aspects of our natural world that there would be nothing left,
unless that technology was matched with social and governance innovations,
as well as the technological innovation. That's my general sense on that.
Well, look, I think you're right. At the same time, it's something that could really help us.
But on the other hand, we have to get a lot smarter about how not to ruin the planet further.
And if we get more powerful only to speed up our plundering of the planet, that may not be
the best outcome for man. But in the meantime, if something like that can really help us
speed up an energy transition, so for that, it would have to happen soon. That might be of interest.
So if I have a nuclear fusion reality roundtable or something, would you like to
join in on that? Do you have enough insights and ideas?
Yeah, sure.
Okay, we'll do it. Joris, thanks so much for your time and for reaching out to me a couple years ago
and to be continued, Monami.
All right, thanks, Nate.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
