You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins, that's me.
On this show we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy,
the environment and our society.
Together with scientists, experts and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's
eye view of how everything fits together, where we go from here and what we can do about
it as a society and as individuals.
Joining me once again today is my friend and ecological economist, Josh Farley of the University
Vermont Department of Applied Economics and Community Development.
In our first conversation on this podcast, Josh and I talked about the past, present
and future of human cooperation.
Josh has deep knowledge about many aspects of our coming cultural transition and today
we talk about one of those, money.
Where it comes from, what is it, how is it created, how is it tethered to our bio-physical
balance sheet, what is on the horizon with our monetary system and how might we create
and use money differently in the future during a source and sink constrained system.
The link between money, energy and the economy is about to become a lot more central to all
of our lives.
I hope you enjoy and learn from this educational discussion with my friend and colleague, Josh
Farley on money.
Hey, Josh.
Good to see you.
So Josh, my old friend, do you realize that it will be 18 years coming up where I met
you and started my PhD program at the University of Vermont and you know what I was thinking
today on my bike ride, the same entrance essay that I sent to you and the rest of my committee,
I believe the same things.
I think the same things about energy, money, thermodynamics, ecology, externalities, evolutionary
psychology, I know them deeper with some nuance as do you, but it's kind of the same story
which in some ways makes it robust and in some ways it's fricking depressing because
the world is, you know, GDP is almost twice as much as when I started and more people
are aware of climate and some other things, but the ecological, cultural consciousness
is still not really happened.
The annual increment the harm has done to our planet is probably growing.
Right.
So you and I can talk, well, I call you on a Saturday morning and ask you a short question
and we end up talking for an hour.
So I'm sure we can talk about many subjects that we care about.
On our first podcast, we talked about the evolution of cooperation and competition and
one thing that you are a wide boundary expert on and I think it's a topic that is central
to people understanding what's ahead is the concept of money.
And so that's going to be the topic today that I'd like to delve into your wisdom and
insight on.
I don't know about you, but we both teach college age students and after my class of
all the things I teach them about the myths underpinning the modern mainstream view of
the world, it's what is money and where does it come from is the thing they find hardest
to swallow.
Is that the case for you too?
Yeah.
I mean, it's not just my students.
I mean, I teach students, for example, that money is loaned into existence by banks and
econ professors tell the students, that's just not true.
Banks can't create money.
Yeah.
They can't send those econ professors, you know, papers from the central bank of England
explaining that banks create money.
So it's not that surprising that students don't get something that our leading politicians
and economists also don't understand.
Yeah.
No, we're going to get to that in depth, but it's almost like some time when you're a
teenager, your parents sit you down and explain where babies come from, but they never explain
where money comes from, which is kind of a fundamental aspect of our reality.
Okay.
So let's start from the top.
What is the conventional taught in finance and economics classes, the conventional definition
of what is money?
All right.
So there's two parts to this really that in my PhD program, the only thing I learned
is that money facilitates barter and plays no other role.
So they didn't even teach us anything.
But in general, when they're going to teach something about money, they'll say money has
essentially three purposes.
It's a means of exchange, a unit of account, and a store of value, but it's basically neutral.
It plays no important role.
So all the mainstream theories of economics work just the same in a barter economy.
Money is unnecessary for mainstream view.
So did we ever have a barter economy?
Is that true?
No.
I mean, there have been elements of barter economies, but Adam Smith introduced this story
that money evolved to facilitate barter.
When anthropologists look at that question, they actually find there was never a barter
economy in the context of, I'm going to give you something now and you're going to give
me something of equal value in exchange immediately.
It was always like a reciprocity-based economy when I have a surplus.
So for example, I go out and get an elk and prior to refrigeration and stuff, that's more
food than I can use.
So really low marginal value to me, but for the rest of my community who didn't get an
elk that day, immeasurably high a marginal value.
And so I would bring home this elk and I would share it with everybody, low cost to
myself, enormous gains to everybody else, and really strengthening all our social ties
as a community.
So the origin of money was almost a part of a social agreement of reciprocity?
So it's very difficult to pin down the exact origins of money and it seems that money evolved
several different forms, but it's kind of converged on our current approach.
But what I view it as is that we really did have a society in which tracking reciprocity,
or a very social species.
And we need to know that if I am doing something for somebody else, they are in the future
going to reciprocate either to me or to somebody else in my community.
And it's really tough to keep track of all those different reciprocity relationships.
Whereas so my view, and I think it's very a well supported view, is that money evolved
to track those reciprocal exchange.
So I bring home an elk and I give some to you, you give me money.
And that means there's no enduring social connections.
The money just tracks that reciprocity immediately.
The other big element of money is it allows us to coordinate economic activity with people
we don't know or trust around the globe.
You don't need trust.
I don't need to know if you're going to be a good person and pay me back in the future
because you're doing it now.
So back in the day, this is another indirect aspect of the agricultural revolution and
the industrial revolution is that we started to amass surplus.
And before the days of surplus, we didn't need any counter to keep track of the reciprocity
because we were all in the same band in Africa and you could remember Dunbar's number and
the associated accounting, who you owed favors to and everyone was kind of part of a group.
But then once we had this boost of surplus where we had more stuff that we could carry
with us and started to have digital representations and stockpiles and vaults of gold and then
claims, paper claims on the gold, we needed some unit of account that people could keep
track.
Yes?
Yeah, yeah.
It definitely has to do with that surplus.
And basically that idea is that our society expands in size to the point where it's impossible
to keep track at an individual level.
We need new mechanisms.
But there wasn't an awful lot of effort expended tracking reciprocity back in the hunter-gatherer
days as well.
And if somebody didn't reciprocate, they could be ostracized from the community and that
was like certain death.
There were punishments involved.
But that was all done in the head, really.
There were no scorecards of that, right?
There were no scorecards.
Okay, so let's dive into it here.
This is something that I wrote about and I spoke about.
And as my PhD chairman, you're aware of this and where money comes from.
And for the longest time, I was ridiculed until 2014 when the Bank of England came out
with a report and some other writers like Richard Werner explicitly stating where money
comes from.
How does money come into existence and how does this differ from what's taught in conventional
textbooks?
Yeah.
And so, I mean, there's really kind of two paths by which money comes into existence.
We always hear right now about the government printing too much money which is driving inflation.
And that's a red herring.
The government actually, the Treasury, only issues coins.
So it's not like too many coins are driving inflation.
The Federal Reserve issues notes, but they are given the banks to back up their reserves
accounts with the Fed.
And so government money is essentially, you could think of as the Federal Reserve notes
or as a central bank note, but that's a very, very small fraction of all money available.
The vast majority of money is loaned into existence by banks as interest-bearing debt.
They are, banks are explicitly allowed to lend money they don't have.
And there's two ways to think about this.
One is that we have fractional reserve banking.
That's what the Fed says, that banks essentially have to keep 10% of their money in reserve
and can loan out.
So if I donate 100, if I deposit 100 bucks in a bank, they can loan out 90 bucks, but
that money gets deposited in another bank and they can loan out $81, it gets deposited
in another bank, which can loan out $72, and that $100 turns into $1,000.
So that story says that if the bank wants to make another loan, somebody approaches
them with a really good project and can guarantee they'll pay back the loan, the bank won't
say, oh, I can't do that because they don't have enough money on reserve for the Fed.
Actually the Fed targets interest rates, wants to keep interest rates down.
So if banks have more people wanting to borrow money than they can make available, that would
drive up interest rates, so the Fed will actually loan money to the bank so the bank can make
more loans.
So the bank is essentially allowed to loan as much money as credible borrowers want
to borrow.
So the quantity of money, it's not that my deposits allow banks to loan, it's the demand
for loans to create deposits.
A business demands a loan, borrows money from the bank, and then that money ends up deposited
in another bank.
So banks are essentially loaning money based on the demand for consumers and investors
of good reputation who can repay it.
So you're distinguishing between vertical money and horizontal money, and most people
think that it's just the government somehow in this shadowy thing between the Treasury
and the Federal Reserve that create and destroy all our money.
And the reality is that's only 3% to 5% ish of our total money, and that 95% of our money
is created from commercial banks when they make loans to people who are credit worthy.
And there is no cap really on that money creation.
And the other thing that happens at that point is the interest is not created.
So when we create money, and it's not quite, a lot of people say it's created out of thin
air, that's also not correct because it's based on the productive capacity of the borrower
and the viability of the system based on historical productivity of the economy.
So it's not truly out of thin air, but it is out of thin air when it's referenced to
the ecology of the earth and to the amount of biophysical capital energy materials, minerals
that we have available.
Right?
So I have a couple of comments on that, actually, is that first of all, most people don't even
realize, you know, everybody says, well, the government's got to tax you in order to get
money to spend.
And so we always have to say you need to tax and then spend.
What are we taxing?
We're taxing money.
Where does the money come from?
The money has to be created before it can be taxed.
So logically, governments would need to spend money into existence before they could tax
it back.
So when governments spend money into existence, it creates it, when they tax it back, it destroys
it.
Banks lend money into existence, it creates it, when it's repaid, it destroys it.
As you point out, though, banks are lending the principle, but not the interest.
The question is, where does that interest come from?
And you know, so we have the one point I was making, too, is that interest bearing debt
obeys a mathematical law of exponential growth.
And money is a claim on real resources, and we watch now debt growing exponentially.
And it's several multiples.
It's almost four times GDP, either at the national or the global level even.
And so this exponential growth of debt can't be matched by a finite planet.
What we could do, so if banks collected interest and spent it back into the economy, then it
would be available to pay the interest on the principle.
But banks tend to reinvest it is more interest bearing debt.
So that's really problematic.
So we get this, it's almost impossible to repay all the debt without continued economic
growth.
One more comment I wanted to make quickly is that, you know, I said banks create money
out of thin air.
You said, well, actually, money is a claim on resources and therefore has to be in some
way backed by those resources, so it's not out of thin air.
But a lot of money, in fact, the overwhelming amount of money right now, I would argue in
the United States, is loaned into existence to buy existing assets.
And you can bid up the value of existing assets.
There's no physical limit to the value of existing assets.
What do you mean by existing assets?
So for example, the stock market, you know, when you, so people think when you, well,
when you're buying stocks, you're giving money to corporations to invest in real goods
and services.
But the fact is that it's only initial public offerings that actually create money for investment.
And you know, when Exxon stocks are Exxon's not issuing new stocks, Microsoft is not issuing
new stocks to give them new capital, the existing stocks being recirculated.
And so there's a kind of a fixed supply of stocks.
Not always though, right?
There's secondary offerings when they need new capital.
But it's a tiny fraction of the total.
So I think like Tesla's talked about some secondary, but the vast overwhelming share
of stocks being sold now is, you know, existing stocks.
And in fact, over the past 10 years, stock buybacks by corporations have exceeded new
issue of stocks by 10 to 1.
So really corporations stocks are pulling money out of, you know, that could be invested.
Why are they doing that?
And what is the impact of that?
So it's anecdotally, you know, my brother used to be vice president of VFI, William
Ruckelshaus, the founder of the EPA was the CEO, and he was telling his stock brokers
he wanted to invest in real physical production of waste management.
So you know, more waste sites, more truck, but the investor said, no, look, if you buy,
if you increase the supply of size of the garbage industry, you've increased supply,
price goes down.
And the other hand, if you buy back stocks, the price goes up.
Your investments in real production will make a 7% rate of return.
Your investments buying back our stocks will drive up the value of stocks by 16% in a year.
And so, you know, stockholders want that 16% rate of return, not that 7% rate of return.
Even though when you're investing in real physical production, you're creating new wealth.
When you're buying back your own stocks, there is, you know, there's no new wealth being
created.
Well, there's paper wealth.
There's real physical wealth, and then there's monetary wealth.
And this gets at the core of ecological and biophysical economics, is most economists
and technologists view the world from a monetary lens.
If we have enough money and the money math works out, we can do anything, whereas you
and I know we need energy and materials, mostly which are from finite stocks.
And the environmental sink capacity is also finite and growing or declining.
So every time that we create new money, it is a claim on future energy and resources
and ecological sinks.
So let me go back to that to make sure that this is crystal clear.
Can we start with an example you're in at the University of Vermont?
So the First National Bank of Burlington, let's say they have $100 million in assets
on their account.
And you are a handsome, full professor who is very creative and has a stellar credit
rating, and you ride your bike to every day to school instead of using a car and all these
other things that impress the bank manager.
You want to start some ecological sequestration thing around Lake Champlain, and you want
a million dollar loan from this bank, okay?
So walk me through what happens.
So I would go to the bank and give them my plan and say, okay, you loan me a million
dollars.
I'm going to invest it this way, and it's going to generate returns in these ways.
And so the return, you know, from what you're talking about, maybe there'll be payment
for ecosystem service programs that will pay me for restoring ecosystems or payment for
carbon sequestration, either way, this gives me the money that allows me to pay back the
principal plus interest.
And so the bank loans me the money.
But what mechanically happens at the bank, their balance sheet and yours?
So what mechanically happens is the bank says, you know, the bank needs to balance its books.
So the bank is going to give me a loan for a million dollars and deposit on my bank account,
and that counts as a liability of the bank.
But it counts for me as an asset.
On the other hand, I give the bank an IOU, you know, I've got to repay that, that IOU
counts as an asset for the bank and a liability for me.
So assets and liabilities perfectly balance out for the bank.
So on their books, boom, they're, you know, balanced.
And it perfectly balances out for me, except that I also owe interest.
So I've got to pay that.
But the other thing that happened is that now the total balance sheet of that bank is
a hundred and one million dollars and another million dollars of purchasing power in the
global economy just came into existence.
So from a creditor versus debtor relationship, everything is balanced.
There's everything is, is neutral.
But from a biophysical perspective, suddenly at that flick of the switch on the, the bank
manager's computer, a million dollars more of potential claims on coal and ocean absorption
and energy and timber and everything else came into existence while those things stayed
the same or actually slightly, slightly declined.
So an example you gave though, you know, I was actually investing in ecological restoration,
which in some ways is rebuilding the system.
If instead though, I had wanted to invest in a coal plant or a tulk mine or a, you know,
something that actually does use resources and that would be very explicitly just to
drain or if I could, you know, I want to build cars, they would loan me the money and that
would just be a net drain and raw materials and energy and it would increase the claims
on that.
But quickly getting back to another point though, what happened right now, land prices
are skyrocketing here.
I could go to the bank, borrow money to buy a trunk of land and sit on it for five years
doing absolutely nothing and sell it from four and five years for twice what I paid.
And I would now have more money that entitles me to more goods and services without having
created any new wealth whatsoever.
In fact, I could buy a piece of farmland, kick the farmer off because it's just too
much hassle and the value of that land would go up and then I would sell it and having
created more wealth for myself with less wealth for society.
And that's an awful lot of what's happening today.
Well, it was also happening in the 19th century when Thorstein-Veblen made the distinction
between business and industry.
Industry makes our shoes and our sandwiches and things like that, whereas business uses
money to make more money.
And so now that's represented by the fire economy, finance, insurance, real estate
and how big of a portion of our economy is the financial sector, do you know?
So it's growing dramatically.
I think right now finance counts are about 8% of GDP about quadrupled in the past few
decades.
Paul Volcker commenting on that, former chair of the Fed said, the share of the financial
sector is quadrupled and in that time the only innovation they've had is the ATM machine.
So really there's not much going on and the way of useful innovations in finance that
actually create more value.
There's a lot of innovations that allow the financial sector to suck more wealth from
the rest of the economy, in my view.
So why does money being loaned into existence by commercial banks, why does that matter
and what would a standard economist think about hearing this conversation?
So first of all, why it does matter exactly as you point out, there's two reasons it matters.
One is when it's loaned into existence to increase productive capacity.
Let's say I'm borrowing money to build new fracking infrastructure.
So that is money that's, you know, there's all the materials required to build the wells
and then I'm pumping out wealth from the soil and we actually count that I'm draining our
net restore stock yet we count it as pure gain.
We don't mention the fact I'm depleting our wealth stocks.
That money loan for production is directly increasing the claims on our finite resource
base and because it's growing exponentially, I have got to, you know, get more money in
the future.
A good example of this, take an extreme example like Brazil where interest rates might be
40% a year.
I borrow money to build a sawmill.
I've got to pay off that 40% interest that gives me a huge incentive to chop down trees
growing at 3% to pay off debt growing at 40%.
And so I'm just rapidly depleting.
Okay.
We'll get back to your second point, but on this one, how long has inflation been kind
of a standard expectation because my understanding was if you would have asked an economist in
the 1950s, will prices go up next year and it would have been a coin toss half the time
they went up, half the time they went down.
But since you and I have been alive, we've been alive during a period of pretty much
consistent every year inflation.
But how long were there ever monetary regimes where there was very low interest rates or
no interest rates?
I don't know a lot about that.
Yeah.
I'm not a true expert on the history, but interest rates have been a thing for thousands
of years.
Some societies had like rules where you could charge 10% interest for seven years, which
means you're paying back twice what you borrowed essentially.
And that was it.
Other societies had jubilees periodically where all that would be canceled because a
lot of these traditional societies understood that that exponential growth can't continue.
And if you look at old literature, actually, you'll see they always talk about, they talk
about people's income.
Read like, you know, the Bronte sisters or something, they'll tell you how much somebody
earned or how much things cost.
That never happens anymore because every writer now knows that that is useless, you know,
five years from now, you don't know what that even means.
So we did have a long period with kind of inflation free societies or where inflation
was periodic episodes.
Now it's kind of built in.
It's expected.
Although for many years, I actually never taught my students about inflation because
we went about 20 years, you know, without really much worry about it.
Our concern was deflation.
And you know, one of these things is if you're loaning the money and you are increasing the
production of goods and services, then there's not inflation.
So, you know, in fact, if you think about it, when the price of oil skyrocketed, so
2008 July reached 140 bucks a barrel, lots of firms are saying, oh, we want to invest
in oil.
So they borrow a lot of money to invest in oil, they increase the supply of oil.
And because demand for oil is what they call really an elastic, a small increased supply
leads the price to plunge, the price plunged.
Actually loans for productive capacity can drive deflation in the short run.
Of course, it also exhausts our oil sooner.
And then, you know, given the importance of oil, that triggers future inflation.
But with a lot of things, loaning money into existence to increase output drives, you know,
can drive deflation.
Here's the way that I think of it.
You know, I got my MBA at the University of Chicago and people look at the future with
a financial technology lens, or if they've taken ecology classes or read books on ecology
and energy, it widens the boundaries of how you look at the future.
And most people at the business schools around the world have never taken an ecology class.
And so I think the models that they're using are correct in a very short term and narrow
boundary sense during this moonshot of economic growth period where, yes, next year the economy
grows 3% from this year.
And therefore this whole econometric logic Rube Goldberg machine makes sense until the
divergence between all the monetary claims on reality that we've created is so distant
from a soon to be declining amount of energy and materials coming into the economy every
year.
And then we have, well, we have the onset of the great simplification in my vernacular.
What would a standard economist say to debunk what we're saying right now?
What is taught in contrast to what we're saying?
Well, one thing I think that is taught is this, you know, you and I believe that resources
are finite.
Right.
Economists are often accused of being cornucopia and their argument is as a resource becomes
scarce the price increases creating an incentive to innovate substitutes or demand less.
And so technology will always step in and solve the problem.
And you know, and so far it's true that empirically, you know, technology always has come up with
solutions to our major predicaments.
Unfortunately the day before Thanksgiving, a turkey has the most evidence that humans
are benevolent and kind and ductive reasoning doesn't always work.
No, exactly right.
And that's what you and I are doing with all of our work.
It's a few weeks out metaphorically from Thanksgiving for our culture.
And we're trying to educate and inspire more people to start looking at how we can live
better or the same with less because less is probably coming because at some point it
very much is a musical chair situation with the amount of well, here's here's the other
thing is when we have a financial problem and we have to tighten our belts and we have
to use less, it's so politically difficult to sell or explain the necessity of using
less that we just create more credit.
It's amazing Josh to look at the debt ceiling of the last 30 years.
It's these like flat lines and then a jump up and then a flat line and a jump up every
single time we've hit a debt ceiling, there's a bunch of wrangling and political arguing
and chicken little doomerism and then all of a sudden we raise a debt ceiling.
And it's almost like the boy who cried wolf because we've been warning about a fiscal
cliff and a debt crisis, you know, some people have been warning for a long time and it doesn't
seem to really matter.
What really is the problem with debt is debt necessarily a bad thing unpack that a little
bit.
Yeah, this is a big topic.
So debt itself, it does, you know, if we go into debt with interest bearing debt, that
means our future obligations continue to expand, which in and of itself is highly problematic.
What a lot of economists worry about with debt, they compare governments to households
and they think, well, the government can't repay the debt.
What they forget is that the government is the sovereign issuer of money.
You know, it says in our constitution that the Congress has the right to coin money.
We could at any time issue a coin equal to our entire outstanding debt and pay it all
off.
That could lead to too much money chasing too few goods and services, which is inflation.
But the government is not going to go bankrupt.
Modern monetary theorists harp on this constantly and they say as long as we have unused resources
by which they mean labor and capital and firms operate typically with about 25% excess capacity,
even now with really low unemployment, it's still like 3% or 4% probably, which is quite
a number of people.
So they argue the government can spend money to employ those unused resources without driving
inflation at all.
What the modern monetary theorists forget though is we don't have unused ecological capacity.
We have vastly overused ecological capacity and when the government spends more money
on things that create demand for oil and raw materials, that is growing our ecological
debt, which is easy to hide because if you have a huge forest, you can keep cutting it
down every year and without really noticing in your income stream.
So like if you inherit a huge trust fund, you can spend it out pretty fast and you live
well until it's gone.
You have to live on the interest, not the capital.
Well, that's a microcosm for our culture.
We're like a 12-year-old who inherited large amount of money and is spending it down as
if it were interest when it's actually capital.
So on MMT, Modern Monetary Theory, you said that one of the things that's in their view
that is flawed is they ignore the ecological debt.
I would argue two other things are problematic with MMT.
Number one is as we issue more and more debt to pay off our claims like a trillion-dollar
coin, like you said, that's true domestically, but it sends a signal to people internationally
that our currency may not be trustworthy forever.
So there's that.
And then the larger issue is it's energy blind, like so many things today.
So we have 100 billion barrel of oil equivalents per year of fossil carbon and hydrocarbons
we're extracting.
We only pay for the cost of extraction, not the cost of creation nor the pollution.
So we have basically a labor force of 500 billion human worker equivalents added to our
global economy.
And as those retire and it's more costly to wake new ones, and we go from 500 billion
helpers to 450 to 400 to 300, as we're creating more monetary claims in a Keynesian sense,
our workers, you know, 5 billion of us real humans and 500 billion of these energy armies,
they're getting weaker or are less productive over time.
And that you can't print that you can only extract it faster.
So I get the point by MMT years that you can't go bankrupt.
The difference between a person having a four to one debt to income ratio and a government
having a debt to ratio four to one is, yes, the government can print the money, the individual
cannot.
And by the way, there aren't that many countries that can actually do that.
I mean, the US can, Japan can, China can, but a lot of countries in Europe can't because
you know, Slovakia or some of those satellites, they have to look to Germany and France to
call the shots on the euro out of all the aspects of the story that I've put together
with your help over the last 20 years.
It's the disconnect between our monetary expectations of reality and our actual physical situation
is probably one of the most underappreciated under recognized risks to the next decade
because we are growing our debt as a world.
We're doubling our debt every eight to eight and a half years.
And we're growing our economy or we're doubling our economy like, like every 20 to 25 years.
And that's before energy starts to decline.
So we have a massive financial recalibration coming in the future, in my opinion, and it
could be the very new future or it could be five to 10 years from now.
I don't know.
So let's just briefly talk about that before I forget.
Before and after the Great Depression, we had a similar situation that before 1929 and
after we had the same productive capacity in the economy.
So what happened in the early 1930s with money and productive capacity?
And could that be an analog for what's ahead?
Yeah.
So, I mean, prior to the Great Depression, most money was not being loaned to increase
our productive capacity.
It was being loaned to invest in existing stocks.
And because, as I said, the supply of stocks, you know, it's not totally fixed, but it's
very rigid.
So the price of stocks is determined by demand.
Demand is determined primarily by how much credit is available to buy those stocks.
So banks were loaning money, hand over fist to buy stocks.
Stocks were collateral on the loans.
The value of the stocks was going up.
So the banks saw themselves as making very, very safe loans.
Same thing happened with the housing bubble, you know, 2005 through 2008.
The more money you loaned to buy stocks, the more money you loaned to buy land, the more
demand there is for those, the higher the prices, the more collateral you have for the
loans until eventually you reach a point where people get too overly optimistic, they're
borrowing too much to buy too much, they can't find a seller, as soon as they can't find
a seller for the land or the stock, then they can't pay off their loan.
And so as soon as a few people can't find sellers, they have to start selling their assets.
And as soon as the supply of assets for sale goes up, the price plunges.
And this is known as debt deflation.
So that, you know, when you loan a huge amount of money to buy stocks, all these people owe
money to the banks, contingent upon rising stock prices, stock prices start to fall,
people can't repay the banks, banks therefore stop making loans, and they stop making loans
not only to the speculators, but also to the real investors.
So people who need money to borrow money to make payroll or to buy the goods to do real
production, banks stop making those loans as well.
The amount of money circulating in the economy tends to go, you know, it really goes down.
And so we have a banking system that exacerbates bubbles and exacerbates busts.
So it's a cyclical system.
When you really want one that's pro-cyclical, you want one that when the economy is doing
poorly, you put more money out there to stimulate investments, and when the economy is booming,
you want one that reduces the amount of money to, you know, stop the overheating of the
economy.
And overheating, in my view, is, you know, extracting too many resources faster than the
planet can sustain.
Well, in that case, we're already on fire.
You were on fire.
Yeah.
But the other thing you said is kind of what we've done, right?
In 2009 and in 2020, the Treasury and Federal Reserve came in and printed bazookas worth
of stimulus and guarantees and everything because otherwise we would have tipped into
a depression.
Here's the other thing people never really think about.
You know, the Federal Reserve is amalgamation of private banks that have paid-in capital.
And the amount of paid-in capital, like if you were to start a bank in Burlington, there
would be some investors that put together capital to create the bank, and then you start
loaning out and you get paid higher interest on your loans than you pay out to your depositors.
So over time, you make money and the whole model is leveraged, so you do well.
The Federal Reserve has $50 billion or so in paid-in capital, and their balance sheet
now is $8 trillion, or I haven't looked in the last month or two, but they're the most
leveraged hedge fund in the world.
The European Central Bank is even worse as far as a leverage ratio.
But since it's quasi-government, no one really worries about that.
But at some point in the future, when we have all this vast amount of paper and electronic
claims on reality, and we start to call those in on real reality, houses and money in my
own bank account and things like that, there really is a musical chair situation, and my
belief is contrary to 2009, when we had a too big to fail situation, the next crisis,
there will be a too big to save situation, where some country, some entity, the Bank
of France or something, will need so much money to be bailed out that all the other
central banks in the world won't be able to do it, and that will cause some sort of a
recalibration, currency reform, Bretton Woods III, something like that is coming, because
when we have a financial crisis, like in 2009 or 2020, we have options, right?
We could say we've consumed beyond our means, we need to tighten our belts, there's going
to be some austerity for a few years, we're going to let companies fail that we're not
doing well, or we're going to add some non-renewable tax to save and marshal our natural resources
and our ecosystems, any one of those options could have been taken, but instead, we wanted
to make everyone whole and people that were gaming the system with the PPP loans and things
like that, and so we had this Monty Hall campaign of just massive stimulus and central bank
artificial guarantees, low interest rates, negative interest rates, and what that did was
you're solving a credit crisis with more credit, who was it that Hyman Minsky said that that can
never happen in the long run? So it's bizarre to me that we are so deep into this, yet no one
even thinks about it, and I think it's because it's happened twice now, in 2009 and 2020,
and no big deal. Look, we came out of it, but I think this is central to our future.
One thing I'll say is that if you think about it, what we often do when there's a recession,
we lower interest rates with the argument that this is going to lead firms to invest in new
production, hire people, create more goods and services, create more wealth, and the recession.
But in reality, when there's a recession, firms can't sell what they're already producing.
They have no incentive in producing and investing in additional consumption,
what they tend to invest in is speculation. So it's like March 23, 2021, Powell is the stock
market is plunging, he says, I'm going to make credit available to prevent asset prices from
collapsing. And people interpreted that as if necessary, he would actually buy stocks. He ended
up purchasing bonds traded in the stock market. I don't understand a lot of this stuff, to be honest,
but it triggered the biggest 50 day increase in the price of stocks, because the price of
stocks is determined by the demand for stocks, which is determined by credit availability.
And this didn't in any way, it didn't create more jobs. It actually triggered one of the
biggest increases in inequality we'd ever seen, where billionaires were just getting phenomenally
richer at the same time that people were losing their jobs and living in misery. So this idea
that we can reduce interest rates to stimulate the economy during a recession, if you can't
sell what you're already producing, you're not going to invest in more production. You're going
to invest in speculation. And if you can't speculate in the US, we'll go speculate in
Brazil or South Africa or Turkey or India as we did in following the quantitative easing
in response to the 2008 crash. So getting back to this core question,
because I know people listening to this, there's a lot of big words here and our fundamental
point that we're trying to make is that commercial banks create most of the money in our world
when they make a loan. And the loan, they're not loaning out someone else's money from their bank,
they're actually creating the money. And when that happens, there's no reference to ecology or
how much oil we have. So what would a Larry Summers or a standard economist, what would be their
core argument saying that we're wrong? So first of all, according to all their models,
it doesn't matter where money comes from. Money is neutral. So they say that who
creates or destroys money has no impact on the economy, which in my view is absolute nonsense.
The right to create money is incredibly powerful. And our Constitution says it's reserved for
Congress to coin money. We've interpreted that as, oh, only Congress can make coins,
but banks can essentially loan money into existence, which I think is a misinterpretation
of the Constitution personally. And so when I did my PhD, none of this stuff was even mentioned.
And still a lot of economists buy into this idea that banks serve as the intermediary
between savers and borrowers. So I put my money in the bank, I get 3% interest from the bank,
they loan it at 6%, they keep 3%, and they're just an intermediary. In reality, they're ignoring
the fact that 95% of the money is created by the banks. So that's largely just ignored. And as I
said, this has come up in my university with students coming to me saying, you told us the banks
create money, our other econ professor says, no, they don't. If they did, I'd be a banker.
And so there's just a certain amount of ignorance. It's amazing. And we're going to make sure to
put in the show notes the hard references from the Bank of England and other places explaining
exactly how this works. But you know that I talk to mostly retired politicians, some current
politicians, they don't know this either. They interviewed politicians in England and found
that 85% did not know that banks could create money. So how you make decisions about economy,
not understanding the basics is beyond me. So money is not neutral. Can you describe why money is
not neutral? Yeah, I mean, the fact that if you can create money out of thin air and loan it at
interest, interest rates are higher than the growth rate of our economy. And the debt is growing
faster than our economy. And I don't know the exact numbers. I've tried to look it up. But if
our debt right now is 360% of GDP, which it might be a little bit more than that, but you can find
that on the Federal Reserve sites and we can post that in the notes. And let's say the average
interest rate was, you know, a little under 5%. That means 15% of our economic, our GDP is being
transferred to the bankers every year. And typically, as we get technological innovation
and advancement in a sector of the economy, like computers or cars, they become cheaper and cheaper.
And you get more for your buck. In finance, it's the opposite. You know, we're not,
they're not, there's no innovations that are saving our money. Instead, we are spending
more and more and more of our GDP is flowing to the banking sector.
One of the reasons that debt hasn't been a front page issue is we just crossed 30 trillion in
government debt. Of course, our debt in reference to our underlying resources isn't just government
debt. You have to add personal debt, household debt, corporate debt. And so there's lots of
claims that add up to around, like you said, between 360 and 400% of GDP, which would be
the equivalent as an individual if you made $50,000 a year and you had to pay taxes on it,
but you owed the bank 180 grand a year in debt. At some point, the bank is going to say, you know
what, Josh, you're a good guy, but I can't continue to loan this money to you. You need to pay this
back. So what happens from a biophysical perspective if the profits from our aggregate economy are
not enough or are less than the interest? Yeah. So I mean, what basically happens is,
you know, as we say, we have money growing exponentially faster than the economy as a
whole, which really does mean we have way more money chasing a finite pool of resources,
you know, borrowing, you know, these magical technological innovations,
which are possible, but nothing that I see is happening right now in that level.
And ultimately, it boils down to inflation. And so I actually, people are stressed out about this
current, you know, inflation crisis. What they failed to acknowledge is that household debt right
now is 80% of GDP. That means if we get 7% of inflation, and inflation is a general increase
in the price of goods and services, and we've actually seen wages for the poor are rising
faster than inflation. The last couple years, yeah. The last couple years. But basically,
to the extent that wages accompany inflation, the real value of debt is going down by 7% per year,
which is 5.6% of our GDP. That's just for household debt alone, what we owe. That's a
massive transfer of resources from creditors who are the rich to debtors. Unpack that a little.
I didn't understand that. The real value of debt is 7%. What do you mean by that?
Yeah, a student loan of $50,000. But if we have inflation, that means prices of wages and
goods and services are going up. So with 7% inflation, overall, you could expect your
income to be rising 7% faster per year than otherwise would be. If your income is rising
faster, your ability to pay off your debt is rising faster. Because your debt is capped at
$50,000 and you just have to pay the interest. Yeah. Or actually, your debt has interest,
but if the interest rate is 5% and inflation is 7%, the real value of your debt is going down.
But in general, the value of the actual principal you owe goes down with inflation.
So there's some kinds of inflation are absolutely terrible, like when a lot of corporations right
now are just using their market power to jack up prices and making record profits. So across,
we see tons of corporations who are jacking up their prices right now, making record profits.
They're not jacking up prices because they need to to stay afloat. They're just doing because
they have market power. But the general phenomena of inflation, so the fact is that we have
exponentially growing debt, finite pool of natural resources on which debt is a lien.
And basically, when the demand exceeds supply, you have two choices actually, we can just go and
deplete the hell out of our supply. We can chop down all the forest, fish out the oceans, suck dry
the oil wells in the short term, and then do a kick the can down the road is the phrase you like to
use and delay that. And when we actually make more credit available at low interest rates,
that facilitates that. That's what we have been doing. That's what we have been doing,
exactly what we have been doing. And what's the other option? And the other option is just to
acknowledge that we have too much debt and really we need essentially, as they used to do in the
past, a jubilee. But what people don't pay attention, I lived in Brazil with a during a hyperinflation
and you can have 50% a month. And if I had had a million dollars in debt at a fixed amount of money
at an interest rate, and they weren't expecting hyperinflation, so it was like at a 5% interest
rate, the value of that debt, my salary was going up by 50% a month. So if I had a fixed
amount of debt, the value of that debt would have been plunging at the end of one year,
it essentially would have been a jubilee, except that what people do is they build in
expectations. So there's a lot of debt contracts out there right now with fixed interest rates
at low levels. They're actually in negative interest rates. If you're paying a negative
interest rate, the value of your total debt is going down. All right, so this is not a question
I had planned to ask. But I think you consuming less and telling our society that we have to use
less is, in my opinion, a viable cultural direction to go. It's just never going to happen. So we are
going to try to inflate our way out of this debt eventually. And so what you're kind of saying is
if that is the problem, the correct game theoretical response is actually to go into debt,
that would be at a fixed level, expecting there to be inflation that the real value
of the debt declines while you do something productive with that money. I'm not recommending
that as an outcome of this conversation, but I could see how that would be a logical way to
think about this. What's wrong with that idea? I mean, I'm not calling for more debt. I'm just
calling for the inevitable fact that when we have exponentially growing debt and therefore
exponentially growing demand and a non growing supply, you end up with too much money chasing
too few resources. So I view inflation as unavoidable. Since inflation is unavoidable,
we should manage it in a way that really helps transfer credits or resources from creditors
to debtors from the rich to the poor, essentially use it to reduce the value of debt. What Powell
is suggesting right now and what Volcker did back in the eighties is raising interest rates higher
and higher and higher, which means that any new debt will be at those much higher interest rates
and therefore will be growing exponentially even faster, which I believe exacerbates the problem.
I think we need other ways to manage overuse of resources than just raising interest rates.
So kind of the way that I look at it, not from a near-term perspective, but from a longer-term
perspective, the main input to our economy is the non-renewable carbon pulse sort of
materials. And as our energy return on investment declines from 50 to 1 back in the day to 20 to
1 for most of the last 30 years to 15 to 1 now down to 10 to 1. As EROI declines society-wide,
inflation is the inverse of that. So as EROI is going up, we're going to have very little inflation
because the productive capacity is so boosted by this fossil pixie dust we're adding to the system.
But as that stuff gets harder to extract, it's going to act as a tax on all of society. You
see it right now. People are posting pictures on Facebook that cost them $130 to fill up their truck.
Yes, oil is only $110 right now, but the refined products from oil because of some refinery glitches
for diesel and gasoline is effectively the same as if oil was $150, which is where it was in 2008.
So I think inflation and the inability of poorer people to afford basic things is very much in our
future. So on that topic, is there a difference between good inflation and bad inflation?
Yeah. And here's where I think that bad inflation, in my view, is what Powell triggered in March,
2021 when he actually encouraged people to invest in the stock market. So last year,
we saw the price of the stock market increase by 30% to twice total GDP. So really, we saw this
massive increase in wealth. So the wealth of billionaires increased by 50% of GDP just in
response to rising stock prices. And same with land prices, skyrocketing land prices. When you
increase the demand for assets that are available in a fairly fixed quantity, that's really bad
inflation. We don't even count it as inflation. So when we see the stock market going up,
everybody cheers vigorously. When we see even land and housing prices going up, people cheer,
not the people trying to get a house right now. But we have always treated that as good inflation,
but it is inflation. It's more money chasing the same amount of goods and services, and that leads
to a higher value. What's interesting about that, though, is that as soon as those people who own
stocks, and we saw this with Elon Musk, he sold $5 billion worth of Tesla and the price of Tesla
falls. So as soon as the owners of those stocks try to liquidate that and turn that, the value of
their stocks into real purchasing power on goods and services, as soon as they start to sell in
large enough numbers, the price plunges. So it's absolutely impossible to realize that wealth.
But in the meantime, it does give people this enormous claim at the margin to more and more
goods and services, but it's simply redistributed wealth. So I think of that as bad inflation.
I think of corporations with market power rising their prices because they can making record profits
is bad inflation. But I think inflation that reduces the overall value of money and hence
the demand on our finite supply of goods and services is good inflation and inflation that
deflates the value of debt and therefore transfers resources essentially from creditors to debtors
is good inflation. And it's pretty complicated. You have to manage it carefully. But I think it's
also we have unavoidable inflation locked in. We just can't possibly allow, we just have too much
demand for too few resources. And one quick comment to say, though, that in response to what you
were saying earlier is that this idea of selling lower consumption is untenable. We invest like
a trillion dollars a year through advertising to convince people they buy the buy stuff they don't
want to impress people they don't like. And to spend all their time working like hell to do so
at the expense of time with their friends and family and community, because you can't make money
advertising people to work less, buy less and spend more time doing the things that really
makes life good. So we could spend a trillion dollars in Madison Avenue marketing on the exact
opposite message and it might actually at this point wake people up or make advertising illegal
or at least not tax deductible. Let me probe that a little bit because I've watched some of your
and I've sat in some of your lectures on money. How does money itself change the way that we behave?
And so that's very, very important. If you think about it back in the day before there was money
and you know, we get old, we get decrepit, we got to rely on others at some points in our lives.
In a pre monetary economy, you better be damn nice to people your whole life,
so that when you're old and decrepit, they'll take care of you. In a monetary economy,
you're not building up. You don't need to build up this goodwill. You don't need to build up social
relationships. You better have a bank account though. You better have a bank account rate,
which might be sketchy in the future too. And I'm not super confident about any of my
retirement. You have a lot of friends and neighbors though.
I have a lot of friends and neighbors, but I think that money, you know, the idea that every
monetary transaction, you know, the social relationship ends. I go to the store,
they give me something, I pay them over and done. I don't rate them a thank you note.
I don't owe them anything. On the other hand, when my neighbor does something nice for me,
I feel an obligation to do something nice for them. I feel stronger social bonds,
every interaction strengthens social ties and overwhelming evidence is social ties really are
what give us meaning and value in life. There's a new study, I'm reading a book right now,
arguing that our brain used our pain mechanisms to avoid bodily harm to also the same mechanisms to
avoid social harm. So when we're having social problems or not connecting well, we feel like
almost physical pain, same part of our brain, which is one of the reasons opium just takes
care of all that. Well, if I was a politician, either local or national, and I had to describe
that money is created from a penstroke in commercial banks and that we are in a musical
chair sort of situation with the amount of monetary claims relative to our underlying
ecological and natural resources, I would feel social pain from telling my constituents that
story, which is probably one of the reasons it's not being spoken. Well, the story I would actually
tell is that right now we are allowing in the private sector to loan money into existence
in the pursuit of profit. And you make profit pumping out oil, you make profit building things,
you don't make profit sequestering carbon or restoring ecosystems or investing in, right now
there was an article recently in the New York Times saying that businesses that want to invest in
alternative energy and green technologies can't compete with crypto or NFTs,
non-fundable tokens. So right now the decisions about who gets money is based in the profit
motive. The problems we face aren't likely to be solved by the profit motive. If I was a politician,
I would say it's time for the state to reclaim the right to issue money, which we gave up to
the private sector, and then we can dedicate new money towards actual social good, kind of like
the state bank of North Dakota, which they use their bank to meet the needs of the state, good
cheap loans for their students, cheap loans to rebuild areas destroyed by disasters. You change
the goals of your monetary system and instead of the money flowing to the financial sector,
interest payments would flow to the state, it would function just like taxes. You could cut
other taxes because if the state bank is accumulating all the interest, that's just
a flow of money that essentially destroys money or you could think of it as giving the state
that money to spend. Is that the only bank in the U.S. that does things that way, the only
government bank? So there's a lot of other states talking about it right now, but I think
right now the only state bank is in North Dakota. I'm an advocate of municipal state and national
banks, so the publicization of banks, not the nationalization, but making them public and
ending all subsidies for the private banking sector. No more bailouts, no more guaranteed
deposits or anything for the private banks. Integrating ecological economics, anthropology,
and the biophysical models, what in your opinion might be some more sustainable monetary models
going forward? You had told me once and I forgot the example of some province in Brazil where they
would issue money that could be used for something. Can you unpack that a little bit?
So I think the core point about money is the reason I accept money is I have to pay taxes.
If I don't pay taxes, I go to jail and I've got to pay taxes in the national currency,
so I accept money, so I don't go to jail. And because I accept money, money is backed by my
productive capacity. So this creates a lot of opportunities for banks to create new, or for
governments to create new types of money. One I'm exploring right now is Brazil's Atlantic Forest
is maybe 20% forest cover right now. The ecologists say that if they don't get forest cover up to
30%, the system's going to collapse. It's going to be a massive die-off of biodiversity,
it's going to affect water flows, it's going to affect huge numbers of things.
So the government of Brazil, I'm suggesting, could create a new currency. The Atlantic Forest
and Brazil's Mata Atlntica, so the Mata Atlntica Reserve currency, or the MARK,
they would say, we're going to institute a new tax only payable in this currency.
And they could tax carbon emitters, they could tax wealth, they could tax activities they don't
want. And only make it payable in this currency to get this currency, you actually have to restore
the Atlantic Forest. And it would be geo-referenced. It's very easy to say, if you claim your,
this currency has exists, I can look on a map and see its geo-reference point. So it's very
verifiable. And that would allow the government to essentially use monetary systems to achieve
specific goals. And there's a lot of evidence psychologically that people prefer, if you're
being taxed, that actually you could see exactly the benefit from it. So that's one type of option.
There's a lot of ways money could be used to achieve other goals.
That would be not only would that maybe work, but I don't know what percentage of the population
would also feel like they're doing something of meaning instead of just frivolous consumption and
Netflix and deep dish pizzas. They're actually working and getting paid for their work in something
that improves the ecology of their area. And other people are doing it too. Everyone's doing it.
They have to, because that's where the money comes from. Could that model work in the United
States towards all sorts of non-GDP as a metric of how much stuff we burn, ecological restoration,
community restoration, that there's a parallel currency, that we have to pay a certain percentage
of our taxes every year in this XYZ, Farley dollars to help our future. And so that everyone has to
get paid in those, at least a portion of their income. Are people working on this? Is this a
crazy idea? There are people who have suggested it. So Bernard Lieterra was one of the architects of
the Euro and I'm my concern to the Euro, but he has a book called Money and Sustainability,
the Missing Link, which lays out some of these ideas. And the modern monetary theorists advocate
for a job guarantee. So we'll just print money to pay people. You could have variations of that.
As I say, I think modern monetary theorists don't pay enough attention to the ecological limits.
And therefore say, well, we can just create more and more without respect for ecological limits.
But I think what we could do is have a jobs guarantee with people investing in regenerative
agriculture and alternative energy. And they could potentially be paid in carbon credits that
correspond to the amount of carbon they sequester. And you could tax, you could impose taxes on
those carbon credits that would drive the value up to a living wage. So if you're working in
regenerative ag, you're going to get paid in this carbon credit. And the taxes will be high enough
in that carbon credit that the amount you are paid gives you a living wage and allows you to
meet your basic needs, which then of course obviates the need for minimum wage, because if you have
a job guaranteed living wage, then every firm would have to match that. And you're actually
alleviating ecological constraints. I swear, I think I understand our monetary system and its
relationship to ecology and human behavior. But I still learn from you every time we talk,
and this is just a horribly Byzantine complex subject, money. Seriously. It's so central to
our lives, and it's so fraught with confusion. And to me, it's clear that our current monetary
system is unsustainable. And so there's two things that have to happen. One is the little
avalanche guns and the Alps that do the mini avalanches so that there's not a huge one. We need
something like that. And we're going to have to navigate this musical chairs moment in the next
decade where the amount of financial claims versus the underlying reality, there's a great
depression-ish event on our horizon. So that has to be dealt with. And then in the next century,
we have to have some more sustainable and more tethered to some other outcome other than just
GDP monetary systems because exponential growth, because the interest isn't created,
is embedded in our system right now and has been for a long time. Here's one thing that the
gold bugs were punked saying that, oh, in the 1970s, we went off the gold standard and that's when
we started to decouple from sound money practice. That's not true because they're only talking about
the vertical money from the governments. They're not talking about the 95%, which is created from
commercial banks basically out of thin air. And that's happened ever since the early 1900s when
the Fed came into existence. I think it's happened just before that. Some of the theories or some
of the early banks were goldsmiths who had safe for storing gold. People would deposit it. Riffy
would put their gold there for safe keeping and then get a certificate and title it into that
gold. But then the goldsmiths would lend out some of that gold knowing that the certificate
circulated independent of the gold. So you kind of created that loaning money into existence.
So they figured if I have no more than 10% of the people will come demanding their gold for me,
so I can loan out 90% of the gold on deposit. And that functions like our current banking system.
So what would be a more sustainable system? Let's ignore for the time being this widely coyote
moment we have on the horizon. Once we make it through that, what would be something more sustainable
meaning that it would be... I mean, if you look at the average length of a fiat currency,
fiat currency being something that's not backed by something physical, it's around 30 or 40 years.
That's how long they last. So what would be something that would be longer lasting? How could
we tether our monetary claims, how we keep track of things to something that would last for a long
time either as a nation or as a world? Do you have any speculation on that? Yeah. And this is
challenging and I'm not even sure. So these are where the things get really difficult. So inflation,
as I said, I think is kind of necessary. If you had enough inflation to create a debt jubilee,
the deal is people, as you pointed out, people lose trust in the currency. When I was in Brazil
during their hyperinflation, people lost trust in the currency. So they introduced a new currency,
had two currencies at the same time, one with hyperinflation, one with deflation. And that
actually worked quite well. And it remains, that was done in 1994, and the real remains the most
stable currency or the strongest currency in Latin America. But so there's things, well,
maybe with the way our system currently works, we could inflate away debt and then issue some
kind of insurance or inflation back bond, which would be inflation proof. So you could have two
currencies, one would erode away. And these are speculation. But my main view is that finance
is kind of essential to the way our economy currently works. You need to get money to invest
in things to later generate returns. But the focus on all money being loaned for the profit
motive, which is built into a private banking sector, I think is fundamentally destructive.
We don't need, you know, what we need to invest in is things that have collective benefits, public
goods, the individual doesn't get the benefit society does, like ecological restoration, you
know, regenerative agriculture. So, you know, I think our very powerful tool we could use is,
it's already legal, but public banking solves so many of our problems. And the problem is people
don't understand it well enough. But if you had public banks, then, you know, the public sector
would loan money into existence or give it out as grants, they could adjust interest rates according
to, you know, the societal benefits being generated. You invest in a coal mine, 50% interest,
invest in ecological restoration, negative 10% interest. I mean, you could have a lot of flexibility.
And even then when you're loaning money, even if you're loaning it into existence is interest
bearing debt, the interest gets paid back to the government who then spends it back out,
allowing the debtors to get that money and pay their interest. You don't need continually
generation of more money. I think that's a fascinating idea, granted,
quite speculative. Realistically, how would something like that come to being? Because you
would almost have to have all the research, all the constituency built many years before
some sort of crisis where it would have to be implemented. For instance, you have Democratic
Congress and a Democratic president right now, and they got elected and they took the mantle
from Trump and the Republicans, but they were too busy playing whack-a-mole since
moment one. And it seems like we're going to perpetually be playing whack-a-mole no matter
who wins the elections. So how could something like you just describe to actually come into existence?
Yeah, it's not that difficult. I mean, it's already legal. There's other approaches that would
take major legal changes, but already any state can start its own state bank. I'm pretty sure any
city could start its own city bank or municipal bank. So this is an option that already exists.
It doesn't need to be done at the federal level. It can be led at the state level.
We put forward a proposal to the Vermont State Treasurer to do this, and she was skeptical.
I think the main problem is overcoming people's total lack of understanding of how the banking
system works and how it systematically transfers resources. I mean, if interest-bearing debt,
the rate of return on it exceeds the growth rate of the economy, and the debt exceeds the size of
the economy, I mean, this is, you know, it's a Ponzi scheme for transferring resources to the,
you know, to the financial sector. So we don't need legal changes. We need mental changes. We
need people to be aware of what the possibilities are. Next semester, I'm doing a course part of
which we'll look at outlining what a public bank would look like for Vermont and presenting that to
the new state treasurer since the old one just retired. And a lot of other states are talking
about state banks right now. I think that's awesome. Okay, if you were benevolent dictator and had no
personal status risk or danger from doing so, what would be the one thing you would implement
regarding money or advertising or our system to help our future? So having to do with money,
what I would actually do is essentially create a national bank that functions like a conventional
bank, except that, you know, with the interest rate and everything accruing to the government,
and remove all support for the private banks. So we would, you know, right now we need a
financial sector. When they do stupid things, they know they'll be bailed out. If you took away
the guarantee that they would be bailed out, first of all, they wouldn't do stupid things.
Second of all, people would be much less confident about investing in private banks or putting their
money in private banks, where it's not really backed up versus investing in a public bank,
which is backed by the full liquidity and full government. So I think that alone would switch
from, would move us to a system of public banking, although if the goals of the public bank managers
were exponential growth and profit, it wouldn't make a bit of difference. You know, they would
have to have goals that align with this, you know, a socially just sustainability transition,
which is another thing. Well, on that note, I just think that cities and counties and regions,
states are going to have to try that model and people are going to have to see that it works,
and then it might happen at a larger level. It's just my opinion. Okay, go on. What would you do
generally, not money related if you were benevolent dictator? Perhaps here's what I would do. If I was
going to do one thing, I think perhaps the most powerful tools at our disposal right now for
affecting culture are social media. Unfortunately, social media is entirely driven by the profit
motive. And this means that the algorithms that determine what we see are designed to get us to
spend more and more time looking at advertisements, which means they're promoting consumption. And
what gets us to spend more time is polarizing content, you know, extremist views. So at a time
we need global cooperation, our most powerful corporations are driving consumerism through
polarization, exactly the opposite of what is required. So if I was going to call for one thing,
I would actually call for making all knowledge required for socially just sustainability transition
or make all that knowledge free on the condition that no improvements were patented.
And this creates a knowledge commons that would also include a common control over social media.
Instead of public sector control, that's used too much to manipulate and to push propaganda.
But I look at a common sector as being transnational across the knowledge institutions
like universities. And if they were in control of social media, that was directed at reducing
polarization, reducing consumerism, educating people on the real causes of the problem,
that would begin to change our culture in profound ways. You would be getting advertising saying,
spend more time with your family and friends, you know, take a break from your work. You don't need
a bigger car. You don't need, you know, that it would just be really changing our goals.
Could you imagine if we had advertisements like that, spend time with your family and friends,
don't go to the store and buy a bunch of crap, you don't need a public servants announcement
brought to you from the anti polarization commons. And interestingly, you know, when we first gave
the airwaves to the corporations, it was on the condition that they provide public service
announcements. Then Ronald Reagan said, Nope, we'll actually just give our airwaves away worth
billions and billions of dollars to private corporations to use as they like. And all the
private corporations, the messages, you know, what we see is driven by advertising. And ultimately,
advertising is geared towards making you feel crappy about your life unless you go out and buy
this thing. Yeah. So they're really focused on undermining our quality of life. And we gave the
airwaves away to the private sector so they could undermine our quality of life is one way of looking
at it. I think I gave a presentation to your students maybe six or seven years ago, where I
said the single best invention ever by humans was a golden retriever and the single worst was
marketing and advertising or something to that effect. So on that note, as a college teacher,
Josh, what advice do you give students after learning about all this stuff about money and
climate and our wily coyote moment and everything? I know you struggle with it like I do, but on
our first podcast, I didn't ask you that. And I just wanted to hear what do you generally tell
your kids as you push them out the door at the end of the semester? So first off, I actually
told them that throughout the course, I told them at the beginning and at the end that if what you
learn in an economics course doesn't help you understand reality, it's useless. If it's contradicted
by reality, it's wrong. It's your job to test all the theories you learn in this class against
reality. And I also say that I am far from infallible. The fact I'm standing up in front
of you doesn't make me right. If you took a course in the econ department, you'd be learning
totally different things. So you are the ones who kind of have to decide what's right.
But I also say that to solve the problems we face with overshoot, it's going to be much,
much more difficult than a lot of you hear from the mainstream. It's not going to be technology
stepping in and solving everything. It'll be very, very challenging. But the impacts on your life,
I say one of the things that gives people the most satisfaction in life is cooperating with
friends and community overcoming difficult challenges. And working your endless hours at
some job to buy more crap has very little to increase your benefits so that the sacrifices
we have to make to achieve sustainability are far less than you believe. We're sacrificing our
well-being and the altar of endless growth and consumption. And so it's going to be a huge lift,
but that actual lift of collaborating and working with people to achieve those goals could be the
most fulfilling moments in your whole life. And it will be challenging, but it's doable. And we
have to take that approach that these things can be done. So based on your last three minutes,
that is evidence of why I chose you to be my PhD chairman and why you're one of my best friends
18 years later. So thank you again, Josh, for your time. Our first podcast was about cooperation.
This one was about money. Thanks so much, Josh. All right, good to see you, Nate.
