out of the thousand people, only two people categorized luxury items and things of convenience
as very important. Almost everyone doesn't really care about living a luxury lifestyle. So this is
where we get back to the human behavior thing of comparing ourselves to others based on the cultural
metrics of our current lifetime. We don't need all this stuff to be happy. Part of the reasons
we think we need all this stuff is we're looking around and we're getting this marketing and
advertising that you suck. But if you buy this extra little toy or gadget or Xbox or whatever,
you're going to be cool. So I'm just wondering how much of our problems go away when energy surplus
goes away. But coupled with that, as energy surplus goes away, so does some of our technology,
our complexity, our interconnectedness, and our food supply. So there's that. What do you think,
Josh? So this is going to get me off on a little one of my interests is the relationship between
abundance and cooperation. And this is just kind of anecdotal. But I'm very, very interested in
slime molds, which is a little, you know, it's a little Amoeba Lake organism that in conditions
of abundance, they all go around hunting on their own. And but when things get scarce, that
individual hunting strategy no longer works. And they come together in what's called a slug mass,
and they can send out little pseudopods looking for food sources. And they're so efficient at this
that they've taken like a topographical map of Spain and put food on the map in a proportion to
the population of different cities. And you put one of these slug masses there, and it will
recreate the transportation infrastructure of Spain as this more efficient way of getting food
through cooperation. And that is only that cooperative mechanism is induced entirely
by resource scarcity, leading to this kind of perhaps polyanna ish view that as resources
become scarce, we really come to depend on each other much more and cooperate much more. And it's
interesting that if you look at you were talking about, you know, early cultures, and most of them
that I know of, they, you know, you individuals never starved either the group starved or nobody
starved, you had much more egalitarian distribution. I would say though that you know, you talked about
there were some early groups with resource abundance who did develop I mean, like, you know,
the Northwest Indians in America had slaves and hierarchies pre agriculture. So I think that
plasticity is intense in humans, we can evolve different paths. But I think that the conditions
we face dictate what cultural approaches are likely to be most successful. And I think it's
painfully obvious the conditions we face now do require cooperation at a global scale and massive
reduction in consumption. Economists say that we are inherently insatiable. But the last I looked
at this would got the data was like early 2000s. We spent the equivalent of the GDP of Canada on
advertising convincing people that they're insatiable. If we were insatiable, you wouldn't
need to spend that much to convince us we are getting rid of advertising could be an enormous
play an enormous role in reducing our expectations of, you know, how much we should consume and how
much we should work. It's interesting. I don't have a TV. I gave my TV away in 1999. Five years
before I met you, I have a screen, which I watch Netflix, things and Green Bay Packer games and
things like that. But very infrequently. And when I do, I'm just shocked at the stupidness of current
advertising. And it just makes me really squeamish because I've had 20 years without that advertising.
And now, contrary to when you and I met, but now all the big ad agencies have evolutionary
psychologists, PhDs on staff to, you know, really hone in on what what we need to trigger
these people to buy stuff. Yeah, absolutely. And I mean, the people are so who is adopting
these ideas revolutionary psychology is the the market sector. And, you know, because of the
government, we still have this myth of libertarianism, you know, the government shouldn't intervene in
our lives. Where's the private sector? And I actually think that social media plays one of
the biggest roles in shaping our behaviors and attitudes. You know, the whole goal of social
media, of course, is to get people to see more ads. And as it turns out, the way you get people to
see more ads is staying on land longer is sending them highly polarizing information. So at a time
we need reduced consumption and greater cooperation. The biggest players in the market economy are
focused on polarizing people as a means to get them to see more ads and buy more stuff.
And I really wonder what future generations, how are they're going to look at these people,
if they're going to look at them as the equivalent of Adolf Hitler or something,
you know, when they know the problems we face, and how they're using these brilliant technologies
and amazing knowledge of, you know, human psychology.
