Good morning. Welcome to part four, the final part of this Just Stop Oil series.
I never really intended on calling this Just Stop Oil. I just wanted to highlight
the two parts of the narrative. There's Just Stop Oil and Just Pump Oil, which
kind of gets to the core message of this series, is that there are two very
important but distinct, at least to most people's perception, stories. And where
we ended part three was if we had to a lower emission scenario or a post-growth
scenario, we have to first navigate the four horsemen of the 2020s, which are
financial overshoot. Since that episode came out, the forecast is for the United
States is borrowing $3 billion a day with higher interest rates. We're going to
borrow $1.5 trillion in the second half of this year. This strategy has an
expiration date, and this is not just the United States. The second is also
getting worse. The second horseman is geopolitics war and the real life game
of risk. There are drone attacks now from Ukraine backed by NATO in Russia,
naval ships, etc. The third horseman is the global supply chains and complexity,
and the fourth is the social contract. How do we talk, discuss, and decide things
with our fellow countrymen and women, fellow citizens of the world? That's one
story. The other story is the web of life and the environment that is
downstream from human decisions, behaviors, and economies. There are three
subsets of environmental damage and risk. The first is the metabolism that comes
from the size and scale of the global energy-hungry superorganism, and we
discussed the superorganism dynamic, how our culture optimizes profits, tether to
energy, tether to carbon. This superorganism dynamic predates corporations, it
predates fossil fuels, it predates capitalism. It originated when humans
left hunter-gather lifestyles to store surplus, which created hierarchy and
everything else. Technology, corporations, fossil fuels, capitalism turbocharged this
dynamic, but we are not in control of the metabolism of what's happening. So
that's part of the environmental damage. The second part is everything else,
plastics, endocrine disrupting, chemicals, losing biodiversity, chopping down
forests to grow soybeans, etc. The third category, highly relevant to this
series, is those environmental impacts that are built in the pipeline the
same way that we have warming coming. Even if we stopped carbon today, we have
environmental impacts coming because eventually this debt-fueled turbo
moonshot consuming beyond our means is going to recede, and people are going to
have less money. We're going to approach taking down forests for timber and fuel,
getting bushmeat, which is already happening in poor areas, etc. So there is
an environmental built-in cost as things get worse. So this story, most people
keep these two camps discrete, and the great simplification, what I care about
is both of these, is how do we bend and not break during the fourth horseman of
the 2020s, and how do we protect and midwife the web of life, the ecosystems,
the 10 million other species we share this planet with, who have no say in our
economic decisions and trajectory. So this story is about the intersection of
these two camps, and that's what I'd like to talk about today.
So in discussing what do we do, I would like to discuss what's at the intersection
of these circles, and I have 10 rough categories. In no particular order, as we
head towards an overleveraged precipitous four horseman situation, we're going to
have to use less as the average individual and as the average nation. Certainly some
individuals in some nations may use more, but if we're able to look two steps ahead,
instead of looking at this month's media, this month's news flash, this month's
incentives, this month's stock market prices, if we try to anticipate and look
two steps ahead at what the appropriate technologies will be, what the appropriate
supply chains will be, what sort of energy services will give humans the basic needs
that we are really seeking, transportation, food, health and medical care, shelter,
including heating and cooling, waste capacity. These are the things, if we look two steps ahead
and we stop looking at technology and profits per se, but look at what are the energy services
that can give humans what they need in the future, I think it would lead to different
decisions, planning and maybe structure. That's my first suggestion, think two steps ahead
on all this stuff and make decisions accordingly. Next is to simplify first and beat the rush,
and there's the famous fable of the tortoise and the hare and the hare was out running out ahead
and eventually got too tired and had kind of a debt deflation and the tortoise caught up and
ended up winning. If we imagine that a great simplification to some extent is coming to some
degree and to some timing is coming, those individuals, those communities and those nations
that simplify first and beat the rush in their decisions and their planning might be outcompeted
in the short run and have more pain and heavy lifting and social strife and different challenges,
but being under the gun in those things when the rest of the world is still holding together
might spur creativity, community, invention in ways that would make those places ahead of the
game in the next 10, 20, 30 years. Again, just a framing, do you want to be the tortoise or the
hare in your actions and your thinking? Third category is incentives. I don't think it's
the fault of the fossil fuel companies or the companies, the corporations. This is an emergent
structure that happened over time and the people that work at these organizations are following
the cultural cues that we set in motion a long time ago, but we are pricing this unbelievably
powerful, non-renewable on human time scales input to our economies oil just at the cost of extraction.
So there's too cheap energy and the goals of the system are just to maximize growth.
And so cheap energy, maximize growth, go humans, figure it out. We have self-organized into that
system. So over time we'll somehow need to change the incentives of the system. Humans are incredibly
social. We copy other people. We have optimal foraging dynamics. We have very other regarding
social impulses which have been suppressed from the stories that neoclassical economics
tell us. I think over time we could change the incentives and that's something that we
should be working at at all scales. Number four, we talk about as long as the global growth is
happening, there is Jeven's paradox which is the more efficiency we wring out of the system,
the more excess profits we have to funnel back into a global energy-hungry superorganism.
And this is true. As far as going forward, we could mentally and behaviorally come up with some
sort of a Chinese wall or a superorganism wall between that part of society and we could wall
off our profits or our efficiency gains or our productivity gains and take some portion of them
and direct it towards a system not part of the superorganism. Take the profits from some new
tech invention and put it into local and regional food and supply chains as one example.
It's really hard to have avalanche guns that shrink the system without breaking it but we
can move things out of the system and I don't know how this looks but I think there is a way to
circumvent Jeven's paradox. Don't funnel things back into the market but change the direction
of those profits and those gains. Related to that is the fable of King Midas where everything he
touched turned to gold and he was very happy about that at the beginning but you can't eat gold.
So this concept of transmutation is something that I think applies to this situation.
The metaphor is that we have parsed everything of value in the human system, social capital, human
capital, built capital and natural capital into financial capital. Financial capital gives us
the optionality to turn it into all kinds of things. I think given the forehorsemen, given
the deterioration of the web of life, that it behooves foundations, philanthropy and others
to spend down their digital electronic claims on reality in order to influence reality now.
We can't just wait for those digits to multiply to the year 2050 because a lot of them
are going to have dissipated because we have way too many financial claims
to cover the the biophysical reality that underpin them and this is probably going to get worse.
So I would argue that a spend down strategy for those that can do it makes a lot of sense.
Another idea that is pretty central is the superorganism has kicked the can repeatedly.
Almost 200 years, Thomas Malthus talked about the exponential food demand would outstrip the linear
production of the food. He was wrong because he didn't know about fossil fuels and farming the
earth vertically instead of horizontally. About 50 years, Paul Erlich wrote a book about the
population bomb predicting similar things. He was wrong, at least about that, because we found debt
and we found globalization and we were able to kick the can further. 2009, the global financial
system almost crashed and we switched the monetary creation authority from the commercial banks to
the central banks and have been with temporary too big to fail guarantees ever since. 2020,
we had bazooka stimulus to keep things going. We're running out of technological natural resource
cans to kick. I think the next can to kick is in our minds. We don't need all this stuff
to lead happy and healthy lives. I've started this thing because of my coaches advising me
silent Saturdays to not use the internet or tech on Saturdays and I'm so busy with this
podcast and all my work that I've kind of failed so far. But what I do do is two hours with nothing
and I set my alarm clock and I check things for five minutes that I need to address.
But of the four major neurotransmitters, dopamine, serotonin, oxytocin, endorphins,
we have kind of a one-legged stool where our culture has just created a love affair with dopamine
and I think inner tech, how to change our behaviors as individual humans as part of this
super organism matrix. If 1% of humans or 2% of humans or 5% of humans heal the fractured
existence we have and start to live more in tandem with Earth's cycles, with the natural flows of
the sun, with a human timescale and heal themselves, I think that acts as a kind of foundation for
broader cultural change. So I actually think the next can to kick is in our minds, inner tech.
The thing I care the most about is all the other species and creatures and I've even changed in
my own life like weirdly, a few days ago there's wasps over the office door here and I can't have
wasps stinging people coming into the office. I got stung 15 times last week and I eventually had to
kill them and I apologize ahead of time and I watched them die and I just sat there and reflected on
it. Ten years ago I wouldn't have thought about it but now I reflected on that experience and that
they're a creature too and I just maybe we had to experience this tragedy to kind of come to terms
with what we're doing and what we could do. So maybe that wasn't the best example to lead into
the point I'm about to make but I think we need to deeply, deeply take a stand to protect the
natural world and I think if you think about these three circles of environmental impact,
you can choose to combat the super organism and reduce CO2 but you can also try to help the other
circles and one of the ways to do that is to get very involved locally on ecological restoration,
all kinds of things to protect the soil, the animals, the habitats where you live. I think we need a
bigger ask of people who become aware of this and instead of just bitching at what's going on
to actually take a proactive approach and maybe give some portion of your time, of your money,
set it aside and have it to be Alice's Web of Life Fund or set up a group of a life brigade
in your community where we need to partition off some portion of our own individual wealth
and time and allocate it either directly with your own labor and your own community
on helping wild nature get midwife through what's coming or donate it to others that you come
in contact with that could really make an impact. I hate to keep referencing my friend DJ as an
example but he's a prime example of this. Him and his wife had a similar feeling about nature.
He's the guy at Earth Trust and they decided instead of having children they would reproduce
other species so they have made it their life goal to increase the population of dolphins and
he became a very famous, not not famous, very successful dolphin activist and other things.
There's an essay in our book on reproducing other species but somehow it has to be more than just
adding your email to a list or sending a check to WWF or something like that.
We need to own this in a cohesive way because otherwise we're going to be shifting baselines
all the way to the only animal our kids will see as a squirrel or periodically a cow.
I'm going to have more to say on this but I don't want to get too prescriptive because
what is sacred to each of you may be different than it is to me. It almost certainly is.
As far as community I think we can anticipate what's coming in the next decade and I would implore
especially those of you who are aware of the Four Horsemen to mentally take a step beyond
bullion, bitcoin and beans and ask yourself how can you better contribute to your community,
your family, your community, your area? How can you be a pro-social prepper ahead of what's coming?
How can you be a rock in the river as the water starts rushing faster? Rocks that are small or
unattached or without a foundation are going to tumble downstream and the more larger solid
foundation rocks in the river the more that's going to stop or even redirect the flow of the river.
So consider being such a foundation in your own community and ask yourself how could you
contribute in these coming scenarios? Second to last I think we are going to need
and as evidenced by the comments I get on these podcasts lots of people have really strong identities
and it's understandable that someone is entirely focused on climate or entirely focused on social
justice or entirely focused on the global south. All of these issues are relevant and important
yet we're trying to fly up high enough and look at a system. We're going to need diplomats and
social facilitators that are able to in public settings suppress their own identity and act as
memetic tribe facilitators because the ability to have a bunch of people with different goals,
different objectives, different values but all living in the same place and all forced to be
with each other the ability to have those people have a conversation and begrudgingly or ultimately
agree on something is going to be a massively important skill and so just shouting at the other
tribe who has a different focus than you is the way the default path and I think we need to
be able to have a discourse with people whose focus might be different than our own.
Last but not least there's something in science called the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
which is when you observe some process in science the act of observing it changes it at least on a
small scale. You all subscribe to following along with this conversation on the great simplification
on the franklies are doing something similar with respect to the superorganism and the maximum
power principle is becoming aware that our species is a mindless metabolic energy hungry
superorganism at some threshold is that enough to change the fact that we're a mindless energy
hungry superorganism so I think inoculating more people about the dynamics of how everything fits
together creates the possibility of emergence that none of us can imagine we live in a complicated
system I think I've done a decent job of trying to describe the complicated aspects of how energy
money human behavior the environment fit together but we also live in a complex system and a complex
system we cannot predict what's going to happen and when something happens then that opens a whole
another array and and paths so what we can do is change the initial conditions of that moment
and I think it's an open question on how an emergent response to what's coming could happen
and a subset of that I've integrated a lot of dots on these four episodes and in this podcast
and I'm reasonably confident that I'm telling an accurate story I'm also very confident
that there's a lot I don't know and there's a lot that many of you watching this right now
know things that I've never heard of and so I think we need to keep our minds open to things
that we don't understand and continue to learn and continue to share and this is
just an unbelievable amazing time to be alive and to wrap up the series just stop oil is
the book end to that is just pump oil and we're going to be in this push and pull on environment
versus economic issues for a while so I'm trying to look at the things at the intersection of those
two issues and thank you all for listening and hopefully we can on this journey together figure
some of these things out I don't know the answers but I've spent 20 years thinking about the questions
and how these things fit together and I'm going to go see my folks so there will not be a frankly
next week but I have lots more things to talk about I hope this was at least somewhat helpful
if not a little long-winded thank you all
