Greetings. This is going to be part two of a series on Just Stop Oil. First, some housekeeping.
I've got some amazing podcasts coming up. Kevin Anderson next week, followed by financial
energy commentator, Doomburg, followed by French energy expert Jean-Marc Jean-Covici,
philosopher Ian McGilchrist. Some of these are just fantastic episodes. Click subscribe if you
haven't already, and please look forward to those. Okay, it is with some trepidation that I arrive at
part two in this Just Stop Oil series. After these next two videos, you may subscribe and then hit
unsubscribe. A word of caution or a word of authenticity. I am not in these next two videos
advocating for what we should do. I am trying to observe and describe our situation. It is my
deep belief that describing the constraints of our situation eventually will inform better decisions,
better plans, better preparation, and I don't know if Nora would chastise me for saying this,
but better emergence. Okay, so last week, briefly, we looked at the systemic implications of the
serial refining of oil, and that if we suddenly didn't need gasoline, we would still need roughly
the same amount of oil because of the power and relevance of the middle distillates and the asphalt
bunker fuel, plastic precursors, etc. Today, I'm going to explain why, at least for now, oil is the
economy. And what I'm going to talk about next week is 10 pathways to post-growth economies,
which would use less oil and fossil fuels. So today is going to be a little bit of a long
reflection. I hope I can remember everything. I'm going to start by doing a whirlwind recap
of the importance of energy and particularly oil to our societies, and then I'm going to talk about
10 systemic inferences.
Okay, here we go. Energy is incredibly important in nature. Those organisms that have an energy
surplus of their expense versus the income have evolutionary advantages. This is throughout the
animal kingdom, and it also applies to human systems. There's something called the maximum
power principle, which Howard Odom, the PhD advisor of some of my PhD advisors, called the fourth law
of thermodynamics, which is that organisms and ecosystems in nature self-organize around the
ability to degrade an incoming energy gradient. For instance, trees will grow the correct amount
of leaves to maximize the energy degradation of the sun. One leaf wouldn't be enough,
and a billion leaves would be too many because they would shade. So the maximum power is in
between, and this happens throughout the natural world. What ends up happening is there is a
biological relationship between the mass or the size of an organism or an ecosystem and its energy
throughput or its metabolism. This is called Kleber's law, and the metabolism is roughly the mass to
the three-quarter power. It doesn't matter if you're an insect or a mouse or a blue whale. This rough
biological scaling law applies at all scales. Lo and behold, the same scaling law applies to the
total human system, the global human economy on mass together, where all countries grow their
energy consumption about to the three-quarter power of their size. Okay, energy and humans. We need
energy for absolutely everything in our economies to move, to create, to invent, to refine, to deliver,
to maintain, to repair, to dispose of. Energy is required for everything. There is, in fact,
a 99% correlation between energy and GDP and around 100% correlation between materials and GDP.
So our material, our GDP footprint is very, very tightly linked with more energy and more
material use. If we consider electricity, those places in the world that have no
blackouts or brownouts, but 100% connectivity or very close to it, have the highest GDP per capita.
Once you just have even one or two percent of brownouts or blackouts, your GDP per capita drops
substantially. Access to available energy 24-7 has, so far in our society, been incredibly
correlated with economic success. So many listeners of this program know that we are living in this
couple 300 special period where humans are drawing down ancient carbon. Some might say from the maximum
power standpoint, we are liberating ancient carbon productivity from the earth tens of millions of
times faster than it was sequestered. Tony Barnofsky at Stanford showed that the total
animal biomass has increased 700% in the last 300 years. This isn't because of technology,
it's because we liberated this productivity from under the earth. And most of that increase is
farm animals and humans. But we have seven times the mammalian biomass on the planet now than 300
years ago. So it's not just energy, it's energy combining with machines. So I've said this many
times, the amount of work in a barrel of oil is 11 years of my work. But I can do work two and a
half times more efficient, my muscles to the actual job, than fossil fuels. So you have to
handicap that by 40%. So it works out to around four, four and a half years of human labor is
replaced by a barrel of oil. We use 100 billion barrel of oil equivalents of coal oil and natural
gas per year, which roughly is around 450 billion human worker equivalents. And I've done some
tweaks on the math, it's actually closer to 400 billion. But it could be 100 billion or it could
be a trillion, depending on the boundaries of the analysis. I cannot, even with 1000 other people,
push a fully loaded semi truck over Pikes Peak in Colorado in the middle of winter. But I can
create presentations and spreadsheets and duck houses that that oil might not be able to do.
So we have incredible amounts of machines in the earth, in the human economy. The average American
has 40 devices plugged in 24 seven in their houses, drawing down energy. We are surrounded by machines
and we don't even think about that because they're all powered by pretty cheap energy. But if you
think about the unique period we're living in where we add more and more primary energy to the
global economy every single year, if you look at just the additions every year of coal, oil and
natural gas, not the baseline that we started with, but the additional fossil carbon we're adding to
the economy. In effect, we're adding around 5 billion or 4.7 billion average during the last
decade. Human worker equivalents every single year to the global economy. I suspect that
heterodox economists in the future will look back and say that this addition of more energy every
year actually explains much of Solow's residual, which is the mystery productivity that describes
our wealth. So we are adding machines and the energy to power them on top of the human workers
that exist every year. So for now, oil is the economy. This is a logarithmic chart showing
that the correlation on the bottom between oil consumption per nation and the GDP per nation
is around 0.96R squared. Oil is incredibly special in its energy properties. It's very dense. It's
liquid at room temperatures. It's transportable in pipelines and ships. It's like superhero juice
that we can store in barrels and burn and refine and turn into things when we need them. Finally,
in a review, it's not oil that is the problem with the world economy. It's the energy and
emergence that we self-organize in an economic system that optimizes profits. Profits are linked
to energy and 82% of our energy is fossil carbon. So what ends up happening is, as we grow our
economic system, we add nodes, little new subdivisions and new relationships between
American Indonesia and all different kinds of connections are added to the system. As we add
nodes, the number of connections requiring energy increases by the square of the nodes divided by
two as a rough guess. So if we add 10 new nodes in some division, 10 squared is 100 divided by
two is 50. Well, the right answer is 45. We add 45 new nodes in the system. I'm a new
connections in the system, each of which require energy to maintain and traverse and transport
in the next iteration. So you can extrapolate this to the global economy, which is growing
continuously, creating transportation routes, shipping routes, air routes, Amazon truck routes,
et cetera, all demanding energy. So from this perspective, global human culture is effectively
not that it was anyone's choice, not that anyone wants this to happen. But global human culture
is acting as an energy dissipating structure, where oil, in effect, gasoline and diesel,
are the hemoglobin that's transporting goods and services through the arteries and veins
of a global system. Oil is not the problem. Oil is in service of this energy hungry global
transportation system. Okay, so what are the systemic inferences for this little brief overview
of oil and the economy? First of all, we live in a system with an exponential monetary system
pulling the entire thing forward. We create money with no tether to underlying resources
and with no interest. So there's a compulsion of the entire system to grow. Irrespective of
climate change or technology or efficiency, our economic system will continue to destroy the
earth if it is based on growth as the objective tethered to money, tethered to resources.
As we eat down the high quality low entropy energy and materials, not only will the scale
of the human economy grow, but the percentage of our economy allocated to the energy and
materials sector will also grow, shown here by an oroboros, a snake eating its tail and
getting not only larger, but taking a larger percentage of the earth. You can see this in
the Jeven's Paradox literature and graphics that we do continue to get more efficient every year,
about 1% more efficient in using resources, yet the global consumption of energy increases. Since
1990, we've increased energy efficiency by 36%. And yet globally, we've increased our consumption
by 63%. Next point, we don't look at our situation in terms of systems. We recognize that climate
change is an urgent problem. We recognize that the environment is a problem. So we take little
micro snapshots of this picture and try to remedy them like outlawing natural gas and propane stoves
in New York or outlining long internal combustion cars. Reference last week, that's not going to
directly reduce oil consumption. So the focus on electric vehicles as a response to climate is kind
of like having a personal trainer focus on bicep curls while you have a cancer diagnosis.
Bicep curls are a good thing. They could help the future. Electric cars are cleaner. They use less
energy, but system wide, they are not a response to either climate or energy depletion. Next point,
what about peak oil? Peak oil historically actually has never been about running out of oil. It's
about the phase shift in human economies that happen once we start to lose those additional
fossil workers added to the human system instead of the last 100 years where they've been increasing
every year. This chart shows it's based on Reistat Energy. My friend, Art Berman, made this chart.
It shows, in fact, that peak oil did happen in 2018, at least so far. But we're still growing
the total liquids, but it's not really oil. It's natural gas plant liquids, which have less BTUs
and can be used for plastics and things like that, not directly in cars. But we decline by about a
quarter in the next 30 years. It's not that we're running out of oil. It's we're running out of high
quality affordable oil at scale enough to power this system and its financial claims. So the issue
with peak oil isn't oil collapse. It's financial collapse. The relevance of oil decline as we
continue to paper over our energy claims with more and more money, the world over. And we can't
print energy. We can only extract it faster with more money. So this little inflection here between
the red lines and the yellow, the white line is when all of a sudden we can't extract enough energy
to maintain, particularly oil, to maintain all of the musical chair financial claims on the system.
This is quite relevant on why oil decline is important. Another point is getting back to the
maximum power principle in nature waste is actually evolutionary selected for. We don't run things
purely at 100% efficiency. We don't run things purely at using all the energy at the same time.
We run things right in the middle, which is the part where the maximum amount of work can be done.
This is called the maximum power principle. What that means is that humans and our aggregate system
not only cares about energy and energy efficiency, but time. It's the amount of work that we get done,
which is why many of the technical challenges of autonomous vehicles or lots of electric vehicles
run counter to our own internal primate disposition to get neurotransmitters in the moment.
I want to go see a baseball game and have fun the whole time. I don't want to stop for two hours
and charge my electric car, even though that would be saving energy and being better for the environment.
Until we change the inner tech in our minds on how we get our basket of evolutionary neurotransmitters,
maximum power is going to have a big say on sustainability and our energy use.
Another point. There is a social discourse where we try and integrate climate, equity,
and growth, but the reality is that there is no overlap between these three circles.
We do have net zero and kind of a global wealth transfer convergence from the global north
to the global south is the vocal part of where these three circles overlap.
But if you optimize for one of these things, the other two you can't optimize for. This is a real
problem that we're trying to optimize all three of those things. All three of those things are
really relevant. A lot of people within and between countries, this economic system is not
working for them. They are squeezed out and yet we need the economy to function to allow goods and
services and stability and any carbon additional admissions is counting against our carbon budget
and we're already kind of well past what the sustainable stable levels could be. Now in the
future there could be overlap of these three things. We could have a better climate than the
default. We could have some sort of growth in information and other things not material growth
and we could have basic needs and well-being as a baseline for people. But right now in our current
discourse there's Gutierrez at the UN and many other people are giving lip service to how we
optimize these three things at once and I don't think we can. Another thing and I had someone
look at a draft of this and they're like dude you don't want to say that because you're going to
look like an apologist for the fossil fuel companies. I am certainly not that. I left
Wall Street because I cared about climate change in the environment and for the last 20 years I've
been working on this. I have to observe and describe what I see. There is a meme in the news that
what is happening to climate is the fault of fossil fuel companies. Certainly they like many other
companies obfuscated the facts in order to grow their profits. It is not the fault of the people
at Exxon what is happening. It is the shareholders of Exxon and Google and General Electric and Home
Depot. The shareholders are optimizing profits. Profits do not have an environmental component
in today's day and age. I did a video three years ago for Earth Day. You should watch this section
on why fossil fuel companies are not to blame but effectively the meme is that there's five
trillion dollars of subsidies that go to fossil fuel companies that is bunk. 90% of that are
externalities and of the remaining 10% that are actual subsidies 90% of those are subsidies to poor
people mostly in oil producing countries to give their citizens a break to be able to drive and
do other things. Of the remaining 1% of actual subsidies subsidies to renewable companies are
higher than they are for fossil fuel companies and most of the subsidies to fossil fuel companies
are actually in the form of tax credits. So to speak in terms of the amount of subsidies that
governments give to fossil fuel and oil companies is a rounding error to the 400 billion worker
equivalents that fossil fuels give to us to society. Building on that another point in just
stop oil is a UK activist organization. I realize that they're really not trying to stop oil. What
they're trying to do is stop new oil and gas leases in the UK. Given the backdrop of this video so
far the critical power that is found in a barrel of oil let me talk about the UK. UK used to be one
of the world's leading oil producers shown in this graph the blue bars are the discovery of oil in
the North Sea and various places around the United Kingdom. The red graphic is the production of oil
and we're less than half of the level that we used to be at. In the unshaded blue the tiny little
percentage of about 10 or 15 percent of the total is what's left to produce. So the UK's wealth
and energy is behind it. Not only that but energy aside the UK invests little and saves even less
relative to the other G7 countries and so it's no wonder that we have environmentally aware
leaders in the world like President Biden and the Prime Minister of England that are
environmentally aware and yet they're approving oil and gas leases in the UK in Alaska etc because
our countries depend on that. So there's optionality that comes from this. Right now we can some
countries can print money and with that money they can buy energy like Japan or European Union
but ultimately the wealth of nations is energy and materials. From that vantage point Russia
and Canada are very wealthy nations in the long term and the UK and Japan not so much. So when we
talk about just stopping oil this is part of it. It removes and truncates the optionality of the UK
going forward if they don't have access to this incredibly potent energy source. Building on that
it is quite apparent that we need to reduce emissions relatively quickly to avoid
worse or possibly catastrophic climate impacts. Next week I'm talking to Kevin Anderson about
this. It is obvious truism that the global north has been using more fossil fuels and is responsible
for the majority of the emissions. So from an equity perspective to have the global north reduce
faster and still leaving fossil fuels for the global south makes sense. From a maximum power
standpoint this is the same equivalent as arguing with a forest fire. There is a metabolism
to the system and humans are not going to voluntarily degrow. They're not going to reduce
consumption en masse. I can reduce consumption. Those people listening to this program can reduce
consumption but en masse humans are not going to voluntarily sign up for less especially when
other countries can have more. This is actually more and more I'm thinking that the great simplification
will affect the global north and the remaining fossil carbon that's extractable may be consumed
happily by Indonesia and Pakistan and India and other countries after our mismanaged financial
kind of musical chairs situation. So humans are generally going to get
more pissed off and meaner and hot cold hungry and so on which right now all those negative
emotions are directly held at bay by oil infrastructure and I think only an insignificant
minority of humans will ever voluntarily be guided by abstinence and the other thing that I
should probably do an entire frankly on but there's a sentiment to have a wealth transfer which would
be fair from the global north to the global south it actually cannot happen because in the
process of transferring the wealth the wealth disappears imagine you had a car that was worth
forty thousand dollars and you wanted you wanted to give half of the money to another person you
can't give them the engine or the wheels or something the car exists as a totality this
office where I'm recording this is owned by a landlord we pay him rent I assume he's relatively
wealthy this office might be worth four hundred thousand dollars if there had to be a wealth
transfer in the world he would have to sell this office or some of his other real estate but who
would he sell it to because other people would have to be selling at the same time so the metabolism
of the United States is different than the metabolism of France or Indonesia but the wealth
exists because the metabolism is ongoing and so a wealth transfer other than one or two percent
or something at the margin even if it were voted on cannot physically happen okay um
the other thing is when we're talking about climate and energy and oil we're running out of time
if we look at the Russia Ukraine situation this was a shot across the bow no pun intended of a
biophysical phase shift Russia and Saudi Arabia and Iraq the three of them together control over
50 percent of the global oil exports so I think you can see what's happening with the financial
claims on reality and who controls the oil and the energy and this is going to be a major story
in the coming decade Russia is trying to destroy the dollar hegemony of the world
the US and NATO are trying to destroy Russia I don't know how this is going to manifest but a
lot of the let's extrapolate the last 50 years of technology and growth forward in time I think
are unlikely going to happen my last point in this potentially upsetting and intense frankly
is perhaps the most upsetting and intense point that is the concept of choice there are a lot of
people looking at our current situation whether they're focused on the environmental issues
climate change or global poverty and inequality or polarization or whatever and they're like
we have a choice we have to choose a better future and with respect to the metabolism
and the maximum power principle we don't have a choice we are like individual
cancer cells becoming self-aware of this situation we have the potential for an
emergent response but there is a biophysical unfolding of what's happening where there's a
history of decisions and emergence has created a situation where humans in the global market
economy have outsourced our decision-making to the market the market is now in control of all
global north governments in the world and they're afraid to circumvent the market for fear of some
wily coyote response so the market as an emergent phenomenon of human culture is now exerting
downward causation on the individual components of the super organism you all of you watching this
and me this doesn't mean that things are bleak or that they're over it's that there is not a direct
policy logical response to combat this super organism in its current form
next week i'm going to outline 10 potential pathways that would lead to a post-growth future
and indirectly using less oil and less emissions in the following week
because that also is going to be a bit upsetting and intense the following week i'm going to give
personal advice as opposed to just this scientific logical observation and witness of our global
metabolic situation i'm going to give personal advice on as those pro-social humans aware of
our situation where do we go on route these pathways thank you for paying attention to this
long frankly again i'm not advocating this i'm not happy about this this is the conclusion of the
scientific synthesis that i've spent 20 years putting together and i'm trying to get more
smart caring people to recognize this is where we've come and to inform the path ahead talk to you
next week
