Your very popular book, Donut Economics, highlighted the outer core or the outer ring,
which is the planetary boundaries that we don't want to exceed. And then the inner ring was the
human needs for well-being, the things that we don't want to go below. And in it, talking about
visuals and orthodox economics, you outlined a list of old economic thinking, like 20th century,
and new 21st century economics. And maybe you could either visually or we could put up one of
your graphics, just give a kind of a brief summary of the, I think you had seven points.
Yeah. So first of all, let me say that it was really important to me what I was aiming to do in
that book was to set out ways of thinking, right? It's principles of thinking that will
then be adapted over time between different countries that will be relevant differently in
Malawi or Sweden, but also that'll change over time as suddenly AI appears or as crises hit.
So I wasn't trying to say these are the policies that we should implement, but rather
what are some of the ways of thinking that will equip us to go well? And I'm sure there's many more,
but yeah, here's seven. And I'm just for the fun of it with you, I'm going to see if I can show
them quickly visually. This is going to be kind of like a donut economics circus big tent. So
let's see if I can do this. So seven ways to think. The first one, change the goal. The goal of 20th
century economics was endless growth, right? There we go. Endless growth curve. It was just
implicitly underlying everything that we said we were aiming for, success of the economy. No,
that is not a sufficient statement of what success looks like. And we know that endless
growth actually takes us into a lot of problems. So we need, here we go, the donut that you just
described, a goal that says, leave no one falling short in the hole, but don't overshoot Earth's
limits. Get everybody over social foundation inside the ecological sheet ceiling. We want to
meet the needs of all people within the means of the living planet. It's a goal that brings
together human rights and ecological integrity. And I say, okay, that's the starting point on
day one. Bang, this is where we begin. What kind of economic system will actually take us there?
So number one, change the goal. Two, see the big picture, right? If that's the compass, what's
the map? The map of economics. All mainstream economics courses start with this little diagram,
supply and demand. Now, that's a big act. To put supply and demand on the screen on day one,
it means we put the market at the centre of our vision. It means we make price, the metric of
concern. And everything that falls outside the price contract gets called an externality. That's
a big framing choice of the death of the living world. Oh, it's an environmental externality.
That is not nearly a big enough picture. There are no externalities, as Herman Daley and I
would say, your model's just not big enough. So I drew a diagram. Here's my embedded economy
diagram. Here you go. Let's see if we can show this. So this brings together ecological economics.
It brings together complexity. It brings together feminist economics and common thinking.
The economy is embedded in society, is embedded in the living world. It is a subsystem and utterly
dependent upon it. But also the economy is made up not just of the market in the state, that very
20th century boxing match. The household, the space of unpaid caring work, typically done by women,
and the commons and an Ostrom space where we co-create goods and services of value.
If we start with this big picture of the economy and recognize that all economic activity
has to operate within the planetary boundaries, and we can use these different forms of provisioning,
to me this is just so much a richer starting point for all macroeconomic modelling. So
number two, change, get the big picture. Number three, nurture human nature. Who is humanity?
How do we tell ourselves the story of who we are in this picture? The portrait of humanity in 20th
century economics? This guy. Here we are. He's framed. This is a rational economic man. I decided
to draw him to make him visible. He would be a man standing alone, no dependence. He's got money in
his hand. He's got ego in his heart. He's got a calculator in his head, and he'd have nature at
his feet. He hates work. He loves luxury. He knows the price of everything. The real problem with this
depiction is that the more the students told, oh yes, this model is a sufficient model of us,
actually, we start to mimic him. Students say over time they more value competition and
self-interest over altruism and collaboration because they start to mimic the model. So who
we tell ourselves we are, shapes who we become. Instead of this rational economic man, we need
to recognize we are first the most social of all mammals. We are social or we are adaptable.
We are heuristic. We care about other's opinions. We follow the crowd. We are learning. So we
have to start with the reality of humanity, which we learned from cognitive behavior, psychology,
from sociology, a much richer picture of humanity. Now before, we've got to get savvy with systems.
So instead of assuming the economy is in equilibrium, like that supply and demand curve
showed us, recognize that it's almost probably never going to be there. It's a complex adaptive
system. For this, my favorite shape, little donut, springs into a complex adaptive system of interlinked
dynamics, reinforcing feedback, balancing feedback, tipping points, delay, resilience,
redundancy. That's the world of D'Nelamedo's. So think of it as a complex adaptive system that
will ever be evolving. We can't control it. There's no levers to pull. The best we can hope for is to
steward that system. So how do we want to steward that system? We want to steward it away from
being deeply divisive. We've inherited a divisive economy that captures value and opportunity in
the hands of a few. Here's the rise of the 1%. We need to turn it, steward that system into a much
more distributive economy. There we go. A system that shares value and opportunity with all who
co-create it. How can we make a distributive economy? So from divisive to distributive,
second big dynamic that we can steward in this complex adaptive system is from
linear and degenerative, stick it in the pipe of production, make stuff throw it away.
That's what pushes us over plenary boundaries into a circular or cyclical
regenerative economy where we use resources again and again from more collectively,
carefully, creatively, and slowly. So from degenerative to regenerative, from divisive
to distributive. And then this takes us to the seventh principle, that what is the future of
economic growth? What does the future look like? I mean, kind of coming back to where we began,
the presumption was economies would just keep growing forever. This says, well, maybe actually
we need to be agnostic about growth because what we really want are regenerative economies and
distributive economies. And there might come some point, indeed, they probably have already come to
it, especially in high-income economies where they need to grow up, right? Nothing in nature
succeeds by growing forever. It goes through a growth phase and then it grows up and matures.
What would it mean to create economies that actually mature? Because if we don't do that,
we're going to get that. We're going to induce collapse, which is something very close to your
heart and focus and thoughts, right? So how can we not break? How can we bend? How can we bend
this system so that it actually matures and grows up? So those are the seven ways to think,
and let me just say again, that's just seven. Those are the ones that came really clear and
obvious to me. I bet there's more. And I offer people to keep adding to them.
