Today's guest is Kevin Anderson. Kevin is a professor of energy and climate change at the
universities of Manchester, Uppsala and Bergen in Norway. He's also the co-founder of Climate Uncensored,
which is an educational organization focused on unflinching commentary and assessment on climate.
Sounds like Kevin. He was also the formerly director of the Tindall Center for Climate Change
and he continues to engage widely with governments and remains active doing research in publications
on climate policy, nature and science. Kevin and I talked about the emission and difference
between the global north and the global south, our carbon budget and is there any way to remain
under one and a half degrees Celsius or even two degrees Celsius. Please welcome Kevin Anderson.
Kevin Anderson, welcome to the program. Yes, nice to be with you.
Among the other things we have in common, like caring about climate change and the future of
the biosphere, we also are avid bicyclers and I am exhausted today because I biked 100 miles
this weekend, which for an old overweight guy is pretty good.
Well, I mean cycling 10 miles is still worth doing, but 100 miles is a significant distance.
In over three days, I did 40, 30 and 30 and I'm hurt today, to be honest.
So, I have followed your work over the years. You are a scientist and an eloquent communicator
on the issue, one of the issues of our time, which is climate change and I have a ton of
questions for you. I look forward to this discussion. To be blunt, I'm a little anxious
about this discussion and I'll tell you why is because when I invite guests like you that are
experts in another area than I am, it always seems to be that I learn from you and you learn from me
and the aggregate of our understanding makes our situation seem much more daunting and worse.
And that's probably because most of the time I think the tendency for us as humans, as parents,
as people who value our society is facing the consequences of where we're heading
is very challenging. So, I think we tend to even for ourselves sweeten the pill a little.
And so, I think when we get together and discuss just how things are almost all pointing in the
wrong direction, not everything, but almost all and often accelerating in the wrong direction,
it's hard to draw anything other than an even more depressing conclusion that you start with.
And then, of course, you leave those conversations and you have to live your life day to day.
And so, you start to, again, I think try to find coping strategies, which often is to
sort of slightly adjust the reality that we know from our sort of more cognitive engagement,
if you like. Yeah, that's well stated. That makes any sense. Yeah, so we're going to get into it,
but for those that don't know you or your work, what is your background in climate science and how
has that over years or decades led to your recent work and your conclusions about the state of
the climate system?
Well, unlike a lot of academics, I've got a slightly different background. I left school at 16.
I did my apprenticeship as an engineer in the engine rooms of ships, oil tankers, containers,
ships and so forth, traveling around the world. Later on, I went to university, did an engineering
degree, mechanical engineering, then I went offshore to design off, well, went into the
oil industry to design offshore oil and gas platforms, which I did for quite a lot of years.
And so, I have at least sort of 10 years of practical design engineering experience in mostly
in the petrochemical industry. So, I have the engineering background, but right from being a
kid, I've always been interested in environmental issues. I mean, climate change was not an issue
back in the late 60s and 70s. At least it wasn't something that we voiced commonly,
but it's more discussed about nature and environment and that sort of that way of
thinking of the world. And that certainly influenced me, but I was also very interested
in engineering. Right from being young, my dad worked at a nuclear power station as a mechanic,
as what we call a fitter, and he used to talk about energy and engineering issues,
and we lived by the sea. So, it felt quite nice to combine the navy and engineering.
And right throughout all my time, even on the rigs, I was always very aware of the
environmental challenges we faced and tried to improve things in terms of
capturing the CFCs that we used in our refrigeration systems at a time when those
own issues was a big challenge. It still is to some degree, but much of that has been resolved.
And also recording spills for the old platform and recording my reporting my own company to the
relevant authorities. That was on top of my day job. So, I always had that other sort of
environmental or maybe just fairness conscience that went alongside my work.
And then whilst I was offshore, climate change became a big issue in the press, if you like.
And it seemed to me it was an area I didn't know so much about. So, I went back to university to
the masters looking at climate change and the broader environmental issues and also how we
might resolve the most of the economics, which I was deeply disillusioned by. And I then went on
to do a PhD and then pretty much an academic career since those days. But I think having that
engineering background and particularly one when they've been involved in the energy and petrochemicals
really provides me with a certain set of insights that not all academics actually have.
And I found that very helpful in trying to think about the challenges we face today.
So, I think we're going to jump all over the place with this because I have a lot of questions
for you. Let me start with this. It's all over the news that last week was two consecutive days of
the hottest temperature that we're aware of for the last 100,000 years is what I'm reading in the
media. Could you just expand on that? How do we know that? What are the implications of that?
And why is that relevant? I think that's kind of obvious, but can you unpack this for me?
Yes. How do we know it? Well, we have been measuring temperature around the globe for many,
many years now, going right the way back to even when we were doing it in the days of sailing ships,
for instance, when they would monitor at different parts of the oceans. And we know what types of
thermometers they use so we can replicate those measurements today, the few measurements we had.
But of course, as times progressed, we've got more and more measurements. And now we can both
more precisely and more widely measure temperature around the globe. So we have a very good historical
record which has got better and better as time has gone on because of the instruments we can use
and more importantly, the frequency and the geographical spread of those measurements. And
we are very confident there when we give these temperature figures where we're heading. For me
personally, it's another sort of very bad sign when I hear about some high temperatures somewhere
or whatever that may or levels of rainfall that are way outside the margins. And we're certainly
seeing these things happening more often. But it doesn't trigger anything in me other than one of,
you know, this is exactly what we expected. It's not, oh, well, what a shock. This is what we've
been doing. This is what happens when you think that you can rule physics, when you think that
your ephemeral economics and your short term, ephemeral politics and short term economics can
somehow trump how the atmosphere sees the rise in CO2 molecules and greenhouse gas molecules.
Inevitably, we will start to see these records broken and we'll start to see the implication
and more importantly see the implications of that in how that changes basically all systems
around the planet that are then trying to deal with the significant variation we're seeing now
in temperature and rainfall, in floods, in droughts, in fires and all the other repercussions
of putting huge quantities of energy into the atmosphere. I mean, we're putting unprecedented
quantities of energy into the atmosphere and somehow our politics and economics expects
business as usual. Well, the physics will play out a different story. The physics always trumps
the short term economics. Building on that, and this is one of the things I wanted to talk to you
about, is I think we have three systems and there's an implicit assumption that they're
all overlapping, but they're really not. We have the climate system and you could call it a broader
ecological biogeochemical system, but for simplicity we'll just say the climate system.
We have the socioeconomic system, including geopolitics and elections and power and all
that, and then there's the energy system, coal, oil, natural gas, solar, renewables, geothermal,
and it seems like those three systems actually the overlap of them is this tiny sliver of
the current net zero narrative. But for us to really do something,
those three systems have to have a heavy amount of overlap and they do not right now.
So those listeners of this podcast that are deeply aware of climate change,
probably nothing you say is going to educate them or surprise them,
but a lot of people who are focused on poverty or the energy or biodiversity or other things,
they don't know what you know about climate change and it really feels to me like
a slow motion unfolding of the movie don't look up because these camps of people are not talking
to each other looking at the same map. What are your thoughts on that?
Well, I mean, I would agree with that. I would be slightly sympathetic,
sorry, slightly less sympathetic. In fact, probably go as far as say often quite critical
of the group you started off by saying that we buy into this narrative, we understand the board
sort of framing of the physics and where we're heading. But I think we have, and I've often
used this language or more repeatedly used the language of we're not science deniers,
but we are mitigation deniers where the people that have denied the scale of the challenge
and the implications of that for our system. And in that I very much include the expert group.
That could be the NGOs, it could be this, a lot of the senior people in academia, for instance.
So those people who have often worked on and accept the science are simply unprepared to
accept what the implications of that science mean for modern society. So I think
in some respects that increasingly for the last few years, I felt that that's the group we really
need to get to our own group. Because when we describe the narratives about what needs to be
done, I don't think they in any way align with what our own physics or our own science is telling us.
So we are sweetening the pill, we are deluding not just other people, but the real skill I think
we've successfully managed here is to delude ourselves. We've deluded ourselves that somehow
we can significantly shift business as usual. And in that I think equity is an absolute key
concern. We can shift business as usual to align with what our science says is necessary to deliver
on our political commitments, which in themselves are I think quite weak. But really scratch beneath
the skin of us experts. And I think we're fully aware that that is a delusion,
that the repercussions now of how late we have left things mean that the changes to business
usual are nothing. They don't exist in the current paradigm. We're talking about fundamental
reshaping almost every facet of modern society. And we don't describe it like that because we
don't want it to be like that because we have done remarkably well out of the system. So we don't
really like the idea of thinking about what would be necessary now because it would be very
uncomfortable for us. I kind of agree with that, but I'm not so sure that it's delusion.
This is what I meant by the three different circles. I don't think the socioeconomic circle
is overlapping with the climate system. Because what would we have to do? I mean,
I don't think democracies or capitalism are commensurate with the true changes that would
be needed to happen. I mean, there's no solving climate to avoid the worst and to mitigate
the current trajectory. This is what I meant at the start. I mean, I'm looking at social
systems and energy systems. And I think what would be required to cut our emissions to the levels
that are needed is going to be politically and actually physically impossible given the momentum
of our current energy and metabolic needs. So I struggle with it.
I think your conclusions will turn out to be right. But I don't think necessarily that they
are the right conclusions exactly where we are today. I think we'll continue to choose to fail.
To me, that thin gap, if you like, in the old days, it's a regret paper,
but whatever you'd call it now, there's a small opportunity for driving significant change. And
I would tend to agree with you. I don't think it can be aligned with whatever capitalism is,
the modern structure of our economies. I think that is completely counter to what would be
necessary, anything like what would be necessary. But I'm not so sure about the democracy one.
I think because we don't really have democracy, we have a very partial democracy and that partial
democracy supports the status quo. If we had something that was actually more what most of us
think of democracy in a simplistic form where people have their say, then maybe that could be
aligned. But we don't, of course, have that what we have are highly biased power systems,
which manipulate democracy to serve the benefits of those powers. And so I don't want to privilege
that system with what we might call democracy. I mean, the United States barely has a functioning
democracy. The UK has one is, but it's rapidly trying to break it down. It's some degree the EU
has one. So I think there are different interpretations of what democracy might look like,
and some of it might be much better or less worse than others. But I wouldn't go as far as to say
yet that a properly functioning democracy is incompatible with the scale and the rates of
change that we need. I think the power structures that have abused democratic systems are incompatible
with the changes that we need. And in fact, not only incompatible, they deliberately are trying
to counter the changes. It's not as if it's just coincidentally incompatible. They don't want to
bring about the changes. They like the power systems that we currently have that we benefit from.
I just don't see humans globally in India or China or anywhere voluntarily using less energy,
because that's what this is really about. I just don't see a mechanism for that.
Certainly from 2007 onwards, and in quite a large swathes of the global north,
we have seen significant swathes of our population put up with and sometimes have to endure
actually reductions in material well-being and lower energy consumption. Now, let's be clear.
Of course, our societies, this has very seldom been the case. The wealthy of us have done
remarkably well, and we somehow think that we deserve it. But I think it's not as if society
or many people in population would be completely opposed to less material well-being. That's what's
happened to them under a spurious economic system that has served this other group very well.
If arguments can be made, that society as a whole should change its material use and energy
use idea less than those. For the well-being of those of society's own children, the own future,
and of course, that of its intertwined other species as well, if that argument can be made
without being twisted, then I think you can bring a large swath of the population with us,
because it would not mean for those they would necessarily have to use less energy or less
material. In the end, of course, for most people, it's not even the energy they care about. It's
the services that energy provides. There are lots of ways to provide those services without
using lots of energy. If you are going to use some energy for it, to actually
to have much lower carbon, green or whatever language you want to use, it's more sustainable
energy systems. I don't like the idea of seeing the populace as one mass. In some ways, I think
the sooner we break up some sort of collective view or fellowship around climate change,
the better. We need to drive wedges in there, because those separations exist and have been
deliberately manipulated by those of us who have done very well out of the system.
I would like to almost, to some degree, I realize this language is quite provocative,
I almost want to open up a class warfare. Maybe warfare is not the right language,
but as a metaphor, because I think that that might help us understand where the changes
need to really focus, which is why I think people in positions of power, people in positions of
influence, and I don't just mean in this the billionaires, I often mean people like myself,
like the professors, like the so-called elites in our society, that why we are reluctant to
open up that Pandora's box about equity, because we know if we do, it looks incredibly uncomfortable
for people like, or it will be incredibly uncomfortable for people like us who have done
disproportionately well out of the system over the last 30, 40, 50 years, if not longer.
So I think there is scope for a new narrative with much, much greater appeal than the one
where we see universal we on climate change. Could you unpack that with data and statistics on
who's emitting so much and consuming so much? I assume you have those figures.
Yeah, I've got some of the headline numbers. I mean, they just obscene. Now, what's interesting
about they're not produced by left-wing think tanks. I mean, there's sort of work that came out
in 2015 from Lucas Chunson and Thomas Piketty, which fell in just before Paris about carbon
inequality, just demonstrated then this huge inequality, even within wealthy parts of the
world, between those who are responsible for the lion's share of the missions and those who really
just have no agency to change their missions. They're locked structurally into the systems that
are around them, poor quality housing, rubbish, public transport and so forth, and don't have
the wherewithal to change those things. So they demonstrated that this famous thing that came
out of that was that 50 percent, half of the world's carbon dioxide emissions broadly came
from the activities of just 10 percent of the world's population. And then more recently,
we've seen work from various people, Sivan Kartha, the Stockholm Obama Institute, but I think most
tellingly, from the International Energy Agency was really being a bit of a laggard on many things,
climate-related, slowly changing its tune, not as fast as some people suggest it is, but it's
certainly improving, I think. But nevertheless, earlier this year, I think it was in February,
they had a report out pointing out, and it was reiterating some of the other numbers,
the lifestyles of the top 1 percent of global emitters
produce as much carbon dioxide, sorry, twice as much carbon dioxide as the bottom half of the
world's population. So we are not all in this together in any way, shape or form.
Emissions are dominated by a relative few in our societies, and that includes within wealthy
societies as well. It's not just the difference between poor and wealthy countries, but within
wealthy and, of course, within poor countries, there are huge differences. That gives scope
for rethinking what the policy realm might look like, but the problem is the people
structuring the policy realm, informing the narratives, are almost without exception in
the high emitting group or desperately clamoring to get there. And so we are reluctant to introduce
narratives that will be very uncomfortable for us. But I think the data makes us, the data itself
suggests we need to open up the dialogue much more widely. And I think that there are very much,
in that sense, I think there are much more constructive, progressive, positive narratives
that most people could buy into. But when I say most people, of course, these people typically
are not the ones with their hands so readily on the levers of power. It's not not the structures
that we have, the levers of power for them are probably the ones that we're normally our legal
systems try and stop. This is why I think those three systems are not overlapping,
because I've done a lot of work on complexity and energy systems and the metabolism of our culture.
And I totally agree with you. Well, it's not up for debate that the top 1% are using double the
emissions of the bottom 50%. But how to change that is a Herculean task, because I think
you can't, each of those cultures, each of those states and nations has a built infrastructure
that relies on what it's built. And to change that instantaneously would collapse the entire system,
which then feeds into the nitrogen fertilizer that's created from fossil
fields as feeding Africa, for an example. We have 100 million people that live in
the Southeast United States. If they had a ban on air conditioning or something,
there would be a mass migration. So it's the incremental building of the system that's got us
here. And I think to just draconian lease, even cut 10% would have massive systemic
implications for the global economy. Well, what do you think about that?
Well, firstly, I suppose going from the end of what you're saying more towards the beginning,
I don't know quite what the global economy is. I can see a global North economy and I think
increasingly China has a different interpretation of that, but something quite similar and probably
India moving in that direction. But there are different, certainly the global economies
have importantly different nuances to them, which maybe could be
levered further apart. So you look at the US and then you look at Sweden, at least until the
recent election anyway, you look at Sweden, I think there are significant differences there,
not sufficient differences to solve these problems, but I think ones that could be
levered further apart. So I think that there are economic models that are less out of tune.
They are still all out of tune, as far as I'm aware, with what is necessary, but there are
ones that are more aligned. And generally, those are ones where we see greater levels
of equity or less inequality, but they're still not anywhere near what's necessary.
But I mean, the two examples you use then I think are interesting about feeding Africa,
about fossil fuel produced fertilizer. Well, a huge proportion of the world's fertilizer
is used for putting into generating and producing animal feed. So straight away there, it's not
as if you're saying people have to starve, it might mean that you can still provide the calorie
input for people around the world, but we could do that much, much, much more efficiently. Again,
that's not going to solve all the problems, but it would mean that we could dramatically reduce
the amount of fossil fuel used there and maybe find other alternatives to produce the relevant
nitrogen when they were necessary. And on the other side, I mean, I think it's
it's a really simple assessment I made a few years ago, and it's just a simple sort of
calculation to get a handle on the levels of cuts we can make. If the top 10% of global emitters,
which includes about one third of the people in the OECD, so about the top 10% of global
emitters, reduce their carbon footprint to the level of the average European, which is still
very high, about six tons per person for carbon dioxide at the moment. And the rest of the world,
the other 90% of the world's population, which of course doesn't include two-thirds of the people
in the in the OECD countries, made no changes to their current emissions. That would be a one-third
cut in global CO2. Now, if this was a climate emergency, I think you could do that almost
overnight. Well, it is a climate emergency, but but it's not it's not recognized as a climate
emergency. Yeah, yeah, if we recognize it's a climate, we actually, we rhetorically recognize
it as climate emergency and lots of governments then do absolutely nothing about it. It's even
worse. I mean, rather than just say we don't care, just let's have some honesty. We don't
give a damn about future generations. You know, we only care about, you know, the next five years,
then that's that's an honest position. We can argue with it, but I thought they pretend
that they're concerned about climate change and they, you know, they declare climate
emergencies, then do absolutely nothing. But I just think what I'm saying there is that
you could get a massive cut just by changing lifestyles of a relatively small group. I want
to say changing lifestyles, that means the materials and the way they use things could be
used for other other purposes. So I've started to describe this more recently, and you talk about
the collapse, what would be necessary with a collapse to the global system is a complete
shift. But that's going to happen anyway. So there are no radical, no non radical ways out of
this. We have chosen to leave it so late a third of a century since the first IPCC report. So we've,
you know, we've deliberately failed over those 30 years. In fact, we've not just failed, we've
seen emissions rise by about 60%. So what the system is going to change either because we
have the wherewithal and the intellect and the compassion to do it in some sort of organized
fashion, which will still be very problematic. But we actually try to do it in some way that
we can muddle through that. Or alternatively, we just carry on with the lies and the rhetoric and
will be hit by increasingly severe implications of rising temperatures. And that will mean a
fundamental reshaping of the world anyway, but it won't be done in any organized, compassionate way.
It will be, it will be sort of hell on earth type, everyone out for themselves, mass migration,
collapse of a lot of agriculture systems, other other systems, we see all the sort of the work
that people like Roxton and Tim Lenton others have done on the sort of tipping elements, tipping
points, whatever language you want to use, those things starting to play out as well. I mean,
that's an utter disaster. That will change the current global system. So there is no way, way
out the current global system will change, either we do it in a, as best we can, organize fair
fashion in a timely manner, or just carry on with lies and rhetoric and pass on to our kids,
say, Hank, you sort out the chaotic mess that we've given you. So I don't think there's a way out of
that. It will change one way or the other. And I see the role of people like me to say, well, is
there a way, you know, is option, option A, which I often refer to as like the velvet revolution
rather than the violent revolution, is there a way that's actually trying to open that up as to what
would that have to look like? And how can we do that very rapidly? And I think the issue of equity
does give us a lot more policy space, if you like, than the traditional way of just
bolting on bits of technology and some sort of rubbish financial mechanisms to business as
usual, which is what we've tried for 30 years, and it's fundamentally failed. And so you may be
right, maybe we are going to go to hell in a handcart, and there's nothing we can do. But at the
moment, I don't think you can come to that conclusion. I think there is that thin chance
of us using our intellect for something slightly more worthwhile than we normally do,
and that that could open things up for a rapid change, whether it's rapid enough.
Who knows? But we are guaranteed to fail if we don't try.
Yeah, I have so many thoughts, Kevin, on this. First of all, you and I care about the same things.
But I've approached this from a metabolic standpoint. So I'm calling the climate change
and ocean issues the next 30, 50 years, biggest issue in the world. Next 10 years, I think there
are four more prominent issues. The lack of geopolitical agreement leading to potential
nuclear war this morning, Ukraine blew up another bridge and Russia pulled out of the wheat agreement,
and wheat is up like 5% or 7% today, and it's going to go higher. This also has an equity
implication on the global south, because Russia and Ukraine together are a quarter of the world's
grain exports. The second thing is this financial overshoot is much of the global north is
technically insolvent, and we're printing more money in order to maintain our current
existence. We're borrowing money in order to use more energy today, and that's totally unsustainable.
The third thing is the complexity of our six-continent supply chain,
and the fourth thing is the social contract. I think all those things are going to be more
prominent than climate from a leader government policy perspective. Those of us that care deeply
about the environment want to say, no, let's incorporate this into our decisions. I actually
think your best role and people like you, and I'm about to get to this part of the interview,
is to paint out exactly what one and a half degrees, what two degrees, what two and a half
degrees looks like, because I still think people are imagining this as numbers or temperatures,
and it doesn't emotionally hit as to what this means in the future.
I think overall we're agreeing there, but I think there are some important,
potentially simple, important distinctions. The issues you feel you were discussing and
bringing to the fore for the next 10 years, I think are all symptoms as is climate change
of the economic. I'm not trying to pillory all economics, but this particular economic,
I mean, for one of a better term, I don't particularly warm to the term, the sort of
capitalist model that we have. So they're all symptoms of that, I think in many respects,
and there's also in other respects, they're quite often quite self-reinforcing.
To provide an alternative, but within that, as I say before, I think there are very clear
differences within between nations as to quite how that plays out, and I think that might be
important. I think we can't, again, we mustn't sort of see the whole world as one place, even the
global north, as just having one model. There are sufficiently significant differences, social
contract going back to the 1920s in Sweden, that that is quite different from, well, maybe there
was some similarities, some similarities with Roosevelt's fireside speeches there, but anyway,
certainly they've played out differently over the intervening 100 years. So I think there are
important differences there. The other thing is I'm not sure how appropriate it is for people like
me to be pointing out what this looks like. And also, as I agree completely, if we were going
back to it again, we would not choose temperatures, surely we wouldn't use temperatures. One and a
half degrees centigrade of warming and a chilly day in the peak district in Manchester, near
Manchester, you know, you think about so what, that's what most people not unreasonably think.
And so I don't think that's the best way to communicate these things, but I think we're
locked into it to some degree now, 30 years on, that's the sort of language we've been using.
But to interpret that as to what that means for us, I think that we need a whole suite of other
voices there. The people we trust in society, and I gather social science research demonstrates this,
are typically people who are more local, have similar dialects to us, more sort of colloquial,
they're using, they're discussing things down the road, the names of streets and places that
other people are familiar with. And we often trust those. So local radio in the UK is often
trusted as much more than national radio, because there's a sense of shared space and
empathy and geography and all those other things. So I think we need to be getting these narratives
about what the world might look like, but also, you know, the positive ones and the negative ones,
get those much more from people who are culturally embedded in those societies,
and not using things like CO2 molecules or temperatures, but trying to use a better language
that describes the world in a way that people are more familiar with and understand.
And I mean, I like PowerPoint slides, I like graphs, I like, you know, measuring CO2 molecules
and spreadsheets, but that's not a way to communicate to most people. And people like me
are pretty poor at going beyond that way of thinking. So I think there is real scope for
bringing other people on board to discuss what these futures might look like, and move it away
from the so-called expert field. But that's an engagement with those people. So I know some
some people in the arts are trying to do this in very constructive ways and other ways that
always feel to me slightly more exotic and perhaps less helpful. But there are communities
who are trying to do this now. Yeah, the role of philosophers, thinkers, storytellers, how they
play out in our world, I think are also very important here. But we must make sure that we
don't we don't couch all this in some sort of elitist fashion, that we are going right down to
the, you know, what does it mean for the local boxing club in in Hume,
near where I am in Manchester now, right to this moment, what does it mean for them? So,
you know, they're probably not going to want to listen to a rich white professor coming and
talking about climate change. So I think there are ways we need to get a much richer cultural
dialogue on on the issue of climate change. But I say not just climate change is more the
sort of systemic, the systemic challenges as you rightly pointed out, that many communities,
often some of the poor communities in our society are actually facing today, climate
change being one of those bit plays out in terms of food, and particularly volatility of prices
of food and energy which play out in terms of your well being and health of the children and
all the rest of it. So I so I think there is scope for opening this dialogue up. But unfortunately,
the expert community, people like me are actively there trying to close it down. Because we do not
want to do that because it is too uncomfortable for the norms of our society. And by those norms,
I mean the norms that people like me have become accustomed to and bizarrely tell ourselves and
others that we're worth it. I more meant not charts and graphs per se, but I think the public,
including me at times, think one and a half C, two C, two and a half degrees Celsius over
pre industrial levels. It just seems like this linear story. But the difference between one
and a half and two and a half degrees Celsius, by the way, for the record, I think one and a
half is gone. There's nothing we can do for that and probably two as well. And I am a peak
oiler. I think oil is going to peak and decline now. So by the year 2050, we'll probably have a half to
65% of the world's current oil production and that will change everything. But still,
there's so much momentum built into the system already. And I just I don't think people understand
what a two and a half degrees Celsius world will look like yet. I think the majority of people
not the one we live in today. Yeah. Can you maybe spend a few minutes describing it?
I think the best that we can often say is that it's going to look nothing like the world in
which we live. We modern humans have lived with a very, very stable temperature with very little
variations. So all of modern human time has been spent with very little variation in the global
temperature. In other words, the amount of energy we've gotten into in the atmosphere.
And overnight, literally overnight, we're changing that by a significant margin. And we
call it one and a half degrees or two degrees or whatever. But these small numbers represent
massive shifts, massive increases in the amount of energy we put in the atmosphere,
which means that plays out in terms of all all systems around the world, human system,
agricultural systems, energy systems, water flow and temperature, all of the things that we have
relied on for modern society, literally gets thrown in the air. And we don't know exactly how
they're going to come down. But what we do know is when you when you just, you know, almost clap
systems overnight, then there was a period of significant chaos. Now, okay, in a planetary
level, you know, some clever being may look back in a few million years and think, well, that looks
quite unpleasant that 100,000 years or that 1000 years or that 10,000 years. But it was just a
blip. Well, that blip is the one that we're living through. It's going to be, it's, you know,
these sorts of changes we're seeing are going to be catastrophic at virtually every single level.
And because it's not just the temperature, the sort of work that that is coming out from these,
what I call planetary boundaries, again, it's an expression that's fine for some of us to use,
but not be helpful for others. When you're looking at the other ways that the world has
maintained this very nice stable system, and how come they're all entwined, like how come the
forests absorb any excessive carbon dioxide, until some point they can't do that anymore,
and the temperatures change, and they no longer rain forests, and they now are much more susceptible
to catching fire and becoming sources of emissions. So all the things that have allowed this wonderful
planet to maintain some sort of stability, whereby humans over a very short period of time have
become phenomenally successful, all of that balance is effectively thrown in the air overnight,
literally overnight. So you've, you've gone to work, you've come home in the evening,
you know, two of your kids are dead, one of your parents is missing, the house is on fire,
and there's some flooding down the end of the street. Yeah, it's chaos that's occurred overnight.
Now, at the moment, we're just on the cusp of that. And in some parts of the world, that's
already happening. Let's not be as clear. Climate change is not a threat. It's a reality for many
people around the world today. For others, it's still elements of it are playing out already,
but, but for those of us in more in more sort of geographically insulated places in the world,
and probably slightly wealthier, we're just getting the early signs of it, but we can see it playing
elsewhere. But our science tells us absolutely clearly where we're heading, that and that we
have to do everything we can to avoid it. So there is there is not there is nothing out there that
suggests that living with one and a half, two, two and a half, three, three and a half, four,
wherever those temperatures might might stop, that that is that that is a good place to be.
We know that in the short to medium term, and by that I mean over the next, you know,
any sort of period of our own children's life, our grandchildren's life, our great-grandchildren's
life, over that sort of timeframe, we are locking in sort of horrendous lives for them and for all
other species. So there's nothing positive about that. There is every reason to change what we're
doing today rapidly and very significantly in a much more progressive fashion. I'm not giving you
one by one accounts of exactly what will happen because we don't know exactly what that will be,
simply because we're throwing we're throwing the whole basket in the air and seeing how will it
come down and it will come down chaotically. Now, exactly which way carefully we don't know,
but they're not chaotic. Chaotic things are not things that we can live
satisfactory good quality lives within. In my materials for my college students,
I likened it to the earthquake scale, the logarithmic scale, the Richter scale.
It's not exactly like that, but wherever the temperature ends up stopping 2.5 degrees is
infinitely better for the planet than 2.6 or 2.7.
Absolutely. Every 0.1 is a worth. Yeah. Every 0.1 is worth fighting for, literally.
In that, I don't want us to think, okay, well, 1.6 is not much more than 1.5. Yeah,
we should be doing everything we can to stay nearer to 1.5. As you said, and I think many
people will agree with you. I don't quite agree with you, but I think most people I know in the
climate realm will do that we have no hope of 1.5 and probably we're going to pass two.
If I was to put any probability on it, I'd say we have every reason to be deeply pessimistic,
that we will stay below 1.5 as a long-term temperature rise. I think that also holds
for 2 degrees centigrade, but every reason to be pessimistic doesn't mean to say we're guaranteed.
Again, it's that idea of, is there enough of a sliver of hope in there to try? If we're lucky on
how the climate responds to our emissions and if our policymakers get their heads out of their ass,
more significantly, I think the ones we have are by and large,
inequipped for the system level challenges of the 21st century. It probably means replacing them.
If we could do that in some sort of way relatively quickly, and then I think there are ways we could
probably, if we are lucky on the sensitive climate, what's called climate sensitivity,
we might still hold the 1.5 to 2 degrees centigrade. The evidence suggests we are
unlikely to be lucky on the climate sensitivity, and so the temperature is likely to go way above that.
I'm going to have James Hansen to talk about his new paper once it's through peer review on the
climate sensitivity, because that's quite a scary situation. Let's just focus on 2 degrees.
Let's be clear. I think people like James have made a really important contribution.
His work is almost always very, very valid. I think actually almost that should be his
sort of voice, and that end of the science spectrum should be the one that informs policy,
because the consequences of failure are so utterly, potentially so utterly dire.
I think we should be listening to people like James, and this is how it might turn out. Now,
we could be lucky, and there are other people writing the other end of the science spectrum.
Both are valid from the science, which has elements of uncertainty inevitably in it,
but even the most optimistic interpretation of science doesn't look good. That looks very,
very bad. Then we've got James, which looks really, I mean, it's completely a different
planet, probably moving beyond our solar system in terms of what's happening,
but it's just a different world altogether. I disagree with James Hansen's work at all.
I think it's a really important part of the debate, and from a policy perspective,
that should give a lot more impetus for why we need to do everything we can today.
All the things that we think aren't possible, let's try and do them.
So many ways to go with this. First of all, I want to ask you, let's set one and a half,
because aside for the moment, because that would be a harder ask,
but you think there's still a chance of remaining under two degrees.
Can you explain what we would need to do to, and you can say one and a half if you'd like.
What would we need to do?
Yeah, well, the reason I don't like, I think this can be unhelpful for a communication point
of view, but nevertheless, as an academic who works in this area,
I think I have to hold to what the analysis tells us as my interpretation of it.
But isn't that interesting, Kevin, because you're wearing two hats, right? You are a climate
scientist, but also a communicator for policy, and you're wearing two hats simultaneously,
and you constantly have to switch back and forth between them. It's difficult, isn't it?
Well, actually, that's an interesting, because I use that language in a critical way for a lot of
others. My communication should communicate in an appropriate language, exactly what my analysis
tells me. Sorry, I should not sweeten the pill away from my analysis. So the language I use,
the words I use, they may be the adjectives to describe the numbers, if you like, and they
should be a fair reflection of those numbers, of the analysis. There are lots of colleagues I have
who are particularly senior ones, who what they do is not that they just choose different adjectives.
They will rewrite the story. Their adjectives will not reflect the numbers. They will do any
down the pub having a pint with them or a glass of wine with them. They'll tell you what they'll
use the language that reflects their work. But when they put a microphone in front of them,
put them in some sort of boardroom or somewhere that's being recorded, and they'll spin us,
they'll spin us sort of a cheery, not a cheery yarn, but a challenging but doable within the
current paradigm within the business as usual view of the world. So I think that's two hats,
and that is very dangerous, because one of those hats is effectively dishonest.
So the two hats, I would argue, what you describe for me there is actually, I use a sort of
language in a communication language, which is not just the numbers and the graphs, but that has
to accurately reflect what comes out of the numbers and the graphs. And so going back to this 1.5 and
2, what's important here to me is that from the IPCC, we can intergovernmental and
parallel climate change, they give us a number, what we call a carbon budget. In other words,
how much fossil fuels can we burn and dump the CO2 in the atmosphere and how many other greenhouse
gases mostly from agriculture can be dumped in the atmosphere if you want to stay below
two degrees centigrade? And it gives you a probability. What's a reasonable chance of it
or not a good chance of staying below two? And that's where there's some uncertainty if you like.
So the amount they tell us we can burn for fossil fuels and other greenhouse gases
for a good chance of staying below two degrees centigrade also gives us an outside chance of
staying below 1.5. I would say the analysis in the IPCC innately is very conservative.
Now, that's not a criticism of it. That's the role of the discerning user of the
intergovernmental and parallel climate change data to recognize that the process of bringing
the consensus amongst the scientists often means that it plays a slightly safer role.
It won't push things perhaps as hard as it might do if you talk to the individual separately.
And so I think we have to choose, take the IPCC as the most optimistic interpretation.
So I work from that and say recognizing that it is, in my view, quite a conservative organization
and say that's not criticism. That's a natural function of how it works.
Then I think we have to look at the budgets they have as being the most we can have.
But then that tells us something. That tells us how much energy we can use, how much fossil
fuels we can use. It gives us a timeline from where we are today to when we have to eliminate
all fossil fuels. And that starts to feed into, well, okay, well, how do we do that? What does
that mean? So a timeline for a good chance of staying below 1.5, I can't see how you could
write that future. I don't know how you could do it. Maybe someone else could do it. I couldn't.
Well, I've tried it and I can't. The timeline, in other words, the amount of mission space we have
for a good chance of staying below 2, I could sketch out what that world looks like.
And the headline things are firstly that whether we like it for moral reasons or not,
the equity part is absolutely key. How do you drive the emissions out of the system in the
very near term? And the near term is the most important part because we're dumping the CO2
in the atmosphere at 42 billion tonnes a year at the moment. And then on top of that,
another sort of 15 or so of other greenhouse gases. So the equity part tells you if we're
serious about our commitment, then the wealthy amongst us in society, and that's not just the
billionaires, we will have to have rapid, deep changes to how we live our lives. And that we'll
have to come through. We won't do it through altruistic means. That means that our leaders will
have to put in regulations and policies that drive our emissions down very rapidly.
The repercussions of that are pretty significant. No, we won't be living in large homes. If it's
150 square metres, then that's as big as you'll ever build anything, probably much smaller than
that. If it's a very large house, when it gets sold, it'll be split into two. We won't be having
the big SUVs. They'll be taking away materials used for making trams or wind turbines. So it's
basically moving the productive capacity of our society for furnishing the luxuries of people like
me to actually improving the public infrastructure, decarbonising our public infrastructure.
You look at most of the homes across continental Europe, or indeed in the US, most of the homes
are really inefficient. They're really poor quality in terms of energy use and keeping them
either cool or warm. They are certainly not fit for the 21st century. To make those homes fit for
the 21st century is a massive labour materials job as is improving public transport so that
virtually all travel will be done by public transport and active travel. Now these are
massive infrastructural jobs. I align them with the marshal plan, the reconstruction of Europe
after the Second World War, or the new deal that came out of Roosevelt right back in the 30s.
They're analogies and they fall apart quite quickly, like all analogies, but they give a feel
for the fundamental reshaping of the productive capacity of our society. The simple language
I use is that we have to move from effectively private luxury for the relative few people like
me to private sufficiency for people like me. I can still live a good life, but private sufficiency,
but public luxury for all of us. All of our public transport system works. We all live in
reasonable, comfortable homes, can afford the energy they say for the homes, that we can all
eat reasonable diets, that we have public swimming pools and public parks. Those things that we can
all share, rather than the moment we have this privatised world, we're pretty much what we've
moved towards is relative public squalor for a lot of people and private, absolute private luxury
for a relatively small group of us. So it's a shift in that productive capacity. I think you
can align that with the carbon budget for two degrees centigrade, just about. So that's the
sort of shift I'm talking about. Do I think any of that's likely no? Do I think it's possible yes?
Do I have any sense of how that could come about? Some inklings, but I think it's probably quite
cultural, how we look in the States or Sweden or China, that would be quite different.
So for the last 20 years, Kevin, I don't know how much you know about my work, but I like in
humanity's explosion to a thousand times, our population times, our goods and services in
the last 500 years, on the backs of the carbon pulse, which is that we are emitting this incredibly
potent, using this incredibly potent indistinguishable from magic on human timescales 10 million
times faster than it was sequestered. And all of our economy is based on that. So when you talk
about a carbon pulse, have you ever mentally, I'm sorry, a carbon budget for the global economy,
have you ever likened that to like a cocaine budget? Because if people or nations or
developing nations or insolvent rich nations run out of the energy needed to power what they
recently had, they'll go to debt or crime or war in order to access it. I think that's what we're
facing that sort of a dynamic and what's going on with Russia and Ukraine is just a tiny tip of
the iceberg. So again, I totally agree with the objective of limiting temperature, nothing to
do with us, but to do with the next 1000 years of humans and other creatures, because there's
an equity there too. There's the intergenerational fairness and there's interspecies fairness.
And how many of the 10 million other species we share the planet with have absolutely no say and
are not on a podcast with us discussing this? I share your views there. I mean,
I think that's the way we're heading. I feel my obligation is to ask the question,
is that inevitable? And if it isn't, however slim that chance may be,
how do we discuss, how do we open that up? But I wouldn't disagree with what you're
saying there. You're talking about cycling before. I've just come back from a lecture tour in Ireland,
did a 1000 kilometers cycling in just over six days, talking to different venues, including
the governments and so forth. But one of the most interesting things about it, I was traveling
through significant parts of rural Ireland on smaller roads. And in all the time I was in Ireland,
the only mammals I saw were two seals in some rivers that just come up from where the salmon are.
One dead rabbit, one live rabbit, two dead hedgehogs, one dead badger, one dead fox. That's it.
Why were they dead? 950 kilometers traveling around Ireland, they were dead killed by cars.
And that's it. They are all the mammals that I saw that were not domesticated. I saw
probably thousands of cattle and sheep, quite a few horses, a few dogs,
four live cats, one dead cat. I get a tally of everything with reasonable numbers.
So, I mean, it was so evident in you went to Ireland with a low population density.
We've killed everything. We've killed the natural world.
Yeah. And it seems normal because that last year was kind of similar to that. But maybe when you
and I were boys going in Ireland, that same situation would have been totally different.
Yes. I mean, what we've done in the last 20, 30, 40 years is just devastating to so much
that has made our planet not only successful, but also in my view, a beautiful wonderful place.
There were so few insects as I'm going around Ireland. The hedges were, I'm going to credit
my credit to you, the hedges look quickly quite much more diverse than the UK. Not many trees,
very few insects, almost no butterflies, virtually no mammals, very few birds. I didn't see one bird
of prey. Yeah, it's not as if I'm traveling through an urban environment. I'm traveling through,
well, I go ahead to the US, a small country, but a relatively large piece of land of Ireland
with a relatively low population on it. And I'm still seeing, well, hang on, what's happened?
To the world that it evolved over the 3 billion years. It's gone. We've wiped so much of it out
almost overnight. It's silent spring 60 years later, but not only due to pesticides, but due
to growth, basically. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. I mean, growth and its role in our economic facade
are hugely problematic. And I think it's one that we're going to have to grapple with. Many
people are trying to grapple with it, but the incredibly powerful status quo is unprepared
to have it questioned. That is at the core of this, Kevin, is we can talk about climate and
biodiversity and emissions and net zero and renewable energy and all this. At the end of the day,
all the problems that we face come down to governance. And my work says that there's a
metabolism to the human system, and we are not choosing. We don't have a choice. There is downward
causation from outsourcing the decisions in our world to the market, and the market has
billionaires and politicians enthralled to it. So my question to you is we need to do this for
climate. Who is the we in that case? And what would be a governance structure that could potentially
implement some of the changes that you feel from a climate standpoint are necessary? Because I don't
see would it have to be a global thing, or would it be the UK and the US taking the lead or the
global south? I mean, I just don't see who the we would be in that case. The United Nations?
Yeah. Well, okay.
I'm asking you a lot of very difficult questions, so I realize that.
No, it's fine. I have given some thought to these, but it doesn't mean to say, of course,
that one thing is in a way correct, but I have spent a lot of time ponding over this. I don't think
top down at some global level, it can help and it can hinder and by and large it normally hinders,
but it could help. I think the structures sort of that we have could help. They don't at the moment
really at all. But they can't solve or can't address the scale of the challenges that we're
facing. Even within nations, I think it is a struggle. So I see a leadership, which is what we lack.
I see leadership not as top down, but then I never really have. I see leadership as
and I know friends of mine who or colleagues of mine whose eyes will be rolling when I say this
because they often hear me say they use the same language. It is a messy relationship between bottom
up and top down. Great leaders are not great people. They are people that have listened to other
things around them and they have taken that on board. But the good idea is often they've percolated
through the system and been interpreted and changed and modified as they emerge to the system
from an individual potentially through to a family, to a household, to a sports club,
to a local council, to a company, to whatever they might be in our churches, whatever that might be,
they percolate through the system and they change and they emerge and each time they're modified.
And then it may well be that that informs someone who thinks about how would you play
that out in terms of policy within the council or within the government? And then we get ideas
that have come through the system that inform the policy agenda against that, which is a really
positive thing and recognizing that we all in that sense, we all have a role, at least in places
where we're able to do this, we all have a role to have our voice heard, to change things, to
inform the debate. Of course, there are massive powers rail reality against that. And in that,
I include the status quo, the people who think that many of the climate experts, certainly
the people that sort of dominate a lot of the higher profile events at the big climate jamborees
every year, the cops and so forth. The people at the top of these things are generally part of the
problem, not part of the solution space at all. But there are, so I think there are increasing
numbers of people engaging in the debate, not just the formal NGOs, some of the more informal NGOs
involved now, wider populations are now just talking about these things because they're seeing
some of the effects around them, even when they're not basically talking them in a way that as
academics or it doesn't quite make sense, it's not really talking about things in a way that we
would, well, they're fine, at least they're debating these issues, they're starting to think
about them and experimenting their lives. That in a sense, is a sense for is that a group, a
constituency that's not neatly bounded, that can have some sort of direction pointed or helpful
direction pointed towards it, coalesced if you like. And could that be more powerful than the
relatively small groups that completely dominate the global economy, certainly the global North
economy, which I know more about, but even probably much the global South economy.
I think the jury's out on that, if it housed how rapidly it could shift that balance.
Probably there have been times in history where it have, if we look in someone like the UK,
look at a national level, the rise of the labour movements and from the industrial
revolution, from the depravities of the industrial revolution, started to say, well,
how do we make this a more, how do we make the success of the industrial revolution
very mentally catastrophic in many respects, but the social successes of it, how do you make them
play out more widely in our society? So eventually we get a welfare system, a national health system,
we see those things emerge that start to start to provide some equality in our society, which then
is broken down in probably more recent decades. So I think there is scope for that sort of change
and that dialogue. Again, I'm not saying I think it's likely to be successful,
but I think feeding into it without some overarching view as to quite which direction it will go.
Fitting into it honestly, directly, bluntly, mostly curtlessly, but perhaps not always.
Some people will engage with it physically, they'll put their bodies in front of things,
some people will argue in courts. There are multiple ways where you can engage in these sorts
of debates. As I said, I don't think they'll succeed, but I don't know they will fail,
but I think that's much more where I see this governance change coming from, not some benevolent,
you know, great and good bringing about the changes. I just don't think that's the case.
It didn't happen with the Suffragette movement, it didn't happen with the race movement,
it didn't happen with multiple things throughout the history of modern and global
north societies. They were forced to bring about significant change by groundswell movements in
the end, that included, of course, if you like, the middle classes, it wasn't just if it was all
the very poor people, it was other people engaging as well. That is what we need now on speed, if you
like. That's what I said. It's likely, but I can imagine that it could succeed and some early
signs of it, I think, are actually there. The dialogue we're seeing on climate change
has changed not because of the professors, not because of the great and good,
not because of all the people we would like to think, oh, I've had some contribution,
you know, some mild way we might have done. It's changed because of the voices of civil
society getting up and saying enough is enough. Now, not everyone's saying that, but those voices
have changed the mood music in the last few years and the way that the establishment,
including experts, has not. Yes, but 2023, all-time emissions and all-time highs and
temperatures. So let me ask you this. If imagine this scenario, that there's some
positive movement in the things you just talked about, not huge, but some. Oil peaks,
and we have an end of economic growth, a reduction in complexity, hopefully not a
resurgence of coal around the world, because I think that's a real risk as people become poorer,
is we're going to try to get every scrap of thing to burn as we can. But leaving that aside,
say that emissions peak but decline more gradually than you would like in your two-degree
scenario than you would require in your two-degree scenario. What is the hope
or what is the latest on regenerative agriculture in a way to sequester some of the
built-up emissions or the emissions in the future and or geoengineering? Is there any
solid amount of emissions reductions in those two camps or is that mostly a fantasy?
At this moment, they're fledgling industries or early ideas. So I think to rely on them and
to assume, as virtually all models do in terms of some of the technologies to
succure to the atmosphere, or indeed massive tree planting screams without really thinking
through the implications, that things are played out in every single IPCC scenario about what we
need to do about climate change, including of course all the ones that come from the energy
companies and most governments, I think is deeply problematic and shows this the huge systemic bias
by the expert community towards business as usual. That's not to say that we shouldn't try and pursue
these things and research them, but let's not rely on them because they are in their infancy.
Everyone will tell me about some regenerative agriculture schemes that they've got that some
can be rolled out around the globe. Well, they haven't been played out at scale yet, as far as
I'm aware. I'm less afraid with the agricultural side now, with the energy side. On the energy
side, on the emissions side, these technologies are just literally in the infancy. They're talking
about storing a few thousand tons, maybe the odd million of tons. We're putting out 42 billion
tons every single year and these things would need to be able to do something significant
in almost no time frame. So yes, let's research them. Let's not rely on them in any way, shape,
or form. And it's also worth pointing out in the carbon budgets, in other words,
amount of CO2 we can dump in the atmosphere, fossil fuels we can burn in the IPCC scenarios.
They anyway assume lots of massive, really big improvements in agriculture and other greenhouse
gas emissions and they assume lots of improvements in forestry and so forth. So they're embedded
into the budgets. You can't double count them. So we should not be relying on these sorts of
technologies but that does not mean just dispense them, ignore them and do not use the language.
They're not an insurance policy. You take an insurance policy. If something, unfortunately,
goes wrong, it pays out. In this case, the chances of it paying out to me are incredibly slim. So it
is not an insurance policy and that's the wrong language to use. But it doesn't mean to say that
we shouldn't be putting some funds, some resources aside to try and research these things because
anything else that can help is worth having. But there are plenty of things that we know would
work today. I think you usually use the language of 50% to 60% of oil because of peak oil by 2050.
If that's the case, then we're stuffed. We're blown through any budget through much higher
temperatures. If you drew the IPCC scenarios down to zero from a straight line, from where we are
today, for 50-50 chance of 1.5, we need to be zero emissions by about 2040 to give us a good chance
of staying below 2 degrees centigrade. It would be somewhere near 2055, something like that.
So this idea that we have a whole load of fossil fuels in the system in 2050,
that means we have failed. We have failed. So we have to eliminate fossil fuels much,
much faster than that. That's if you drew a straight line from today. Of course you're not
going to draw a straight line from today. Even if we imagined that our leaders suddenly became
more enlightened and really tried to drive an agenda, you're still talking about quite a sort of
political and technical lag of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 years as you roll over from where we are today.
And that means actually that the emissions to be zero would need to be about 2035 probably
for 1.5, good chance of 1.5, and near about 2050 at the very outside, probably 2045 for 2 degrees.
So yeah, I'm not worried about peak oil because we haven't got any space for it. I don't even
really think it's such anything because we're very good at getting more oil out of each well.
And there's a lot of unconventionals that we're still exploring. And we are very good at reductionist
technologies. Engineers are great at that. It's one of the part of engineering I love.
And we will find new ways to get the fossil fuels out of the ground.
Fortunately, the renewables by and large are far, far cheaper, cleaner. It will easy to implement
and give us more energy independence. They're almost win-win on every category of the renewables,
except for, of course, they only work in terms of climate change if they substitute for the
fossil fuels. And the renewables industry doesn't really quite grasp that, at least a lot of people
don't grasp it yet, that the climate doesn't care about your renewables. It doesn't care about energy
efficiency. It only cares about how much CO2 dumping the atmosphere, which basically means
how much fossil fuels are we burning. Renewables are irrelevant unless they substitute for fossil
fuels. And it's, and the reason they're not substituting, they're adding right now,
isn't because of renewables. It's because the GDP is the goal. I was just going to come back
on the point you made earlier, which touches on that a little bit, about the GDP is the goal.
I think there's another thing, you'll be aware of all the great work from ecological economics,
which is an economics that actually makes some sense and ecological and economics that broadly
works within the physical boundaries of the planet. I mean, everyone must think that economics
does that, but most people who aren't aware necessarily that modern market-based economics
doesn't, doesn't think that we have a round planet and physical limits. It's just has some sort of,
it's some sort of mythical world that they've generated. And just by adding some maths to it,
they made it look, they made it look like it's scientific. I mean, I often refer to sort of
modern economics as little more than astrology with calculus. But ecological economics, which
there are many people work on that. I mean, they, they are providing much more useful insights.
But I also think in economics and our economy, use the word earlier economy,
when my mom was looking after my grandparents, that part of the economy was never factored in.
So there were all these things that are very familiar with, I think, the sort of discussions
around, you know, that particularly often the caring communities and often it's the role of
women, not always often it's the role of women in our society. These things aren't
valued in our society. So we'll, we'll quite happen to measure an accident, a road accident,
or a tank accident, and how that improves GDP by all activity. But we're not going to measure the
things that are hardly looking after your parents or caring for our community in one way or another.
Those sorts of things aren't valued in our economy. And that tells us something again about
how inappropriate GDP is as a measure. And indeed, in fact, the people that came up with GDP
would never have attempted being used in the way it is today. So the current form of economics
is an aberration, really. And it's not something that can be modified, it literally needs to be
buried and we can all pay our respects and then we can get on with something more functional,
like ecological economics, which is a much better way to start to sort of frame our world.
And it's not as if we're starting from scratch there, there's lots of work that's been done
on that over many years. I have my PhD in ecological economics, Kevin.
With the good. Yeah. I liked your reference in the paper to, was it the apes getting their hands
into the cookie jar? So you have read my paper. Okay. So do you think it's necessary for leaders,
including climate scientists, to demonstrate the changes they'd like to see in the world by
lifestyle changes in their own lives as a way of leading by example? I know you have stopped
flying and other things. How do you implement this view in your own life as a climate activist?
And why do you think that's important? Yeah, I don't see myself as a climate activist.
That's not, I think climate activism is really important. I don't see myself as one of them.
And I can unpick that a little bit, but this is a question that is asked all the
times ongoing debate about, does it really matter what individuals do?
Well, my key comment is in terms of emissions, perhaps with a few exceptions out there,
the emissions don't really matter. The point about it is, is that there are a number of things
that we absolutely know clearly from all the psychology research around this, that
if you try to make some changes yourself, even if you're successful or not successful,
you can talk about it with others. People give your arguments a lent credibility. It doesn't
make your arguments more or less valid, but people take more notice of what you have to say.
And this is, I mean, this isn't rocket science. If you go to the doctor and they're smoking away
and they're telling you to stop smoking, you're not going to take as much notice as someone else
said, well, I've managed to give up, it was really hard, but I managed it. And so it's,
from a popular view of this, of course, that's the case, but the research demonstrates that
repeatedly as well. So trying to do things ourselves gives much more credibility to our
arguments. And it also is part of the learning curve about how we do things differently.
What are the problems when you try to install a heat pump? What are the problems when you're in a
really poor community, you're trying to get your street retrofitted from some limited budget
from the council? What are the problems and the challenges there that opening this thing up,
discussing it with our friends and so forth, is experimental. It's changing the 10 of the debate.
It's making us think differently about how to do things with the resources that we have.
And so I think it's absolutely key that we stand up and make, and we will be accused every time
of being hypocrites, some pathetic lowlife out there and there are plenty of them,
we'll make some comment, oh, look, they drove their car there. So it means they don't care about
climate change. So by standing up to be counted to some extent with your own actions, we will be
innate and accused of being hypocrites because of course we are. But we're hypocrites within
the system that still trying to change it. So I still think it is our role, if we think climate
change is that important, to demonstrate it personally, as well as just arguing it for others.
But it isn't as if these are separate things, they're two sides of the same coin. System change
and individual change are two sides of the same coin. Let's also be clear, I don't want to put
pressure on everyone to think they've got to try and drive emissions down personally because for
a lot of people in our society, I'm particularly talking about wealthy societies that I know more
about, wealthy societies collectively, like somewhere like the UK or the US, there are huge
swathes of people in our society who are absolutely struggling day to day. They live in
a rubbish house as often rented them. There's no way they could actually afford to do anything to
make them much more efficient. They've got a rubbish car that they drive to work with because
the public transport system is hopeless. They can't afford an electric car. These people have no
physical financial wherewithal to make dramatic changes to their lives. They still have political
agency and including in the last few years, they've demonstrated in voting for idiots like
Chump, pathological liars like Johnson or a number of other sort of fairly extreme views.
I personally have welcomed their vote, welcomed hearing their voice. I've had a lot of criticism
of my colleagues. I've seen myself as sort of being on what I like to think was the progressive
left, but I think the reason that a lot of these people are voting for these extreme views is because
the progressive left has been either progressive nor left or cared about these communities for
years. The Democrats haven't cared about dust belt. The Labour Party in the UK hasn't cared about
the industrial areas of the UK that have been decimated in the last 20, 30 or 40 years. These
people are now getting their voices heard. Often, these people are the poorer people in our society
who are locked into the system. The role of the rest of us then is to say, well, how do we bring
these people get much better quality lives that are low carbon, where they actually can start to
better fit their homes and have good quality public chance for and prove health, which is good
for their kids, which improves their educational attainment, all of those things. This is for
large swathe society in rich countries. That's why I'm saying, I think there are things we can do
because I think there is a huge swathe of people, people who are voting now, last having their voices
heard, in my view, sadly for the wrong sorts of framings of society. But nevertheless,
they have no voices heard. And I think their voices would be much more supportive of a good
world for them, their communities and their families. And it is the job of those of us
who are in fortunate positions of influence and power and so forth to start to describe those
futures and put in the way with all to change those communities for the better.
So all of this comes together. I think there are ways to change things. And even the fear that I
hear a lot of so-called progressive say is, look, these people are voting for people on the right.
They're not voting. I don't see them voting for anyone on the right. I see them voting against
the establishment. The establishment has not cared about them for years. And not surprisingly,
in the end, they'll vote for any nutter. You put an orangutan up and they'll vote for them.
That's what Trump is or Johnson or people like that. A few people like them. But by and large,
people are voting for them holding their notes because they know that the establishment hasn't
cared. I think that is quite a positive thing from a climate point of view or from a sustainability
point of view because we're talking about a better society for all, a more equal society for all,
a more progressive version of the view of the future. And so I think in this, this changing
how we as individuals who are the high emitters with the physical wherewithal agency and making
the arguments politically gives us much more legitimacy when we talk to these other communities
and try and get them to come on board with us. Rather than they'll just turn around and say,
well, look, why don't you do these things then? Quite recently, they say that. I hear that all
the time. What about you? You're not making these changes. So I think there is something in that.
Those of us who want to bring about progressive change to demonstrate that we recognize it's
important and applies to us as much as it applies to other people. I want to segue into
my closing questions because I promised you that we would finish in time for you to go see your
PhD student graduate. Do you have any personal advice to the watchers of this video, the listeners
of this program who are tuning in because they're aware of the climate risk, the global upheaval
and anxiety with many of the things we discuss or what you'd call the poly crisis? Do you have
personal advice to the listeners of this show? The most obvious thing would be just to pinch
a phrase from Greta is that hope comes out of action. So acting is absolutely key here. And
now what exactly your action is, I think that will depend on your skills, your interests,
what you're comfortable doing, and sometimes what you're not comfortable doing. But identify
things that you can do to try and drive change. Don't always look for an immediate response or
success from that, the process of actually driving change. The system is far too emergent to see a
one for one. You put some effort in, you see an output. That's not how complex as you well know,
it's not how complex systems work. So hope, if it resides anywhere, it resides in action trying
to do something. The other thing I would say that we, all of us have agency. And my point about this
is often to say identify the areas of our own life where there's a high carbon or
unsustainable activity and try and change them. And I say, I'm not particularly interested in
the emissions, but, and it's not easy for some because they don't have the opportunity, but
try and change them. But then the change is less important. The point then is talk about it. We
have engage in a friendly, constructive or vociferous way with other people around you
to start that dialogue and debate, engage with your councils, with your churches, with your
schools, with your places of work, your companies and so forth, and also engage at the national
policy level. And we can do that much more easily than we used to be able to because I think social
media has opened up a media space for far more people to engage. Unfortunately, it's at the moment
it's been significantly dominated by a particular groups of people often, not all of them, but
some of them are quite unpleasant. But I think that it is there for the rest of us to engage with
and the more positive people engage and try to engage constructively and courteously. And that
does mean to put your fingers in the ears to some of the nasty comments that are made. I think that
can really help and be supportive of each other. Even if we don't agree with each other, be supportive
of us, be supportive of others who are trying to get their voices heard in a cogent, thoughtful,
compassionate, decent way. So we support each other in trying to change the framing of our
society. And in all of that, I think hope emerges from all those things. Now, whether we succeed
or not, we don't know. And this is my sort of thing on this. We don't know whether we'll succeed.
The chances don't look very good, but that we absolutely can guarantee we won't succeed if
we don't try. So trying action is really what we need. And quite what colors the action I think
is personal to you, your community, your local circumstances. So I don't think it's appropriate
for someone like me to say, you should do this or you should do that.
And how would you expand that advice to a young human 15 to 25 years old listening to this,
understanding the difficulty of the climate and economic and other scenarios? What sort
of advice do you have for young humans?
Well, as an older human, but it doesn't feel very long ago that I was a young human. I think
I would say engaging the system in a how the systems are around you is constructively pushing
as hard as you can, but also push against the system often is necessary. And the voices of
young and the younger people are the energy that they have. And the dynamism they have in their
imagination, as we get older, we get more and more locked into status quo, we like to call it
wisdom and all that sort of language we use patronizing sort of language we use as older
people. Well, actually, what we need is more innovative ways of thinking. And that is that is
on average, that is that resides more in the younger generation. So stand up for what you
think is important, make good strong codes and arguments where you reasonably can. And that may
sometimes mean that you have to put your body in the line of things. So certainly in democracies,
I think we have that's the one good thing we still have. I know some of our governments are
trying to curtail that with laws and so forth. But by and large, we are families and us and our
families and friends aren't killed if we stand up physically. I think and I think the what we've
seen with some of the younger people, and then other generations joining them in some of the
protest movements has been really important. And successful social change has required protest
throughout history. And history tells us that it will be an absolutely key part. It's not the only
part but absolute key part of being about rapid social change to make a fairer, low carbon and
sustainable, progressive world to live in. And that would be my recommendation for a lot of
younger people. But more importantly, I say, we want to hear people of my generation need to hear
your recommendations. Because what we've tried has failed. And that I think sometimes you have to
stop and reflect on that we have failed for 30 years. So we need other voices. And I'm very
happy to hear from others as to what they think we should be doing. Tomorrow I have a this week's
podcast will be a 28 year old Pakistani man who came across my podcast and he's he shares his
opinions is quite interesting. Final question, Kevin, if you could wave a magic wand and there
was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you would do to improve human
and planetary futures? If it was the one that was a characteristic I could instill in everyone
it would be courage and integrity. Or honest, it was every language you want to use. But
oddly enough, yeah, I think they're so important and undervalued virtues.
Yeah, courage and integrity, or maybe you should go the other way and integrity and
courage perhaps that's a better way to put it. I think I don't have to agree with everyone but
people standing up for what they believe and have thought through which is what I see is
integrity and honesty and then having the courage to stand up for it. And if you were to add a
third one to that would be some humility. I totally agree with that. And from what I know
of you and this conversation, you are exhibiting both courage and integrity. Well, thanks very
much. Others can make that judgment. I'm sure many other people would disagree with you. But
well, like I said at the beginning of this conversation,
I'm in a worse mood because of this because I don't see us going to that draconian. I think
carbon is the economy at this point. So my conclusion is that we are not likely to stay
below two or even two and a half unless some black swan occurs. But I agree with you we have
to try to save the wonder and the functioning of the natural ecosystems of this world because at
the end of the day, you and I will be and everyone listening to this show 100 years from now will
no longer be here but Earth and its ecosystems and its species and denizens and web of life
still will be. And I think that is the prize. That is the goal. But our economic system doesn't
account for that now. We agree. They're the other sides that what we do without ever knowing it
might end up in that black swan event. There's emergence. And that's why I'm doing this podcast,
Kevin, is we don't know what's going to happen. And we have to pass the baton of understanding
and caring for our situation to more humans, full stop and hope that something unique and good
happens away from the default trajectory. That's my work. That's your work, I think.
Yes, yes, certainly. Yeah. Anyway, it's very nice to engage with you and thanks for the questions.
I always like to find this process is quite cathartic. So it's good to maybe I'll go away
now and think a lot more about things in a slightly different way. So thank you.
To be continued, Kevin. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
