You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins. That's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy, the environment, and our society.
Together with scientists, experts, and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's-eye view of how everything fits together,
where we go from here and what we can do about it as a society and as individuals.
Over 20 years ago, I left Wall Street in order to take a deep dive into understanding energy, ecology, and macro-human and planetary systems.
As was the case then and now, the financial community was energy blind.
Sure, investors know that oil and gas and electricity are very important, but they rarely recognize that the entire arena of financial markers is fully dependent on inexpensive and growing energy supplies.
This is not a financial podcast, yet finance, since I've been alive at least, is both driving and steering our cultural car,
which happens to be built and powered by non-renewable energy and materials.
With me today, to take a bird's-eye view of the global energy financial situation, is legendary financial icon, Kirill Sokoloff.
Kirill is an investor, a researcher, and a longtime editor of the highly respected publication, 13D, What I Learned This Week.
For 50 years, he has predicted major inflection points in energy and commodity prices correctly, including 1980, 2002, and 2008,
and recently stating that sanctions on Russia will result in economic suicide for Europe.
Kirill is also an active philanthropist in the areas of healthcare, education, and the scaling of human consciousness.
I invited Kirill on this show because I wanted to understand why the financial community is so complacent about peak oil,
the relationship between increasing energy scale and growth, and predictions about the future.
This is quite a different and information-packed episode. Please welcome Kirill Sokoloff.
Good morning, Kirill. Good to see you again.
Great to be here. Thanks for inviting me, Nate.
Thanks so much for being on the show.
So you are an icon in the financial world, a frequent feature in financial media.
But the reason I've invited you here is, to my knowledge, you're one of the few central nodes in the realm of finance
who has consistently understood the critical role of energy in the functioning of our economies.
Before we get into predictions and the world situation, can you share how your recognition of the importance of energy came about?
Well, I had been a major disinflationist. I wrote a book in 1982 called Disinflation Ending.
Are you ready? Nobody ever read it. I ran into somebody once who claimed that they did.
I think I have 6,000 coffees somewhere in storage.
So I've been very bearish on commodities for 20 years.
And then I read this book called Hubbers Peak in January 2002, and it just really, really resonated with me.
And I became the largest proponent of peak oil in the world because I believe in it.
We rode oil all the way up from 20 to 143, 50 June of 2008 where I got out.
And the only reason I was able to do that was because I believe in peak oil.
Because there were many opportunities to sell. I mean, gains we had were just astronomical.
And the problem with that peak in 2008, which is 147 actually with the top, was that the public was not in the market.
Every major secular peak of every major asset from 1929 to 1969, to 1979 in commodities, to 1989 in Japan, to 1999 IT, 2008.
Recent meme bubble bursting. Public has always been deeply in.
And the doubling of oil prices between 2007 and 2008 was really commercials just covering their shorts.
The public was not there. So there was a flaw in that top that always troubled me.
I wonder how you came across my work and I came across who you were when I ran the oil drum,
when we were trying to write and educate the world about the fact that there will eventually be a peaking in world oil production.
And society is going to have to prepare since oil kind of is the economy.
But I wonder now, 15 years later, we are past or approaching peak oil and yet peak oil is a dismissed meme kind of to most people.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, it's been a terrible shame because of the volatility in oil and going up and then going sharply down.
And then, of course, the shale revolution, people came to believe that there was no such thing as peak oil.
And of course, the irony is that just at the very moment that you have it, that's what everybody believes.
And this is the nature of markets.
And I call Mr. Market a cynic.
And to elaborate, here you have ESG has forced the liquidation of fossil fuels, which in turn has caused underinvestment in fossil fuels just at the moment when investment is needed most.
So Mr. Market is one real cynic.
I think George Soros used to call that concept reflexivity, the interaction between human behavior and the markets and that they get inverse at the exact wrong moment.
But it seems like, and I know you've followed some of my work on this, that our culture is energy blind, especially in your industry.
Why do you think, I mean, there are a lot of people in finance that, of course, understand commodities and the importance of natural gas and oil.
But I don't think they understand that finance, while it might be driving the world economy, the car of the world economy, that the car is made of materials and powered by energy.
Can you offer your wisdom on the disconnect between a financial worldview and an energy-informed financial worldview?
Well, of course, we had 20 years of dissipation in the 80s and 90s.
And then we had the decade in the 2000s, which was very deflationary.
And financial community investors essentially believe that they're making history.
They're not interested in the lessons of history and they're not interested in cycles because they're making history and the laws of the past don't apply to them.
And I think the fact that the shale revolution arrived, even though it was extremely flawed and 500 billion was lost, and now you have a whole bunch of new management in there who understand that you have to have better capital allocation.
And Wall Street isn't going to give them the money anyway.
This is still not penetrated.
And this is the most important question, I think, in the world today, at least from an economic standpoint.
If we're at peak oil, this means OPEC Plus has never had more power.
So it's the most important thing to understand in the world, and it's not understood at all.
And there is an illusion how quickly the green energy revolution can take place.
And back in 2002, when we turned bullish on oil, I tasked one of my colleagues to become the world's expert, if he could, on what we call then alternative energy.
And we created a portfolio of solar stocks and wind stocks.
So I'm a big believer in alternative energy, but there is so little truth in this world.
And the illusions are so massive.
It's extremely dangerous at a time like this.
We need people telling the truth, who search for truth, and to understand what the truth is.
Well, that is what I'm trying to do, and one of the reasons I'm talking to you right now.
So let's get back to this dichotomy between energy and money and technology.
So you have long predicted a deflationary pulse due to changes in technology.
But at the same time, you read Hubbard's Peak and you understand that decline rates of the most important input to our economy accelerate.
Right now, the global decline rate with no new drilling is over 6%.
So can you unpack the relationship between tech productivity, which is deflationary, and versus your awareness of energy depletion, which would be inflationary?
Well, let's go back and look at how I first got involved in disruption.
So it was 1988, and I read a small paragraph which said it took 70 years to put a landline system into the UK, 50 into the US, 30 into Japan, 20 into South Korea.
But you could create a mobile phone system in a year and a half.
And the light bulbs went off, and my head understood that all the emerging world would soon have access to all of human knowledge.
And with that became the understanding that the world would be digitized.
And with that understanding, it became clear that every industry would be disrupted, and it would be very deflationary.
So in 1995, I tasked one of my colleagues to be studying this, and I don't think we've missed any of the major disruptions.
So that's very deflationary.
On the other side, of course, there are all these inflationary forces that are appearing for the first time as sort of a combination of factors.
So we have peak oil, higher energy prices.
If you look back to 1973, all of the major inflations were oil induced.
1973, 1974, the Shah of Iran in 1978, the 2000s and so on.
And then you have a labor issue, which I know we're going to get into later, where wealth distribution, the cycle of wealth distribution is inflationary.
But we really have now is a massive underinvestment in production and what makes things go and ignorance of how important they are.
So the world is about to get a lesson on this.
And if you look at the world from a biophysical standpoint, if we are underinvesting in fossil fuels and in alternative technology, all of that would require pulling energy and materials that are currently allocated to other sectors of society.
So can the market solve this transition by optimizing on short-term profits?
Because the scale of energy and material, minerals that we need for this transition, I don't know how the market can allocate that.
Do you have thoughts on that?
Well, the numbers are so astronomical.
The number that I use to simplify is the 1.4 billion vehicles in the world and 95% of them use liquid fuel, meaning petroleum.
And 60, 65% of petroleum demand is transportation.
And there are 16 million electric vehicles in the world.
Now, there are forecasts coming out that there could be as many as 60% of new auto sales will be electric vehicles in 2030.
And I just think that's a dream because what goes into the battery, which requires cobalt, lithium, nickel and copper, isn't going to be there.
So we happen to like that sector because it's one of the great bottlenecks in history.
Copper is the one we have to like the best because it's the most essential.
Maybe you could find with some genes that they're finding replacement for lithium or cobalt, but you can't find replacement for copper.
And so, you know, it's just the irony that the world came to believe that technology and the markets can solve all problems.
And I think that that's generally true, but the problem is that it just takes so much longer in this case than people expect.
And that's where the shock factor is going to come.
And Europe is about to get that shock factor as a thing that suicides for the third time in 100 years.
Well, let's talk about that.
I am quite worried about Europe, but let me first get your thoughts on that.
Unpack what you just stated.
What do you expect to happen in Europe?
Well, when you sanction the world's largest oil exporter in a time of peak oil and when German industry has used low-cost natural gas from Russia to be competitive,
remember the German industry is very uncompetitive.
It's very high labor cost.
And then you take away that gas and you're replacing it with market Christ, LNG, three to five times higher.
You will no longer be competitive.
And there are talks about the fact that German breweries will have to close.
Well, you tell a German he can't have his local beer and there's going to be massive social unrest.
And of course, we're all looking at the fall and the winter.
I live part of the year in Lukano, which is in the Italian part of Switzerland.
And of course, Italy has a massive drought just like France does with its nuclear reactors having to shut down.
So it's a perfect storm in Europe.
The Rhine, there isn't enough water for transport.
So Europe is in a total disaster.
It is economic suicide.
And I was speaking at a conference.
It's a small luncheon, I should say, with the business investors in Berlin in early June.
And with me was a gentleman who had been chair of the German Chief of Staff of the Army.
And he was also the first representative by Germany to NATO.
And we got into a conversation of what was going to happen.
And yes, my opinion, and I said, it really comes down to very simply who would blink first.
And I do not think that Putin will.
And if you study Russian history, World War II and the invasion of the Napoleon, the Russians are tough and they're not going to give in.
So Europe is going to have to change.
But the pain that will happen before that is just really, really difficult to watch.
So as of this morning, this is recorded August 17, the forward price for electricity in Germany is 500 euros per megawatt,
which is pretty much 10 times what it was a couple years ago.
So something that I worry about geopolitically is you're right,
the average German is not going to tolerate the breweries shutting down.
And at some point they may have to team up with Russia and say, OK, we need your energy.
What do we do?
And it almost would isolate the UK and the US because Europe has no other option than to get Russian energy.
Do you think that's plausible?
I do.
And of course, Europe has a long relationship with Russia.
I mean, going back hundreds, if not thousands of years.
Another point I would make is that the real fight is China and US for global supremacy.
And China also is the largest producer and exporter of anything to do with alternative energy, green energy.
So if the US decides to sanction China for whatever reason and ask the EU to join, the EU cannot give up Russia and give up China.
So there's a lot of splintering already going on in Europe.
Of course, we have the fall of Draghi.
Macron is going to have a government of cohabitation with the left and the right,
both of whom have said in the past that they're pro-Russia and anti-Europe.
And of course, Boris Johnson has fallen.
And of course, there's going to be much more political unrest as inflation stays high in Europe and energy unavailability.
I mean, you could only imagine a kid at home doing his homework and cold with gloves on and wrapped in a winter coat.
How long would people put up with that?
Several thoughts.
Number one is it seems that it took the Russian incursion into Ukraine to remove some of society's energy blinders.
So at least we're somewhat becoming aware of how critical energy is.
My second thought is human history is rife with examples of when we ran into resource constraints.
There were military conflicts.
I think peak oil and the limits of continued material growth could create a phase shift in human geopolitics.
I mean, how do we make it through the coming decades without a big war, Kirill?
I think the chances are very slim and I'm very worried about it.
And I have studied very intensely in my whole adult life, the causes of World War I.
There's probably been no subject that's been written about war and obviously because of the destruction and Europe at the peak of its civilization entered into suicide.
And I've read a couple of books recently that are causing me great concern.
And it was once the process began, it couldn't be reversed.
Mobilization was expensive and it took a lot of time.
The Germans could mobilize in a day, but the Russians could only mobilize in nine months.
The Germans had a mobilization advantage.
And this is where we are today.
I see no de-escalation anywhere.
I just see escalation.
Pelosi going to Taiwan, Republican congressman adding to that.
And there is no one out there who's trying to de-escalate this and it takes on a life of its own.
And you're absolutely right.
Japan went to war because America cut off its access to oil in 1941.
And when it comes to state security, and this is the whole theme of John Mersheim or great power politics,
that the state becomes very aggressive in its own security.
Could the conversation we're having even be outwardly spoken in a G7 meeting or such?
It's almost like you cannot speak the quiet part out loud because we've had this oil.
With the exception of 2009 and 2020 and the two periods you mentioned in the 1970s,
we have had a continued growth in global energy scale.
And that has allowed all countries to participate in economic growth.
If there's a phase shift where growth may not be possible or if it is possible, it's from a lower level.
What does the global cooperation look like and what could it look like in a benign scenario?
I would say two things.
You know, Vaclav Smil has written this wonderful book, The Way the World Works,
and he makes the point that it's ammonia, meaning fertilizer,
that was responsible for four or five billion people on earth.
And without that, there wouldn't be enough food.
So if you're talking about a curtailment of natural gas and ammonia and fertilizer,
you've got some really, really serious problems coming.
I'm tremendously worried about social unrest, famine, mass migration as a result of all this.
Technically, I think if everything else were to hold together,
which of course my colleague Joseph Tainter is not so much worried about a drop in 5% energy or something like that,
but the impact on complexity from such a drop.
But I think we actually do have a lot of natural gas in the world.
It's oil that will be depleting more rapidly,
and if oil is the thing that upsets the apple cart, maybe we won't have access to that natural gas.
So I agree with you. I'm quite worried about that.
Well, one of my colleagues has a farm in Scotland,
and there was a town meeting in the spring that all the farmers showed up to,
and they all were citing how expensive everything had become.
And many of them said, it's too expensive.
I'm not going to use fertilizer this year, or I'm going to let the lands life follow.
And if you try to cut off Russian gas, even if it's just only for a couple of years,
these are the problems you're going to get into.
And natural gas was in a massive bear market for a long time, and now it's in a bull market.
And I think you and I would probably agree that natural gas should sell on a BTU basis with oil.
And last time I looked, that would put it at about $20 per MCF versus $8 or $9 now.
So we're talking about significant increase in natural gas,
and that's going to make the farmer, unless crop prices go up massively, unable to use fertilizer.
When we talk about the future and what might work, I think there's always two questions.
There's what sort of scale and technology and energy and material footprint could we have into the future?
But then a more important question is how do we get there from here today?
And that's the question I don't have an answer to,
because we have generated all these financial claims on our underpinning biophysical reality.
And when we have an economic problem, we create more money to solve the problem
rather than innovate or tighten our belts.
And so our monetary claims on reality are accelerating,
where our underlying biophysical balance sheet is declining.
How do you see that unfolding in the coming decade or so?
Well, this is one of the weaknesses of democracy is that you give the people what they ask for,
if they're in trouble because of rising prices, then you give them subsidies.
And the subsidies, of course, keeps demand going.
And I said for years and years, the best thing to do would be to lock in the price of oil at $200 a barrel
and make sure it never went down so that people had incentives to convert to alternative energy
and that there would be plenty of incentives to find as much as you could.
But of course, that is what happened.
I didn't know that you said that.
I think that's a great idea.
I think we missed the window for doing that, though, because if we did it today,
it would be upset the apple cart of the financial system.
But if we did, I mean, for all intents and purposes,
oil at $100 a barrel is still an unbelievable gift for what it provides to society,
even at $1,000 a barrel.
So if we could give the signals that oil will be more scarce and expensive in the future
so that innovators and inventors and technology could design some way of humans navigating coming decades,
I think that would be a huge boost.
But I don't see politicians allowing that to happen, like you said.
And who knows election every two years and politicians don't get reelected by telling the truth.
Politicians don't get reelected by looking at the future and having scenario planning,
which is one of my great beasts.
If I were in a position, I would have 50, pick 100, maybe to be 50, maybe 25,
which would consider the major risks.
The pandemic was one for us.
We wrote about 20 years morning.
Peak oil, obviously, is a second.
Water, flooding, I mean, hurricane damage, the whole Florida being hit.
So what you do is you have scenario planning and you have a plan of action,
if something like that were to happen.
And then as soon as it happens, you step into action.
So in January 2020, the plan of action would have been,
okay, there's a pandemic, what do we do?
First thing we've got to do is to vaccinate the world.
Because if you don't vaccinate the world,
then the variants will come from some place that's not vaccinated
and this will go on and on and on.
But that wasn't what was done.
So we're now suffering with these variants
and probably will for the foreseeable future.
And we'll also suffer from long COVID,
which as you pointed out to me at the conference,
people are very worried about declining productivity because of it.
The decline in productivity from people having to take time off,
even now the airline shortages in Netherlands and things like that.
But also there was a concern that the percentage of long COVID is increasing
and that couple of years from now,
there'll be a productivity decline just from the loss of the function
and the productivity of more workers.
So I hadn't really thought about that, but it's another risk.
So when we talk about economic stagnation
and maybe a smaller economy in the future,
how do you see the dynamics,
given what you just said about politicians,
how do you see the dynamics for democracy versus authoritarianism?
Well, this idea that you have to have economic growth or you stagnate.
That, at least in my recent study of history,
that was a Darwinian thesis that's a force in the late 19th century in Europe.
You've got to grow, you've got to acquire, you've got to get bigger.
And maybe the human race, maybe biologically,
we're just programmed that we have to grow.
And as you know, civilizations reach a point where they really do reach peak
and then they stagnate and die.
I mean, this is a factor,
going to be studied, 26 civilizations, this is a fact of life.
So I have mixed feelings about lack of economic growth.
It's a very controversial subject.
And you have to have a different population with different goals.
But the problem is if you're in Africa and you want to become more prosperous
and you want to take your people out of poverty,
how can you say to them,
well, you can't have economic growth, you can't.
And so it's just not going to happen.
So whatever happens has to be global.
Otherwise, it's not going to work.
But on the flip side, how can you say to an average American
who uses four or five times the energy and materials as the world average
that you have to use less because we're in a world crisis?
I mean, that's loss aversion.
And I mean, I don't see that happening either.
It's not going to happen.
It's only going to be the price.
So we could have rationing in a default with no planning.
The rationing is going to be by the markets.
It's going to be by price.
But we could have other sorts of rationing.
What do you think about that possibility?
Well, I remember the gasoline line.
So in 1978, I was studying Iran and I saw that the Shah was going to be overthrown
and there would be real problems.
So I put in a gasoline tank on my property in Westchester
and I put in a huge heating oil tank.
And my uncle who lived next door made fun of me.
And then after he spent about three hours waiting in a gasoline line,
he came over humbly said, can I fill up with your tank?
So let me ask you this personal question.
You are really an erudite macro thinker.
How many hours a week do you read and how much of your insights
is because of your world experience and all the things you've read in your career
versus what you're learning now every week?
Well, I don't read as much as I used to, but I read a lot.
Probably five, six hours a day.
I have a wonderful team of colleagues who do a lot of reading
and forward me what they think is interesting.
And we have an incredible group of clients all over the world who send me things.
So I've got a tremendous source of information.
I have certain tools that I use to watch things.
Because I went deaf, which you know, and I have a cochlear implant,
I lost something, but I gained something.
And one of the things that I'm able to do is to see things that others see
but don't see the significance of.
And like that example I gave of the mobile phone,
and I used to travel with a client of mine,
and he wanted to see in the newspaper what it was that I found for ventures.
And I have this uncanny ability to pull out this detail
that everybody else is missing that I see as being significant.
I'll give you another example.
In the spring of 2002, there was 500 year floods in Eastern Europe,
and I said, ooh, 500 year floods.
And according to my theory of contagion,
if an outlier event like that continues the next year,
the contagion would be on.
And in fact, there was the hottest year in France's history.
And we used to keep a record,
I think we probably still do, of these extreme weather events.
I mean, the liquid's going on now.
I mean, hottest weather in China in history.
This is 5,000 years of history.
German flooding, German heat, Italy.
I mean, this is so obvious, but it all began in 2002.
It's my theory that limits and complexity and geopolitics
and financial overshoot are going to be kind of the drivers
of events in the coming decade.
But it does seem that even though climate change
is kind of a longer term thing,
that some of even the milder 2020s impacts of climate
could really trip things up.
For instance, heat waves that make the water either unavailable
or too hot to cool nuclear plants or hydro plants in China,
for instance, and what's going on in Europe right now.
So it does seem like there's a convergence of the natural world
and the human construct in our systems that are piling on.
Exactly.
And it's only going to get worse.
And I've been saying for a few years that the big one is coming,
the big hurricane to hit God forbid, South Florida,
and the whole Atlantic coast, and there was a wonderful book on this
by a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner,
has been built without any regard for flooding
and incurred by the US government.
So it's just an accident waiting to happen.
This is a perfect example of lack of preemptive thinking
and another example of thinking what happens if this were to happen.
The San Francisco Bay could flood.
And if it did, the entire Central Valley of California,
which is where half of the US vegetables are produced,
would be flooded.
But no one thinks about this.
So getting back to what you said earlier about scenario planning.
So I was just in Finland last week where we led
a government discussion workshop on energy descent
and how Finland specifically could supply energy to their economy
in mostly a low-carbon way with maybe a smaller economy than a larger one.
And I didn't have to say this is 100% certain,
though I think that's reasonably the case.
But even if people think it's 10% likely,
we can start to do blueprints and break glass plans.
But here's my question to you.
We make decisions based on economic growth and profits and investments.
And the more of these scenarios we have to plan for,
there's a cost to preparing for those.
And culturally, whose responsibility is that the governments
or do we have to embed that in our social system?
Or how might we do that differently?
What do you think?
Well, I worry that there is no leadership
in the government level anywhere in the world that can do something like this.
And we warned about the supply chain issue 20 years ago
that it was very fragile.
Barry Lynn also wrote a lot about it.
And no one paid attention.
And then no one pays attention until you have to pay attention.
But part of that was localization.
And I also think that one thing that America certainly needs is a sense of community.
It's been lost.
A lot of it had to do with outsourcing and downsizing and the loss of family values.
But to have a local community where you're worrying about your own needs
and you grow your own vegetables and foods
and you have your own energy supply
and locally you put in solar or whatever it is you can do
and you work at the local level to reduce consumption
and you help people who don't have the means to help themselves.
This is the way I think it will get done.
So we started to have a dry run of that in the 70s
and it kind of went off in the opposite direction.
But I completely agree with you that it starts with your community
and your social relationships.
And in many ways we've become so rich
that we can sit in our houses and order stuff from Amazon
and we don't need other people.
And I think in the coming decades we're going to need other people again.
And I would hope that we could start that before a crisis.
But it's difficult.
There are pockets of it.
And that's a small community.
I've been working there to bring people together
and to work on problems.
And of course it's also a transient community.
You come and you relax, you ski or you hike.
You don't want to have to worry about these problems.
But you know, it takes a little bit of work.
But there is a good grasp of what's going on.
That's good.
It's ironic for me because I'm trying to scale this awareness
and building community and appreciating energy globally
with my podcasts and my work.
Yet where I live, no one knows what I do.
And I'm not, it's too difficult for me to try to do it where I live.
But I need to do more.
So Kirill, I have a ton of questions for you
and I don't want to take up too much of your time.
Here are some other questions that I prepared looking at your work.
You have recently written on the shift in power dynamics
from capital to labor.
Can you expand on that and do you have a view
on how both of those relate to energy?
Well, I've been a student of history my whole life.
And I ran into a history professor when I graduated from college
and I was working in New York.
And I said, all you do is teach about the death of kings
and this war and so on.
But did anybody write about the lessons of history?
He said, yes, as a matter of fact, Will Durant did.
He wrote a book called Lesson of History.
So I went to Skibner's on Fifth Avenue,
a hundred-page book and I didn't even leave the bookstore
until I finished it.
I was so engrossed.
And he wrote this book after having written a series of civilizations.
And one of the key tenets of the Lessons of History
is the cycle of wealth creation, wealth distribution.
So time will come when the best and brightest are unleashed
and they know the time and they're very talented
and they accumulate vast amounts of wealth
and it goes into an excess and then social unrest comes
and then there's forced wealth distribution
and the best and brightest complain
but pay the price for social stability and so on and on and on.
So I was present at the beginning of the cycle of wealth creation in 1978.
I've become one of the first supply ciders,
understood it, believed in it
and it helped me a lot in the ensuing decades
knowing how this was going to unfold.
And I'm different from a lot of people.
The longer something has gone on,
the more I worry about it changing.
So I've been looking for the end.
And the first example was in, I was in China in 2009
and I asked my friend at the PBOC.
I said, explain to me household savings.
It's very high in China.
She said, no, it isn't.
It's actually the way we import the figures
and we're going to start to force capital
and profit down to the worker.
And the next month China announced
25% manufacturing wage increases
and they told the Japanese, if you don't do this, you're out of here
and for the next endless number of years
manufacturing wage increases went up.
That was the first sign of the cycle of wealth distribution.
The next one, of course, was President Xi
coming to power in the massive anti-corruption campaign
and then we had Occupy Wall Street, Brexit
and of course Trump and there are all kinds of examples of it continuing.
It's just a permanent factor of history.
You don't resent it.
You understand it.
You go with the flow.
One day it will recede
but it is just starting to gain an intensity
and it's sensational.
I have this book here
and I have Will Durantz in the other room
so we have some common reading.
Let me ask you this.
The analogy I had earlier about finance
is steering the car of the world economy
but it's based on energy and materials.
You are obviously a generalist.
I tell my students that the world needs more competent generalists
but that our economic system rewards reductionist expertise
and actually the example I give them
is the only jobs that you can be a generalist
are a hedge fund manager or a teacher
but I'm just wondering with your general wisdom
about how all this fits together
can you jump out of the field of finance
into advising world leaders on the train wreck ahead of us
or is it just too large of a gap to breach?
Well, it's sort of like the question answers
well, what do we do now in Ukraine?
Well, the answer is you had to do something
before the invasion began.
Russia's been invaded 55 times
and it is very insecure.
In Russia's were killed in World War II.
Unfortunately the central banks have abused their power
and we will look back and we'll be discussing
with our grandchildren and they'll say
were you really alive in a time of negative interest rates
whenever $19 trillion of sovereign debt
with a negative yield meaning we are paying governments
to borrow from them?
I mean it is unheard of
and in 5000 years the recorded history has never happened
and we are now reaping the whirlwind from that
and massive debt was added
because if the debt doesn't cost anything
of course you borrow and that of course
means misallocation of capital
and misallocation of capital
means someone is going to lose money
somewhere along the line.
So we are now in the endgame
and the Fed of course is fighting
to hold on here
and retain its credibility
and it's going to be very volatile
and very disruptive.
So what would I do if I had a choice?
You know if I were on the Fed board
I would say I'm going to resign
I don't want to be anywhere near the debacle
that's going to happen.
Okay you've got to be here.
Well I would say alright
I don't want to be here
I'll do it for the sake of the country.
I would allow inflation to run
and I would explain why it's needed
because debt can only be eliminated
freeways.
Growth which isn't going to happen
inflation or debt liquidation
and in the 30s debt liquidation
is just for default.
So they did this after World War II
financial repression
inflation rates were reduced by about a third.
That is politically impossible
you know what I just proposed
because there are all these pundits
and goos around who would say
if that is losing credibility
you can't do this
and the Fed can't do it
because then the bond market understands
that it's going to get destroyed in real terms.
So it has to be very subtle
and in 2021
U.S. debt to GDP actually declined
by if I remember correctly
something like 10 percentage points
that you did out for four or five years
and you get somewhere.
I also would adopt the supply side solution
don't try to stop
encourage the producer side
step on the gas
give every possible incentive
for oil exploration.
Of course they're environmentalists against this
you know we have the climate change issue
I realize the dynamics
and how difficult it all is
and how sensitive it all is
I would never want to get in the midst of all that
but if you're looking for solutions
someone's going to have to make some tough choices.
So because we didn't do scenario planning
20 or 30 years ago
now we're faced with a triage situation
instead of proactive one.
Exactly.
Yeah so do you think
that the Japanese experience
in the last three decades
is a dry run for the rest of the world?
Europe, UK, U.S.
Well you remember that the bubble
burst in 1989
I remember the Bank of Japan
the head saying
we're just going to burst the bubble a little bit
then with last words
I've heard that many times
because they wanted that in 29
and Tao wants it now
and the Chinese trying to
burst their property bubble
so I think
that we're in a very very
difficult place right now.
And is the eventual
end game as it were
recognizing the political difficulties
of belt tightening
or austerity
or tightening or easing
is the eventual way we're going to go
is yield curve control
which is not only controlling the short-term interest rates
but all along the curve
thus allowing
whatever bonds need to be
issued, de facto nationalizing
the bond market?
Well in the late 90s
most popular trade was shorting JGBs
and I think they were like
1.75%
on the 10 year
and I started thinking
about it
why is the JGB
yield so low
and you may remember
that the Japanese did Uchiwi
before any other country
and of course their currency was too strong
until Abe came along
in 2013
which was a sign of the deflation
but also a sign of deflationary monetary policy.
So in 1997
I studied demographics
in Japan
and I wrote this piece
something like more coffins
than tradeals in 76 countries
and Japan was the first country
that had population peak
the first country that had
working population peak
it was the first country that entered
deflation
and the baby bust
and women just aren't marrying
and the number of babies are just
foreign
so we studied it very carefully from that standpoint
and as it turned out
the JGB wasn't as short
it was the outlier for what the rest of the world
was going to end up at
when interest rates started to rise
and inflation appeared
Japan
instituted milk growth control
and part of you for years has been
that that is the end game
that the central banks will have to do that
because inflation is endemic
and as they do that
of course the currency will collapse
just like it has in Japan
now it's been particularly bad in Japan
because the
yield differential between
the JGB and the tenure
treasury has been very large
and Japan is a huge source of capital
so money is flowing back and forth
but I think that's a really interesting thing
for us to study
will we follow
Japan into yield growth control
and if
the US does do that
then the US dollar will get very weak
and that of course will add to the inflationary
forces
and propel the commodity
to grow markets even farther
and faster
I could see the US dollar getting weak
if the US instituted
yield curve control
however relative to
the other major currencies in the world
we still are
85% energy independent
plus or minus
whereas Japan and Europe and the UK
have a much
they have to import a lot more
of their energy
what happens with the relationship
between energy and natural resources
versus
fiat currencies
and is this how fiat currencies
start to die
and what happens after that
well I would move on to
different analogy and that is
that the US economy is financialized
and the US
treasury is very dependent
on capital gains taxes
from stock prices to fund itself
the US has run a trade deficit
for 15 years
a fiscal deficit for 50 years
it's what I think the Gaul
or one French president said
the exorbitant privilege
and that is unsustainable
and also the US
owes
16-17 trillion net
to foreigners the greatest
it's ever been
now with the freezing
of Russia's foreign exchange reserves
every country that owns
treasuries
UAE, China
is thinking
if America doesn't like what we do
they can confiscate
our holdings
so of course
they are sellers
and so that's more supply
and if the fiat continues
to tighten
and try to deal with inflation as it is
the equity bubble will continue
to deflate as bubbles do
once they take on
a life of their own you can't
undo it and then that means
the tax receipts will go down
the deficit will go up even further
and then foreigners
will look at this fiscal situation
and accelerate their selling of treasures
so you're looking at it from an energy standpoint
I'm looking at it from a financial standpoint
so the US
there also is so much money
is in the US
and the money left the Euro
back in
the Euro crisis 10 years ago
there's not a lot of hot money
for sure
so I agree with your analysis
there but
given the way that stock and bond markets
are acting today, middle of August
it seems to me that
stock prices are really a measure of
flows of money in and out of them
but they're supposed to
what they teach us in business school
is be a discounted
net present value of future earning streams
but given the
headwinds that you and I have discussed
about energy and geopolitics
I just don't see
how many people
in the financial community agree
with your thesis so I assume that your view
is kind of minority
I mean what percentage of financial
market participants suspect
we're near the all time high
of scale and complexity
in human economies I assume
a very small percentage
well remember it was Ray Kurzweil
who wrote a book on Singularity
and his point was
if you compound
something at 100% a year
you're going to just take off
and the book is
I think it was written in the 2000s
and we really latched on to it
it made a lot of sense to us
and there's going to be exponential growth
but exponential growth
which is a level where people just don't
have any comprehension and I think this is why
we have all these identity politics
because people are just lost
they can't figure it out
and my view of COVID was
I mean big picture view
is that the central nervous system
of the human race
had a nervous breakdown
because of too much change
and you may remember Pascal said
the problem with human race is that
a human can't sit in a room
quietly by himself
okay well
enough to stay home now for three months
and the rivers
in Venice were clear
people said this isn't so bad
obviously there was a lot of suffering
associated with it but
it was sort of a glimpse
and I think it is
I think about this all the time
technology is advancing
and I wouldn't even get into AI
and all that which is
I had this discussion
AI is terrifying
it's also incredibly exciting
but the dangers
are just immense
and there is no thought
about what this means
it's unknowable
how we
evolve with this
complexity
but I think that people
we spend a lot of time studying complexity
and innovation
we do well
and I find it overwhelming
that the average person must be lost
and desperate
for some kind of simplicity
well in some ways
more simplicity would be a good thing
as long as basic needs are met
and there is a social contract
in place I think we could do
with a third
less energy per capita
as long as distribution was okay
I mean you were talking about the general public
I do think the financial public
is still energy blind
and hasn't read Toynbee
and Joseph Tainter
and Vaclav Smil
so I do think there is a disconnect
between our biophysical reality
and our financial perception
of our reality
that is voiced in the markets
I had this conversation with Vaclav
and he was saying
no one was listening
and I was saying well
when the assets
start to go up
Wall Street is driven by profits
and when
energy stocks continue to outperform
coal stocks continue to outperform
and then the drilling stocks
start to outperform
there will be an understanding
and the question then is
will it be too late to shift
the aircraft carrier which is our
consumer led society
towards solid ground
one of your new themes
that you've been writing about, Kirill
you call it the alliance of the aggrieved
and the resurgence of the
colonized
could you briefly summarize what that is
and why you think it's important
well in 1999, Big Brzezinski
who is national security advisor
under Carter
wrote a book and in that book
he said my greatest fear
is that Russia and China will come together
in an alliance of the aggrieved
and I've been thinking about that
because that's exactly what
happened and there was
a 5000
word agreement that was signed
by Putin and Xi
the day before the Olympics
and we've read it twice
we got a copy of it
from the website
and I started thinking about
the fact that 87%
of the world's landmass
was controlled by Europe
in 1914
think about it, Belgium, Congo
French West Africa
think about the
the Brits pushing
opium addiction in China
thinking about what
Spain did
to Latin America
what happened in the Congo
which is one of the most egregious stories
ever in the history of man
it's worse even than the Holocaust
15 million were killed
the torture they were raped
and there is now
an alternative
so the aggrieved
the wounds are
are surfacing
and you now have an organization
that you can join
you can band together an alliance
with other like-minded countries
let's take for example the Brits
there's I think seven new
countries that are trying to join the Brits
there's something called the Shanghai
operation which was founded
by Russia, China
and Central Asian countries
and now
we have Saudi Arabia wants to join
and the UAE wants to join
and Qatar and Bahram
and Iran so something
is going on under the service
and of all the things I've studied in my life
I find this the most intellectually interesting
I'm just interested that there never
has been a new world order
the Tree of Westphalia
was the European world order
but this is the creation
of a new world order
and essentially
what's driving it is
to break away from the US
unipolar world
and a dollar-based
hegemony and you may be very cynical
and we look at this with
tremendous objectivity
we're just reporting what we see
and we're analyzing the trends
but the Chinese are saying
and they're using words like
mutual respect, equality
so let's look at Afghanistan
where the 8 billion
of foreign exchange reserves
have been frozen with some talk
about releasing half of that
to the starving people in Afghanistan
and the Chinese are saying
well we'll come in and help you
we're not going to tell the Taliban
what to do
now you can look at that and you can
decry that type of
morality if you call it that
but the Chinese are saying
we're not going to tell you what to do
we just want to do business with you
and we want to help you raise your nation
out of poverty and then they bring
these nations to Beijing
and say look this is what we did
we took 500, 600 million people out of
poverty so it is a story
that's resonating with what we call
the global south
Could we have a multi-polar
financial economic world
with a unipolar military
world? How's that going to work out?
Well it's an evolution
and we have to see
how the alliances break out
President Xi was visiting
Saudi Arabia his first visit
ever since Covid began
the fact that
that is an alliance
to me is amazing
and around Saudi
talking
seriously and these are
very strong historical enemies
so there is a lot going on
I would say
it's probably going to be an alliance
of degree and the producers
versus the consumers
consumers is largely the western nations
and the consumers have had
a great for 40 years
and the producers have not had a great
and now the producers are going to have a great
and the consumers are going to be suffering
now it's just a cycle
My initial two thoughts when you just
said that is
we're going to need more tar sands
and we're going to have a lot of social
unrest as we get
ready for a lower consumption
future in coming decades and we have to
prepare for that somehow
Yeah we haven't in the
United States had any really
tough times
since the Great Depression
we benefited massively from World War I
and World War II
and the GFC was over in
and then you had the greatest stock market boom
that benefited only a small percent of the population
and of course those
who are left behind which is
50 percent, 90 percent
they've been suffering but in terms of
the nationwide
debacle
America hasn't experienced it
and everything comes to an end
Well that is a good segue to
my closing questions that I ask
all my guests they're on the personal side
and I'll make a personal comment
first
I'm not a prideful person
but I consider myself well versed
in what's going on in the world
and I've been humbled by your
knowledge of what's going on in the world
obviously you're one of the most
famous investors of all time
so it would stand to reason that you're on top of this stuff
but thank you
so the last comment you gave me
do you have any suggestions Carol
on how people living
in the United States
and democracies today
can prepare themselves
and their communities for
this time of maybe
less consumption
and probably
a smaller material existence
perhaps
how do we meet the future half way?
Well I think being self-sufficient
is a wonderful place to be
and I'm growing entirely
off the grid in the Bahamas
with batteries and I'm
growing my own food
it's very hot in the Bahamas
and I just think self-sufficient
is just absolutely spectacular
and to the extent that one can
move towards that it gives you
a sense of freedom and independence
but it also gives you a sense of security
we also
have what we call
barterables
who knows
suppose the grid goes down
suppose there's an EMP attack
I mean any things
any number of things could go wrong
so we have barterables
which would be little vodka bottles
things that people need
and you'd be amazed
at how we take things for granted
I mean the batteries
for this hearing aid
well I've got five, ten years
applied and
we just take this all for granted
it's always going to be there
well maybe it's not going to be there
it's over the head saying
be careful supplies are in
very
strange
and we may not be able to get these
things
but if you have something that is essential
you must have it in your inventory
do you think that if
more and more people understood
what you and I can kind of see coming
in the distance that there could
paradoxically be a crack up boom
where people go out and buy stuff
they won't be able to buy it in the future
I think a crack up boom that comes actually
from Ludwig Weimesis the Austrian school
is very possible as you see
the currency being debased
she figured well
I might as well spend it and it's a false
boom and of course on the other side of that is
it's a bust that's a very real possibility
and my
feeling last December I became
very very cautious
and people around me were getting sick
I was bitten by my dog
people were falling off the roofs
people were getting cancer
the energy on the planet has never been
darker and I feel that energy
so I respond to it by being very
careful and very cautious
this is not a time to be a hero
it's not a time to be making bets
it's a time to be ring fencing
yourself and protecting your assets
and
in a bear market everybody loses
the bear wants to go
as far down as possible with
many people just like the bull wants to go
up as far as he can with his few people
so we had
the bear took out the meme stocks
and the SPACs
and then the bear came and
took out the
technology sector and then the bear
decided well that people are in inflation
stuff they're
making too much money let's take
them out and give them a scare and of course
the people in the bonds have been impringed
and
this is the nature of the bear
in the last month the shorts have
been creamed by the bear
this is the nature of bear markets
it's the nature of markets to cream as many people
as possible
so the goal is to lose as little as possible
but also to lose as little as possible
in real terms
so at its bottom in the S&P
in June I think they've estimated
down 24% 24%
if you take my view
that inflation is really 20%
say 15%
in real terms you have
massive losses
so why do you think that inflation is 15% to 20%
because of shrink
inflation and they're selling packages
that used to be 60 oz and are now
50 oz and that's not included
in the prices or what?
that's one of the reasons and housing
which of course is one of the biggest boom on
on record was not accurately
reflected
its owner-occupied lens is how they
calculate and I think what's going on in Europe
is probably closer to it
so if inflation is
truly in line
with what you're saying that means our
real GDP is actually
increased at a very tiny amount
relative to what they've been saying
so do you have
I'm sure in your extended family
and in your universe
you have a lot of young people
that you come across
what specific recommendations do you have
for young humans who are alive
during this time learning about
energy, environment, financial
biophysical, geopolitical constraints
do you have any advice
to young people listening to this?
well I think you want to study history
and you want to understand cycles
and that there's something called return to the
mean
and it's important to
have
emphatic understanding
one of the problems in the world is that
we don't understand
the other person's view
so whether it's a country or a nation
so America doesn't understand
the suffering that Russia went through
in World War II
for the millions of civilians
being killed by the Nazis
or the Americans
can't understand what it meant
when the Japanese invaded
Nanking
and the rape of Nanking
they just don't understand it
then you understand it
and look at that country and those people
in a different light and this helps you understand
who they are and where they come from
and they also will respect you
if you understand
where they came from
so let's just look at the Pope going
to Canada and apologizing
to the indigenous people
which of course is a very ugly
horrible story
and there's going to be a lot more of this
a lot more
that's important
empathy, compassion
I keep this
hard to quote
a wonderful way to think about the world
but he learned more from the river
than Vasudeva could teach him
he learned from it continually
above all
he learned from it how to listen
to listen with a still heart
with a waiting open soul
without passion
without desire
without judgment
without opinions
if we could all reach that state
the world would be a wonderful place
Well I worry a lot about
oil depletion
but I also think that trust and empathy
are maybe depleting faster
than oil
and I agree with you
you have a link to
Buddhist philosophy and your friends
with the Dalai Lama I'm to understand
I mean what if the world was
a Confucianist Buddhist ethic
I think that would maybe
improve our situation some
do you have any random thoughts on that?
tremendously
the two basic tenets of Buddhism
is
the impermanence of all things
now if you understand that
the deepest heart
why do you want to own more
you want to own less
and of course we know you can't take it
and the second is the interconnectedness of all beings
and this is the point that I made earlier
about the pandemic
so in January 2020 of course we're worried
about the United States
but you know the bigger picture is
we've got to worry about the rest of the world
because it could come back in saples
so for 20 years I've been saying
and talking that compassion
is good for business
and there's a wonderful story about Coca-Cola
and before the war
Second World War began
then President of Coke
two bottling plants
decided he was going to give Coke
to American servicemen
for five cents
and he ran the world
by the end of the war there were 45 million Americans
around the world
drinking Coke at five cents
and what do you think they did when they came back
they drank Coke for the rest of their life
I mean isn't this so obvious
why don't people do it
so what's the modern
converging environmental and resource
crisis
analogy of that
today just to connect a few
threads in this conversation about
the multipolar world
and the alliance of the aggrieved
and all that is there any possible
evolution of
global cooperation
at a global level
at this time I personally
don't see how that can evolve but I think that's
one of the only benign ways out
do you have any thoughts on that
what I do is
Prime Minister of the Bahamas is a good friend of mine
and I've discussed with him
the alliance of the aggrieved
and there is a movement
in the Caribbean nations
that the debt that they have
is 40 to 60 percent
because of climate
change induced
hurricanes which they had nothing to do with
so there's going to be
a reckoning here
and who pays and how
does the debt default I mean I can't predict
how it's going to unfold
which you can feel these changes
are taking place
and there's going to have to be an understanding
that when they speak like that
they make some sense
and these are the resources
to make this good
that remains to be seen
but I think we need a more
compassionate leadership
and we never would have had
the problems that we've had
understood that as Gandhi said
there's more than enough food in the world
it's just not
rightly distributed
I'm a capitalist and I understand
why it works
but if you want to keep capitalism
going you have to make sure
there's fairness
otherwise the whole system isn't risk
so you have to adjust
you can't just keep going forever
and we need a major adjustment
and I would hate to see it be a forced adjustment
but that's the way it's going right now
that's the way it seems to be going
yeah
so Kirill, personal question
what do you care most about in the world
raising human consciousness
and how does that unfold
and scale
well it's been something I've been doing
for a long time
and I have to be honest with you
that the energy on the planet is so dark
and has been for all this year
that is the futile effort
at the moment
but we are going to enter the age of Aquarius
at some point
and the people who
understand where
the world can go and will go
will be the ones who will lead us
on into the next
next world and of course it's going to
involve empathy and compassion
it's going to involve
respect for the earth
and the earth's finite resources
and the humility that we
need to have as human beings
that we don't own the planet
the planet was here
before we came
so that's where I think
we are
going to end up but right now
I'm focused on helping my
clients, my friends, my family
because the energy
is so dark and I can see all these
these problems coming at us
and there's no one out there
who can solve it
so all we can do
is help each other
get through this
our community, our family, our friends
our clients, the people we love
and educate and inspire
others more broadly is my
hope as well, thank you for that
so what issue, and we've talked about
several, but what issue are you
most concerned about in the coming
decade or so in the world?
well war, famine
social unrest, failed states
mass migration
in contrast what are you most hopeful
about in the coming decade or so?
that inevitably we're going to get
through this period and enter
the age of the Aquarius
and we will
be a more enlightened species
simply we survive
which is not predestined by any means
the universe didn't
didn't write it
that we have to survive
and you always have hope that the rising
generation will be the ones
however I had
dinner with
these history professors recently
and I said well tell me how this generation
that you're teaching is different from others
and
they both said
they are nihilistic
meaning they have no hope
and that's of course very disturbing
and they have no hope obviously
because trust has been
broken
it's a very very tender
and fragile thing
now the Japanese
statement a reputation of a thousand
years can be lost in an hour
so rebuilding trust
to me is the most important thing
that can be done in the world
maybe you have to start at a local level
and
where people start to trust again
I actually have a great deal of hope
but that's because I've lowered my expectations
contrary
to the general narrative in society
so I'm hopeful things will be better
than I expect
so a last question Kirill
if you were benevolent dictator
and there were no personal
recourses to your decisions
what one thing would you do to improve
human and planetary futures
well I
would do several
I would want everyone to be
familiar
and practicing
the Buddhist principles that I explained earlier
of
interconnectedness of all things
of impermanence
I would want to
have the world population
understand what happens
when you have violence and wars
and atrocities
I'm taking a page from Anthony Burgess's
Clockwork Orange
you may remember this is violent use
and
they were raping and stealing
so they
put the leader
in a room and they tied him up
and he couldn't close his eyes
and they made him watch
atrocities and after several days
he would start to throw up
if he saw an atrocity
and it's sort of
an amusing
story
maybe using the wrong word
is it
feasible but you could do a variety of that
and when I was in Auschwitz
in 2001 or
2002
I was amazed and delighted to hear
that
the German high school youth
must spend a summer
working in Auschwitz
so avoiding
man
has basically responsible
for most of the destruction
and it's through wars and greed
and aggression
to be taught
by a man kind
to be taught at the earliest age
these are the consequences
and we watched movies
of World War I
and we would watch the destruction in Russia
and we would watch it over and over again
until the thought of war
was so important
that you could never do it
or participate
but it would have to be global because it wasn't global
then it wouldn't work
and but pairing that
with what you said earlier
we have had an easy go of it
in the United States
since you and I have been
alive and I think
we are so complacent
and non-aware
of our time
how unique this time is in history
riding the top of the carbon pulse
and having all the
access to the technology and goodies
but I do think that raising
our consciousness
both recognizing
how horrible some of these potential
futures are and working to avoid them
but also
we are the first generation
of our species to be able to understand
how we got here
who we are, what we need, what we're doing
and how the thing fits together
and I have some hope
in that
so Kirill thank you so much
for your time and wisdom
to the listeners
well I think that there is such a shortage
of truth
and I'm just going to put something here
I run this in my publication every few years
and it's George Orwell
of course famous for 1984
and it's during times
of universal deceit telling the truth
becomes a revolutionary act
the further a society
drifts from truth the more it will hate
those who speak it
miss which are believed and tend
to become true
some ideas are so stupid
only intellectuals believe them
but the point is that
we have forgotten
our search for the truth
and America was a science
based country
and we need to respect science
and of course we saw this during Covid
the distortions
and the lies
and the things that were said
that were so untrue
and we have to have a population
that is desperately searching for the truth
and doesn't want to be told
what they want to hear
they want to be told what the truth is
well I am on board with that
and I'm all in to help
and I hope we can continue
our relationship
and this conversation so thank you so much
Kirill for your time and to be continued sir
absolutely Nate
it was a pleasure to be here
in a fun and interesting conversation
if you enjoyed
or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification
please subscribe to us
on your favorite podcast platform
and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases
