If you look at how people were finding thermal comfort
before the Industrial Revolution, or actually,
you don't have to go that far back before the 1950s,
there was no central heating systems.
There was not this ample supply of fossil fuels
that made it possible.
And so the strategy was totally different.
They were heating people instead of spaces.
And there were different ways to do that.
The first is to use a radiant heat source.
And that is, of course, originally the fireplace,
but then later it became the stove.
And that is a different type of heating.
So the share of radiation is much higher
than the share of convection.
And that means that you're not creating an equal temperature
in the whole space.
The closer you get to the heating system,
the warmer it gets, and the further away you get from it,
the cooler it gets.
So what people did was actually creating
a microclimate of thermal comfort in a rather cold space.
And people could choose where they would sit or stand.
So if you were too hot, you moved away from the stove.
And if you were too cold, you were coming closer,
or you were going to sit on top of it.
And that's, of course, much more energy efficient
in the sense that the energy use is independent
of the size of the room.
And you can be comfortable at lower air temperatures
because you increase the share of radiation
in the heat transfer.
And you can be comfortable at a lower energy temperature.
Like radiant heat is comparable to the heat
you get from the sun.
And we all know this affects if you are, say, in winter,
you are sitting in the sun, it can be quite comfortable,
even if it's, like, only, say, 10 degrees Celsius.
But if then someone comes to stand in front of you,
suddenly the air temperature remains the same,
but suddenly you're cold because this person takes away
your radiant heat source.
And the second thing was that people used,
made use of personal heating devices
that worked through conduction.
And conduction is another type of heat transfer
that is actually physical contact
between a heat source and a human.
So, of course, the temperature needs to be lower
or you get burned.
Like, if you touch the cooking fire,
you're going to get burned.
But if you have a lower heat, lower temperature heat,
like a hot water bottle, you can directly transfer heat
from the heating device to your body.
And that's, of course, the max in thermal efficiency.
You need very little energy to keep yourself comfortable.
And so originally, these personal heating devices,
they were based on kind of scintils from the fire.
So people just took glowing coals from the fire,
put it in a ceramic pot, put that in a wooden box,
and then put it under their feet, for example.
And the clothes from those times,
they were like kind of working together with that.
So they were draped over the heat source.
And you were literally, the heat was rising into your clothes
across your body.
And again, you can be comfortable in a room
that has low air temperature because you created
a microclimate that heats yourself.
How long ago were thermal hot water bottles a thing,
like in culture?
Was that several hundred years ago?
And a secondary question, you would
heat that up before you go to bed
and you sleep with this bottle.
But then at 3 in the morning, I would
assume all the heat had dissipated.
Do you go refill it then?
Or what can you tell us a little bit more about that?
Yeah.
So hot water bottles, they show up in the records
around like 1600.
And then, like I said, they were kind of used with glowing coals.
So it was quite dangerous.
You also had the bedspan.
So it was like glowing coals under your mattress.
And then when the water supply came in the 19th century,
then people switched to water as a heat storage medium, which
is, of course, it's better and safer.
And first, these hot water bottles
were made out of ceramics and out of metal.
And then in 1900 and something, the first rubber hot water
bottle was invented.
And concerning your second question,
indeed, people always think that these hot water bottles are
meant for use in the bed.
And that they are very useful there.
And actually, if you have in winter,
if you put a hot water bottle there in the morning,
it's still hot because the blanket
is a very well insulating the heat.
But they're also especially useful outside the bed.
Like for me, it's my only heating system.
And in winter, when I'm sitting here,
I have a hot water bottle on my lap.
I have one, if necessary, behind my back.
And if it's really cold, I have another one below my feet.
And yeah, every two hours or one, two hours I get up,
I refill them and I come back.
I mean, you have to move now and then.
It's not healthy to sit on your laptop
without interruption for so long.
So yeah, it involves some human labor also.
Do people on your street there in Barcelona
refer to you as that Belgian MacGyver mad scientist guy?
Or do they have any idea what you do?
I managed to hide it for a very long time, but less and less.
And actually, I live above a bar,
like the typical Spanish bar here.
And I'm quite often there writing.
And in winter, when I meet my friends here and it's cold,
I come down with like four or five hot water bottles.
And the people of the bar got so interested
and they actually want to do it next winter.
They want to set up a whole infrastructure
with hot water kettle and then a rack of hot water bottles
and blankets so that they don't have to pay for their gas
terrace heaters anymore, which is very expensive.
And it might be even more expensive next winter
with the whole Russia-Ukraine thing.
We don't know what's going to happen there.
Yeah, so that's made it even before.
It's probably like, yeah, this guy is a clown,
but now people start realizing that it can actually
save them a lot of money.
