You're listening to The Great Simplification.
I'm Nate Hagins.
On this show, we describe how energy, the economy, the environment, and human behavior
all fit together and what it might mean for our future.
By sharing insights from global thinkers, we hope to inform and inspire more humans to
play emergent roles in the coming Great Simplification.
I'd like to welcome climate scientist Leon Simons to the program.
Leon most recently was a co-author of James Hansen et al's paper Global Warming in the
Pipeline.
Leon is also a board member of the Dutch chapter of Club of Rome.
Most specifically, what we're going to talk about today is Leon's contribution to this
paper, which is breaking out the emissions and the aerosol contribution from human activities.
Aerosols and emissions have been going up in tandem, but the aerosols are masking the
expected warming from the thermal impact of a higher energy imbalance.
Global ships now have new regulations to reduce the sulfur particulate emissions.
When that happened, in the global shipping routes measured by satellites, the ocean temperatures
went up.
They were absorbing more heat because there was less aerosol masking.
This is a difficult conversation because the implications are that we're about to have
more warming in the pipeline than expected, and also because Leon is a scientist and had
scientific answers, which were quite dense, and yet it's a very important hypothesis to
put out there on how human particulate aerosols have been masking the warming so far.
Please welcome Leon Simons.
Leon Simons, koo de midak.
Koo de midak.
How are you today?
I'm good.
How are you doing?
I'm good.
I am nervous for this conversation.
Nothing you say will change what's happening in the world, the physical climate world,
but what you say may act as a bunker buster to my prior assumptions of my own analysis
of the future.
I'm nervous because I expect I know the things that you're going to say because I've watched
and read some of your materials.
Let me preface this conversation by saying this.
You are a climate scientist, but you're also a human that cares about our future, and you're
also a human that's living during this time.
You, like many of us, wear three different hats.
Part of our problem is that a lot of people merge the science and the response on various
things and it ends up being muddled.
I'm going to break this interview into three pieces, and the first piece I want you to wear
your scientist at, and then you can speculate in the second piece about the future and responses,
and then finally I'll ask you some personal questions.
We have a lot to unpack.
Can you start out with your broad expertise, your particular specialty in climate research
and maybe a couple-minute umbrella of your main thesis?
Yes.
My expertise originates from first traveling the world and trying to understand our impact
on the world, which I did after high school when I was 19 years old.
I traveled the world because I knew things were changing rapidly and I wanted to understand
them.
And then I started studying, and I wanted to change the world for the better by studying
tropical forestry.
But what I've seen in developing countries where about 3 billion people still use biomass
for cooking, and I saw that this can cause rapid deforestation and change the place
where people live and destroy the environment.
So then I decided to drop out of school and to start my social business focusing on developing
clean energy technologies, especially around cooking for Ethiopia.
And then, but in the meantime, I've always kept up to date with the science.
I got involved with a think tank called Club of Rome in the Netherlands, and then through
that I kept always working on doing research both on the science, but also visiting climate
conferences and trying to understand the changes that are happening.
And while doing that, I learned that the most biggest uncertainty in climate science is the
effect of small dust particles, both natural like sea salt or desert dust, but also anthropogenic,
so human-caused dust.
These are called aerosols, and they change how much sunlight is reflected by the planet
by directly reflecting sunlight.
But they also interact with water vapor in the atmosphere.
There's water vapor condensers to these aerosols and then clouds form.
And without these particles, there wouldn't be any clouds.
So I learned that this is a crucial aspect within climate science and also the biggest
uncertainty because it's so uncertain how clouds respond to these particles.
But then you see that in the communication and in the about science, it's very rarely
this aspect is being discussed.
And yeah, I think we'll get to that, but I think that's, I started looking into that.
And then I found that in 2019, I learned that in 2020, there will be this very big policy
change over the oceans of reducing sulfur in the fuels, and that that would change how
much sulfur was being emitted.
And sulfur is a very important aspect of sulfate particles, which are the strongest cooling
agent of our climate.
And I got into touch with James Hansen and I explained to him what was happening.
First, he was skeptical about it.
And I explained the science and the policy and how this is implemented.
And then he asked me to do the research with him on that.
And that's how this, I got more involved into the science and I started spending more time on it.
So, and that led to you being a co-author of the recent paper, Hansen at All Global Warming
in the Pipeline, which I've read and is terrifying to say the least.
Could you give just an overview of the main thrust of that paper?
And then we're going to unpack the aerosol component.
Yeah, sure.
It's a very big paper and it brings together many different fields within the science.
And the co-authors represent different fields which come together.
So there's, for example, Norman Loeb is a scientist from NASA.
He adds the series team, which provides the satellite data, which we use in the paper.
And the paper also looks at the paleoclimate, for example.
So all these different parts of the climate system, the different sciences to understand
all these different parts come together and they strengthen the findings from one part
of the paper to the other.
So what we learned, for example, from paleoclimate data that it was much with a less strong climate
forcing, the effect on climate was stronger than was previously thought.
That's what we learned from the climate data for millions of years ago.
But then also, if you look at thousands of years ago, for example, after the last glacial
maximum, so the ice age, so to say, how fast the planet warmed and how long it stayed warm
and what caused that, of course, we can learn from air bubbles captured in the ice sheets
and to see what the greenhouse gas concentrations are.
And then if we look at how the climate changed over time, some models don't understand
what's happening. For example, the models look at the greenhouse gas, they take into
account the greenhouse gas concentration of the past, say, 6,000 years.
And the climate should be warming.
Instead, there has been a slight cooling if you look at the climate proxy.
So some other scientists analyzed the climate of the past 6,000 years from three
year rings, et cetera.
And then they noticed a slight cooling, especially over the northern hemisphere.
What we looked at is, for example, the aerosols, so these particles I talked about, might
have been cooling the planet while these greenhouse gases have been causing warming
for off the planet. And then these two effects, these two forcings, they interact and then
there's a net has been a net state or more or less stable or a bit cooling climate while
these greenhouse gases kept increasing.
And those increasing greenhouse gases from Rudiman at all that research shows that it
might be or could likely be because humans spread across the planet and started
de-forcing the world.
And they started producing rice, which creates methane and this deforestation, of
course, results in CO2 entering the atmosphere.
And these effects, of course, increase the greenhouse gas concentration, especially if
you compare it to other interglacial, other warm periods after a glacial and after an
ice age. So we would expect it now, if you look at just as the greenhouse gas constraints,
you should expect it to the planet to warm up until the pre-industrial times.
But now we see that the planet, so the proxy show that the planet has been cooling down
instead. And then, of course, industrial revolution happened.
And then there was a big increase in greenhouse gas emissions, but also an increase
in in aerosols.
And so the implications of the Hansen paper and the conclusions and implications.
Yeah, well, the show with the paper led by James Hansen is that the rate of warming is
already increasing. So the planet is now warming faster than it was in the recent
decades. We show that the resatellite data, mainly that the rate of planetary heat uptake
is rapidly increasing. And that is mainly caused by the planet absorbing more sunlight.
And that's not because the sun is starting to shine brighter, but that's because there's
less light being reflected. And that's because there's less clouds, there's less aerosols,
and there's less ice and snow reflecting the sunlight. And the cloud effect includes the
effect of these aerosols. But there's, of course, uncertainty by how much.
And that's what this data helps us. This is the greatest uncertainty in climate science.
This data helps us in the recent data from what we call inadvertent aerosol
experiment of rapidly reducing the sulfur emissions. This helps us to reduce the
uncertainties within the climate science. And then while we're reducing these
uncertainties, it shows, together with all the other data I already talked about, it shows
that the warming from greenhouse gases is stronger, very likely stronger than we thought
before, because aerosols cooled more and the glacial periods were cooler than we thought.
That means that the change from greenhouse gas constraints is also stronger. The forcing
effect is stronger. So the greenhouse gas will warm more if the aerosols cooled more.
And then that means that we can expect maybe a few degrees. It's like what we call a
gedanken experiment. So a more thought experiment, what would happen if the greenhouse gas would
stabilize at the current rate? Of course, that's not what's happening at the moment.
The greenhouse gas are rapidly increasing and the aerosols are rapidly decreasing. But
we look at what would happen if hypothetically the greenhouse gas concentration would stabilize
and with and without aerosols. Then we could have four to five degrees warming by the end of the
century. And then further in the future, that's of course very hypothetical because
greenhouse gas concentrations will not stay at this very rate indefinitely. But then we could see
eight to 10 degrees Celsius warming. But that means that if all the ice sheets around the planet
would melt, and one thing to take into account there is that also the sun is shining brighter
and brighter over millions of years. So after about 50, 60 million years, the sun is shining about
one and a half watts more brighter over time. So the greenhouse gas concentration of 50 million
years ago is only part of the story compared to today. Yeah, I didn't think about that. So the
PETM mass extinction due to volcanic activity that took thousands and thousands of years,
that happened when the sun was less bright. So if we have the same CO2 in the atmosphere from our
Volkswagen's and Volvo's instead of Volcano's, that's going to be meeting a brighter sun as well.
So higher sensitivity could be presumed. Yeah, you have to take that into account indeed.
So this is horrible news because there's two phenomenon and we've been focused on one. Let me
unpack what you've just said and throw it back with some questions. So humans burn stuff and the
resulting CO2 and methane act as a thermal blanket on the planet absorbing more infrared heat and
ultimately heating the earth because there's a higher energy imbalance. And we've recognized that
and we're focused on that and we're worried about that. Some people who don't believe in climate
change point out things like the little ice age or why isn't the climate warming because you have
all this CO2, there's not the correlation that you thought and there's stories like that out there.
But what you're saying is there were two phenomenon, two things that humans were doing in addition to
the sun and other natural things that were offsetting forcings, the CO2, but then the aerosols
that were created long, long ago, you mentioned up to 6,000 years ago, from burning of forests or
riding horses and kicking up dust and anything that humans do and that that particulate matter
heightened the reflectivity of clouds and reflected more of the incoming sunlight back into space
so that we didn't warm the planet as much as the CO2 science would have predicted. Is that correct?
Yeah, what you started off saying is that this is not taken into account the aerosol, but it is.
So for recent climate, the changes since the Industrial Revolution, since let's say 1750,
there is the IPCC, for example, especially the part of the IPCC reports, it's a very big report
for the most recent one, for example, it's split up in three parts and then there's a synthesis report,
but the first part, aerosols are an important part of that because otherwise without these aerosols,
you cannot understand the changes that are happening, as you already just described.
But of course, the scientists who are trying to understand, they do take this into account
and I can show that effect with one of my slides, for example, the slide showing
the main drives of global warming and that's from the IPCC assessment report from the summary of
policymakers and I've taken out the two main drivers and if you see it on the left, it says
the total human influence, that's up to about 2019 and it shows about 1.1 degrees Celsius of
warming globally since the Industrial Revolution, so since 1750, I think this is 1850. And then
there's one bar which shows that there's about one left degree warming from well-mixed greenhouse
gases and then one might think, okay, why didn't it warm 1.5 degrees Celsius yet? And that's the
main cause of that is the emissions of sulfur, sulfur dioxide, which cooled the planet by about
half a degree. And by the way, with a very large uncertainty, so this IPCC estimate saying that
there's a half degree cooling from sulfur, but with an uncertainty range of about 0.2 to 0.9
degrees and that's sulfur cooling to date. So that doesn't take into account the present energy
imbalance. So if all these concentrations of greenhouse gas and sulfur emissions and all the
other particles would stay the same, they would still be warming because there's still an imbalance,
there's an energy imbalance, so there's still more energy coming in than going out. So until
there's a balance, then there will be no more additional warming. Still there's more heat
radiation coming out and sunlight being absorbed, there's no balance. So the IPCC does include aerosols
in their math, but you think that the cooling effect, the dampening effect of what we would
have seen as warming is larger than the IPCC core models. So before we start this research,
we didn't think anything really. We just thought, okay, this uncertainty which IPCC shows in their
graphs and in their text, this uncertainty is so large, it's a lot, especially with the interaction
of particles, these aerosol particles in clouds, it's the largest uncertainty within climate science.
So it's important to reduce this uncertainty to understand how our climate will change.
And this natural experiment, which I'll talk about, of rapidly decreasing the
sulfur emissions over the oceans by 80%, that provides climate science with an experiment,
a natural, we call it an inadvertent experiment, to reduce this uncertainty and to understand what
the real warming effect of greenhouse gases is. And how fast do you see a response if you stopped
aerosols? How fast is the cooling masking disappear and we see warming?
Yeah, so the effect, we see a direct effect. So you would expect, for some of these particles,
these particles stay in the atmosphere for four days to weeks. So when they rain, they rain out
because it's solid and liquid particles compared to greenhouse gases, the name says it, which are
gases which stay in the atmosphere until they react with other gases. But then the aerosols,
they rain out. As I mentioned, they cause cloud formation and they interact with clouds and they
rain to the ground and then they are out of the atmosphere and their effect is gone.
But then how long does it take for, so we expected this to cause a forcing change. So
this cooling effect of these particles to reduce right away. But then it takes time, of course,
for the system to respond. So if you take these particles out of the atmosphere, the sun will
shine, instead of it will reflect it, it will be absorbed by the oceans. And then, but of course,
it takes a long time for the oceans to heat up because it's a very large mass of water
with a high thermal capacity. So it takes a lot of heat to heat up. When it heats up, of course,
it also influences the climate as well, because if it's warmer, there's also
a change in clouds, because there's less cloud condensation and clouds evaporate faster. So
all these feedbacks, these are feedbacks which also take time to come into effect. There's more
evaporation, so there's more water vapor in the atmosphere, which also causes warming,
but also if the plant heats up, there's more thermal radiation, so that reduces the warming.
So all these different aspects should be taken into account. And now we are learning after,
now we have about three, almost four years of data of what happens when you reduce the aerosol
emission, or the sulfur emissions over the oceans by about 80%. And that's the data that's
becoming in. Of course, we've only had, mainly had three years of La Nina. Another aspect is
a negative Pacific Decadal Oscillation, which our co-author Norman Loeb wrote a paper about
where he says, okay, if this Pacific Decadal Oscillation will be negative, we expect the Earth's
imbalance to decrease, but it has been increasing instead. So that's also a worrying sign that
this effect might be even stronger. So you could, I want you to unpack what happened with the sulfur
emissions, but let me just ask a question on what you just stated. This kind of is a testable
hypothesis, because if we don't have the sulfur emissions from shipping the way we used to,
so that we have less particulate matter and the dampening forcing is less,
and we shift into a El Nino, we can predict, right, with high confidence that we're about
to have another spike in temperatures, like in the next six months as we move into El Nino.
Yeah, so that's what we also show in our paper and in other communication that we expect this
El Nino, because we now have entered an El Nino, and we are now starting, what we've seen this year is
in part an El Nino, but more even just the end of El Nino. So El Nino is a cycle in the Pacific
Ocean where the equatorial Pacific, sorry, surface temperatures increase and they result in,
during El Nino, it increases and it results in net global higher temperatures and during
El Nino, the sea surface temperatures in the equatorial Pacific are lower and that translates
generally to lower global surface air temperatures. So we have that three years of El Nino.
And three years of lower emissions too. I mean, not carbon emissions, sulfur emissions.
Lower sulfur emissions indeed, but also higher greenhouse gas concentration increase, especially
with methane and nitrous oxide. So there's of course many things happening.
That's the problem with all this, isn't it? It's this giant 10 dimensional jigsaw puzzle that
people focus on one piece of it, then that's just climate and then there's economy and geopolitics
and money and energy and I mean, the whole thing is our species can't figure it out.
So you also have these environmental regulations and health regulations, which I'm
now talking about from the shipping, but we do know where these ships are going. So if you look
at again at this graph I was showing. On slide three? I think slide three, yeah. So where you see
the main drives of global warming on the left and as you see on the right, you see the sulfur
deoxides from the anthropogenic sulfur deoxide emissions. And there you see that these emissions
over the oceans, over the Northern atmosphere, especially over the North Atlantic and North
Pacific oceans are very high. So that's the yellow, the yellows and orange swaths over the ocean?
Yes, between the land masses of Europe and North America.
And what are the red?
That's overland, like the dark red is overland, which is mainly coal-fired power plants,
mainly coal-fired power plants, large sulfur sources.
And then the kind of yellow straight lines that go into the Southern hemisphere, those are the
shipping routes, presumably. Yeah, so the ship routes, especially around Africa, you can see that
there's shipping routes going around Africa. And of course, through the Suez Canal, through the
Mediterranean, there's high ship traffic as well. And so how did you use this data to test your
hypothesis? So let me show a different, this is from the next slide. We have this in our paper
and it's from Jinedal, who's also a co-author of our paper. This shows coastal sulfates, so sulfur
dioxide forms sulfates in the atmosphere. The left map shows sulfate in the atmosphere,
par-patriol in the volume. And then do you see that, of course, there's a lot of sulfur, again,
over the Northern hemisphere, because that's where seven of the eight billion people live.
But there's also natural sources. But then on the right map shows the sulfates from shipping.
As a percentage of the total?
Exactly. Yeah, thank you. So there's indeed the sulfate of shipping as a percentage of total
natural human anthropogenic sulfates. So in the North Pacific, it's like 80 or 90 percent?
Yeah, over the North Pacific and over the North Atlantic, 70 to 80 or 90 percent, even at places.
And that's because there's very little algae. So the natural source of sulfur in the atmosphere is
from algae. But algae need nutrients. So without these nutrients, there's little algae. But over
the vast oceans, there's not so much nutrients. And then so if there's no nutrients, there's no
natural source of sulfur. And then the effect of this sulfur from ships is much stronger,
because it doesn't have to compensate with other sources of sulfur, of aerosols, also other
areas like natural aerosols. God, I mean, this could be a five-hour conversation. I know your
family's coming, so it can't be. But I'm going to ask a couple of naive questions. Earlier in
the conversation, you said that if there wasn't aerosols like sulfur, there would be no clouds.
But we had clouds millions of years ago. So is that from the sulfates and aerosols from algae
and phytoplankton and other natural sources? Yeah, so natural sources of aerosols also create
clouds, of course. So there's sea salt, there's algae producing sulfur through dimethylsulfide,
and then there's all chemistry there, which we are, that's what the science is still
learning about how it works. Are there more clouds today? Can you speculate or do we know
then there was 10,000 years ago because of all the particulates that humans have kicked up
and burnt up? Yeah, 10,000 years ago, it's of course, you also have to take into account
different temperatures. But of course, we don't know for sure. But we do know that if you increase
the amount of particles, you increase how much condensation nuclei there are. So there's more
particles for the water vapor to condense. And also, especially there's some things to consider as well
that some particles, they are better for ice clouds, ice crystal formation. So there's more
ice crystals forming around sulfate particles than around sea salt particles, which you can
understand, because especially in the Netherlands, if we put on the road, we put sea salt, we put salt
to keep the roads from freezing. So that's an example of sea salt reduces freezing. But then
the sulfate doesn't do that. And that causes more crystals in clouds and cause whiter clouds.
And you can see, if you know clouds, you know that white clouds often are ice clouds and dark
clouds or more water clouds. Also, these rain out faster. If you see a dark cloud, you know, okay,
often you know there's rain coming, right? So these are all things to consider. So aerosols
overall cause clouds to be bigger, brighter, and longer lasting overall. And again,
there's a lot of uncertainty there with this inadvertent experiment to help to reduce.
Right. The inadvertent experiment of stopping or regulating how much sulfur emissions
in our global ships. From our global ships, yeah. I'm going to get to that in a second,
but let me ask you one more naive question. There's lots of people from different stripes
and backgrounds watching this show. You just mentioned on these graphs that the aerosols
are parts per trillion. One, two, five, the real bright, highly concentrated are 10 parts
per trillion. Is that correct? Yeah. I'm a scientist and it's even hard for me to conceptualize
that the difference between two parts and five parts per trillion can actually
significantly change both the clouds and the dampening effect and the albedo.
Yeah. And it's a similar thing that three, four, or five parts per 10,000 on climate
can change the thermal imbalance on Earth. Can you talk to me like I'm in a sixth grader?
If you see clouds, that's about the same order of magnitude in particles. There's very little
water, condensated water inside a cloud. It's also in the parts per trillion volume level.
Oh, that's helpful. So when I see a cloud, it's not like 50% of the mass of the sky.
Visually it is, but the actual condensation and particulate is in the parts per trillion.
The rest is just air molecules. Yeah. Yeah. So there's, or water vapor, of course. So there's
gas, gas, water vapor is also gas. So there's that also explode because you can see a cloud,
of course. But CO2 is in the parts per million, right? So that you can see clouds when the
concentration of water inside a certain volume within a cloud is much less than the concentration
of greenhouse gases in the air. But you can see a cloud. You cannot see gases. You cannot see
greenhouse gas. But if you would be able to see greenhouse gases, if you could see in the wavelengths,
greenhouse gas absorbs infrared radiation, it would be black. The sky would be black because it
has much more particles in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere than there's water inside a cloud.
So let's get to this inadvertent experiment. So what happened? A massive reduction in sulfur
in global shipping. Can you explain slide five? Yeah. There's these emissions called
sulfur emissions, which are harmful for health, for the environment. For example,
I'm from a nice town called Seto Gombos in the south of the Netherlands, which is
beautiful cathedral. And these statues on the cathedral, they were dissolving because of acid
rain. And that was mainly because of the sulfur emissions from our coal plants. So in the 1980s,
there was sulfur regulation decrease to reduce the emissions from coal plants. But over the oceans,
this regulation took a long time to come into effect around North America and around Europe,
especially the North Sea. These regulations have come into effect in the past decades and
become tighter and tighter. And especially in 2015, the maximum amount of sulfur in fuels was reduced
over these areas was reduced from 1% to 0.1%. So reducing the amount with 90%. But globally,
there was still a lot of sulfur being emitted. But then in 2020, on January 1st 2020, the regulation
which called IMO 2020 came into effect, regulating how much sulfur is allowed to be used over open
seas by ships. And this decrease from maximum 3.5% to 0.5%. As the graph showed, there's a big
decrease, all of a sudden, a sudden decrease in how much sulfur the ships are allowed to carry,
unless they use what we call scrubbers, which wash the sulfur from the exhaust gases. So that
started in 2020 over these reasons. So here you can see the next slide shows, since 1900s to today,
how much sulfur dioxide in thousands of tons shipping globally was emitting every year.
And that nose dived again in 2020 because of these regulations.
How much of that international shipping sulfur is that of all of the sulfur from humans?
A good percentage?
So from the total amount of sulfur emitted globally, the shipping is about 10% or was about
before 2020, it was about 10%. And that might seem like not so much. But as I showed you,
effect is much stronger if it's emitted directly over the oceans because there's no other sources.
These ships are there all by themselves. There's very little algae. There's no coal plants there.
They are the only source there. So if you want to understand this effect, you have to take that
into account. So while the sulfur dioxide emissions from shipping have been plummeting,
the sulfur dioxide from coal plants in China and everyone around the world are continuing.
China has also been decreasing its sulfur emissions very rapidly in the past two decades,
especially since the Olympics. Also through the installation of these desulfurization systems.
All these new coal plants, they have a system which uses chalk to wash the sulfur from the
exhausts from the coal plants. And then the product is gypsum and the gypsum is sold on the
market. And then through that, it's also relatively a cost-effective way to reduce these emissions.
But what I was getting at is if we had a steep drop in sulfur from shipping,
that still is only, the rest of the world is still producing a lot of warming, masking,
sulfates. So this is the real Faustian bargain. We have to presume that civilization continues
and as soon as it stops, as soon as the musical chairs game stops and sulfates stop,
we have an immediate spike in temperatures coming our way.
Yeah, but that's already what we're starting to see now.
Even with just this little stop, we're seeing that.
Yeah, but it's not a little stop. I think that's really important to understand,
because I think there's been a lot of confusion around that very understandably,
of course, because it's not easy. It's not easy to understand. It's 10% and you think, okay,
it's only 10%. But it's 10% over the oceans and the oceans are 70% of the Earth's surface,
it's oceans. But 90% of the global heat uptake is by the oceans. So the oceans, 90% of the
heat from global warming. So global warming is mainly ocean warming. And then the oceans,
if you reduce the forcing, so that if you reduce the aerosols over the oceans with 80%,
the effect is expected to be much stronger than if you would do the same over land.
Because the oceans are dark, they have dark surface, because there's no other aerosols to
compete with. And because there's more clouds over the ocean, these regions are much more,
and because they take up much of the heat. And if the sun is shining on the oceans, it's not
just heating the first centimeter or the first layer of the surface, like when the sun is shining
on the land. The land absorbs the surface, the first centimeter of the land absorbs the heat
from the sun and it radiates it back as heat to space. But if the sun is shining on the water,
the water, the radiation of the sun, it enters the water into a depth of about 40 meters,
some of the radiation even deeper. So that's also important to understand that this all contributes
to the effect of changes of aerosols over the oceans to be much stronger than if you would
do a globally average reduction of this effect. So how about the next slide, which I see as slide
number seven? So what we did to try and understand what's really happening, because there's just
models now before this inadvertent experiment, they were just models to try and understand what's
happening. But without data, the models have, of course, limited value and that was clear
by the big uncertainty between models. So some say that would be much of an effect,
some say that would be a very strong effect about equal to 10 years of greenhouse gas emissions.
But we don't know, we didn't know, and we still don't fully know what the real world effect
will be and is. And for that, we need to, we now have the experiment in the real world where we
change this, we're still taking shape, of course. And what we did was we looked at these northern
North Pacific Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean to see how much additional sunlight is being absorbed,
because there's less sunlight being reflected by these particles, by less clouds reflecting sunlight
back to space. That means there's more sunlight being absorbed and we compared this to the region
of the southern hemisphere with the same latitudes where there's no shipping or much less shipping,
so there's also less of a forcing change. And then we see, if you see the purple and the red line,
of course, there's variability, there's this effect on the Pacific Decadal Oscillation,
which I mentioned, which around 2016 increased how much sunlight was being absorbed because the
oceans were warmer and there was less clouds formation. But now the PDO is negative so that
we would expect the red line to go much lower, but it has been increasing very rapidly. And
it's likely that this is because of this change in aerosols, in sulfate aerosols. And the same
over the North Atlantic, after 2020, we see a big spike, a big increase in how much sunlight is
being absorbed. And then over the southern hemisphere, we don't see this happening.
So the difference on this chart between the red line and the black line, the red line representing
the North Pacific and the black line, the southern oceans, is around three watts per meter squared.
Three watts per meter squared is like RCP 8.5 is eight and a half watts per meter squared. I mean,
it's a big deal, three watts per meter squared.
Yeah, so the total greenhouse gas forcing, so how much heat, more or less, all the greenhouse gas
humans have put into the atmosphere since 1970. So the CO2, but there's also methane and nitrous
oxide, but also stratospheric water vapor and ozone. So all these combined effects is about
four watts per square meter. And if you have then now a three watts per square meter increase
over the North Atlantic and North Pacific oceans, which are areas of 40 to 50 million
square kilometers above, that's really an enormous increase in how much heat the oceans are absorbing.
And I can show you that, of course, we expect that to increase the ocean temperatures. And
in the end, I can show you what we're starting to see now with that regards.
Okay, so this graph with the showing the ocean absorbed solar radiation, did you make that
graph? Was that your data and discovery? Yeah, so this is what we presented in the global warming
in the pipeline paper. So when you found this, were you like, holy shit, when you found this,
was this like the smoking gun of fitting together a lot of explanations that had previously been
lacking? Yeah, so again, we didn't know what would happen. We didn't know if we would see
what we would be seeing. We just that sort of hypothesis was that from the climate research
models, looking at this in the past, was that there will be a decrease in how much sunlight
is reflected and increase in absorbed solar radiation. But the very high uncertainty in how
big this effect is. And now we see indeed this spike happening, we are now starting to see it.
And this is the 48 month running mean. If you look at it from the past years, it's even higher.
So you see that by the end of the graph, it starts increasing more even, it's still spiking.
So that's really indeed, you say holy shit, I think that's quite an appropriate way to put it,
because that's really a lot of, this implies that the cooling effect of these aerosols
was much stronger. And the warming effect of greenhouse gases is also much stronger than
previously thought or the best estimates, let's say, the best estimates of the IPC or of a lot of
climate research underestimates this effect. And of course, it's in the range because I showed it
until now, it seems to be more or less in the range. But what worries me, because I'm still not
certain that this is the end of it, right? I'm not certain that this is how bad it really is,
because the oceans are still quite cold relatively to other years, because of we had three years of
La Nina and this negative PDO I mentioned. So now we are starting to see what happens with
an El Nino. And that's what we see is worrying, because it's, that's what I mentioned is this
spike is still going up. And probably still don't know what will happen when the Pacific
Decade Oscillation, this other large cycle, which takes longer to variate, that we don't know what
will happen then. And the hypothesis from NASA and NOAA together is that it will increase even
further. So that's really worrying. Well, I mean, it's beyond worrying. Yeah, my scientific assessment
is that it's worrying. Okay. Could you walk through the next two graphs, please? Earth's
energy imbalance. So here we're looking at the yellow is the absorbed solar radiation and the
red is the outgoing long wave radiation over the last 20 years or so. Can you explain what this
means? Yes. So this is the global average incoming sort of absorbed sunlight. So there's about 340
watts of sunlight coming in. And about 29 or 30 to 29% of that sunlight is being reflected back to
space. And then about 240 watts per square meter was absorbed by the planet 23 years ago. And as
the graph shows, this has increased by 2 watts per square meter. So the earth is absorbing
2 watts per square meter more heat than it was 23 years ago. And then that has been balanced a bit,
only a little bit, by an increase in outgoing long wave radiation. And you might think, okay,
why is there more heat going out while the greenhouse gas concentration is increasing?
That's because the temperature has been increasing. Without the increasing greenhouse gas emissions,
there would be about 4 watts per square meter more heat going out at the current temperatures than
we see on this graph. So it would be off the chart and there would be more heat being radiated
to space than there's being absorbed from the sun. But now we see so there's more heat being absorbed
than there's being radiated to space. And that's you see the yellow part is growing bigger. That
means that there's more heat is absorbed faster. So the rate of heat uptake is increasing. And
that's what the next graph shows. The rate of which we call the earth's energy imbalance. So the rate
of accumulation of heat is increasing very rapidly. So it was the beginning of the century,
this millennium, it was about 0.6 watts per square meter. And now it's over 1.8 watts per square
meter. Over the past, let's say two or three years, it's 1.5 watts. So that's really rapidly
increasing. And especially in recent years, it's been going up and up and up. So I have a
profound question to ask here. At one point in this graph, the global net heat flux, the energy
imbalance was zero in around 2010. Why was that? Yeah, then we can go back and see that the red part
was touching almost touching the yellow part. That means that there was not much more heat
being absorbed than being radiated to space. Is that because of the global recession?
No. I think that's mainly natural variability. So if I would take, for example, a 48-month mean,
you wouldn't see that. So it's really, of course, this is really 12 months. And there's just a
variability in the system. So it's an interesting question to ask. And you could assess that.
You could do an analysis and see, okay, where was it? How hot and why is that? Maybe it was more
hot over land, which increases outgoing thermal radiation, but it was still colder over the oceans,
which caused more clouds to be over the ocean. Something like that. I would assume it was my
expert's judgment. But that's not really what to look at, of course. It's more the long-term trend
to look at. And then that's really going up. Right. No, I understand. Okay. So what we've
learned so far is that the Earth's energy imbalance is increasing. The climate temperature
response is not as high as it would be without aerosols. And a big component of those was just
reduced in global shipping regulations. Yes, without the decrease of greenhouse gas emissions.
Right. So talk to me as if I'm a sixth grader right now. What are the big picture
implications of this and the Hansen et al paper? Yeah. So what you would think would happen if the
planet is warming. I think there's three things to take into account. So what we call a forcing is
greenhouse gases are forcing. So the climate is pushed in a direction where it's warming.
Aerosols are a negative forcing and push the climate into a direction of cooling.
So we've been, of course, pushing the climate into a warming state while also pushing in the other
direction. So that's a forcing agent. But then what happens as a result of this net effect
is an imbalance. So there's an energy climate response and it's warming and when it heats up,
at a certain moment we expect there's a new equilibrium. So more as much heat going out as
coming in as you showed as you mentioned, like, okay, around 2010. So if there's always
around zero, there's an imbalance going around zero, then there's no more warming.
But now we are faster pushing it. So we stopped some of the cooling effects. So we rapidly, we
call this a termination shock of rapidly reducing part of the cooling, which causes a rapid warming
effect. And we expect this to translate to, of course, higher surface air temperatures as well
and more ice melt and more fast sea level rise. And so because there's more heat in the system.
But we haven't seen that yet in the past years. That's why some are skeptical about if this effect
is real. But now we're starting with this El Nino. This additional heat is starting to surface. So
if this data from NASA is correct, which it really seems it is, then that should contribute to rapid
increase in rate of surface warming as well. So there are two opposing camps at different extremes.
One is all those people, especially in the United States who think that climate change is some
great reset hoax that is not based in science and the earth is always warmed and they don't
believe this per se. And the other is the climate scientists themselves who have perhaps underestimated
the role of aerosol as a cooling forcing and underestimated. So you can underestimate the
cooling effect. And we're starting to learn whether this has been underestimated. And it seems it is
generally for the best estimate has most likely more and more likely been underestimating the
warming effect of decreasing these aerosols. But what's also being underestimated is that the rate
at which these aerosols can be reduced because it was always thought James Hansen wrote in 1990
about the effect of reducing fossil fuel use. And then there would be first there would be warming
because this would coincide with decrease in aerosols. But now we continue to emit a use of
fossil fuels. We continue the increasing CO2 and methane going into the atmosphere and the
concentration increase. But we are rapidly reducing the amount of sulphate aerosols. And that's
combined that's really that's of course we couldn't have every expert who understands this
should expect the rate of warming to increase. And that will also what now we're starting to see
that happening. And if that goes on for the next years, I think that will also help some skeptics
maybe not or some will double down on that. That's what I was just going to say is that
in a horrible way, this may be a science communication global alert. If you're right,
we are going to see a spike in temperatures next year with the change in the PDO and a shift to
El Nino on top of lower sulfur emissions. Yeah. And if we don't, you have something wrong in this
story. I hope I'm wrong. But so maybe I can show you just a second. This graph is think the next
graph shows a lot. And if you can see it. Okay. Yep. There's a lot of information on this. But
I think it's quite clear if you if you know what it shows. So the top shows global emissions of
sulfur dioxide over since 1950. So we can see it had been increasing from 1950 to 1980. The global
sulfur dioxide emissions have been increasing. And then the more or less stabilized and there
was a dip and then increases again, up to 2010. And then there was it started to decrease. And in
2020, it started, there was a big dip. The second part of the figure shows global chip emissions
of sulfur dioxide, which are more or less steady increase up to 2010. And then the sulfur regulations
came into effect step by step. And really coming into effect in 2020, when it nose dives, and then
yeah, you see that there's almost no more sulfur in the oceans. Yeah, it's very sharp drop. And then
I show three different sea surface temperature, monthly graphs and warming stripes. For the
northern hemisphere met latitude, it's not only warming sites also cooling stripes, because you
see they the temperature has been decreasing since 1950, with the increase of sulfur coinciding with
the increase in global but also ocean sulfur dioxide emissions. Yeah, that's what we would
expect if there's so if there's a lot over the northern hemisphere met latitudes where most of
the 8 billion people today living today live. That's where most of the cooling was from these
particles was happening. And that's what once these emissions started to decrease, the warming effect
of greenhouse gases was stronger than the cooling effect of aerosols. And we see a rapid increase.
But now in recent years, you see it has been increasing more and more and faster than the other
region I show in this the second lowest region, which is the mirrored region of the north, so the
southern hemisphere met latitude, where we see only a gradual increase in temperature over the oceans
without much of an effect of these sulfates. And then the bottom we saw the global effect. And
there you also see that there's there wasn't much warming in the beginning up to 1980. And then there
was a gradual the warming started to increase. And then your research has started to increase
faster. But then now in the past aspect of coinciding with the start of the El Nino,
we see a big spike again. And we can expect with this continuing decrease, because there's also
other place where the sulfates decrease can expect the warming to increase further. And that could
also have other effects, for example, the aerosols could have been keeping the amok stronger than it
would have been without these aerosols. So the Atlantic Maradona or overturning circulation
could also be impacted indirectly by these changes in sulfates. So we really have to
prepare ourselves for a lot of very big changes to come to our climate and weather systems.
We also started seeing this in 2023, with a lot of crazy weather storms that formed within 12
hours from the storm to 5 hurricane 5, hitting Acapulco in Mexico, stuff like this, these high
sea surface temperatures impacting coral reefs, all these things happening. So you're right, it
could help to open some ice. Maybe some ice will shut even more because it's very inconvenient
to believe this, that we are responsible for this. I agree. And who should have seen this coming,
and who haven't seen this coming, are already starting to bury their head deep inside the
sand or inside their models and pretending is very punitive. Well, it affects their built
identity and all the decisions they've made in the world. So I want to get back to the paper,
but first let me ask you this. So yes, if we do get another half degree of warming, even temporarily,
because then it'll go back down after the El Niña starts again, at some point.
It might. But it won't go all the way back down probably. It'll just retreat higher highs and
higher lows sort of thing. Yeah, maybe. But of course, we don't know with this forcing,
the temperature might not even go below 1.4 ever again. Global average increase in surface
temperature might, it might stay very high. Well, ever is a long time. Yeah, ever. Okay,
sure. But I mean, for in, yeah, this is a good point in the next few thousand years.
Yeah, I like to focus personally. I like focusing on this century because it's more,
it's what we understand most and it's also what we can impact.
I actually don't like focusing on this century because I think the climate won't stop warming
in the year 2100. And I think one of the implications of Hansen paper where you were a
co-author is the earth system sensitivity to a doubling in CO2 is now based on your research
much higher than is conventionally accepted. That if we double CO2, there's a transient
equilibrium and an earth system effect after all the feedbacks are measured. And if we only care
about the transient one, because that's when we and our children are alive, we're neglecting what
happens to all the other species and ecosystems and the human species thousands of years from now.
I agree on that. But I think also if people, I think most people don't care about that much.
And then if you want to take that into account, if you want to, the long term effect to be less
strong or less bad, it's also important for people to understand that the near term effect
is likely much worse than most think, right? Because most don't know about these aerosol
effects. It's like in the cop in Dubai, very few people were talking about it. And the word
aerosols don't are not in the agreement, right? So people are blind, very blind to this effect.
So because they don't know, well, if that this could impact the overturning circulation, they
don't know that this could cause really rapid warming where they live themselves in the very
near future. And if they would know, if people would know, they might, I don't know, but they might,
they get their shit together faster.
Emphasis on might. Let me ask you, I have so many questions, Leon. I know your family's coming home
soon, but there's a thousand questions. So first of all, yes, we might say that a half degree
additional warming Celsius in the next six months due to the combined effect of the PDO switch and
the sulfur would be an alarming don't look up asteroid hitting a sign that would wake people up.
But on the other side, is it possible, either in the near term or in coming decades,
that the positive feedbacks from nature, from low lying methane producing areas and
some of the feedbacks that are triggered from warming start to make human emissions
not the dominant story? In other words, could we trade off some alarm and political
awakening to this with a pushing into a higher percentage of biological feedbacks dominating
the process?
Yeah, so that's what worries me personally is the Atlantic Ocean, where most of the heat flow
from southern hemisphere to northern hemisphere happens through the ocean and through the atmosphere
over the Atlantic. And then so that's transported heat from south to north. And then if we because
we decrease the sulfates, the ocean is absorbing more heat than it would was without. And then
there's less need of heat transporting from the south to the north. And we also already see
in the hypothesis I have that that this might contribute to the melting of Antarctic sea ice
so faster because there's more heat staying in the south and which contributes to melting of
Antarctic sea ice, but also keeping it from freezing because and then and then if the amox
flows down, of course that could influence global weather systems, could impact the monsoons,
it could impact the weather we have in Europe, it could impact the weather all around the world.
So that's really something to take into account. And some parts of the system might be less
affected by it than others, but and of course we have the Canadian forests. Another paper I was a
co-author of this year by Ripple Edel showed that present also the different things happening to the
climate system this year. And one enormous spike in forest burning over the Canada was part of this
and it's really really off the chart combined with the sea surface temperatures and the surface
temperatures and Antarctic sea ice. I think it's already very worrying without even without what
we might expect happening in the years to come and yeah how people will respond to that.
Do you feel some vindication that you've been devoting a lot of your life's energy to researching
this and and now it turns out that what you've been writing about and talking about for the
last 20 years is is happening or is it kind of bittersweet because humanity just didn't do anything?
Yeah so it's very in a ways of course it's for everyone it's personal right. If my country is
30% of my country is already below sea level and that's increasing so I might lose my country
because of this so. Yeah I was right but I lost my country. Exactly so I rather be wrong I think
that's that's important so but whatever people say I think the data shows that it's likely worse
than most people think and I cannot argue with the data I can try but the data is there.
So what would the very senior respected IPCC scientists say about the slides that you've
shared with me today and and your your paper and your explanation and your prediction that we're
gonna have another spike in temperature likely in coming first half of 2024? I think it depends
whether they are listening and whether they are reading the paper before they respond. I think
that's important. I think the first response might be this can be right because I think the first
response of James Hansen when I talked to him about this was also this can be right. I respect
him for that he's a puzzle solver and he's skeptical and he's like a pit bull he wants to
understand it. Exactly. And here's the thing I don't know him well but I would never discount
what he said because he did this almost 40 years ago was talking about this and what a burden that
guy must carry trying to explain all this to the public and to policy people for 40 years
and all-time emissions all-time new coal capacity building in 2023. Yeah. Sorry to interrupt keep
going. No you're right and I think that's also maybe a reason why why Hansen is sometimes using
stronger language than he has in the past. He said that your research is a big fucking deal
is what he said on some recent podcasts. Exactly. Yeah so I think that's the research but I mean
the findings it's just not just our research but it's even before we present this research
our co-author Norman Loeb from NASA wrote a paper in 2021 showing that until 2019 there was an
increase in the rate in the earth's energy middle is the rate in which the earth is warming
doubling in the rate of warming and it didn't get much attention but this data is worrying it's not
just what we how we present it it's the data itself that is worrying so yeah and I wish
people would look at this data and come to with different conclusions and explain us
why we are wrong using the data but I haven't seen that yet so that's what I think what's
important to see but if you say okay but what would be the response of of IPCC authors which some are
even part of our paper but what would be the response of some IPCC authors I think please
look at this data and tell us we are wrong I think that's that's what we all want to hear thank you
so I have so many more questions for you let's let's move into the second part like you've been
full scientists talking about the data and your research so far now I still want you to kind of
have your scientists hat on but also speculate I'm going to ask you some questions so so given what
you know now of course this isn't can't be proven this is just your opinion as a very well informed
person under the default scenario where do you think the ultimate what I'm referring to with my
colleagues Holocene Anthropocene Thermal Maximum will be where we headed temperature wise as the
centuries unfold if we do nothing and the default and I'm not talking about rcp 8.5
biophysically implausible coal and oil and gas availability but even a near term next decade or
so peak and decline in emissions what are we looking at so limited guess yes and and then
attach a confidence interval to your guess so I think it's very very uncertain what will happen I
think because well you've already told me that we're headed to one and a half and James Hanson has
said that in the next two decades we'll hit two degrees and that will be kind of the baseline
so we've got that even what we show in our paper we assume that the amok will not stop okay there
will not be a shutdown of that well it's already stopped 20 to 25 percent so it's slowed significantly
yeah exactly so but it has stopped before right so it's in right after last ice hatem but it has
stopped many times so we know that's possible almost stopped we know it can slow down significantly
and that within within years the weather in europe can change right so in the place where people
are producing food it can change and I don't know what what will happen like I don't know maybe we
might increase coal use again because we need to eat we need to eat our homes yeah that's a response
right it's not something I I think should happen or I want to happen but yeah what humanity might
refer to in the with the same situation that or or we would chop down forests which would mean a
smaller sink for carbon yeah if you look what happened in canada which I already mentioned that
we couldn't maybe cannot even cut it down fast enough before it started burning right so that's
also something to consider so there's indeed what you mentioned there's a lot of known unknowns
and then like personally of course surface air temperatures are interesting but for me
living in the Netherlands I think sea level rise is much more important than global surface
average surface air temperatures are what are not what people really care about right it is not
what they feel strongly about it's it's a storm category six hurricane or this stuff like which
we never knew what could happen or these the floods hit in Germany a few years ago which are
still rebuilding and all these these things we cannot really prepare for like what happens if
if our solar panels are blowing from the roofs and and the windmills are being destroyed or in the
in the North Sea when we are getting some super storms which we could we we or at least the engineers
didn't expect weren't warned about right so all these things contribute to change that could happen
I think that's what really I think will happen I expected more or less to happen
this century already and I think that's really something we should take into account so your
recent paper with James James Hansen clearly states that temporary solar radiation management SRM
will probably be needed in the future in other words we're going to have to purposely inject
atmospheric aerosols to limit warming in the future how do you see this happening this is
speculation of course this isn't your your core thing using what techniques under what scale
what time frame and under whose governance and control do you think this is coming let me first
start with saying this it's not something Jim or we want right we don't want this to happen
but I think that's important to note or or that we think this is an alternative to reducing greenhouse
gas emissions it's what we see already we see now happening is that we are not decreasing greenhouse
gas emissions people are not decreasing greenhouse gas emissions at the rate needed and because they
are not doing that because of what we see happening in Dubai just some some weak tea and no real
action happening relative to the problem at hand we realize that people and the governments and
companies will likely revert to sunlight reflection methods SRM or whatever you call it
and that's what we expect and then we better prepare for that we better learn from what's
happening do not do it without the knowledge do not have agents trying to cool stuff down
and causing a lot of terrible things to happen elsewhere or even where they are trying to do it
so I think that's really important and then how it will happen I think that's
that's very uncertain but I think that's also really depends on where the effects are taking
place so if certain countries are for example I think India, India I think likely will be one of
the countries which will consider it maybe before others because it has a billion people
overbilling I think 1.4 billion people now living in a country that's generally quite hot already
and it's still being cooled by a lot of coal plants putting a lot of sulfur in the atmosphere
isn't this also the wouldn't have to be global what could India do SRM solar radiation management
alter the temperature yeah so they are already reflecting a lot of sunlight
with their sulfur emissions at the moment they are already putting a lot of sulfur in the atmosphere
and not just sulfur but also a lot of brown carbon and black carbon and that has health
effects so they are probably they already have policy like China did and has and like what's
happening over the oceans they had policy to reduce the amount of air pollutants including sulfur
here's a dumb question Lian if India does some policy to change the sulfates or their emissions
it's globally mixed won't it want to be a little bit more impactful in India but basically be
diluted around the world yeah it depends what how they do it right okay if they if they put it
into the stratosphere there's much more global effects than if they would do it over the surface
over the oceans like to what the ships have been already doing as a byproduct right put the ships
in the but the coal and the coal plants and and all the cooking fires which kill four million
people a year all the biomass cooking fires also cause all these particles in the atmosphere and
absorption of sunlight in the in the in the atmosphere but the decrease in how much heat
is reaching the surface and this all has to be taken into account to to understand how India has
has even cooled or at least not warmed a lot in the past decades as it's developed industrially
when all these emissions increase let's assume that there is a technology to use solar radiation
management and it's effective and that society around the world is seeing how bad the climate
forcing from emissions are and it's warming and the energy imbalance is so high that we have to
do something but isn't that like some modern equivalent of the stone heads on Easter Island
because as soon as we stop it then the heat comes back with a vengeance so wouldn't it have to be
done in perpetuity yeah we are already stopping it so that's what's happening now we have been
cooling not intentionally but we have been cooling the climate we have been limiting the warming
especially where we live and now we stop doing that and then we're learning what will happen now
and then of course just doing it intentionally I think that's a very big discussion we and I think
this should be held on on a lot of levels well well here's the thing Leon if you are really this
podcast this conversation is December 13th this will come out in January we're gonna know by March
April June July of 2024 whether you're really right about this and I imagine that next year next
summer you and Jim Hansen and others are gonna be bombarded with what the hell do we do sort of
questions or you're wrong and this doesn't happen but I find your your logic quite compelling on this
yeah the data is wrong I think that's because we're just presenting the data right and then
right then it will be the correlation is wrong there's no correlation yeah there's the causation
there's a correlation for sure that's what the data shows but then there's no causation and it was
just all the stupid coincidence and everything will be fine I hope so but then you're right so
I think that if this in the coming months will take shape more and more and if more and more
people will be affected by this like of course we already see that there's stronger voices
of intentionally cooling the climate and so on that note I know you're not an expert on this
per se but can you speculate are there other ways that humanity could use technology to
create global cooling like regenerative agriculture that sucks in carbon into the soil
and artificial whale poop and and other things or is there anything out there that you think might
play a decent role I'm all for whale poop and increasing the biosphere I'm a big fan of James
Lovelock and his theory about earth being a living system and because of course we know
there's life on planet earth and we know that plants grow and then the plant and that life
interacts with with its environment and the environment impacts life but life impacts the
environment as well and in a way we are the conscious of this planet we can have a positive
effect on the planet and I think I do believe in that and I think it's a very it's not easy
it requires stewardship it's an enormous responsibility and we can do a lot of things
wrong which we are doing at the moment but in the end I think I do believe that humans can have
a net positive effect on the planet and that's maybe that's very hard for many people to think
about even to see humans as a positive force for the good overall but I think that is possible
and we have a lot to learn on how to get there and yeah I think that an important part in getting
there is is increasing the biosphere and to increase the potential of life itself to to
create a better climate well the the other additional pieces we have to increase the
number of people that actually understand what's going on and how how dire the situation is not
only for our economies but for the oceans and the biosphere we've been treating oceans like a
garbage dump out of sight out of mind and it's invisible CO2 that's just being absorbed by
these giant bodies of water so we're not going to have time for the 50 other scientific questions
I have for you I want to keep my promise to you on time but I would like to ask you now just
wear your hat as a human and by the way I don't think you can really do that you're always going
to be a scientist I can just tell by the way you you think but but that's okay I really value
your contribution and your heart on this I'm sure a lot of people watching this specifically
tuned in to hear you because they know of your work with James Hansen and they're very worried
about climate change and probably many other issues as well do you have any personal advice
to the listeners of this program at this time of environmental disruption and global anxiety
what some people might call the meta crisis but you could maybe even say specifically climate
and what's coming any advice that's a good question I think it's important to do what you're good at
and to not despair to not take everything to to personally to not internalize everything you
see and read and maybe what I talked about to take it to heart but not to not let it affect you
personally too much but also try to work on on solutions with the best of your capacity I think
that's really important to to see okay what where can I be a force of good in the world and
because I think that's for everyone different so everyone would answer that question differently
but I think that's everyone can add value to this world and I think you all I think it's important
to to see also at look at the scale look at the scale of the problem of course I believe in small
steps but if everyone does a little it only little happens I think that's true so take into account
the scale of of the planet of the of the of the problem at hand and try to add value there
and you have children right young children yeah seven and five years old seven and five what advice
do you give for teenagers and people in their 20s who are learning about all this and having
to make decisions about their career and their lifestyles and and choices would you change your
advice for young people or add to it yeah I think for young people I think it's important to again
try to to do it from your own perspective so do what you're good at because if you like not not
everyone likes to do science or do do data analysis or be an entrepreneur or whatever I did what I'm
good at and what I what I like to do and I I think that's really important if you want to do this for
the long run because we need people to really be committed and because the challenges ahead of us
are are very complex and require commitment I think that's important and it helps if you do
what you like to do or if you do what you're good at that will help you to build a career it's
important but it's much easier to build a career around something which you which you are good at
and which you like to do it which also fulfills you in a way well you and I are both doing that I'm
educating the broader public on a system science with an environmental ethic and you are solving
deep complex biogeochemical earth system puzzles with your research what do you care most about
in the world Leon? That's a big question I care about the the plan itself about life and about
my personally of course my family and and friends but I also know that if we want to
conserve a future worth living we have to be very conscious about the reality of this and
sometimes it's confronting but I think it's important to understand the reality and take
that into account to build solutions for the future and really look at the large scale of things
and I like to look at it from the really like a macro large-scale perspective because that's
that's where things are changing and where we have to change them for the good. I agree
if you could I don't think you've probably watched any of my podcasts we had conversations offline
but this is a question I ask all my guests if you had access to a magic wand and you could change
one thing and there was no personal recourse to your decision no status loss or anything like that
what is one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures? I would try or if I could
change how humans interact with reality that would be great so of course humans are not
rational beings they think they are but generally they are not so otherwise we wouldn't have had
this conversation right because rationally we know what our effects are and we know how it impacts
and we know it we should do things differently but we are not we know the potential is enormous
but we are not living up to that overall I think I would like that to change so that we can use the
tools which physics for example give us for example I don't like it there's some subjects which
even if you mention it you'll be put into a certain corner right so including this subject
this subject is a very good example of that indeed so aerosols like if you even talk about
aerosols even when you talk about it from a climate perspective and you say it this is the
largest uncertainty in climate science and we need to understand this better this provides us an
opportunity to reduce the large uncertainty climate science people say ah you must be pro-geo
engineering and you want more fossil fuels like totally ridiculous of course but that's what happens
and there's many subjects like that like for example nuclear energy yeah if you even mentioned the
word some people might already just because I didn't say anything about it people might think okay
you're like this or you're like that nuclear energy renewable energy climate change they're all
polarized all of them exactly yeah exactly so I would like if I could have a wand and could change
that just for things to be less polarized and more based on on the physical reality of this world
here here so we covered a lot here you are a scientist and know a huge amount about this topic
I would love to have you back at some point in the future if you would come and we did a round
to what is one specific topic and it could be as narrow as you like that you think is relevant to
human futures that you would want to take a deep dive and unpack and tell a story about that one
thing anything come to mind yeah what I would like to assess further yeah I think that's how
how in the past thousands of years humans have interacted with the planet and how they
change the planet in many different ways and how that could take shape in the future I think that's
to me is very interesting and I think that's so how can we be in that force of good I for example
one can think of his own carbon footprint and I've often people say okay I have to fly there
I have to fly and they complain about the carbon footprint but I then say okay what is your net
footprint if you make sure that some technology can decrease carbon emissions by a billion tons
for example you could fly anywhere in the world but hypothetically right so I think there's there's
many ways we humans as individuals could be a force of good in the world but overall humans can
be as well and I think that's an interesting question to dive into further thank you do you
have any closing comments for the people watching and listening who kind of understand or maybe some
people this is the first they've heard that aerosols have been masking the warming in the
pipeline do you have any closing words yeah so if you are skeptical I think many people
watching this might be try to look at the data yourself I think it's the data is quite accessible
and I almost when I share my figures on on x for example I always add a reference and
whether you have 10 followers or a million followers if you respond I always try to respond back and
if you have questions I can share that my expertise in how to access the data and how to try and
understand it because it's really that I would love that more people look at this and try to
understand what's happening and then with the knowledge they gain do what they can to within
their expertise to further the cause of humanity on this planet thank you so much lian you're welcome
if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification please follow us on your
favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification.com for more information on future
releases this show is hosted by Nate Hagans edited by no troublemakers media and curated by Leslie
Badloots and Lizzie Siriani
