We know that the AMOG is a potential tipping element in the climate system that it could shut down.
We see from paleo data evidences that it might have happened before.
And we are not really much closer to knowing when exactly this will happen in terms of timing,
in terms of how much degree of global warming would be okay before the AMOG could collapse
than we were like 20, 30 years ago, even though we know much more.
Today's conversation is with Climate Physicist Levka Caesar.
Levka works at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research in Potsdam, Germany. Her current
work primarily focuses on the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, aka the AMOG, and its
pivotal role in our climate system. Levka's research has produced seminal work on the past
evolution of this important ocean current. In October of 2023, she also assumed the role of
scientific lead for the newly launched Planetary Boundary Science Initiative at the Potsdam
Institute. This conversation was a deep dive on all things AMOG, what we know, what we don't know,
and what speculations are for the future of this critical component of our planetary systems.
Please welcome Levka Caesar. Levka, great to see you.
Yeah, great to talk to you, Nate. Thanks for inviting me.
You are welcome. So usually when I host guests, I have their location on my globe, but since we're
going to be talking about the AMOG, the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation of the Atlantic
Ocean, I highlighted the Atlantic Ocean as the theme location of the podcast. So you are a world
renowned expert on ocean issues, especially the AMOG, and that's going to be the topic of our
deep dive today. But let me first ask you this. How old were you, and what were you thinking
when you first decided I want to be a scientist studying how Earth's natural systems work?
That's a very interesting question because I have to admit I'm actually coming from the space
science side. So when I was young, and I think even at the age of like eight, nine, I was really
interested in the formation of black holes, the life cycle of stars. Then I had a period when I
wanted to become an astronaut, and that basically sparked me to study physics, and it was then
later during my studies that I kind of realized I want to do something that's closer to home and
that feels a little bit more relevant. So I still really believe that astrophysics is really cool,
and I don't know, physicists might call it sexy in terms of the data, the mechanisms, but yeah,
I guess I was in about like 22 when I really did my bachelor's in physics that I realized
physics can also be applied to our planet, to the Earth system, and can explain so many interesting
and relevant phenomena, whether the ocean circulations that, yeah, basically then when I
decided to shift my focus. Excellent. I shifted my focus when I was on Wall Street and realized
that the externalities were not included in our prices, and we were in for a phase shift during
my lifetime of the ecology and natural systems on Earth. So as you're well aware, global heating
is in the news. Lots of people are worried and aware of climate change. Oceans are a very integral
part of the climate system, but they don't get as much coverage in the news. There are multiple
ocean risk that we face, ocean acidification, decline in oxygen content, sea level rise,
overfishing, lots of different aspects. But what we're going to talk about today is the ocean
currents and how they change and how they may be changing in the near and distant future. So can
you start us off by describing what the AMOCK is and how critical it is to the function of climate
as we know it today? Yes, sure. So the AMOCK, which is short for Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation, and I like that name, even though I guess for a lot of people it's kind of difficult to
say it first, but it's actually a good description of what the system is. So the AMOCK is a system
of ocean currents, covering the Atlantic, therefore Atlantic Meridional, because that's the geological
term basically for saying something is moving in the north-south direction. And while the AMOCK is
basically, when depending on where you look, moving in any direction, the main transport is on the
north-south line. So the AMOCK is transporting a lot of warm saline water at or just below the surface
of the ocean northward in the Atlantic. It's really coming even from the southern ocean,
so it's really transporting the whole length of the Atlantic, these water masses, and then as
basically it's going over the equator through the tropics and then entering the colder subpolar
north Atlantic region. And basically with that it's coming into regions of colder air masses
above the surface of the ocean and a lot of this heat is then being transported or basically
released to the atmosphere. The water, the surface water is cooling down and cold water is denser
compared to warmer water and this is then basically leading to a sinking of the water masses, which
we call convection in physical terms basically. And these water masses then that are sinking
down in the subpolar north Atlantic. And while the locations are the Erminger Sea, the Nordic Seas,
the Leoparder Sea, but I guess if you're not an oceanographer, then probably you wouldn't know
what these ocean regions are called. So it's basically around the Greenland ice sheet, so to
the south of it, to the east of it, and there you have those places of this deep water formation.
So the sinking of surface water masses that are being cooled down by the atmosphere, getting denser,
getting heavier, and then are going to deeper ocean layers. And when I say deeper, I mean
depths of two to three kilometers. And then these water masses together from the southward return
flow of the AMOC, now transporting colder water southward at depths towards basically back towards
the equator region. And it's mainly this exchange of warm surface water going towards the subpolar
region and colder, deeper water going back, that leads to a lot of energy transport by the AMOC.
Okay, let me let me pause you there for a little bit of history. And I'm going to pretend that I
don't know much about this, which I don't really have to pretend much. We've had the AMOC current
forever, or since there were seven continents, right? I mean, we've been aware of this and able
to look back in time. And this current that you described has been there for a long time, right?
It has been there for a long time. Forever is probably difficult to say.
But yeah. And is this a new, I know there's a new paper out by your colleagues, I believe,
and yourself, on the risks that the AMOC poses in the near future. But is awareness of this
current? Is this a relatively new thing? Or is scientists known about this for a long time?
Actually, no, there are, within the scientific community, this kind of starts with Henry Stommel,
who's one of, yeah, famous oceanographer, who already in the 60s basically assessed that this
overturning circulation, which first of all is special to the Atlantic, so we do not have this
kind of overturning circulation in the Pacific, that it exists, that it's very special in the
sense that normally when we look at either ocean currents or atmospheric currents, they would always
transport heat from the tropics to the polar regions, because basically the sun is heating the
earth in the sense we have most of the radiation going towards the tropics and then less towards
the polar regions. And as is usually the case, basically the systems thrive towards
distributing the heat more homogeneously. So basically, when you have a lot of heating at
one place and no heating at the others, you have a movement of either water or air masses
from the heated region to the colder regions. But the AMOC is special because it can actually
transport heat above the equator. It's transporting heat from the southern to the northern hemisphere.
And that makes it really special. And that the system is there, basically, and why it can be
there, which is like a delicate balance, basically of freshwater, saline water, heating and cooling
in the Atlantic. That is something that has been known, as I said, for several decades now.
And also an understanding of the mechanism that it doesn't have to be there, so that in principle
it's possible that there is no AMOC, or theoretically we could even say the AMOC could be flowing the
other way around. So as I said, we have a northward surface flow and a southward deep flow. We could
also have a circulation in the Atlantic where we have a southward surface flow, deep water formation
basically in the southern ocean, and then a northward deep water return flow. But that's not
the case. The way, basically, our earth system is set right now through the fact that we have
the heating in the tropics, we have then evaporation of water masses, of the warm water masses in the
tropics, and more precipitation rainfall in the north Atlantic. This balance is basically
played out at the moment that we have the AMOC as it is flowing today with the northward surface flow.
Okay, so I'm going to jump around here, but give us the punchline first and then we'll backfill from
there. What is happening to the AMOC now and what are the risks or the scenarios you see in
coming decades or centuries or millennia based on what's already built in?
Yeah, so what we see now is basically a slowdown of this circulation system, very simply said.
And while scientifically it's always a little bit difficult to give exact numbers, everything
hints towards a slowdown of about 15% over the last few decades. And again, it's more difficult to
say why something is happening compared to then just observing it and saying it is happening,
but we do understand under which circumstances, what are the mechanisms that could drive such a
slowdown. And this is mainly related to a freshwater influx into the sub-poller north Atlantic.
So I already kind of said that what is driving this ocean circulation is really a formation of
deeper water masses, a sinking of water masses in the sub-poller north Atlantic around Greenland.
And then basically when you have water sinking at some place, you have to have an inflow at the
surface that is kind of filling this gap just due to volume conservation. And then this deep water
has to go somewhere. And basically with how the earth is set, the rotation of the earth,
the way it is basically that we have a southward deep water flow and then this surface northward
flow. But if we now put a lot of freshwater into the sub-poller north Atlantic, what is happening
is that the surface water there get lighter, less dense. This is because the density of ocean water
depends on two things, the temperature, which I already mentioned, colder water being denser
than light water, but also the salinity. And here I guess it also makes a lot of sense if I put more
salt, more matter into something, I make it heavier and denser. Now if we put a lot of very
fresh water, so no salinity basically into the sub-poller north Atlantic, then we lighten the
surface water and we hinder, slow down this deep water formation, the sinking of water masses.
Now that's in principle, that is understood, not just in principle, it is understood. The thing is
that in real life, it's not happening in the way that we have at every minute, every place in the
sub-poller north Atlantic deep water formation. So it's not like we sometimes call the over-turning
circulation a conveyor belt, and I think there you mentioned something that is continuously
going, flowing, but actually the deep water formation is happening from time to time,
mainly in the winter time, because that's when the atmosphere is specifically cold.
It's also then cooling the surface water the most, and then it's also happening at specific
locations because it's really a delicate balance of what exactly is the local surface temperature,
atmospheric temperature above that, what's the local salinity value, and that's also why it's
difficult for us to say when are we really stopping this process, because we do know that we're now
putting more fresh water in the sub-poller north Atlantic. The greenland ice sheet is melting,
under climate change we see increased precipitation over this region, so also more fresh water,
but whether or not and how much this influencing the over-turning circulation really depends on
where exactly is what happening. So which is more, has a higher forcing component of salinity or
temperature, like a small change in salinity or a small change in temperature, which causes the
water to not descend or to descend faster? That's a very good question, and it depends.
So because the relationship basically between temperature, salinity, and density is not linear,
so basically how much, when I change the temperature a little bit, it matters whether I change it from
20 to 21 degrees or whether I change it from 5 to 4 degrees. The differences or the effects on
density are different and the same is with salinity. So we can't just talk about the change, we would
have to also talk about the background state and then look at the change to say what is more important
and then also when we look at it right now, in terms of the more dominant driver is actually the
temperature, but in terms of what we human change and how we change it, it's actually, the system
is more sensitive to salinity changes right now. So here's a dumb question, but it's my podcast,
so I can ask some dumb questions. When water evaporates from the ocean, the ocean is a salt water,
but when it evaporates, the salt doesn't evaporate, the salt stays in the ocean,
so the clouds just get non-saline water droplets, and the part two of the question is,
as we head into a world with a higher standard deviation of precipitation, floods and droughts,
et cetera, does this changing precipitation pattern over the oceans and supposedly indirectly
over the land which would run off into the ocean, does that higher standard deviation
indirectly affect the salinity of the melt water in the oceans and change this amok?
So first of all, your first question, comment, I'm just going to comment that was right,
so basically rain is freshwater and the salt just stays in the ocean when it evaporates,
which is why when we have more precipitation over an ocean region, we are freshening the water there,
we are decreasing the salinity, and yes, I mean the thing is, unless with global warming where we
can basically say it might depend on the region, but in general we see global warming globally,
so there's warming close to everywhere, when we talk about the changes in precipitation,
there it's way more difficult, so we have a tendency of saying, okay, the regions that now
receive precipitation are likely going to receive more and the drier regions are going to be drier
in the future, but that's like more a general thing, it doesn't have to be true for every place,
but we can see in our climate simulations that yeah, there's a tendency towards more
precipitation over the regions where the deep water formation for the amok is happening,
and that in itself is basically bad for the amok because it can slow it down,
but that alone wouldn't be the problem, I think a bigger problem is actually the melting of the
ice sheets because due to the reason what you said, also snow basically, I mean that's frozen
precipitation, so that is also pure freshwater, and all this melting runoff coming from the
green and ice sheet and entering the sub-Polaroid Atlantic, that's actually potentially very harmful
for the amok, but there are also other effects, just basically the surface warming that we see
globally in the oceans could also hinder the or slow down the amok because it's also making
the surface water lighter, enhancing what we call the stratification of the ocean, really meaning
that there's not a lot of vertical mixing, and therefore also, yeah, tindering the deep water
formation, so there are really multiple effects overlaying this, and I could actually get on
and go on and on because it gets even more complicated, I listened to a few of your podcasts
and you also talked already about the aerosol forcing basically, and it's important for climate
change, and that actually also plays a role for the amok because a lot of the aerosols right now
where they are basically are located in the atmosphere, it's cooling regions that could also
be critical for the amok and help in that sense, kind of and basically be good for the amok in
terms of it's cooling the regions where the deep water formation is taking place, and that might
help the driver of the amok, but that also really depends on where exactly, and this is something
that is different from climate model to climate model, which is why it's so difficult for us to
really say what is going to happen to the amok. We're going to get into the implications of this,
which are potentially quite horrific in the coming century, but as a scientist, and I can
tell from your voice, do you ever feel a sense of wonder that teams of humans with technology and
computers and observations were able to figure out the things that you're describing today?
I mean, it's pretty cool, right, that we can understand the dynamics of the ocean currents
and all that. Do you ever feel like, wow, this is amazing?
When I take the time and take a step back, I guess from what I'm doing, because I mean, in my
day-to-day work, I'm more concentrated on what we do not know and what we haven't figured out yet,
and from that point of view, it's also a little bit frustrating because we know that the amok
is a potential tipping element in the climate system that it could shut down.
We see from paleo data evidences that it might have happened before, and we are not really
much closer to knowing when exactly this will happen in terms of timing, in terms of how much
degree of global warming would be okay before the amok could collapse than we were like 20,
30 years ago, even though we know much more. But basically, in discovering more, we also
discovered that there are more uncertainties and more things we do not understand, and that
all in all led to the thing that we are still pretty uncertain.
Let me give you three scenarios, and you can speculate knowing, like you just said, we don't
know, but you're very knowledgeable on this topic. The first scenario is that the amok slows around
15% and stays there, kind of like it's doing now. The second scenario is that it continues to slow
another 50% or something like that. The third scenario is that the amok actually stops
in the coming 100 years or 200 years or something like that. Under those three scenarios, what would
be some of the effects that the world could experience, or Europe and the North Atlantic
coast in the USA and Canada? Can you just paint a picture of what the future might look like under
these three scenarios? Sure. Maybe just as a feedback question, what kind of climate change
scenario otherwise are we looking at? Basically, because that again is very important, are we
looking at a global warming world, or are we saying, okay, we keep this level of global warming
plus an amok slowdown collapse? Right. This podcast, we talk about neuroscience and debt
biodiversity and climate and economics. Every one of those is unbelievably complex, and yet,
and this is what we're trying to do. What you're saying is that let's keep everything
constant with climate the way it is right now today. If we were able to do that, which of course,
we're not, this is just a thought experiment, then the amok would exhibit under those three
scenarios. I said it would have certain effects, or you could look at it as what is the, at two
degrees above pre-industrial Celsius, what would do the amok? They're moving in tandem.
Let's just say that two to two and a half degrees Celsius in the three scenarios I told you.
Yeah, so basically, if the amok stays as it is right now, so basically, it slowed down by about
15%, then we would probably, I mean, see what we link to the amok at the moment, which is,
I already talked about this global warming signal. You see global warming, or the warming
everywhere around the globe, but actually, when you look at the long-term temperature trends,
you can see that the mid-center of the North Atlantic cooled over the last century.
Of course, this is not true for every single year. I mean, right now, we are having extreme
warm sea surface temperatures in the North Atlantic, but the long-term trend for that region
actually has a slight cooling signal, which is unique seen globally. And that is something
that we link to the decrease in amok strength and the decrease of heat being transported.
So the amok normally transports heat into that region, as the amok slows down,
less heat is being transported into that region, which is why we can see a global cooling signal,
a local cooling signal in that region, despite global warming. This is now making it more
complicated, because when we change the local rate of warming, basically, if that is different
from one place to another, then this has an effect on the atmosphere in terms of when we look at
the changes in sea surface temperatures pattern. So that's what the amok is doing. It's kind of
heating some of the ocean surfaces and cooling others by transporting heat. And this then is
being translated to the atmosphere by either warming or cooling the air there. And this then
leads, for example, when we have strong amok, we have a heating, the local air above that region
rises, we have a low pressure system above that surface region, a higher pressure system in the
air, or up higher up in the air. And what I'm trying to say, I'm probably doing a very complicated
job in doing is, is that we have an effect on weather systems. And what has been shown for
the amok is basically that a slower amok can actually lead to heat extremes over Europe in
the summertime by influencing the state and location of the jet stream and the weather systems
that are moving with that. So you're saying that the ocean current dynamics of the amok would
create a cool blob in the North Atlantic. And because of the jet stream and the pressures
that that actually could cause a heat wave in continental Europe.
Yes, exactly. Because it's determining how the jet stream is located. And that then determines
whether the air that is coming towards Europe is either coming from polar regions or whether it's
coming from the African continent. And in that case, this would actually favor an air pressure
distribution where we have more air coming from the South towards Europe, so hotter air and therefore
can lead to heat extremes. Okay, so carry on with my speculative question. What would be
some of the effects if under these three scenarios, and you can tell me what climate
scenario you would like to choose. I just want to isolate as much as possible. Of course,
we're part of a complex adaptive system, so we can't just talk about the amok without the other
things. But I don't think many people understand the risk associated with just this one ocean issue.
So maybe you could explain under a not too bad, bad and horrible scenario what some of the impacts
would be. Yes, I think maybe I'm talking mainly about the impacts. And with most of them, I think
the risk is just going to be higher under a stronger amok slowdown scenario. Maybe it's a
little bit different for a complete collapse of the amok. So what we know what the amok is important
for, I said it's important for the heat transport. It's also important actually for getting heat from
the atmosphere, extracting that and getting it into the deeper ocean. So in a way, it's also
important for cooling the atmosphere. We know right now that, and I guess maybe some of you have
heard that, the ocean is taking up about 90% of the excess heat caused by global warming.
And how does that happen? Yeah, basically, it's kind of a simple loss of thermodynamics and physics
and I guess you know that. I mean, if you have two systems of different temperature,
then you will have a transport of heat from the hotter to the colder system. That's basically
why we get cold when we go outside in the winter time. And I think it might be also
then important to know that this effect is stronger with water. Maybe you know when you are
out in 25 degrees air, it's a warm summertime. If you stay in water that's 25 degrees Celsius for
a longer time, you will actually get chilly because the heat capacity of water is four times
larger than that of air. Basically, it can take up heat easier, but it's also conducting the heat
faster away from you. And what's happening really is we heat the atmosphere and the ocean below that
is colder. They're not in equilibrium and normally systems will always tend towards going into an
equilibrium. And because of that, we have a heat flux from the atmosphere to the ocean. Now the
thing is, it's really, the ocean is vast. So the mass of the ocean is, even though of course it's
in terms of depth, it's up to 11 kilometers. So that's not as deep as the atmosphere is going in
height, but because the air gets thinner as we go up into the air, the mass of the oceans actually
more than 100 times larger than that of the air and the atmosphere. So the ocean really has way
more capacity for taking up additional heat. So the good news is that our planet has these deep
and cold oceans that have buffered the effects of heat from our greenhouse gas trapping activities.
The bad news is, is they've done this largely invisibly without being recognized and we've
taken this buffer for granted. And what an amazing thing that these oceans are so potent,
but they've kind of blinded and caused a delay in our ecological impacts, yes?
Yes, that exactly. And it's basically a problem that is emerging right now, because you probably
know the problems that we see with coral reefs and the bleaching effect. I mean, and that is also
due to ocean acidification, but it's mainly due to marine heat waves. And this is something we're
seeing now more and more as we're heating up the ocean. And also, it might lead to us taking for
granted that the ocean can take up this much heat and, by the way, also carbon. But that is not
necessarily the case. I mean, as I said, systems tend to want an equilibrium. So if we put more
heat carbon into the atmosphere, the ocean will take up more. But the pace of how fast the ocean
can do that depends on how strong the ocean is stratified and how much deep water formation
also we have. So basically, the deep water formation kind of acts as a link between the upper
ocean and the deep ocean. And if we don't have that anymore, then the upper ocean takes up heat
and carbon, but it's fairly full soon, basically, because it's a thin layer. And it really only
triggers very slowly to the deep ocean. And therefore, there will be like a delay time
when we have the deep ocean connected to the upper ocean via deep water formation,
then we can take up or the ocean can take up the heat and carbon much faster. And that's important,
but that might actually be hindered in the future by the effect itself, by the increased
stratification because of warming the ocean. And yeah. Yeah, so many questions, Lefka.
We're talking about the Amock in the Atlantic Ocean. But presumably, there are currents in
all the other oceans as well that we're just talking about the Atlantic one, right?
Yes. Yeah. And in the past, I've had on a friend of mine, Peter Ward, who's a paleobiologist who's
written books, one book called Under a Green Sky, which was about a historical
period called a Canfield Ocean where they became stratified and produced hydrogen sulfide gas.
And there was no exchange between the different layers. What are the possibilities of that
happening? And what are your thoughts on that? Well, I mean, in principle, it's never completely
going to happen, right? I mean, even if you have like a very stratified ocean, if you keep warming
the atmosphere and with that the upper ocean, there will always be a little bit of mixing
and diffusion basically, and the heat is going to travel downwards. But normally,
and this is why the Amock is so important, as I said, that's a place where we have a lot of mixing
with from the surface ocean with a deeper ocean. And it's basically the difference in I put a drop
of color, let's say into a water glass or a water bottle. If I wait a very long time,
it's going to mix perfectly, but I would have to wait a very long time. If I take the bottle
and shake it, I can do it within a second. And the effect is not as big with the Amock,
because it is a local effect, but it's still a deep region or a large region in the North
Atlantic where we have a mixing between upper and lower or deeper ocean. And that's why it's so
important. And the same is kind of happening, as I said, with carbon. So also the carbon uptake
of the ocean is again, it's the same principle. We have an equilibrium between the carbon pressure
in the atmosphere and the one in the ocean. We put right now more in the atmosphere,
the ocean is taking it up. And the speed depends on the rate of mixing in the ocean.
Okay, so the oceans have taken up approximately 90% of the additional heat
in the atmosphere and approximately 50% of the carbon, something like that?
Yeah, I think it's a little bit more. I'm not completely sure about the number,
but I think it's more like two thirds of the carbon.
Okay, so can this continue indefinitely at this pace? I assume the answer is no.
What is the mechanism that reduces the ability of oceans to absorb heat and carbon?
And what happens if they can't absorb anymore? Or what happens if they can't absorb as much?
Yeah, so basically, the mechanisms are slightly different. As I said, it really is related to
an equilibrium between atmosphere and surface and then the mixing basically between surface
ocean and deeper ocean. With carbon, we also have the problem that it's a gas and gases are easier
soluble in or you can dissolve them easy on cold water. So as we are warming the ocean,
we are actually kind of reducing the capability of the ocean to take up carbon. I mean,
as long as we keep pushing more carbon into the atmosphere, the ocean is going to take up more
carbon because we increase that pressure. But if that process is slowing down, then we see, of
course, also a faster rise in atmospheric carbon concentration because we have to
make the pressure even higher from the atmosphere on the ocean for the ocean to keep taking up.
And then the problem is, of course, also that this equilibrium is going to change in the future.
Let's imagine we stop with our CO2 emissions and we actually manage to stabilize the atmospheric
CO2 concentrations and even reduce them. Then at some point, basically, the ocean is going to
outgas that additional carbon right now and giving it back to the atmosphere and the same
as with the heat. If we start cooling the atmosphere by going into the right direction,
basically, because it's what we want, then the ocean who's now acting as a buffer might give
that back on long time scale. So it's really also, yeah, has to change how we are treating
our solutions and our future pathways by having to consider what we are now changing in the ocean
system. So we're going to get our carbon security deposit kicked back to us at the end. So the
buffer turns into a boomerang. Once our emissions slow or stabilize, hopefully soon, maybe in 100
years or something like that, the oceans are going to then give some of that back at some point.
Yes, exactly. And we have to take that into account.
Are we taking that into account? That's a very good question. I think in general,
of course, we are aware of that. But most climate scenarios that we calculate often,
they stop in 2100. As if our world stops in 2100.
Exactly. And that's not really an oceanic time scale. Let's put it like that. So I guess often,
it's not taken enough into account. So in the earth system timelines,
this is something that's important to look at. Yes. Yeah. Okay, so getting back to the three
scenarios, just let's just say that we don't do anything to abate our emissions and economic
growth is somehow able to continue and EMA continues to slow. What are some of the impacts on
Europe and the world under those scenarios? Just as a disclaimer, basically, it's in general kind
of complicated to really like single out what is an EMAG effect and what is an effect, basically,
of a changing earth system when the EMAG is also changing. Let's assume that they change
at the same rate, the rate they're changing now. Yeah. So basically, this knowledge is coming
mainly from either paleo data or climate models. So when we basically look at the climate model,
then what we see is that when we slow down the AMOG, we have an increase in storm activity
and winter storms over Europe in the winter time, which is mainly related basically to
changes in the sea surface temperatures pattern in the North Atlantic, which is driving the winds,
and that's basically what we can see. We also expect changes in precipitation, mainly over summer,
and that really depends on where in Europe you look, but in general, it seems to get a little bit
drier with an AMOG slowdown. The explanation is fairly easy in the way that if we put less heat
into the North Atlantic, we have less evaporation, and due to the wind system,
normally this evaporation is being transported towards Europe. When we look at the US coast,
we actually see an increase in sea level rise, and the explanation is actually quite beautiful.
I mean, it's not a good thing, but the explanation is beautiful in the way,
because I don't know whether many people know that, but when we would look at the ocean surface,
it's actually not flat. So basically, when you look from space at the ocean surfaces,
you really have hills and bumps and so on, and that is basically because water masses are moved,
and we have, due to the rotation of our Earth, we have a constant force. I mean,
physically saying, we say Coriolis effect, not force, because it's not in a physical
divinitional force, but basically we have something that is moving the water masses
if something is moving more northward on the Northern Hemisphere, it's being deflected to the
right. And now when we look at the surface currents of the Amock on the Northern Hemisphere,
they are moving northward, so water masses are being deflected to the right towards the
midst of the North Atlantic, which is when you would look at the North Atlantic. You actually
have a water hill in the middle of it, and lower water levels, or basically towards the coast of
the US. And that is really linked to the strength of the surface current of the Amock. And if that
strength is slowing down, if that current is slowing down, then basically this water hill
in the middle of the Atlantic is getting lower, and the sea level at the US east coast is getting up.
And again, it's kind of really complicated to say or difficult to say how much exactly that
would be. So from climate simulation, it seems like a complete shutdown of the Amock could
lead to an additional approximately one meter of sea level rise at the US east coast,
but there it also really depends on the city because of complicated dynamics,
but that's a link that we know of.
And what about the temperatures in Europe, if there's a large slowing or shutdown?
Well, if there's a shutdown, it could be locally up to 10 degrees or more, and that depends on,
do I look at the annual mean temperature? Hotter or colder?
Colder. If the Amock shuts down, then because of this missing heat transport by the Amock
towards the northern hemisphere and Europe, it gets colder.
So like the movie the day after tomorrow, just not as exaggerated?
Not as exaggerated and not as fast, of course. I mean, in the day after tomorrow,
everything happens within weeks. And that's something of course, it's also important to stress.
We know that the Amock has a tipping point, which means that if we push it too much towards
slowing down, there are feedbacks within the system that basically would continue the slowdown
process and would lead to an even slower Amock. But this is not happening within days or weeks,
but decades. Could you just briefly mention one or two of those such feedbacks?
Yes, one is actually, and this is a nice thing, I guess, that we are talking about the same
principles. And again, again, the Amock itself is, as I said, it's transporting warm and saline
water, surface waters northward. And I said, ocean density is determined by temperature and salinity.
So basically, the Amock by transporting salt towards the region where the deep water formation
of the Amock is occurring is actually kind of enforcing its own driver. It is making the water
denser where it needs it to be dense to keep going. But if the Amock slows down, then we have
less salt there. And it's, of course, it's a different effect from adding fresh water to the
system. But the result is the same, less salt in the subpoena north Atlantic, where the Amock
deep water formation occurs. You are so smart and articulate. And I have to also point out that
you were doing this not in your native language. So it's so impressive and important and interesting.
So thank you. Thanks for pointing that out. Sometimes I feel a little bit stupid when I say
something in English and the world's tumbled out of my mouth. I could never do a scientific climate
discussion in English, let alone German, the way that you're doing now. So let me ask you
another dumb question. If Amock slows or stops, it could be up to 10 degrees Celsius cooler in Europe.
But this is why while at the same time global warming is occurring. So does that mean elsewhere
in the world, there's somewhere that has a corresponding heat pump to make the whole
thing a little bit net hotter? Or how does that work?
Yes. So A, yes. So basically, again, Amock transporting heat from the southern to the
northern hemisphere. If the Amock stops, we have more heat access in the southern hemisphere.
And that is also what we see in any kind of simulation where we simulate an Amock shutdown
is more heating in the southern hemisphere. Exactly where is difficult to say. It's probably,
of course, in the North or in the South Atlantic, so in that region, but it kind of seems to spread
globally. So this would not be good news for Brazil and Argentina who are already experiencing
quite hot temperatures from climate? Exactly. And I would even go so far to say it's also not
good news for us, even though we might have a cooling through an Amock slowdown or shutdown.
And I mean, we now said, OK, it could be 10 degrees. It really depends on the simulation.
But then we would have to add that a shutdown is probably going to occur. Maybe it occurs under
five degrees of warming. So you could say, OK, great, we have five degrees of warming,
10 degrees of cooling, so maybe a little bit of cooling. But A, this really, it's very local
effect. So we don't know exactly where yet. And that is, of course, a very complicated thing,
because it also means on how to be prepared for our future. It would be very different under
an Amock shutdown than it is under a general global warming scenario with just an Amock slowdown.
There are decreasing benefits in an economy to more complexity. There are also decreasing
benefits to conversations with average people due to more and more complexity.
And this is an incredibly complex topic. But a simplistic understanding is there a risk for
trying to get people in Europe aware and engaged and voting and doing things to mitigate
more global warming, that if they hear that the Amock is going to slow and that Europe is going
to be a lot colder, doesn't that emotionally kind of defer the urgency of climate change at the
margin to some people? Have you come across that? I haven't. And I think that's a very interesting
thing that I haven't, because I think it shows that people understand enough about the complexity
and that basically nobody could guarantee them that it's that they're better off with an Amock
collapse. It's that that we tell them it's really something also depends on where in Europe you
live. So it's not going to be like a cooling everywhere in Europe, but it will be really
centered about the North Atlantic. It's going to change precipitation patterns. And I think
looking basically at the last years with flooding events and draws and so on, people know that
all these changes in dynamics apart from a simple change in temperature can
give so much additional risk or bring so much additional risk that I think a lot of people
know no, this is not something one risk, even though there might be a very, very small percentage
that's actually going to benefit very few of us. So obviously, you can't distinguish
you, Levka, wearing a scientist hat or wearing I'm a human being hat. But if you could just
loosely release the scientist hat for a moment, where do you speculate in the distribution of
possible futures? What's your gut feel on where we will eventually land in terms of
temperature Celsius above pre industrial average? My feeling is we're going to land
somewhere where we do not want to be. And that's basically what scares me. I think we're going
to land somewhere where we are forced to act because the consequences are so dire and so extreme.
And I mean, this is the problem is, of course, I think that the regions globally that are more
vulnerable are not the ones where the power and the money sits. And that basically means that
we are probably going to see the consequences maybe more in having more refugees and having
more war zones and stuff like that. And yeah, it doesn't matter what the number is going to be.
I think the reality is not going to be nice. I was just in India in the south of India and most
people there don't know about climate science. They just know that it's well, it's 100 degrees
there today in the south of India. And it kind of broke my heart because up until that moment,
I cognitively knew that there's a billion 400 people in India and the Indian subcontinent is
one of those places that it's going to warm and have higher wet bulb issues. But to be there in
person and see the real warm, lovely people and culture, it kind of hit me because I visualized
some of this happening not centuries from now, but in the coming decades. So I hear what you're
saying. So how do you, and we'll get back to this, but I want to still ask you some questions
about AMOC. How do you and your colleagues measure AMOC? How can you even measure such a thing?
Yeah, that's very complicated actually. So even a few years or a few decades back,
I think the first AMOC measurement that I know of, like a real measurement basically where they
went into out onto the North Atlantic and put instruments out in the ocean is from 1959. And
back then what they had to do is basically they really had to go on a research vessel and then
drive along the whole width of the Atlantic, because you really have to go from basically
Africa to the US and Brazil basically to really cover the whole length to take into account
all of the water masses that are being moved. And that's how it was done for most of the time.
And from these first measurements, and that's very costly, it takes a couple of weeks to actually do
this. And yeah, just being on a research cruise every single day is, as I said, very expensive
and resource extensive. But these first measurements that they made indicated that the AMOC slowed
down by quite a bit between 1959 and I think the last measurement was in 2001, where they
will really assess that. And the first estimate was the slowdown of 30% over that time. And that
was of course a dire news, but it also led to a lot of scientists saying, well, can we really
say that? Because this was deduced from five measurements to five research cruises basically,
going out there over a course of 40 years. They were done during different times of the years,
some were in spring, some were in autumn. And basically what they always gave us was one
snapshot of AMOC strength in time. And I mean, basically, if I would try to understand how
temperatures are changing, and basically I'm measuring the temperature right now today,
and then tomorrow I'm going to measure the one in the morning and then the next time at night,
then I know even though I have measurements from three consecutive days, I can't really
deduce any trend from them because they're measured in different times of the day. And we
know that there's internal variability with a day cycle. And the same is true for the AMOC,
but on time scales so that we are not completely aware of yet. So there's not just an annual cycle,
but there's an inter-annual cycle. And long story short, that's why they started in 2004
to put instruments out into the Atlantic full-time to really have a continuous measurement.
It's still very costly, it's a lot of work. So you have to have like researchers getting out there,
putting the instrument in, they have to be exchanged every one or two years, they have
to be calibrated. But from now, from 2004 on we have AMOC continuous data. The only thing is
basically that 2004 until now that's 20 years. When we are looking at climate change, we don't
talk just about 20 years. We talk about at least 30 years or longer because we know that there are
internal variabilities at place and things can basically happen or you can have a trend over
two to three years. That's not a long-term trend, but that's just really related. For example,
I guess most people know the El Nino phenomena. All these things have effects on the earth system.
So how does the AMOC relate to or does it relate to the Gulf Stream? And is there a risk of the
Gulf Stream slowing down? So the AMOC and the Gulf Stream are two interesting partners, brothers,
I would say, in the sense of sometimes we even talk or call the AMOC the Gulf Stream system
because they are closely linked but they are different. And the important difference is
the Gulf Stream is in surface current. It's a wind-driven surface current. Basically, we have
wind systems over the North Atlantic. They pushed the water masses due to the Coriolis
effects. The water masses are deflected to the right and this basically leads to the Gulf Stream
flowing as it does. The Gulf Stream is when we look at the size of the Gulf Stream, it's way
bigger than the AMOC. So depending on where you measure, whether it's close to Florida or more
towards the inner, outer North Atlantic, the Gulf Stream has a volume transport between 30 to
150 swerdrop. And swerdrop is this unit used by physical oceanographers. One swerdrop is a
million cubic meters of water that are being transported per second. So Gulf Stream between
30 and 150, maybe just as a comparison, the Amazon River, the largest river on earth,
has a transport of 0.2 swerdrop. So what's being transported in the Atlantic is huge.
But most of the Gulf Stream waters are then basically also end up on the return way as
a surface current. And with return way, I mean basically the Gulf Stream is flowing northward
and it's then being deflected to the right and to the right due also to the wind system. And we
have a southward surface current along the European and African coast basically.
We still have a little bit of a heat transport because we have the warm water masses going
towards the North Atlantic. They're being cooled and a little bit colder water masses going back.
But when we talk about the AMOC, we have an exchange of surface flow going towards the
North Atlantic and deep water, really cold flows going southward. So in terms of driveout,
for example, you could say the Gulf Stream is driven by the winds. The AMOC is mainly
driven by density differences. Mainly I'm saying mainly because when we go out there and measure
the AMOC, we can't ask the water masses, hey, what's your driver? Are you moving because of
the winds or because of density differences? We just see moving water masses. And yeah,
because of that, we would say probably that a small percentage of the Gulf Stream is basically
ending up into the deep water formation region and is then becoming part of the AMOC.
But the majority of the Gulf Stream is just being also traveling back southward as a surface current.
And that part is not slowing down as long as we have the winds. When the AMOC will collapse,
then the Gulf Stream would slow down a little bit that AMOC part of the Gulf Stream.
And warmer temperatures affect both the Gulf Stream and the AMOC though,
because the winds, to my knowledge, are created by the temperature differential
between the equator and the poles. And if the poles warm a lot, then that temperature differential
declines and that would reduce some of these winds, yes? Yes, that is true. I think although
when we measure it right now, the wind effect is really not that large right now. But in principle,
you are right that that's happening. This polar amplification is decreasing the temperature,
gradient, and with that, the wind strength overall.
So in one of the presentations that you have on your website and that you shared with me,
you have a slide which we'll put on screen where you highlight that the AMOC effect has
potentially just part of a domino effect in some of the other issues dealing with the Amazon and
the West Antarctic ice sheet and the Greenland ice sheet. Could you talk about the the feedbacks
and the domino effect that relate to not only AMOC but the climate system?
So the AMOC, I think, is special in the climate system as it's the one major connector between
Tselvarn and Northern Hemisphere between the Antarctic ice sheet and the Greenland ice sheet.
And when the AMOC, let's assume the AMOC would slow down by a lot, we kind of said, okay, that
means more excess heat in the Southern Hemisphere, less in the Northern Hemisphere, that could, on the
one hand side, stabilize the Greenland ice sheet because it's cooling down the sub-Polynorth Atlantic
around Greenland and could therefore stabilize that ice sheet. But it would lead to more heat
around Antarctica and could therefore, yeah, lead to more melting there and destabilize.
When we look at Antarctica, mainly the western part is the one that we are worried about the
most right now because it seems to be the most destable one already. And with that, of course,
then enhance sea level rise. But, and this is really important, it kind of shows that the order
of things happening has an effect. Because if the Greenland, I said a slowdown of the AMOC could
stabilize the Greenland ice sheet, if the Greenland ice sheet is tipping, then this would actually
lead also to a destabilization of the AMOC. Because if that basically is the order, because
we have a lot of freshwater then melted on Greenland and flowing into the sub-Polynorth Atlantic,
and I explained already how this can slow down the AMOC. So, yeah, but it shows that the whole
Earth system is linked. And when we have those major effects happening, more can follow.
You may be too young, and I don't know what TV shows there were in Germany when you were growing
up. But do you ever get the feeling that this is all part of some Twilight Zone episode that
we're describing this, the biogeochemical cycles of the planet that you and I are alive on.
And we're talking about like major Earth system changes happening on our watch. Doesn't that just
blow you away at times and not in a good way? Yes, actually, yes. And I think it feels so strange
that as humans, I mean, an individual human is very small and in a way, I don't want to insult
anybody but insignificant. And for example, when I go out on the North Atlantic on a research
vessel and you are out on the ocean, then there's huge water masses, so much power around you,
so much energy. And also when we look, I mean, I talked about the volume transport by the AMOC,
that's huge, that's nothing we can do basically in terms of engineering. So I had actually people
contacted me saying, can't we put some kind of robots into the water and move the AMOC
ourselves? No, we can't because that's way too much. That is so huge the system that we can't do
that physically. And yet we are actually messing with the system by something as burning coal,
by putting CO2 into the atmosphere, so by actually doing, affecting even tinier particles. And it
feels very wrong, very scary, I guess, trying to be optimistic. Okay, it shows that we can
actually affect the system a lot. But yeah, it feels like we are playing with something and we
don't know the rules. And we can talk about this. I'm a science communicator and I know that people
that follow this channel are very fluent in these issues, but relative to the general public,
the AMOC and ocean risks are relatively unknown, especially in my country. What about in the
scientific community? Is there increasing consensus among your colleagues on the AMOC and
climate and scenarios going forward? Or is there still quite a bit of disagreement on the broader
trends? There's certainly an increased amount of consensus. So when I basically did my PhD and
I published my first paper on an AMOC slowdown, there were quite a few scientists who made the
point to me that there are other explanations for the signals that we are seeing. And I mean,
the difficulty here is, I mentioned the real like direct ABIC measurements continue started in 2004.
So to know what happened over the last century, we have to look at what we call proxy data.
So other climate variables that we can measure that we know are related to the AMOC and then kind
of deduce the AMOC evolution from them. And I worked with my PhD supervisor Stefan Ramstof on
looking at the sea surface temperatures in the North Atlantic. And there are a lot of reasons
why we know that they're linked to the AMOC. But of course, they are also influenced by other
things. For example, an increase in wind strength could cool the North Atlantic
as would an AMOC slowdown. And while there was no one in the scientific community who said,
you must be wrong because of that, there were a lot of people saying, well, but it could also be
a change in the wind system. We don't know that yet. We don't have the data to support that.
But you can't be 100% sure. And I mean, that's true. I would say in all of climate scientists,
we basically are never 100% sure because that's not how science works. We basically,
we make an assumption, we look at the data and we try to explain all the data that we have,
according to that assumptions. And if we find something that is basically disproving what
we thought first, then we have to find a new assumption. This has changed because there
have been more and more publications that indicated an AMOC slowdown and none that showed
the opposite. There's still some data where we are, okay, this is interesting. We can't completely
complain that yet. But with that, the consensus is definitely increasing. I think one problem
is also just the way the science community works as a whole. So it's not that there's one publication
about something and everybody's, oh yeah, now we're going to believe that. It's more like, oh,
interesting. Now let's wait a little bit, see what other research groups are publishing on that,
test that. I mean, that's good. That's how we can make sure that we are not basically following
some random group, but that we're really getting to enhance our knowledge. But it also makes a little
bit slow and maybe with regards to climate change too slow. It's so complex. And I'm sure you deal
with ocean AMOC experts in your paper writing and your job. But then there's Arctic climate
specialists and cloud physicists. And there's all sorts of different disciplines within the
climate discipline itself. And how do you all meet at conferences and compare notes on things
that you're not experts in that someone else is? What's your experience there?
My experience is that the different disciplines are too siloed, basically, so then don't talk
enough to each other. And I think it's not just a problem with within the disciplines, but also
with the way science is being done at the moment, that it's really pressed towards publications.
As a young researcher, I know basically I'm being measured by the amount of first author and second
author publications that they have. Because of that, too many papers are being published and no
one can read all of that. But to publish a paper, you have to find something new. And I think what
we really have to do more is actually synthesizing the data that is out there, the publications
that are out there. Yeah. So tell me about your work. Where do you work? What do you do? And if
you and your team are successful, what do you hope to accomplish? Yeah, here I have to admit that
basically, I kind of left the AMO community, the very small AMO, not small, but the focused AMO
community. Because of the experience I made in the last years, that basically,
the AMO is a topic that is able to raise attention, maybe also because of this movie,
The Day After Tomorrow, and at least in Europe, a lot of people know about the Go stream and the
importance. But there are so many things happening when we look at the increase in extreme weather
events, when we look at flooding. And I feel that the increase in fires, so many things related
to climate change that happen on a way faster time scales than the AMO and that have a big
effect right now, that I basically went to my former institute, the Potsam Institute for Climate
Impact Research, and now work with Johann Rockstrm on the planetary boundary framework,
which is highlighting actually this global approach and the synthesizing approach, saying
it's not enough to just look at one special corner or area. And I mean, this is actually going
further, saying, okay, not just AMO is enough, not even just climate change is enough to really
have to look at the earth system, and looking at all its components, looking at the biosphere
integrity and basically how the biosphere is right now functioning in our favor, because that is
also taking up a lot of carbon, how it's basically working in terms of the radiation budget. And I
just feel that we know so much that we can do that would improve the lives of so many people on earth
in terms of, of course, reducing CO2, but also living more sustainable, changing our diets
towards more plant based, that I just wanted to work on that. And I think the problem is in getting
people to act that most want numbers and certainty, and we can't give 100% certainty yet, and we can't
give like the exact numbers, but we can give with 99% 0.9 certainty the direction that we have to go.
And I just want to press that and work on the science there.
This is an interesting thing, because if we stop this conversation now, you have outlined
scientifically, credibly, in some detail how the AMOC works, and my viewers will have learned about
that. There's a wide variety of viewers that follow this channel, because we cover all the
aspects of the human predicament. But once we go into what should we do about it, I'm sure you have
some suggestions, then once we talk about prescriptions, then some people no longer believe
the scientific description. And I'm not talking about you, I'm just talking about generally in
the world, there is the explanation of the issue, and there's the what to do about it,
and they confound each other. Have you experienced that?
Yes. And I mean, I'm not 100% surprised by it, because it often seems to be human nature,
right, that we find it really difficult to change. And I mean, when I look, we look at our everyday
lives, I guess most people know basically what would be best for their own health in terms of
exercise, diet, and so on. But they seem to be not to be able to do what's best for them in the
long term. I guess short term, I can basically say, okay, I want to eat this right now. So I do
it because it makes me happy. And so it's not surprising that when it comes to this even bigger
and more longer term issue, that of course, we are not able to choose what's best for us in the
long term. But it's also really, really frustrating. I think if 10 or 20 or 30% of people chose the
better path for climate, there would be a social primate pressure to do that. But since it's
someone else's problem, and in the future so far, we have not, we've not done that. Plus, we are
individual humans as part of this globally connected emergent energy, hungry,
pseudo organism that has a life of its own. So climate is a real problem for this situation. And
the only antidote that I can think of is more conversations like this that act as a facilitator
between our current behaviors and our mental understanding of the future.
I agree. I think that the best way still to basically facility or induce change is to explain
things, to understand things. Because if it's difficult to change, then we will only change
if we really get the reason. So earlier you said, and I happen to agree with you,
that we're going to do business as usual, make a few little benign tweaks on the margins,
but not do anything major until we see the temperature, precipitation, ecological impacts
are horrifying. And then we're going to try to do something radical
at the last minute. Do you have any speculation on what some of those radical interventions might be?
Oh, I don't know yet, because I guess it's kind of like a path I don't really want to go down in
my mind. I mean, the thing is, of course, that there are, as far as I know, they're not like real
international laws on what kind of climate or geoengineering is allowed or not. So I'm afraid
that some people might be thinking, oh, cool, now we put a lot of air results into the atmosphere
because that at least has a cooling effect for a few years. I know that I think, I mean,
those ideas have been tested in climate models and basically run through and none of them
seems to be promising for the moment. So I would say that anything radical that we do is probably
not going to be wise. So could you offer any non radical suggestions to our viewers,
either as individuals or as parts of institutions that create policies? And, you know, my view is
Germany or the United States can't just be climate friendly policies and go to the Paris Accord
agreements. It's a global, you know, the CO2 is not recognized national borders. I mean,
it's a global thing. So what sort of recommendations do you have to avert some of the
default paths that we're currently on with the AMOC and with the global climate system?
I mean, in principle, it is very simple. First of all, we really have to get our CO2 emissions
down. And I think personally, that means on the one hand side, I would really encourage people to
basically look at the political party that they support. And this topic should be in there. And
I mean, I'm not basically, for me, it's not really important whether otherwise what kind of
faction you support and whether you like our fan of capitalism or free markets or whatever,
the climate topic should be in there no matter what the party is, because that's non-negotiable.
And that's nothing we can basically, we can't talk to the climate system or to the earth system and
say, Hey, now we're going to pay you this amount of money and you're not going to change. So that's
important. And please stress that no matter what you otherwise basically stand for believe in.
And then the other thing is also be skeptical, I think, because we like easy solutions. But
normally the easy solutions is not the best solution. And I think that's just something
most of us know, right? If we work hard for something, normally it stays longer,
basically what I gain in a minute, I can often lose very soon also, what I gain with hard work
over years, that stays. And I think so with that, be okay with that, it's going to be hard, but it's
not going to be negative. A lot of the decisions or changes that we have to make, as I already mentioned,
would also be good for ourselves. I mean, we do know that a plant based diet is better for most
of our health. And that basically cycling a lot. I mean, who wants to sit in a car all day and drive
around? Maybe a few people do, but and that's okay too. I think kind of try to find the changes
that are okay with you. Nobody has to change their life completely. But we can all make changes that
basically make our lives more sustainable. And I think that's also important to like really
take care of that and do the effort and don't do it for somebody else, but basically do it
because it's the right thing to do. That makes sense. It does make sense. But as I said, climate
is a global issue and we've got India planning to double coal production in their country by the
year 2030. And you can understand why they want to do that because they're going to have higher
temperatures and they need more air conditioning and cooling for their population. So there is
individual recommendations and I agree with the ones that you laid out, but there's got to be some
sort of global plan and there isn't and I know why there isn't. So is there any hope in the
international scope of things that you and your colleagues have? I think these COP meetings so
far have been a real disappointment. They have no teeth. And I think the difficult questions are not
askable with all these high status men and women from around the world because they don't like
truth to power sort of questions. Yeah, that's a very good question. And I have to say basically
there's a reason why I'm not in policy because I like honesty and I like being direct and I can't
deal with people who try to tell me something by I don't know going around the issue and telling me
something else. And with that I'm also very frustrated and I think honestly that this
lying on a like lying on that level on an international level and with lying I'm also
meaning that if you like draw attention away from the truth or you hide some fact that should be
really punishable I think because it is misleading and it's hurting so many people. I'm also hopeful
because I've actually met a few people that are active in policy and that have great ideas and that
are really really enthusiastic and engaged in trying to protect others those who can't protect
themselves. But of course I do see that we are not really getting closer to a solution right now
and I honestly don't know how to change that how to help that. I think we if there are people out
there who know that their strength is to influence other people basically and to get them to basically
do what you want them to do then please use it for good that's what I'm asking you. I can only
give you the facts but we see that delivering the facts is not enough right that's what we've seen
that that's not enough we kind of need some kind of climate lobby where we really say hey people
this is what you have to do. Maybe we need effectivists instead of activists. So let me let me ask
you a personal question. You're obviously very knowledgeable and passionate about this topic
as you should be because this is the topic of our times well one of the the core ones anyways.
How do you manage being all in as you clearly are on ocean issues planetary boundaries where
we're headed and then have a normal life and have a cheeseburger or strudel or whatever whatever
you eat there with your high school friends and and your family how do you live in both worlds
because I struggle to be honest in in in my life with with that. Yeah I do too and I guess I mean
I'm not completely sure what I'm leading a normal life compared to everyone else. I would say that
when I look among my amongst my friends most of them basically support the same things I support
so I'm really living in a little bit of a bubble and most of them really try to be as sustainable
as possible. I think it would be difficult otherwise it's something that I do see with
family with I mean you don't choose your family right you are born into it and there I'm having
sometimes complicated or complicated discussions and sometimes I just yeah decide not to discuss
certain things and in other terms I mean I have to admit say that this kind of is also affecting
basically how I plan my life and I do see that basically I would say the goals and dreams that
my parents have given me and kind of saying hey when you are I'm 34 right now so I should probably
have two kids a husband and a house and basically I have a partner fiance I'm very happy with but
we never plan on getting a house because that's not really I think realistic achievable for most
people so I guess that of course but some people can have their own house in their own place but
when we look at the number of people we have on the planet our limited resources then not everyone
can have a house actually most people can't have their own house and it's also really when we think
about okay do we want or not have children do I want to put my children into this kind of world
will I be able to adequately protect them with what's coming in the future these are things
I'm discussing with my my partner and with my friends because it's yeah it's not just about
what is my own happiness basically and do I give on my genes to the next generation
we certainly know that in terms of population we don't need every one of us to get a child
so we are enough people on the planet and of course in terms of resources not having a child
is way smarter than having one which is not saying that nobody should have children of
course if you but it's something that I think is in there I know of those things I know of
the limited resources and I can't forget it when I basically enter my private life what I
learn or do during my work time so I struggle as you long ago I chose not to have children
genetic children you and I both have cultural children in a way with the young people that we
influence with these ideas and I have ducks and and dogs which also eat resources but
that's the path I chose so let me ask you one more scientific question and then I'll get to the
closing questions that I ask all my guests would it be fair for me to say that this year
will be the coolest year of the rest of my life on average of course there could be El Nino and
La Nina and other things but is that a fair assessment to make given what we know about
the inertia of the climate system? Sort of I mean you just chose basically an El Nino year which
of course we know is a global average a higher temperature so I very much hope that the next
two, three, four years will be on average a little bit cooler again but in terms of course
of the long-term trends yes so basically I wouldn't see like a large scale cooling signal
is not going to happen within the next decades even if we would stop all emissions right now so
yeah but yeah thank you that's my understanding as well but I wanted to back it up with a
climate scientist and I will have Johan your colleague on in the near future he was supposed
to be on tomorrow but we had to we had to reschedule it so Lev K I really I really like you and I
respect what you're doing and I feel the the passion and frustration bubbling just under
the surface because this isn't our fault what's happening but you and I were born on this planet
as humans during this time of the carbon pulse and looking around us and figuring it out is
someone's job and I'm glad that you're doing it so do you have any personal advice you just
mentioned about houses and children but do you have any personal advice for the listeners of this
show that are hearing what you're saying and concerned about the future what what sort of advice
do you have for the listeners I would say on the one hand side kind of be creative in your dream
I kind of mentioned that we don't have to have the same goals in terms of having or becoming rich
having our own house or having to basically fly have a vacation somewhere fancy tropical every year
because that's what doesn't tell you what makes you happy so really like listen
in your inner self basically what really does make you happy because I think most of the stuff
that makes you happy can be very sustainable and totally fine and be done within the earth resources
but then the other thing is I still believe and try to act under the assumption that humans are
good and that nobody really wants to be a bad person or tries to harm others I mean there might
be a few exceptions but I think most people even if they actually do something right now that is
causing a lot of emissions and harm to the environment they have a reason that can probably
be understood by us because there is a reason in their reasoning why they're doing this and why
it's a good thing to do and so it would be good of course we have to educate those people and we
have to try to change them but we shouldn't like make them to monsters and we should act in the way
saying hey okay I see what you're doing this is how it's like this how why I don't like what you're
doing because it's hurting this and this person can you explain to me why we're doing it and maybe
we can find a solution together so I think that's important to also just stay optimistic and to like
life and also because I really believe it's true so most people I talk to when they do something
like how can you do that then they explain it to me I'm like oh okay and now it makes sense but hey
there's actually a different way of how you can do this which is way better for the environment
and for everyone and how would you change that advice for the young people watching the show
and their teens or 20s who are becoming aware of all this and they have a whole lifetime ahead of them
that's a very good question and I would say I'm not completely sure what I would say I would
probably apologize for not for not having taken better care of their world so far I mean and I'm
still fairly young I would try to I would say be bold basically just because you're young and it
feels like you might know less and that's something I experience as actually as a scientist so I mean
I'm talking to colleagues who have 20 or more years experience than I have in the topic and sometimes
still they I see that they make mistakes and it just takes me more longer to be brave about that
and say hey no I'm studying this too and you might have more experience but I put a lot of time in
this and I know I'm right and I think that's also what the young people is when you feel something
is not right be brave about it be bold about it and change and otherwise probably also be hopeful
find your own future but in general I have to say it does it's hard for me it's hard for me to be
like completely optimistic towards a person who has I don't know 70 80 year ahead of them because
I know that life is going to change quite a bit during that time so this is a question I ask all
my guests and I think you may have subliminally through your things that you've left unsaid have
given the answer but what do you care most about in the world Lefke it's probably a fair and honest
world so I think that this is what bugs me most about I guess this topic is that the main people
who are causing the problems are not the ones that are suffering the most and that's just not
what I like so it's really the fairness and the main non-humans are going to suffer as well
that's a very good point yes yeah so if you could wave a magic wand what is one thing you might do
to change human and planetary futures if there was no personal risk to yourself
kind of depends on on the limit I mean if I could basically change the climate system the earth system
back to a pre-industrial state and fix it in that way that no matter what we do we we couldn't
change it as humans that would of course be a safe way although maybe we wouldn't then learn
I think if it comes to the human mind as I said I would really like us to be able to make the
advice's decision to be objective look at the facts and then decide what we do based on them
and what we want to happen and not based on this weird mix of emotion fear maybe favors
yeah so that I think would already bring us a very big step further towards a sustainable future
thank you if I were to have you back on the show which I would love to what is one topic
in your broader work that isn't a broad overview but is a very specific topic that you think is
relevant to our future that you would be willing to talk about in depth
the next time well given my my location better my job right now it would really be about the link
of the climate system towards the rest of the earth system towards with the land system with
species diversity and how all of this is basically connected but from a scientific point of view so
not from a like spherical point of view mother earth but really we see so much scientific evidence
for that and I would love to talk about that excellent any closing words for our viewers
and listeners lefka I guess honestly if they listened until this point then I would thank them
for being so interested in the science because yeah I know it's a complicated topic and I
know that it's hard to understand and I mean I've been doing this for 10 years nearly and
I'm still learning new stuff so yeah thank you for your openness to learn about these things for
your willingness hopefully to change that means a lot and that's I think what the world needs
thank you so much for your time today lefka and for your important work on this issue to be continued
my friend thank you nade if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification
dot com for more information on future releases this show is hosted by nate higgins edited by
no troublemakers media and curated by leslie batloots and lizzie siriani
