the economic superorganism I refer to is a material system that develops around certain species.
I guess I consider that something that evolutionary biologists ought to think about
because what it does is it expands the boundaries of evolution and how we think about evolution.
If you think about the profound changes that have occurred since the agricultural revolution
10,000 years ago, the human planet, the earth has been taken, the planet has become populated by
now 8 billion humans and all other species are reduced. That influences the genetic endowment
of the planet in profound ways. That has obviously evolutionary implications.
I actually think that the economic superorganism, the development of this system,
is a major evolutionary transition for humans. It's another step in the evolution of our
sociality. I don't think evolutionary biologists necessarily agree with that.
Let me ask you this. The sociality of our species always existed or for a very long time existed.
What happened was we combined our sociality with surplus for the first time. That's what
kickstarted the superorganism dynamic, yes? Sort of, but I think it's important to think about
not just combining our sociality with surplus, but that our sociality comes to be involved
in a co-evolutionary process with annual grains that creates a system that gives rise to surplus.
The division of labor, the ability of humans to do that, I think is an essential part of
the story. Let me just elaborate that a little bit. Think about humans as hunters or gatherers,
and then think about external conditions that exist, like the Holocene warming,
the carbon left in the soils from the Pleistocene. Think about those things as kind of
embellishers of the development of annual grains, because we didn't develop annual grains,
they were there. But the Holocene warming created an opening for their expansion,
so humans who already had a capability of working together, and this isn't a very complicated story
really, they start to be more sedentary around these wild stands of grains. They're still engaged
in hunting and gathering, but now the complexity of their material world has increased, because
the cultivation of annual grains is additive to what they're already doing, and probably by
being more sedentary, their reproductive rates increase. So as that happens, the division of
labor is elaborated, they become more articulated with the cultivation of annual grains, and those
annual grains are an expansive proposition, it doesn't take great human intelligence to look at
a seed and see it germinate and realize that you could affect that process. That's not great human
intelligence, especially for human beings who as hunters and gatherers were extraordinarily
observant of the natural world, their strategy was to embed themselves in the rhythm and dynamic
of the natural world, that's how they tapped into the ecologies and their movement to create their
economic life, their material life. So humans start cultivating a little bit, and cultivation takes off.
Cultivation, annual grains have their own expansionary dynamics, so annual grains can be stored.
The more you start to depend on annual grains, the more you realize that they're annual,
they can be stored, but you can't predict how they're going to grow from one season to the next.
So it becomes imperative to try to maximize production in any one year.
That's your guard. They're also an ecological disaster. They're bad for soil erosion,
and so another way that you counteract that is by expanding your grain production,
further expanding your grain production. So I say the annual grains themselves
are kind of an expansionary proposition for humans, and humans come to be co-evolved with
annual grains. The annual grains become like the non-shattering of seeds that are selected for,
may have been selected for inadvertently, but they become part of the complex kind of agricultural
enterprise. And that enterprise, because those annual grains can be, the production can be
rootinized and standardized, and you can employ a division of labor around it. You get certain
efficiencies that can develop there, and that too is expansionary. So I think this system develops
that is actually a universal system that is utilized by a number of different species,
but it's elaborated. It has its particular kind of characteristic with the co-evolution of humans
and annual grains, but they get into the same kind of expansionary division of labor, greater
interdependence, as ants and termites do. But they also, humans also do have intelligence,
and they have technological capabilities, and they have institutional capabilities,
and so they develop institutions and technologies that further elaborate that system.
And once that system gets going, and I think this is counter-intuitive to people,
it's a system that all material systems are earthly systems, but it's a system that has,
in some sense, been disembedded from the rhythm and dynamic of the more-than-human world.
You're no longer looking at migratory paths. You're no longer moving through different ecologies
and garnering what you can in terms of berries riping here, tubers riping there. You're no longer
doing that. Your engagement has been reduced to the annual cycle of these grains.
And the whole dynamic that's set up.
So the dawn of agriculture, when we started to grow and then store the surplus from grains,
is that when hierarchy and inequality began in earnest in human societies?
Exactly. They develop out of that surplus. Yes. And then that hierarchy feeds back on the imperative
to expand the surplus even more. Yes. So you get patriarchy. Because if you are,
I mean, surplus allows for people who aren't engaged in agriculture to do other things.
So surplus in agriculture allows people who aren't engaged in agriculture to become potters,
to become philosophers, to become kings, to develop military operations.
It allows for the elaboration of, I guess, what we might call a social division of labor,
a more elaborate social division of labor, to develop around that agricultural surplus.
And then there's always the imperative. They have their own dynamic of expansion,
the imperative to keep that surplus going.
