The economic superorganism, the development of this system is a major evolutionary transition
for humans. It's another step in the evolution of our sociality.
Greetings. Today I am pleased to welcome my friend,
Lisey Crawl, to the great simplification. Lisey is a professor of economics at the SUNY
University of New York in Cortland. She was a Fulbright scholar, a SUNY senior scholar,
the recipient of many awards, including the Chancellor's Award for Research.
Her most recent book, Bitter Harvest, an inquiry into the war between the economy
and the earth, takes a wide lens view of the evolution of humans through the agricultural
revolution all the way to the progression of capitalism to today's economic superorganism.
Today, Lisey and I discussed the importance the agricultural revolution had on framing,
setting the foundations of the structure of the global energy-hungry system that we have today.
We also talk about the profound duality between humans and the other-than-human world,
and both of these are actually core tenets of my work. So, Lisey and I have been traveling
parallel paths on this research. Please welcome Professor Lisey Crawl.
Lisey, great to see you. It's good to see you, Nate. Thanks so much for the invitation.
You and I haven't spoken too often, but we've been in contact over the last 10 or 15 years.
A lot of my current work on the superorganism and the metabolism of society is on the shoulders of
you and John Gowdy, your writing colleague, and others. But you were academically way ahead of me
in integrating humans, anthropology, energy, economic theory. I would like you, in your own
words, to do a long-form unpacking of the grand narrative of your work, your anthropological
thesis of how humans arrived at this point. Okay, well, that's no small task.
No, take your time. I'm not sure how useful grand narratives are, and I have a few notes,
so I may look down at my notes to try to keep things moving. But as I look out at the landscape,
the economic landscape of our contemporary economic world, what I see is this world of
an economy that is expansionary. It fluctuates between expansion and stagnation. It reliably
produces inequality, and it expresses profound duality and alienation between humans and the
biophysical world. And now we're reaching biophysical limits. We can talk about it in terms of climate
change. We can talk about it in terms of the sixth mass extinction. You know, almost to any gauge we
have, it's evident that we're reaching biophysical limits. And yet the thing that captures my attention
is that we don't seem to be able to do anything about it. So it is clear that we have a formidable
system on our hands. So I've been very interested in this system. I've been interested in how it
started, its structure and dynamic, the duality that it embodies between humans or what ecological
economists called humanity's household and earth. And I'm interested in it in part because it's not
always been the case that human societies have been organized in this way. Okay, so let me give you
a little bit further background. So that kind of is the contemporary kind of world I look out at,
and I have these questions that come up in my mind. I've been, I've had the good fortune of
having many great minds to influence my thinking, as all of us have. For me, some of the notable
influencers on me are the human ecologist Paul Shepard and Wes Jackson, and both of those people
concentrated to a great extent on the agricultural revolution and what a profound change that was
for humanity. So I've been greatly influenced by their work. I've also been influenced by,
as an economist, by Karl Marx and Frederick Ingalls and mostly by their methodology. Their
methodology of dialectical and historical materialism to me is very, very useful in trying to think
about economic systems, their formation, and how they evolve over time. And so I've tried to engage
that kind of methodology, which is not always easy because it's kind of messy. I've also obviously
been influenced by evolutionary biologists, particularly, of course, Darwin, and more recently
E. O. Wilson and David Sloan Wilson and their work on sociality and the evolution of sociality.
So I've been influenced by that kind of spectrum of people. John and I had the good fortune of
working together for many years, and we came together in part because we both had this kind of
predisposition to have a curiosity about hunters and gatherers and also a curiosity and an
appreciation for the profound change in human society and the relationship of humans to the
earth that had taken place when the agricultural revolution had occurred. So we came to collaborate
with that kind of background appreciation, and our work on ultra-sociality that we did together
was a way of trying to create a story of what had happened to humans to try to understand the
processes and the unfolding. So there's a common rebuttal when we talk about this grand arc of
humans that a lot of people think that what's happening now, the biophysical limits, the
inequality, and some of the other things you mentioned is a fault of capitalism and the
industrial revolution. But I think your work suggests that that schism or that duality
happened sooner. Yes, absolutely. Much earlier in our past. Absolutely. Would you explain that?
I look at the capitalism as the legacy of the agricultural revolution. Okay, so it's a system
that, so when I think about the agricultural system, I think about it as a system
that has an expansionary dynamic that creates duality, it creates, has tremendous interdependence,
material interdependence in terms of the people that participate in it, and I'm talking about
grain agriculture. What's the other type of agriculture? Well, I suppose you could be growing
potatoes that might be slightly different or cultivating fruits or something like that or
tubers, but grain has, because it can be stored and because it's amenable to sort of
routinization and standardization is a particularly interesting co-evolutionary plant
with humans. Okay, so let me just kind of go back and kind of get into agriculture a little
bit and then I'll evolve into the questions that you have about capitalism and its relationship
to agriculture. So agriculture is this complicated system, and I guess part of my curiosity about
it also came about because John and I realized that we weren't the only species that practiced
agriculture, so there are species of many species of ants and termites that also cultivate,
they cultivate fungi, and the remarkable thing about it was that the structure and dynamic
of their economic life and their economic system is very similar to the structure and dynamic of
the economic system that humans have, and so humans have an economic structure and dynamic
to their economic life once they engage in agriculture that's similar to ants and termites
because ants and termites that cultivate fungi have been added a long time. Okay, so this made
us very, very curious about the formation of an economic system and in particular the
formation of an agricultural system, so we started thinking about these ants and termites
and humans and thinking about what they had in common, and one thing that they had because they're,
I mean obviously extraordinarily different species, but one thing that they had in common was an
evolved sociality, so ants and termites had attained the stage of superorganism when they
began the practice of agriculture and humans had attained culture, a high level of sociality
employing a division of labor, etc, etc, when they began to engage agriculture, so it occurred
certainly to me that an evolved sociality was sort of a species characteristic that is somehow
captured by an emerging agricultural system and it expresses itself in a certain way and the way
that it expresses itself is with an elaborate division of labor. Okay, so there's this commonality
with ants and termites around their already existent sociality that comes to be integrated
in a system of cultivation that then expands cultivation, expands the division of labor,
expands population and there seems to develop a sort of feedback process
that is kind of foundational to an agricultural system certainly around grades.
I use the word superorganism a lot, could you just briefly define it though in the context of your
academic work, what does superorganism mean? Well, it doesn't mean a biological superorganism
in the sense that we're reproductively a superorganism, in other words that we have different
people in our or members of our community that reproduce and their cast develop around
reproduction and that sort of thing, it doesn't mean that although you can have superorganisms
that are biologically superorganisms in that sense, that also become what I call an economic
superorganism. So my sort of thinking about an economic superorganism is that it is a matter
of the material kind of organization of a species and it need not be, I mean humans when they make
the transition to agriculture become economic superorganisms and that they're bound together
in this system together where individual autonomy is very much reduced and but they're not cast in
reproductive cast and that sort of thing. So and the human genome probably, I'm not saying suggesting
it hasn't changed since agriculture but it hasn't changed measurably. So the economic superorganism
I refer to is a material system that develops around certain species. I guess I consider that
something that evolutionary biologists ought to think about because what it does is to, it expands
the boundaries of evolution and how we think about evolution. If you think about the profound
changes that have occurred since the agricultural revolution 10,000 years ago, the human planet,
the earth has been taken, the planet has become populated by now 8 billion humans and all other
species are reduced, that influences the genetic endowment of the planet in profound ways. So
and that has obviously evolutionary implications and so I actually think that the economic superorganism,
the development of this system is a major evolutionary transition for humans. It's
another step in the evolution of our sociality but I don't think evolutionary biologists necessarily
agree with that. Let me ask you this. So the sociality of our species always existed or for a
very long time existed and what happened was we combined our sociality with surplus
for the first time and that's what kick-started the superorganism dynamic, yes?
Sort of but I think it's important to think about the, not just combining our sociality with surplus
but that our sociality comes to be involved in a co-evolutionary process with annual grains
that creates a system that gives rise to surplus. So the division of labor, the ability of humans
to do that I think is an essential part of the story and let me just elaborate that a little
bit. Think about humans as hunters or gatherers and then think about external conditions that
exist like the Holocene warming, the carbon left in the soils from the Pleistocene.
Think about those things as kind of embellishers of the development of annual grains because we
didn't develop annual grains, they were there okay but the Holocene warming created an opening
for their expansion. So humans who already had a capability of working together and this isn't a
very complicated story really, they start to be more sedentary around these wild stands of grains
okay. They're still engaged in hunting and gathering but now the complexity of their
material world has increased because the cultivation of annual grains is additive
to what they're already doing and probably by being more sedentary they, their reproductive
rates increase okay. So as that happens they become more, the division of labor is elaborated,
they become more articulated with the cultivation of annual grains and those annual grains are an
expansive proposition. It doesn't take great human intelligence to look at a seed and see it germinate
and realize that you could affect that process. That's not great human intelligence especially
for human beings who as hunters and gatherers were extraordinarily observant of the natural world.
Their strategy was to embed themselves in the rhythm and dynamic of the natural world,
that's how they tapped into the ecologies and their movement to create their economic life,
their material life. So humans start cultivating a little bit and cultivation takes off.
Cultivation annual grains have their own expansionary dynamics so annual grains can be stored.
The more you start to depend on annual grains the more you realize that their annual
they can be stored but you can't predict how they're going to grow from one season to the next.
So it becomes imperative to try to maximize production in any one year okay. That's your
guard. They're also an ecological disaster okay. They're bad for soil erosion and so another way
that you counteract that is by expanding your grain production, further expanding your grain
production. So I say the annual grains themselves are kind of an expansionary proposition
for humans and humans come to be co-evolved with annual grains. The annual grains become
like the non-shattering of seeds that are selected for may have been selected for inadvertently but
they become part of the complex kind of agricultural enterprise and that enterprise
because those annual grains can be the production can be routinized and standardized and
you can employ a division of labor around it. You get certain efficiencies that can develop
there and that too is expansionary. So I think this system develops that is actually a universal
system that is utilized by a number of different species but it's elaborated. It has its particular
kind of characteristic with the co-evolution of humans and annual grains but they get into the same
kind of expansionary division of labor greater interdependence as ants and termites do
and but they also humans also do have intelligence and they have technological capabilities and they
have institutional capabilities and so they develop institutions and technologies that further
elaborate that system and once that system gets going and I think this is counter-intuitive to
people it's a system that all material systems are earthly systems but it's a system that has in
some sense been disembed from the rhythm and dynamic of the more than human world. You're no
longer looking at migratory paths. You're no longer moving through different ecologies and
garnering what you can in terms of berries riping here, tubers ripe there. You're no longer doing
that. Your engagement has been reduced to the annual cycle of these grains and the whole dynamic
that's set up. So the dawn of agriculture when we started to grow and then store the surplus from
grains is that when hierarchy and inequality began in earnest in human societies? Exactly.
They develop out of that surplus. Yes and then that hierarchy feeds back on the imperative
to expand the surplus even more. Yes so you get patriarchy because if you are I mean surplus allows
for people who aren't engaged in agriculture to do other things. So surplus in agriculture allows
people who aren't engaged in agriculture to become potters, to become philosophers, to become kings,
to develop military operations. It allows for the elaboration of I guess what we might call a
social division of labor, a more elaborate social division of labor to develop around that agricultural
surplus and then there's always the imperative. They have their own dynamic of expansion,
the imperative to keep that surplus going. So yes it adds to the expansionary dynamic.
Okay now begins the part of the interview where I ask you very difficult questions
that I've been thinking about for a long time. Could equality and a non-hierarchical,
non-patriarchal, patriarchal human society exist in tandem with large amounts of surplus?
Or does surplus itself kind of imply that hierarchy and inequality are part of the system?
Well let me give you a kind of a long-winded answer to that.
Capitalism, which is the global economic system now, as I've said is the legacy of the agricultural
revolution. The form of surplus changes with capitalism but the fact of surplus doesn't change.
Surplus and capitalism revolves around the extraction of surplus value or profit
and then the whole accumulation dynamic associated with that. Okay so it's an expansionary system
because in competition there's always this imperative to keep investing and get ahead of the game.
It's a tremendously interdependent system and it's interdependent in a very specific way
and that is that you have capitalists that are owners of the means of production
and workers that are not. And that right there sets up, I mean that's how the system,
you can think about profit as an institutionalized form of surplus but that's how the system
of profit in part gets its money from exploitation of workers. That's a very marxian interpretation
but I think it's as good as any. So if you ask me can you have a system of surplus
without hierarchy? I guess the answer would be theoretically yes, you could have a system of
surplus without hierarchy but it couldn't be a capitalist system because a capitalist system
is by definition a system of hierarchy. I meant from the evolutionary repertoire of
Homo sapiens, the plasticity and the group selection competition cooperation
that is hardwired in all of us, could we have a system in the face of huge exosomatic,
in the presence of huge exosomatic surplus the way we have now or even half of what we have now,
could we have a system that wasn't hierarchical with massive inequality? I guess I'm asking
is it the surplus that drives these things or is it the system that drives the surplus?
It's the system that drives the surplus. It's the system that drives the surplus. So
that's not to say you couldn't have surplus right now, it's the system that drives the surplus
and things evolved in a certain way to get us where we are now. Could we theoretically have a
surplus system that wasn't a capitalist system? Yes, I suppose we could but our particular
evolutionary trajectory did not lead us to that kind of system. Instead, it led us to the kind
of system that we're confronting now. Well, it didn't really lead us. It was the system we have
now was selected for which is different words to represent the same concept, right? Yes. We
definitely got involved in a system that elaborated in a certain way and landed us here and you can
kind of see it in a simplistic sense, the expansion of markets and a market society. So you get
agricultural surplus, it elaborates the division of labor, now you get potters and all kinds of
other things going on. They then trade. So you can think about initial markets as an institutional
arrangement for trade that makes some sense. I mean, Adam Smith talked a lot about that
and then you get markets that develop where you get merchants that want to make money off of the
trade. So they want to buy cheap and sell dear. So that's kind of an evolution of the market system
from this system of agricultural surplus to the expansion of the social division of labor and
the production in an economy, then to the development of markets as a way to exchange,
then to the rise of the merchant class that is trying to buy cheap and sell dear.
And then a further evolution of that is that that buying cheap and selling dear
feeds back on production itself and the merchant becomes essentially a capitalist.
He no longer is just trying to buy things from petty commodity producers to exchange and make
money. He is trying to produce products to have them consistently available
so that and make money producing for less than he can sell them for.
Embedded in this superorganism dynamic are multiple positive feedbacks that keep it going
and accelerate it. Yes, exactly. And you can in a sense think about the evolution of capitalism
as an elaborate kind of positive something that emerges out of these positive feedback loops.
It's an institutional elaboration, if you will, of this kind of system.
So you've mentioned ants and the social insects and you just mentioned a Marxian framing that
capitalism is some people have owned the means of production and the workers don't. Is there an
analog in the social insects to that or not quite? Well, not an analog that I would make
or that I would elaborate on. I mean, they don't have hierarchy and ownership in the way that we
do, although they do have queens and workers and workers that clean out the waste products.
But I think that's anthropomorphizing. So in nature, you've likened human societies and our
economic superorganism to superorganisms in the social insects. What happens to those super
organisms? Do they keep growing under a positive feedback or how do they reach a limit and stop
or do they hit a wall and disappear and collapse or what happens to ants, termites and the social
insects superorganisms? Well, I think there probably is collapse if, for example, leaf cutter
ants run out of leaves, they're going to collapse. So I think there probably is collapse. They grow
to tremendous size and the colonies last a long time, but they're relatively small and they can
relocate a colony by having a queen fly to another location and start another colony.
So they have that option to do that. So I don't know, I mean, the leaf cutter ants,
for example, evolve in the tropics where there's a lot of material that they won't run out on.
But I don't know how long the colonies last. I imagine it's variable.
Well, let's just say that I don't know a lot about the social insects, but let's say there's a colony
that has 100 million individuals and it's quite successful and has grown for a long time,
but it's approaching its limits wherever it is and the queen flies away and starts a new colony.
So that new colony will continue to grow and expand, but from a much smaller starting base.
So it's almost like expansion, but starting at a lower level. Could there be any analogy of that
to human systems? I guess we can't fly a queen somewhere else and start over.
No, but I think, but I think there probably is some analogy in the sense that
once complexity gets an expansion reaches a certain point, I mean, think about the process
of globalization and now the process of trying relocalization. I think there is this tendency
to revert back to more localized kind of enterprises as things get more complicated
and kind of out of control, probably. So in our circles, ecological economics,
there is a growing movement called degrowth who is recognizing the biophysical limits,
climate change, inequality, and they don't often use the word superorganism, but the tea leaves
are kind of clear. Do you think it's possible, given your analysis of our evolutionary nature
as evolved primates, to voluntarily degrow as a culture or as a species?
We've got a collective problem, and the problem is embodied in a complex economic system.
And that complex economic system is a system with an inherent dynamic of expansion,
profound interdependence, and it has set up this duality between humans and earth.
Okay, that's the way we're organized, we're contextual, we're organized in that way.
So in order to get to a degrowth in order to downsize, in order to entertain limits,
then we have to be willing to confront certain basic parts of that system.
And I don't know whether we're capable of doing that, because confronting foundational parts of
the system means starting to unravel a tapestry that's very complicated, and I think we don't
quite know how that unraveling is going to go.
And when you say we, the we is not you and me, it's the voters or the leaders, or who would be
the we that would need to unravel that? Well, we would have to collectively decide,
and I guess that's the voters, the individuals would have to decide that we're going to implement
a different kind of system. So if you're asking me, I mean, I think we can make things,
we can enact policies and have movements that make things more ecological.
We can make this system more ecological. Can we create a system that stops expanding?
That's another question altogether. And I'm not sure that that is that easy to do.
Now, eventually it will stop expanding. But, you know, so the question is, do we have to collapse?
Or simplify, which would be collapse light, where we bend instead of break. You and I were
talking the other day about how the general person aware of the global metacrisis
under appreciates the strength and the momentum of the economic superorganism and how difficult it
is to change. I think we have a system that's been in play in various forms for 10,000 years,
and it's a powerful system. And I think people underestimate how powerful the system is.
And it was given, let me talk just a few minutes about fossil fuel, because I think you,
you have an emphasis and a curiosity about fossil fuel and fossil fuel is important.
Fossil fuel did not create capitalism. Capitalism was a fully formed system
before we began production using fossil fuel. In other words, the system of profit and the
expansionary dynamic and the movement to a market system was already in play when we
began to use fossil fuel. But there is no question that fossil fuel changed the dynamic of the system.
In a simplistic sense, it kind of moved us from petty commodity production ultimately to the
rise of the corporation and, you know, massive industrial enterprises. And it really creates
the kind of contradictions in the system that, for example, Marx identified, you know, that you get
this expansionary system, but the system that generates inequality and the system that can go
into depression under consumption and crisis. Okay. So we have that kind. So the duality that
already existed between humans and earth is, it's exacerbated with fossil fuels, because then
this institutionalized form of surplus in profit starts to seem unlimited.
What do you say to the people that think that climate change and our economic problems are due
to Exxon and Shell and fossil fuel companies or corporations more generally? How does that fit
into the hierarchy of your story? I think the fossil fuel industry is playing the game according
to the rules of the game. Okay. Are they deceptive? Have they been immoral? Is there greed? All of that
is clear. But that doesn't negate the fact that they are corporations that are functioning on the
basis of profit and trying to make money and survive in this economic system. Okay. And it
doesn't negate the fact that we have a massive energy problem. We are highly dependent, and you
know this more than anybody else, because you've elaborated it extensively. We are highly dependent
on this concentrated carbon in the form of fossil fuels. And it's not so easy to get off of that.
Okay. So fossil fuels give us the illusion that things are unlimited,
but even they are not unlimited. And so there's, I wouldn't blame the fossil fuel industry.
I think you can hold them accountable, but you still have the problem of a massive economy
with 80% of its energy coming from fossil fuel. Blaming the fossil fuel industry is not going to
change that reality. In order to change that reality, okay, you have to know what the limits
of renewable energy are. You have to know, you know, energy return on energy investment, and
you have to understand that climate change is not going to, we're not going to do anything about
climate change unless we have absolute limits on the extraction of fossil fuel. A cap on carbon,
a hard cap on carbon. Those sorts of things would be a cap on economic growth. So at the
at the bottom of the academic intellectual scaffolding that you're building,
or that you have built, is the issue of governance. And how is governance that would attempt to do
or succeed in doing some of the things you've just mentioned,
incongruent with this amount of surplus? Is governance without surplus an agricultural
based systems even possible? You mean governance that will give you that will downside downsize?
I'm not sure I understand your question entirely. Yeah, I mean, well, let me let me ask you a
different way. Can we use collective awareness, knowledge and concern for the natural world
to create governance or new structures that reign in the super organism or direct its movement?
We can, but we have to become a lot more enlightened about what's going on. We have to be a lot more
discerning. Well, it means, for example, that we understand that our our basic challenge,
okay, we have a dialectical tension that's emerged. And it's a tension between an expansionary
economy and an economy that's reaching biophysical limits. It's a tension between
an economic system that wants to function as if it's not an earthly matter.
At the same time, it is. We confront, so we confront this kind of dialectical tension
in the system. And it's very, very hard to come to terms with how we resolve that.
And I don't think, I think expanding our understanding of things to the point where we
realize that what we're really trying to do here is to reconnect the economy with the rhythm and
dynamic of the more than human world. We're trying to re embed ourselves in that. We're not just
trying to attain sustainability in some vague way. And that requires doing that requires limits.
Yes, we're trying to end growth. But sort of a nuanced and expansive way of looking at that
is by saying that we're trying to become an ecological species and move out of the system
we've evolved into that is highly unecological. So on this topic, you discussed the idea of
determinism in your most recent book. In your opinion, how much agency do we really have
as individuals and in aggregate collections of individuals to make change at a larger scale?
Do you see us as active agents influencing the economic superorganism system or rather as smaller
parts playing a role in a much larger story than ourselves?
We are definitely captured by a system where we play a certain role. And we live in the contradiction
of that all the time. You can say you know we need to stop expansion and yet you hope that your
portfolio expands so you have a good retirement. You have to work and the employment that you get
is employment that is involved with companies that are companies that are making profit
and profit is expansionary. So we live with individual contradictions. Now having said that,
in some sense, we're a place to seen species that has become an economic superorganism.
So we have this contradiction in our evolutionary history. I say we are both
Homo sapiens sapiens and Homo sapiens agriculturai. We're both of those. So we feel this tension
and contradiction both in our individual lives and it's obviously apparent to us
collectively an economy that continues to grow against a world in which we're confronting
biophysical limits and we can't stop it. We can't seem to stop it. So we're dealing with those kind
of contradictions. What difference can we make? We have to get our story straight about certain
things. For example, and you and I have talked a little bit about this, we cannot have the attitude
that our energy transition here is an energy transition to expanding renewable resources
and having everything go on as usual. First of all, that's not going to happen
and there are technological reasons why that won't happen.
Second, and so we have to realize that we're caught up in that in an ideology that's outdated
and that's the ideology that technology can solve our problems. So this movement to
renewable energy economy is in some sense caught in an old, it's just the expression of an old
ideology. I don't disagree with moving towards renewable energy, but what we have to realize
is that our energy is limited. It has to be limited. We are going to have a lower energy future
and unless people can think about what is happening in those terms, then I don't think that we're
going to make the kinds of change be able to move towards the kinds of changes that we need to make.
It's very, very difficult to replace fossil fuel. You know that more than anybody.
Well, there's two reasons that technology can't solve this problem. One is technology requires
energy and two is technological impacts impact our biosphere and our earth's ecosystems which
are running out of sync capacity. So do you really believe or do you wish that if 3%, 5%, 10%,
18% of humans understand that we're headed towards a future where there's going to be less
material surplus that we might make wiser decisions on preparing and responding to that?
Or do you think as we approach that cliff's edge, as it were, that denial and fear will become
predominant because it's a double-edged sword. We need to learn and be aware, but at the same
time that awareness causes anxiety and fear. I think anxiety and fear might capture the day.
I like to think that enlightenment is possible and sufficient enlightenment
to actually make meaningful change, but I'm not sure about that. I'm not sure, but in a sense,
it's not a question I ask. It isn't a question I ask. That's not a place I go. I don't because
I don't want to get caught up in whether I have to be hopeful. In any of that, I am only caught up
in what can be done now to try to bring awareness to where we stand.
I am for engaging any movement that tries to get us out of the path the trajectory we're on,
but that starts with basic understanding and enlightenment that I think a lot of progressive
people are moving toward change don't really understand very well. Basic calculations about
EROEI. That's the genesis of this podcast, Lisa, is I don't have the answers, but I want to help
people understand this economic superorganism dynamic because a lot of the doors that we're
rushing towards really have red Xs drawn through them. They're brick walls. Let's solve climate
change by scaling renewables or buying electric vehicles. These are micro, old story responses
to what we face. I think the more people that understand the systemic human organism that
didn't start with fossil fuels, it didn't start with capitalism. It started when we started agriculture
of grains 10,000 plus years ago. This is the manifestation of that story. Something I'm in
my next little frankly video, I think I'm going to refer to it as the emergent Heisenberg. The
Heisenberg principle is that as a scientist, you can't observe something without impacting
it. I wonder if becoming aware that we are an economic superorganism. If that awareness itself
changes the direction of the superorganism, I ask myself that weekly. I think about that.
Of course, I don't have an answer. Do you have any speculation on that?
Well, that's a really complicated issue. It's a very complicated issue because when you get
kind of dialectical tensions developing in the system, the resolution of those dialectical
tensions is a complex matter. I can't answer whether awareness of it will change the dynamic.
Awareness of it and its complexity will help us to target what we do. I think it can help us target
what we can do. Whether what is capable or what is possible to happen in the system will be
sufficient to change the system, I have real questions about and I don't know what that means.
Ultimately. I think without awareness, we can't target what we do individually or what we try to
do collectively. We can't be as strategic as we need to be. I think being strategic
is really important when things are moving so quickly and we are really standing in a very
problematic place. The closing quote in my superorganism paper was Ilya Priyazhin that at times
of crisis, islands of coherence can shift the entire system. I'd like to believe that's true.
I love that quote too and I like to believe that that's true. I don't know if it is.
I don't know if it is, but there is one thing that we know for sure. The center will not hold.
The dialectical tension that we confront right now is not something that can go unresolved.
I think we can count on that. It has to be resolved and it's a complex matter.
Let me just draw an analogy, but maybe it's taking things back to some kind of mundane level
where we shouldn't take them back to, but in ecological economics there's been a tremendous
amount of intellectual capital focused on critiquing neoclassical economics. I often think that
that's really a case of, I don't know if it's misplaced concreteness or what it is,
but it's a case of believing that the way that we describe things is necessarily the reality of things.
The economic superorganism exists independent of neoclassical economics. Now whether neoclassical
economics has influenced it and its course, I don't know, but I wish people would spend less
time doing that, critiquing that as if we can critique it enough and get on top of it enough,
the system will change. I wish we'd spend less time doing that and more time sort of really
talking about the evolution and dialectical tension of the system in a more expansive way.
At the end of the interview with John Gowdy, your colleague, I asked him what can be done,
and he had just gotten done talking about the superorganism and our evolutionary trajectory
and termites and surplus and a lot of the things that you've said, obviously. He said,
well, one thing is we need to vote all the Republicans out of office. It was a missed
opportunity for me because just like you just said, if we debunk neoclassical economics,
the metabolism of the superorganism will still exist. Voting all Republicans out of office
isn't going to change anything with the underlying dynamics of an energy-hungry
metabolic superorganism. It might be good for some and bad for some humans in what they care about,
but the underlying social human insect metabolism isn't going to change because of that. Do you
have any thoughts on that? I'm sure John doesn't mind me bringing that up here because we're friends,
but what do you think about that? Well, I don't think voting the Republicans out of office is
going to, I agree with you, it's not going to change things, and Republicans aren't our only
problem because we have Democrats who are not enlightened in the way that we would like them
to be enlightened about our circumstances. For example, and you and I talked about this the
other day, Joe Biden, who has all these energy policies in the Inflation Reduction Act and
everything to promote renewable energy, at the beginning of his presidency,
he goes and gets in an electric convoy and rides around like we're on track to change things.
That leases for fossil fuel production are still being given out, and moreover, if Democrats aren't
more enlightened than being able to say we need a hard cap on carbon unless we get that, we're not
doing, we're not doing anything that we need, we're not doing what we need to do.
So, Republicans aren't our only problem, which I guess leads me to say, I sort of agree with you,
you know, it's a complicated system, highly evolved and articulated around fossil fuel,
and we have to face what that means, and what that means is that we're going to have less
energy. If we want to do something about climate change, we're going to have access to less energy
or less surplus, as you say, and that's the reality, and I don't think the Democrats are
confronting that reality any more than the Republicans are. In fact, sometimes some of the
Republicans, this is horrible to say, sometimes some of the Republicans who say, you know, we can't
manage without fossil fuels, well, I think it's probably true that we can't manage to have the
expansionary kind of dynamic that we have going on now without fossil fuels. I'm not sure we can.
It's not popular to say that, you know, I'm sure I'm not going to get any
up marks in my favor for saying that, but it's true. So it's not just the Republicans,
it's the Democrats too. How do you change that kind of thinking? It's a worldview change.
It's a worldview change. You and I have talked a bit recently, and we talked a lot like 10 years
ago, but there's been some years in between where we were out of touch, and I'm smiling,
Lisi, because you've arrived at the same conclusions that I have independently,
and it makes me feel less alone that this situation we face is beyond politics.
And there are no easy answers. We can infer that we're going to have to use less energy
and materials in the future. We don't know how that point is going to arise and how we can influence
it. And yet, we have to try because we don't know what could happen, what evolutionary trajectories
of humans interacting in an era of surplus could create. I mean, is there a possible that we have
a new evolutionary trajectory here, that the dawn of agriculture kicked us into an economic
superorganism? Maybe we could have a new cultural evolution towards something else, or at least
50 years from now, 100 years from now, the descendants of people alive today could be
living a different human existence. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, I think what going back to the agricultural revolution and talking about hunters and
gatherers and thinking about hunters and gatherers taught me was that it's really important to
contemplate the complexity of the human being, both individually and collectively,
in relation to Earth. It's important to think about what our place on Earth is. That's
kind of a spiritual question. It's a practical question, but it's also a spiritual question.
What are things going to be like if this kind of magic that we inherited that we have evolved in
this numinous, more than human world is eliminated entirely?
I think those are questions that people need to think about. And if you think about those
questions and you don't want to see what that's going to be like because that's where we're headed
quickly, then you need to think in constant terms of limits. Limits, limits. We are not in an age
expansion. We have to be in an age of limits. And unless we can start to think in those terms
and think in terms of our relationship to the more than human world,
I think we probably will not do what we need to do. I think we have to constantly keep those
things in the back of our mind. And I know that might sound kind of wishy-washy, but it's true.
Yeah, I agree with that. So can you bring that down to an individual level?
Our viewers and listeners, you've been working on this as a career choice, your entire career
integrating the economic superorganism, biophysical limits, the ecosphere with your work with Paul
Shepherd and West Jackson. What sort of personal advice to many of the listeners of this show
are aware of these things? What sort of personal advice would you give to people who are aware
of the economic superorganism, yet they want to live their life and play a role in our situation?
Engage, look into the black hole constantly. Look into the contradictions.
Look into what we're confronting and don't be afraid of looking into them deeply.
Don't be afraid of engaging them. Don't be afraid. Don't let yourself sink into despair
at the same time. Sometimes enlightenment only comes when you can look at something
squarely and size it up for what it is, and then there's a certain liberation
in what you're able to start thinking about. You're able to start thinking in different terms
once you do that. Don't get caught up in whether there's hope. Look into the contradictions. Look
into the black hole. Engage it fully, and then don't let despair overpower you. Continue on.
Make your choices about your activism and what you do based on what you come up with when you
size things up. I guarantee in terms of what we're talking about,
you will have to confront this proposition of limits. We try to hedge that. We try to
hedge that. We can have development without growth. Well, we can, but unless there's infinite,
no diminishing returns to technology, that's limited. We have to confront this limited
world that we're starting down. There's practical things you can do. For example,
I'm involved in a lot of conservation work, and I'm trying to stop the development of somebody
who wants to put in a massive resort up a small river valley in Wyoming, and he's saying he's
doing it in the name of conservation. I've been involved in two years in a project trying to
stop it, trying to speak to the migratory paths of animals. Have I been successful? Not all together,
but I think that kind of work is good work, and it's work people can engage in. You can engage in
those kinds of community localized community oriented enterprises, movements, but you have
to see clearly what you're doing. Are you still teaching, and what would you say to college age
humans who start to understand the synthesis of climate anthropology, energy, resources, and limits?
I would say to them, what I just said, don't despair, embrace the world in all its magic.
Try to understand it at a very foundational and critical level. Lead a thoughtful life,
and understand that what has happened in the past, that your goal in life is not to be better off than
your parents. That is not your goal. That is not your future, because you're at a different moment,
and you have to rise to the historical moment. That's what I tell my students all the time,
and they find themselves at a very important historical moment, and I am almost at the end
of my teaching career. What do you care most about in the world, Lisi? I care most about
I guess compassion, and I also care most about right now, I think
trying to fight for what remains of the wild impulse of the planet. I think that's what I care most about.
Me too. Me too. Good. Well, I'm glad we agree on that.
Yeah, we deeply agree on that. Most of my guests agree on that. Here's a question I ask all my
guests, and I'm really looking forward to see how you answer this, because it's not so implausible
that you might one day have such a moment. If you, Professor Lisi Crawl, had a magic wand,
and there was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you would wish
with that wand to improve human and planetary futures?
I can only have one.
Well, if you have a couple of key points you'd like to make, I'll give you more than one.
I would wish that we would be able to see the end of the ideologies surrounding our economic system.
I would hope that we would be able to see that the system of profit
is not sustainable, and that trying to move in a direction away from it
is not going to impinge on individual freedom. It's going to expand it. It's going to expand
the richness of life, not diminish it. I guess I would hope for that.
Well, let me ask a follow-up to that. Is it an ideology that is at fault, or is it a biology
of paired with surplus that we have to change? I'm still not clear on the distinction
between the ideology in service of the superorganism or the biological momentum of a
social species finding surplus, and then building economic structures, not consciously,
just the same way an ant would build a subterranean highway.
That's actually a really good question. It's a really profound question.
I think we got here by accident, not intent, and I think we got here by peculiarities
of our evolutionary dynamic, and not just individual evolutionary dynamic,
but collective, how we evolve collectively. I don't think getting here was an aberration,
and this is the hard thing. Getting here wasn't an aberration. This is where we arrived,
and I can think of which I have the story of how this might have happened. It's not an aberration.
It's not, but we arrive here as a bit of an ecological misfit, nonetheless,
and I think if anything, what it demonstrates is that evolution doesn't see it ahead, and it's not
perfect. I think the challenge is, and we develop ideologies around that, around rationalizing
and justifying and extending where we ended up, but I think we have to go deeper into our
evolutionary history and understand that we are both of the Pleistocene and of the Holocene.
We are Homo sapien sapien, and we are Homo sapien agriculturali. That is the peculiarity
of our evolutionary history. There is no question that that will create
formidable challenges for us both individually and collectively, and so the struggle that we're
engaged in right now is predictable. Will the ideology matter? Yes, the ideology will matter,
I think somewhat. Whether a change in ideology can resolve the dialectical contradiction that
we find ourselves with, I'm not sure, but we can only go about changing ideologies, trying to develop
deep ecologies, strategically looking at what we need to do, not having our head in the clouds,
instead looking into the black holes. That's what we have to do, and so
we'll see what happens. Clearly, I don't have all the answers.
Neither do I, but you're trying to describe the problem and help other people understand it,
which I think is a very important step. Thank you for your time today and for your lifetime of
scholarship on these issues. If I have you back in the future, now that we've done kind of the
preliminary Lisa Kroll's worldview, is there any topic that you are currently really passionate
on relevant to human futures that we could do a round two on? Do you have any speculation on that
or ideas? Well, we could expand a discussion of methodology, which seems kind of weird,
but we could expand our discussion of the importance of thinking in evolutionary and
dialectical terms. We look for simple answers. We look for simple stories, but there's something
to be garnered in more complexity that I think is important, so we might want to talk about that.
All right. I've written it down as a soft circle. Thank you so much, and good luck with your
battling the Wyoming development, and we'll talk soon, my friend.
Okay, Nate, thank you so much. I appreciate it.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
