currency reform, I don't see how it doesn't happen. There's going to be one way or another
currency reform. Not only is it going to come, it's already happening. We have a chart we've
showed clients before, I've put it on Twitter before, 2014. In late 2013, the People's Bank of
China came out and said it's no longer in our interest to grow holdings of FX reserves. It was
basically China saying we're done by growing our holdings of treasuries. This was 2013. Since that
moment, we have seen US holdings of treasuries by global central banks, declined by almost $600
billion, which is unprecedented. Going back, holdings, central bank holdings of treasuries
never fell for the 50 to 60 years before 2014. Since then, they are down about 5%. It's about
$600 billion. Gold has gone up 300 billion. So we are moving towards that. I think currency
reform will happen. It is happening. A war, I'm optimistic that it won't happen simply because
of mutually assured destruction. Right. I mean, if there's anywhere, we're all screwed, so let's
avoid it at all costs. Yeah, absolutely. The sense I get when I talk to people in the military and
intelligence communities in the United States, I think there's absolutely an understanding of that.
You hear the bravado and the rah-rah from certain people in public areas about, well,
we've got the best military and they can't stop us, blah, blah, blah. When you sort of have quiet
moments with serious, sober-minded military intelligence professionals,
they admit that there is absolutely a level of mutually assured destruction, not just from a
military standpoint, but from a financial market and standards of living standpoint. It would be
horrifying. I fully agree with you. I hope you're right. I think the military
intelligence people do get it. It's the State Department type of people that I worry about.
On the one lens, everything you just described makes me incredibly
bearish on the US dollar and our standards of living. On the other hand, we're 90% energy
independent. We import some oil, but we are abundant in coal and natural gas. We're growing
renewable energy. Europe and Japan and other countries do not have that
bio-physical underpinning. The US dollar is bad, but I can't imagine another currency that would
replace it unless it's something bio-physical like gold or land or energy, STRs or something
like that. What are your thoughts on that? I think you described it very, very well, which is
that peak cheap oil is going to force this bio-physical issue. We've been seeing Russia and
China, in particular, others, central banks, acknowledging this de facto by how they have
rearranged the deployment of their surpluses. They've stopped moving them out of sovereign
debt and they've moved them into gold and hard assets. That could even include equities, etc.
The paradox of the way the dollar system is set up, which is that there's a lot of dollar
denominated debt outstanding, as you move to multi-currency energy out of necessity, as China
does this out of necessity, you're going to be created. There's a huge overhang of dollar
denominated debt that needs a constant supply of dollars to service, because every year you've
got interest, so you need more dollars to service that. All else equal, there is a monstrous bid
for dollars, which is an oversimplification, but just for illustrative purposes. As you start
shifting small amounts of the global energy trade away from almost all dollars to some yuan,
some euro, some yen, etc., you're going to effectively, as that oil comes out of the
ground and is paid for in these other fiat currencies, you're basically creating new
supplies of these fiat currencies, so you're increasing supply of yuan. We'll just use that one,
but there's not a monstrous bid for yuan. There's not a lot of yuan debt outstanding
in the global markets, so yuan supply up, not a lot of demand. What happens to yuan? It goes down.
Flipside, to the extent you divert a small amount of energy production away from dollars
into yuan, you're going to shrink the supply of dollars just a little bit. It doesn't have to be
a lot, it hasn't been a lot. However, there is a monstrous bid, monstrous demand for dollars,
from the install base of dollar debt as the system has evolved over the last 50 years.
So as paradoxically, as you move global energy pricing away from the dollar,
it actually mechanically drives the dollar up against these other currencies, right? Slightly
smaller supply of dollars, huge demand, demand up, supply down a little, price up, and vice
versa for yuan, yen, etc., and so we've been seeing some elements of that in the way things have
traded. Now ultimately, it is very bearish for the dollar and for our living standards,
barring this energy miracle because of what we started describing, right? Which is, or started
the podcast by discussing, which is these foreigners are no longer financing our deficits. When we
talk about foreign central banks not having bought treasuries for almost a decade now,
the U.S. debt in that decade is up $11 or $12 trillion. So ultimately, the Fed has to print
the money to pay for these deficits and that causes a weaker dollar in the long run.
