It's a distribution problem.
I remember reading this long ago, the food is here.
You got to get it there and it just doesn't get there.
Well, the same for this, this particular tool for when they do have the food,
but they have no way to safely cook it, they get it to them.
Today, I'd like to welcome solar cooker expert Luther Krueger to the show.
This is a odd topic for this show.
We're going to talk about solar cookers.
I have one.
I've always been fascinated by them.
This falls right square in the middle of the Goldilocks tech category,
where we get a very important human need cooking food with very minimal energy input.
Luther Krueger has been collecting, designing and promoting solar cookers
for over 20 years through community education courses,
demonstration at farmers markets.
And recently he's been traveling across the U.S.
to create video interviews with solar cooker pioneers
and practitioners using solar ovens.
He and I discussed the basics of using solar cookers,
how they might apply to a future with lower energy throughput.
And this is a great whirlwind tour of the different technologies
available to cook food outside using the sun.
Please welcome Luther Krueger.
Luther, great to see you.
Good to see you.
Thanks for having me.
You are welcome.
You are an interesting guest.
Former policemen turned solar cooking forensic museum scholar and practitioner.
Just quick correction, I was a civilian with the Minneapolis Police Department.
So I would have been a hazard to others and myself if I had to carry a gun.
So happily, 28 years, no weapons.
So how did this transition come about?
How did you get interested in solar technology?
Sure.
Well, I've always been an environmentalist since I was in junior high
and read Rachel Carson's book that I'm sure a lot of people have read.
I probably only read a chapter or two, but it just struck home.
How badly we are taking care of the planet.
We weren't taking care.
We're destroying it, really.
And I think it's a good thing to be able to do that.
So forever, it's been in the back of my mind.
And eventually I just discovered solar cookers, the actual manufactured ones
when I picked up my brother after he got out of the Navy in Norfolk, Virginia.
And I didn't have time to talk to the guy with the store, but he gave me a book
called Cooking with the Sun by Beth and Dan Hallacy.
And they were solar engineers in the in the 50s and 60s.
And out of just plywood, you could make a box with a cut at a slant,
put a sheet of glass over it, reflectors, aluminum foil.
And you're talking almost 300 degrees worth of cooking power.
Just straight sunlight fed into the pot.
And so I was convinced we're going to get into all that.
A footnote is if Rachel Carson were alive today, I think she would be
very upset things have gotten unbelievably worse since she wrote that book.
At the core of why I want you as a guest on this program is,
I think, and I know you follow the podcast,
that we're headed for a world in coming decades where we're going to have to get
80% of the things that humans need and value with 20% of the resources we're using today.
I'm starting to refer to this as Goldilocks technology.
Not too hot, like colonizing Mars and flying cars, not too cold stone tools,
but something that assumes that interconnected society holds together
but needs to use less fossil energy and more appropriate tech.
So I don't know a lot about solar cooking other than I do have
a solar oven that I use in the summertime.
And I can put anything in there in mid to late morning.
And it's done by mid to late afternoon, but I don't have to worry about it over cooking.
And I don't use any energy in my stove or my oven or anything.
So we're going to get into that.
But let's let's start at the at the broad macro.
So as a primer, can you inform our guests?
Of course, all almost all of humans in the world cook their food.
Could you tell us the current landscape of the most popular cooking methods in the world,
whether environmentally sustainable or low resource use or not?
OK, so if you're talking about what we are,
pretty much everyone is cooking with right now, gas ovens, electric stoves and so forth.
That's really the current 99 percent of the households
have four or five variations on that theme.
And they all draw energy from fossil fuels, most likely.
Maybe some of their electricity is from wind or solar.
But they're part of the grid.
They're part of the pipeline for gas.
And the situation is such in some cities in New York City, I believe,
has said they want to phase out new construction with gas and go to totally electric
because of internal pollution inside the home of California.
I don't know the status of it, but they were looking at statewide doing the same thing.
And it should have come to light years ago, but now it's starting to the chickens
are coming home to roost. OK, so that's the United States, Canada, Europe.
What about all eight billion humans, though?
A lot of people in India, et cetera, still cook with wood and dung and other things. Yes.
Yes. And that's that's a big concern because of deforestation.
The when I first heard about deforestation, of course,
I pictured the bunch of stumps, you know, of trees.
But when I had it described to me how one particular
mountainside got deforested and then the erosion happened
and then the villages flooded and then the cascading
detrimental effects of that were just beyond catastrophic.
I mean, killing people and so forth.
So they but people have to cook with something
if they want to make sure they have safe food to eat and they're going to get it.
And if they have to walk 10, 20 miles, the stories in Africa are chilling
how far they have to walk just to get that.
I was I was just in India last month, two months ago.
And even in the relatively well to do area that I was,
every day you saw people with stacks of twigs that they had to walk and pick up.
And they were bringing that to cook their food.
So there's there's two issues there.
One is the sustainability of how big are the forests and how much
deadfall is there to to sustain a community.
And there's also the burning of that has carbon and soot
and other air quality problems.
So I have this solar oven.
It's made out of plastic and fossil inputs, but it's made once.
And so far, I've had it for seven years.
It doesn't work as well as it originally did.
But every time I use it, there are zero external inputs.
I just get the the incident sunlight and I have to move it once or twice
to follow the sun.
But that's why I contacted you because why is that not more prevalent
in the world, especially in African India that have a lot of insulation
and more material poverty and more deforestation?
It makes no sense to me.
So so bring me bring me up to speed.
What are what are the the key issues that I should be aware of?
And then I'll have some follow up questions.
Sure. That's the eternal question.
Solar Cookers International, which has done a lot of work overseas
to try to answer that question, they have several answers.
One of the first ones is the cultural barriers.
Can this thing that we're handing them as as the Western World solution
to their problem, can it cook that that traditional dish the same way?
Some of them want the smoke in the flavor.
But a lot of it is just a lot of it, you know, my opinion, having talked
to over 100 people who have tried to promote solar cooking in the US and abroad
is it's if we're not doing it here, they're going to say, well, why should we?
So that's another cultural barrier.
Do they do they really believe it?
You know, why are we bringing it to them?
But we're not using it.
You know, there's a lot of suspicion there.
And by the way, you know, the woods, they are still there.
They're only 10 miles away now.
Instead of eight, like last year, there's the I mean, it's sad, it's sad.
But that's their experience.
Also, one cultural thing that they have found is a lot of those walks.
We think of them all walking through war zones.
Some of them are, you know, very treacherous areas of conflict.
But a lot of them are through their their friends and relatives villages.
And so there's actually a little bit of a social activity, being able
to go get the firewood.
And the one story I heard was this family said, we don't want to do it
because we'd never be in touch with Uncle So-and-So five miles away, you know,
and get the latest Scuttle Butt on the rest of our family tree.
It's not like these people are sitting there doing the cost
benefit of how many fossil fuels and what's the environmental externality
and a solar cooker would clearly be the best.
It's it's how it fits into their current life and culture and social interactions.
That's largely it.
On the other hand, several that have come back from, you know, areas like Haiti
or several countries in Africa, they'll say they will give a presentation
and talk about all the environmental environmental benefits.
And the people will say, we get it, we do know that.
So a lot of them, they understand that.
And of course, even though they're missing some of the traditional
interactions with their villages and so forth, they are they do start to resent
all that extra walking they have to do.
So it's it's a little bit of everything there.
So I'm I'm getting ahead of myself because I'm so excited about this topic.
Let's let's take a step back.
And for those people that that have never heard of this,
maybe you could unpack what is a solar thermal cooker?
How does that differ from solar PV?
What's a little bit of the history?
You are the purveyor or how are you related to the Solar Cooker Museum?
I mean, you you have a lot of knowledge on this topic.
Sure. Well, the museum is is my collection that I built up over 20 years.
I've got just short of 90 unique cookers that have been manufactured around the world.
And in ordering them and trying to trying to find them, I've interacted
with the makers of them.
Some of them haven't haven't been made for 30 years.
And so I've learned a lot about how they have put them together.
What what troubles they had trying to sell them?
One fellow told me, you want to make a million dollars with solar cookers?
You start with two million dollars, right?
The business is is not it's people.
Not enough people know about it and realize the benefits.
Plus, I mean, in this country, at least I'm we're so spoiled.
We just turn the dial on our stove and our chicken is frying, you know.
So there's that it's a convenience thing, right?
And it's a sunk cost momentum thing.
We this house where I'm my office here has a stove and an oven and a microwave.
So why would I need to go out and buy a solar oven?
Because I really have this office and all the infrastructure is ready to cook food.
But if I was starting from scratch, I might say, you know what?
I'm going to I'm going to use a solar oven.
It's going to cost me a little bit more time over the long run,
especially in a world headed for less availability and a higher cost.
It will be more resilient, more healthy for me and cheaper.
But I'm not sure that I would make that decision given the sunk cost of my current situation.
Sure. And in fact, I think a lot of people think, well, it's got to be a lot of extra work.
I'm going to have to learn this new device.
Well, you had to learn your stove top range or your induction cooker
if you have an induction now or your halogen has different characteristics.
There it's really no different.
I actually think it is a lot simpler because remember that
popeal advertisement, just set it and forget it.
Well, look at your cooker there.
You pretty much forget it unless you got a lot of volume
and you got to move around a little bit, right?
Well, what is a solar cooker?
Let's let's start there.
Yeah, we'll start with the solar thermal.
Essentially, you got the sunlight hitting the ground
where you're at or hitting the wall of your apartment building.
The all the charts I've read up on, it's a kilowatt per meter squared worth of energy.
Variations based on particulates in the air from pollution or haze, hazy clouds,
what your altitude is and so forth.
But basically, that's the purest energy there is.
There is no intermediary force that's stopping you from using it.
If it hits the ground, you can use it.
And a solar cooker, thermal solar cooker takes that energy,
captures it, concentrates it, and it transfers to the food
through a pot, through any cooking vessel.
In some cases, it's a it's a turkey bag with the food right in it
in a hot pot or what have you.
That's solar thermal.
So it's pure solar energy converted to cooking heat for the food.
And does the solar thermal cooker, what is the
efficiency and ease and time differential depending on if the sun is directly overhead
or early in the day or late in the day or or in winter?
Does that angle of the sun make a huge difference?
It does make a difference, although I have to say,
you know, it just depends on the cooker you have.
If you have a nice sized parabolic, you can basically start collecting
that energy at the sunrise.
It probably won't be enough to cook with for maybe a half hour or an hour
because it's going through a lot more atmosphere at that low angle.
But once you hit nine o'clock in the morning, 10 o'clock in the morning here in
Minnesota, we're at 45th parallel basically up here in Minneapolis.
That's going to be enough to cook for six, seven, eight hours.
In the height of summer, you can go eight or nine hours really with that.
In the winter, you might only have three or four, but with a parabolic,
you can cook several meals, multiple meals in a row.
If you use a hay basket to put them aside one at a time and put another meal in.
Box cookers, they need to be insulated to really be effective.
But the commercial models out there, such as the one you have, I believe,
was the solar war sport.
That one is very well constructed, very high tech insulation.
And as you mentioned, it's plastic, but it's not single use.
So those are solar thermal cookers and they range from simple panel cookers
that just cook in a pot with a reflector that hits the pot.
Often the pot is covered with a Pyrex bowl or a, or the turkey bag,
as they call it, the oven bag.
The box cooker does the same thing.
Only it's as a dedicated space that contains the heat.
And parabolics, those are like the stir fry cookers.
They had very high heat and you can fry with them.
Okay.
So that makes sense.
That's solar thermal.
How's that different from solar PV cooking?
Sure.
Well, with solar thermal, it's the direct sunlight hitting basic elements,
basic pieces of a cooker to concentrate it on the, on the food,
in the pot, in the food.
Photovoltaic is the panel that might have wires directly to a cooker.
For instance, you could do a DC cooker.
I think the microwave, I know one fellow told me induction cookers can be DC.
And as some have done, which I think, as at Krista Decker might have mentioned,
they have DC just direct to a heating element.
I visited Alexis Ziegler in Virginia to see his living energy farm in February
when I was able to take a quick trip out there to capture that.
And that's exactly what he does.
Panels of solar cook, solar panels that go direct to a very highly insulated
oven box that over time can build up the heat and cook for a dozen or more
people that, that live on the farm.
The, of course, the steps are you need to get the panels before that.
The panels need to be made before that.
The stuff has to be dug from the ground, et cetera, et cetera.
So there's a lot more involved with making it and putting them to work.
It's also a level of a little beyond most people's DIY, which you can make
any solar cooker without a lot of skills, a thermal cooker.
I have very little DIY.
And so I bought the solar, you know what I have, right?
I showed you, it's just a square with the plastic on top.
It works great.
I don't have to do anything.
So, uh, like how much energy do we use from ovens and stoves and
microwaves as a percentage of our energy?
I don't know if you know that.
All I know is for my household, we just installed a heat pump.
And before that, we looked up our gas percentage, 90% for heat, 5% for
heating water and 5% for our stoves.
Now that 5% was based on the, on the quote we got to install the panels.
And we have been doing solar cooking every possible way to not even use
the electricity from that.
And we want to get, we want to get paid for it, you know, since we're on
the net metering system.
So, so how much of your food living in Minnesota that you cook is made
using some form of solar oven?
We are probably only a quarter at most.
Uh, I like to say we live in the variety weather belt.
We're at the mercy of the, of the clouds.
Uh, you know, might be productive.
So just like solar panels for 24 seven electricity, uh, and, and wind
turbines, et cetera, there's intermittent, um, intermittent for, uh,
watching a football game might be okay, but intermittent for eating, not so much.
So, uh, that's something that's important, right?
If you planned on only cooking your food using a solar oven, there
would be days or even weeks that that would be tough.
Yes.
Yes.
Uh, on the other hand, uh, one trend that I, I hope increases is, uh, the
manufacturer of hybrid cookers where it's a solar thermal cooker, but with
electric backup, it's an ingenious cooker because you don't need to be near
the grid or have solar panels or batteries, but you can still use wood or biomass.
And it's a rocket stove that shoots right through the box of a solar cooker.
So if the clouds come in, you just stoke it up and, uh, fire up the wood and
you're good to go.
And the one reason behind that is a lot of people are not going to give up
wood entirely, but they'll adopt a solar cooker if, Oh, well, we'll still cook
with that, but we'll just put wood in as well.
Uh, dual use or a backup system is, is needed.
But what about Kenya or Tamil Nadu in India that have sun almost all the time?
I mean, this makes complete sense from an environmental and a resource standpoint,
doesn't it?
Just for the cultural problems that you said earlier.
So what would like a, you know, not the best top of the line and not the
Uber basic, but a solid usable that has a five plus year lifetime solar oven
cost, if someone in Africa were to buy one or to be donated one.
Sure.
There are the manufactured models out there.
Uh, in the States, there's the Haynes panel cooker, which, uh, he ships with
his own pot at a cost of $65, $70.
And he's been involved with shipping up, shipping whole crates of cookers to
various countries in Africa.
He's actually explored the use of carbon credits.
That's at the low end.
And it's, it's just a plastic foldable cooker that it'll pretty much last forever.
It's just windshield reflector material, aluminized mylar.
That's the, that's the least expensive moving up to where you have.
That's probably a three or $400 model a few years ago.
Uh, a box cooker, every bit is reliable.
Um, probably needs to my Haynes.
I just said it to point where the sun will be at noon at night in the morning.
And by five, we have a piping hot stew for a family of six.
So a very low cost.
And, uh, I don't know what he's, uh, uh, uh, charging to get it to Africa,
but it's got to be pretty infinite.
Does it, um,
Luther, as usual, um, my mouth is faster than my brain.
Um, and I have overly too many questions for you.
And I wanted to follow a logical sequence, but I'm, I'm too curious.
Sorry.
Um, does the food taste any different?
Can you notice, or let me ask it this way, you as a solar oven museum, uh,
curator that has 90 models in your garage, uh, or your basement, could someone do,
uh, a series of meals, uh, an entree like fish, some potatoes,
some cookies or something like that.
And could you know the difference, uh, blindly if it was cooked in a solar oven
or in a conventional oven, uh, by taste or by texture?
I don't know if I could with a blind taste test.
I feel I have about half the taste buds of your average person.
So I need a lot of spice and so forth.
But everyone I've talked to that, uh, cooks regularly with solar thermal cookers,
they'll say, you know, it tastes different.
It tastes better.
And, uh, Joe Rattebaugh, who wrote the best book on solar cooking to date, and
it's 20 years old, it needs to be updated.
Uh, he says, he said, he talked to chefs who said the longer you can cook
something at the lowest possible temperature, the better it's going to taste.
It gives the right amount of time for the proteins to break down for the sugars
to be, uh, developed, what have you.
It doesn't wreck things.
You don't get charred food.
You get actually cooked food.
And I see that you've, uh, frozen again.
So, um, but I have seen, you know, whenever I do my banana bread, that's
my old standby because it's the easiest recipe to remember.
It always tastes better than when I have it in the, in the, uh, gas oven.
For one reason, the gas oven will dry out more food, uh, necessary, you know,
instead of it with a solar cooker, you tend to not dry it out.
So it's going to taste better because you want that moisture to be retained
as much as possible.
Can you overcook things like if you wanted to have them out for three hours
and then you forgot and you came back at six PM?
Yes, you can.
I mean, it's, uh, energy is entered, energy is not going to stop.
And if you leave something out long enough, or if, for instance, in a parabolic,
if you step away for about 20 minutes, uh, it might get out of focus and it
won't cook enough, or you might not realize that it's charring in one corner
of the pot cause it's not quite calibrated right for the, for the focal point.
Um, people say they have burnt, uh, stuff in box cookers, which is hard to imagine,
but they're down in, you know, a Tempe or Albuquerque where the sun is more
powerful, they're at a higher elevation and so forth.
So they're getting more of the concentrated energy and it's a little bit of risk.
So if you have one of these solar ovens, maybe a higher end one or even a solar
PV one, can it be used for things other than cooking?
Absolutely.
Uh, there are a whole, uh, uh, development, uh, programs they're trying to
establish around the world for drying fruits and vegetables.
Uh, one of my favorites is, uh, Juan Maria Hernandez in, uh, in Chiapas, uh,
approached the family who said they, they produce a lot of milk and they'd
like to sell more of this, uh, heirloom kind of dried cheese.
That was their specialty for the Chiapas area.
And she worked with them to put together a solar dryer that would get it at just
the right temperature, make sure the humidity level didn't drop too far.
So it got too dry, too fast and so forth.
Uh, there's all sorts of possibilities for that.
Uh, the, uh, in Arizona, uh, the Kerr Cole Sustainable Living Center, uh,
they have a solar dryer, which a lot of people in permaculture use and it's
surprising how a few of them actually do, uh, solar cooking, but they dry a lot
of stuff in what almost looks like an industrial scale dryer, but it's
entirely solar thermal.
And because it's, uh, dried at the right temperature with the right ventilation
and so forth, the food loses very little of its nutrition value.
It's going to be a lot better than drying in your electric, uh, spinner thing,
you know, with the heating, the electric heating element.
Let's just take today's, uh, economic landscape and ignore what you and I
might infer about coming decades, but using today's costs, uh, uh, for
equipment and costs for energy, natural gas, electricity, et cetera.
What are the, um, the cost benefit analysis of a solar cooker for someone
in the United States or for someone maybe in India or Africa or elsewhere.
That is, that is sunny.
Sure.
Well, the, the analysis would be fairly simple with solar thermal because
you're, you're paying nothing for the sun, for the energy itself.
That's, there's no other way to put it.
The materials, it just depends on how far you want to go with a DIY models for
a couple bucks worth of aluminum foil and cardboard.
And you've got a cooker that's every bit as powerful as a
manufacturer also, you don't have to buy a cooker or you can make a cooker.
Yes.
In fact, on the SCI wiki, uh, solar cooking.org, there must be a hundred
DIY models.
I don't know why people keep trying to make yet another one because they all
work.
I mean, it's the free energy.
If there's somewhat parabolic in shape, even if they're kind of trapezoids,
they will cook plenty, uh, for next to nothing or phone material.
Wait a minute.
So, um, here's another thing for people that have apartments or small
residences and they have, uh, air conditionings running and then they're
also heating their food, um, for a few bucks, those, those DIYers or even 50
bucks or a hundred bucks, they can go and create a solar, a make a solar oven.
And then not only are they getting the health benefits and the other things
you mentioned, not only are they not having emissions, but they're also not
heating their home while the air conditioning is going at the same time.
Right.
Absolutely.
That's yet another thing that's just a common, uh, statement from the people
I interviewed is I just got tired of the hot kitchen and the AC wouldn't keep
up with it.
And here I am.
I'm out in the yard.
I'm gardening at the same time.
I get things done.
I don't have to be stuck, uh, in a hot kitchen.
Uh, it might be hot out.
So what?
I've got myself in some shade, uh, but yeah.
And it's the inexpensive, uh, DIY models.
If you want to just start, there's all these models on the wiki and get your
feet wet, uh, just about everyone I've talked to that started that way.
Within a year or two, they said, man, I really want the juice of these really
powerful ones, maybe the parabolic, maybe the, maybe a box cooker, something
a little more official, but there are some people, they've still been cooking
with a plywood and cardboard insulation, glass sheet over the top for years.
I just interviewed Ed Eaton, Peonia, Colorado.
He's a member of a solar energy internationally.
I believe it's based out of there.
Uh, he still has this massive plywood cooker with just a glass window.
He put it on a trailer and he brought it to demos and he'd be able to cook for
20, 30 people at a time, uh, for next to nothing, you know, the cost of scrap
plywood and a sheet of glass, someone throughout.
Are there any places in the world, uh, any nations or even, uh, subsections
of nations where thermal or PV solar cooking is quite prevalent?
You know, both are, are still way down at the bottom, uh, as far as adoption.
Uh, interesting that you just, uh, went to India because the perception here in
the United States is that India is light years ahead of us, but the Indians that
I have talked to have said, Oh, no, still no one really knows about solar cooking there.
Where I was in, uh, Oroville, there is a place called the solar kitchen, which
is the center, uh, organizing meeting place for everyone in the community.
They go there for lunch every day and that is solar cooking, but not solar
thermal.
They have solar PV and a big solar oven on it's like industrial scale, but
they do all their cooking with solar.
Um, but as far as individual people having the things you're discussing, I
didn't see that anywhere.
No, and it's a, it's still, we still have a long, uh, long, a lot of work ahead of us.
Uh, we have so many that I sent you that solve a lot of those problems.
One particular that came up at the solar cooking conference in Portugal 2020 was
Hey, we're in Madrid and Madrid is a lot of high rise apartments and condos.
And, uh, so we can't solar cook up there.
Well, this, uh, Millen Kilkarni in India, uh, heard that same thing in, uh, from
Indians with all the, they're, they're building up rather than sideways for
housing.
They don't have sprawl.
Now they got, what would you call it?
They got it tall.
And, uh, so he came up with this cooker that you can hang from your balcony.
That's a slow cooker.
It'll cook for a family of three or four, uh, the sun dish.
Uh, and it's based on a seashell.
You sent me this PowerPoint.
Maybe we should just go through that and you could speak for, uh, a few seconds
or 30 seconds on each of them and, and give the audience, uh, a little bit of
overview of what we're talking about.
Sure.
Well, that first one is my, it's one of my favorite interviews, uh, this humble
inventor, he thinks of himself as Justin inventor.
He came up with this because he believes in solar cooking and too many of his
friends said, I can't.
I'm on the 15th floor or whatever in Mumbai.
And he says, so long as, uh, about two thirds of that building is going to get
sun, uh, during the day with enough time to cook, uh, you can just hang this
thing out of your balcony.
It's a tiffin pot.
You probably saw plenty of those three stack pots, kind of wire snapped together.
And, uh, it'll cook for a family of three or four, at least, uh, you can scale
it up to cook for more people.
And let me just ask you a question in theory, um, if you're on the side
of the high rise that is the one third where the sun doesn't go, you could just
walk across the hall and make friends with your neighbor and do some barter or
something.
Yes.
Uh, in fact, they're using their balcony.
Yeah.
And there are, uh, lower low buddy in 103.
Can I borrow your son?
Exactly.
Give me a cup of sun.
Uh, absolutely.
I mean, that's where, where it can help build community too, because, uh, there
are people that aren't going to be in those advantageous spots, uh, to do it.
Number two, that's the sun oven.
That's probably the most, uh, prevalent box cooker, uh, possibly in the world.
It's been around for probably 40 years and it's just a box, uh, insulated with
the kind of pizza grade, uh, fiberglass is what I understand.
Uh, just a sheet of regular glass over the top and then four reflectors that
basically triple the amount of sunlight that gets reflected into the cooker.
Uh, and it's, uh, it's an oven for baking.
Um, you get up to 400 degrees.
So I've had, uh, I've had a version of this in the past.
And what I noted is you could cook fish or rice or anything in just the box, but
to increase the temperature, like if you wanted to make cookies or something,
you would need the reflectors.
Yes.
And in fact, I think if the model that you have as the sport, uh, it can, you
can order it with or without reflectors, uh, they advise not using them, except
maybe in the winter, when you have it at the winter angle to get little, get
that extra grab of sun.
I use it all the time in the winter again for a banana bread using the reflectors.
Okay.
Number three.
Okay.
Uh, and this one is a parabolic and it's, it's one where I try not to play favorites,
but it's hard to not.
It's the simplicity, uh, Alon Bivas, uh, you know, I'm, my undergraduate was in
theater and he was a mime, a professional mime who stumbled across a pamphlet on
solar cooking by Joe Ratabaugh, who later turned that pamphlet into a book.
And Alon told me, he said, the day he saw that, he said, I'm done.
Miming, I'm going to divide the, I'm going to design the best solar cooker ever
made and he's come damn close.
This thing is a parabolic, which is a very, uh, uh, powerful shape to begin with.
Totally collapsible into about an inch and a half, uh, frame, maybe two feet
by eight inches, 10 inches, uh, 10 pounds.
You can bungee cord it to a backpack.
I put it in the trunk of my car whenever I go on my solar cooking road trips.
It's the only cooker I use when I go out.
How much would that cost me if I ordered such a thing?
Well, the, the great thing with Alon is he said, A, I don't want to use any
plastic parts.
He just says, and, uh, so the, right away you're talking metals.
You're talking more expensive.
It's what they call spectral grade aluminum.
So very highly polished and kind of a ceramic coating to prevent scratches
and, and let it age.
It won't, it won't, uh, corrode, uh, over time.
Uh, right now he's in, it's in the 500, uh, Euro range, 450 to 500 euros,
which is about 550, 600 here.
And, and how, how long, if I took care of it, um, which I haven't with my other
ones, because I leave them out in the rain and the wind, but, uh, because I
forget, but how long would this last?
Do you think the, the simplicity, I think pretty much forever, uh, the,
that's a very high quality, uh, aluminum, spectral aluminum, uh, high quality,
metal frame, very solid.
I have cooked on a snow bank and it's taken tumbles when the, the sun has gotten
the base warm enough where it melts and it's slid off.
I've had to start over.
Um, and it's right when the factor, when the factor, like, can you cook
when it's 20 mile an hour wind here in Minnesota?
You can, uh, you do want to brace your cookers because as you can see from
parabolic, they're pretty much like a sale.
So they will grab, you got to wait it down.
But once you do, it almost has no impact on the temperature.
Cause you're talking hitting four, up 350, 400 degrees in the parabolic pretty
easily at the bottom of the pan.
So, so the parabolic gets to be 400 degrees.
So, so what couldn't I cook?
I might not be able to get a crispy, broil, uh, sort of texture, but you
could cook anything at 400 degrees, right?
Oh, absolutely.
In fact, the, the, the simplicity was meant to be portable and a small family.
You could cook for holes, but not trade for a small family in it, but there
are a bunch larger parabolics, uh, Germany, for instance, the SK 14 from
EG solar, uh, that hits close to seven or 800 Fahrenheit in the focal point.
So you're talking walk stir fry cooking.
You can get your braised chicken steak, whatever you want in one of those, or
boil a gallon of water in a, in an hour, you know, and purify it, pasteurize it,
or stew, you know, number four.
Sure.
Now this is, uh, in fact, this is exactly the, the parabolic I was talking
about the SK 14, uh, one of the best stories about solar cooking halting
deforestation, demonstrably halting it, uh, in Nepal, the Bhutanese refugees had
to cross the border, uh, into Nepal.
And it was on the order of 110,000, I believe total, uh, with, uh, eight
different camps and, uh, Martin Oltof from the Netherlands, who was a firm
believer in getting solar, the solar cooking message out, uh, heard about this,
saw that you could literally basically define every 10, maybe 10 meters worth
of forest was going to be taken down every day to be for people to cook for
100,000 people.
So he said, let's get a group together to, uh, put these parabolics in their
hands in this refugee camp.
And he raised the funds and the interest and the infrastructure to get 7,000 of
them, which pretty much, uh, got them cooking right away as soon as they got
there and stopped the deforestation.
So it's one of the biggest success stories, very direct, um, impact on refugees,
but also, uh, preserving the environment for them as they, as they settled in.
Cool.
What about number five?
Sure.
Well, this is a parabolic, but it's what I call the community scale solar thermal
cooker.
It's the kind that you may have seen in India about Deepak Gadia and incredible
work, the parabolic that he has used as shifflor reflector.
Uh, he has it on whole campuses of buildings, heating the water, cooking the
food, heating the building, uh, everything.
Well, it's a very well designed cooker with a tracker.
So you don't even have to think about it.
And, uh, the picture I sent, the video is of the leprosage restaurant in Marseille.
So it's a, uh, uh, double duty.
It's a economic engine for restaurants where they don't need any fossil fuels.
Uh, Marseille is a fairly sunny part along the Mediterranean.
And, uh, we had a great time visiting them for, uh, an episode that should be
within a week or two, uh, going up on my channel.
What is your channel?
It is a solar cooking museum on YouTube.
So at solar cooking museum, uh, YouTube.com slash at solar cooking museum.
And what's number six, number six, uh, actually the next three are the insides
of the cooker of the, uh, cafe leprosage restaurant.
Uh, they have a sign out front that says the snack, uh, where you can get snacks,
quick cook food, because it's such a quick cooker due to the high power of the
chef, the reflector, and it's basically the, uh, one of their main cooks showing
us how this three foot by five foot griddle, uh, cooks everything for people.
And while he interviewed, uh, Pierre Andre Aubert, who is the proprietor, uh,
every minute or two, another three, four people were coming up and, and, uh, being
served, uh, and he's got a permanent restaurant there that should open up in a
month.
He's looking at April or May.
It's kind of fun and exciting, isn't it?
And, and hopeful.
Absolutely.
In fact, uh, I have been, uh, catching up on, on your interviews and, uh, I gotta
say it can be a little bit of a donor, but, uh, I'm not, I'm not, uh, cowed by some
of the messages because I can see this as being an integral part of people
surviving what is to come and, uh, but starting now where you're going to survive
those high gas costs and so forth.
So anyway, I'm optimistic.
I'll get to that.
Let's, let's finish your, your little collage here.
What about number eight?
Okay.
Number eight, that's, uh, another cooker.
It's a vacuum tube cooker and it's about a nine or 10 inch diameter cooker.
Uh, maybe two feet, two and a half feet long.
And the presage again uses that to cook one of their signature dishes.
When he pulled that out, it looked like it smelled and looked like mushrooms,
braised buttery mushrooms, just beautiful.
It's actually eggplant and it's one of their signature dishes that they cook in
high volumes, uh, and it's a France, uh, based, uh, cooker that, uh,
restaurants can use.
So are these a little bit more popular in, in France?
You know, I think they're gaining ground for, they do to simplicity.
Uh, uh, Alain Bivas really, um, hit the ground running with marketing it.
He was, I mentioned he was a mine, but he got some kind of engineering
award for this thing.
So yeah.
Well, they're, they're also, um, there's colapsalogy, which, you know,
there's a collapse of where demographic there that is much higher
percentage of the population than in the U S.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Uh, what about number nine?
Number nine, that's yet another community scale cooker, but it's a box cooker.
The sun oven, uh, the one people mostly know about is the actual family sized box
might hold two four court pots in it, uh, at the most, but this thing can cook 40
loaves of bread at a time, uh, probably six, eight trays of pizzas or, uh,
croissants and so forth.
And this one is in back, it's back in production with the third owner of the
sun oven company in Kansas, uh, the couple there, uh, they put it this way.
They pestered the guy because they try to just send them overseas using NGOs to
get them into the countries that are most in need.
Uh, but they got the brand new version of it there.
I mean, there's, there's so many different reasons this makes sense.
There's the climate, low carbon emission reason.
There's the, let's save our forests reason.
There's the, um, not heating our, our kitchen reason.
There's the, let's save money on future electricity and gas, uh, reason.
There's the health of the food and the simplicity and there's the DIY.
I'm in control of, of cooking my own food without relying on these external
things, but just focus on the climate reason.
What, what would, I mean, are there any plans or such where, um, NGOs and
philanthropists and institutions from the global north might donate huge
amounts of these ovens to people in Africa and India, um, where they just
have to start using them and maybe see the benefits and then word of mouth.
Uh, could something like that happen?
Is something like that happening?
Just about every manufacturer I know has tried or had, they do have limited
programs overseas in Africa, Asia, primarily Africa.
It seems like, uh, they get a little bit more, um, of an ear bent toward the
cause by governments, Kenya in particular, uh, they've been working
with solar cookers international to work it into their, their national
scheme, uh, to address climate change and, you know, pasteurizing water.
Uh, I know one of the reasons I ratcheted up my involvement in promoting
it was hearing about kids with the river worms or, you know, bacterias in
the nearest source of water.
And if they lived to be 10 years old, maybe they were blind or lame.
And it's just a tragedy on a, on a current level.
This is before we're talking, you know, losing fossil fuels.
Um, and so pretty much every manufacturer has done that and solar
cookers international, uh, they're the best source for, uh, on their wiki,
that's solarcooking.org.
They have, uh, by country, which countries have been involved, which have
tried things, uh, some of them, when I check in, they say, well, that was 2014.
And we just really haven't gained any traction.
Uh, but some are really currently making tracks.
I mentioned earlier to just to cap this off, Roger Haynes, retired federal
prosecutor, uh, yet he designed this panel cooker that is amazing.
And he has been working with NGOs and the rotaries.
He's a rotary member.
They've been involved in a lot of the solar cooking promotion overseas.
And, uh, he has looked into carbon credits.
He's kind of stepped back from trying to use them, but, uh, he's sending
them by the thousands overseas.
So it is happening, not to the level we'd like to see.
Continuing with your little montage here, uh, what about number 10?
Number 10, that's the fusion.
Uh, Gosun is a company based out of Cincinnati.
I interviewed Patrick Sherwin back in 2021 vacuum tube cooker, but also a hybrid.
It's, uh, it's got a tray.
If you slide the tray out, you'll notice on the bottom, it's got a heating element.
And so if the sun, if the sun goes down, clouds roll over, you just plug it
into a battery, which they also include a little solar panel kit with it.
So you can keep cooking.
Interestingly, it has higher temperatures with the solar than it does with the
heating element for various reasons, the materials they'd have to choose, but
it's a 24 seven cooker, uh, little pricey, uh, maybe marketed a bit more toward
the vacationing crowd, the campers, um, but it's a, it's an all season, uh, 24
seven cooker.
Okay.
So we're, we're at number 11 Luther.
What are we looking at?
Sure.
This is a bingo who, uh, came up with about the only safe Fresnel lens solar
cooker.
If you've ever visited a lighthouse on a tour, that's that big honking glass
thing, but it's a striated, so it's still a lens.
It's just compressed.
Well, this is a big sheet of plastic and they're in the back of most every, uh,
rear projection TV.
They're the front, actually with the screen.
So, uh, a lot of people that get into this, they cannibalize them, but they're
very, they could be very dangerous.
Uh, people melt rocks with the focal point with these, from these
British projection TVs, 2000 degrees or more, sometimes in that very pinpoint
focal point, bingo has made it, made a safe Fresnel lens.
It's the only one I'm aware of where you cannot, uh, burn your feet, uh, set
your, your furnace, I'm sorry, your fence or your house on fire, because it's
all contained and it's very versatile.
You can use, uh, pasta, boil water or fry or bake, uh, four or five different
attachments.
2000 degrees.
Aren't people curious about the, uh, industrial application of that?
Yes.
Although you, you know, that's 2000 degrees at a focal point about like that.
Uh, uh, green power science in Florida, they make jewelry with it, uh, because
they can use zinc and sand and do all sorts of creative things with it, but
that's a very small scale.
I'm sure it's possible, but you know, right now this is where it at, is it at?
So number 12, 12, we have, this is the, uh, hybrid cooker.
I mentioned earlier, Steve Harrigan in Indiana and a lot of these groups,
they're either faith based and this is part of his, uh, church mission where
they have built these in Africa, where people are totally off the grid.
They have no other choice, but to cook with food or with a contraption like
this, which is solar, uh, big barrel cooker, kind of like the, uh, son of
an villager, only with a rocket stove attached and the heating flu goes through
the cook box.
So it heats the food when there's no sun.
And at the other end, the flu actually has another attachment where you can boil,
uh, stuff as well.
So it's, it's actually can do two different meals, sets of meals, uh, with
the hybrid attachment.
And 13, 13, uh, solar education project, uh, Mary, but Jenna, Jennifer Gasser,
they are really, I feel they're, uh, one of the most, uh, involved leaders in
the solar cooking movement.
They put together a textbook on, uh, physics, which is totally based on
solar cooking and how reflectivity counts, uh, heat retention, the, uh, the
energy and light and so forth.
And in this particular, uh, interview I had with them, they actually took a
carry-on and turned it into a solar box cooker, uh, with reflectors.
And it's just like your cooker, only you can pack all your stuff to go on a
trip and cook with it.
Amazing.
It's extremely low carbon, except for the jet that you took.
Yes.
Uh, and 14, 14, uh, Pat Brown, very involved with environmental causes in
the, uh, Los Angeles area, uh, she is actually pasteurizing food, discarded
food, uh, to use for, uh, fodder for cattle, for pets and so forth.
Uh, yet another application, and this is a DIY model where she just put
together a box lined with bricks so that when the sun heats it up, it retains
the heat throughout the day and it dries at a temperature where it doesn't
scorch, uh, but you can have, uh, food for, for animals or humans, if you
wanted to, I'm sure there's a application for that too.
And 15.
15.
Carla Ramstill, I like to highlight her work.
She's at Appalachian State University and, uh, she has an incredible, uh,
a website and I think it's more or less a blog called No Watts Cooking, W-A-T-T-S.
And she talks about the waste in the food, uh, industry favorite example.
And I see it every time I go shopping, uh, garlic, you see the jars of
processed garlic and then right below it or to the right is the, is the shelf
stable garlic that will last longer than your jar, unless you refrigerate it
and use more energy to keep it in a stable state.
Uh, she explains all that with physics in her classes at Appalachian State
University, one of my favorite episodes, cause she has this fractured, uh, uh,
vacuum tube and she's able to demonstrate.
This is how it works.
Here's where the vacuum is.
Here's the heating part and so forth.
Uh, so an incredible educator and one who is doing outreach on that level
around the world.
Uh, next to last 16, 16 and 16 and 17 are tied together and you'll be happy
to know one of your, uh, viewers, Craig Berglund, Reno, Nevada.
Uh, he is, I, I featured him as the last episode in my first season to celebrate
him doing just about everything you can do with solar energy, both thermal
and photo low tech in this video.
He is roasting coffee beans with a repurposed bunt cake pan, a TV satellite
dish just lined with, with mirrors from, from the craft shop.
And then he used to work for the, uh, casino business in Reno.
And this is a discarded cause, uh, one arm bandit, um, motor, the thing
that spit out your quarters when you won or kept them if you didn't win.
And, uh, with just little lawn ornament solar panels, that thing turns
at just the right speed and the focal point is about a three inch circle.
And so it's roasting the beans at just exactly the right rate about an hour
later, uh, you have perfectly roasted beans a little longer.
If you like a dark roast.
So, so this is all, thank you for sharing all that.
Um, this is all what I would term appropriate technology and
it's cool and it checks a lot of the boxes for the future that you and
I can envision coming, but do solar cookers and technologies like them
inherently first require a mindset change about what technology is for and
a larger change in our lifestyle to a slower, more conscious, more
intentional, more living with, uh, the, the earth sort of pace.
I believe so.
I think that everyone's motivated for different reasons.
Uh, for me, it was the environment, but then it just, it was so damn
much fun to cook in my own backyard, whatever I wanted.
I knew I could cook just about anything.
Uh, for some, it's, uh, it's really they're the tinkerers.
Uh, we're actually, we have a project we're working on where we're going
to be reaching out to maker spaces around the world to do a maker challenge
saying, Hey, you come up with the next big deal, solar cooker.
Uh, these are the people that, uh, they, uh, one guest I recommend.
He's a maker, uh, Chris Hackett in New York city made a solar pasteurizer
where he pasteurized water from the East river and it got picked up by
popular science.
He had a series and so forth, uh, great book, the big book of maker skills.
And just the last point, yes.
He, uh, uh, he, he, he coined the term Obtanium.
He said, don't ever buy new stuff to make anything.
The most common element known to man is Obtanium.
You can obtain stuff from rear projection TVs, junkyards.
How many sofas do we have thrown in our alley here in Minneapolis?
I learned welding because we have so many bed frames, you know?
Yeah.
Obtanium is going to be a big resource in coming decades, more than likely.
Um, so what would it require?
Oh, see, here's the issue.
It's the same thing with, uh, government stimulus and stock markets at all time highs.
We're cognitively able to envision different trajectories in coming
decades for our world, for our culture, for our communities, but emotionally
we're not because we get finished watching a podcast or a video and, and
we have the conveniences of our home and a brown truck shows up and delivers
vitamins or, uh, dog food or whatever it is.
And so we don't have the emotional push to do something like this.
So what, what is it going to take to scale this stuff across our country or in
Africa and India and other places?
What do you think?
Uh, you know, I'm, I'm afraid there's, there's probably four or five different
avenues, one that might jar things looses.
If we have some real tragedies, uh, famines, I'm always surprised at how
famines, uh, which can be, it's a distribution problem.
I remember reading this long ago, the food is here.
You got to get it there and it just doesn't get there.
Well, the same for this, this particular tool for when they do have the food, but
they have no way to safely cook it, get it to them.
I'm, there are a lot of organizations that they say, well, you got to charge a
little bit so they have skin in the game.
I think that works.
So they understand, uh, that, okay, they're investing in this thing and they
don't just turn it into, you don't take the reflectors and turn them into a
mirror for their bathroom and so forth, which is a common story out there.
But I often think, you know, if there are areas where they really need to do it,
let's just do an airdrop of Roger Haines cooker.
You can send 5,000 of them on a pallet up the back of those, uh, C 130s or what
have you and just give them the instructions to say, you know, we've tried
everything else.
We've had 10 NGOs already tromped through your backyards and nothing's
happening in the forest is further and further away.
I think that's a great idea.
And here's a, here's a North American version of that.
Uh, let's have a leader or a philanthropist or someone of means in every community,
Red Wing, Minnesota, Topeka, Kansas, uh, um, you know, Salem, Oregon, get one
of those community level, uh, parabolic's that, that you said for their
community affiliated with a gathering place where people could come and meet
each other and have solar cooked food just as a nucleus of some future, uh, you
know, intermediate Goldilocks, uh, technology that has social capital built
in as an example, because then are like people like, Oh, we're this cooked
without any, uh, fossil hydrocarbons or anything.
We were just using the sun.
Um, I think it's that way.
We need like a foothold, which is why I found you because Craig emailed me and I
have a solar oven and I think they're cool.
Um, and based on this conversation this weekend, I'm going to try to use it.
Um, are, are you, are you going to cook with your solar oven this weekend?
Uh, if there's son, whenever there's son, we try to put it out there.
Yeah.
And we're, but we're doing more than that.
I mean, I've actually learned you can bake, uh, green coffee beans and it's
makes a pretty good mild roast.
Uh, you can make, you can roast your coffee beans in a parabolic.
I've, uh, made, uh, dark roast, nearly espresso roast in them.
So do you and your, your family kind of look at the 10 day forecast and say, Oh,
Tuesday through Thursday, we're cooking outside.
It's like full sun.
Do you, do you incorporate the forecast into your cooking plans?
We do, but we can't go 10 days.
This variety of weather belt, when we, before I was, before I retired, we
would have solar brunches on Saturdays and it'd be Thursday.
I couldn't look before Thursday and it had to be sunny on Friday and Thursday
and Saturday because the weather pattern tends to move forward in time.
And so if it was sunny, both Friday and Saturday, I would call a branch and
almost never had any clouds at all, but I had to do it.
I could, 10 days out, it'll be, it'll be exactly flip-flop.
And, and that right there, um, is one of the reasons fossil hydrocarbons have
been indistinguishable from magic because it doesn't matter what's happening
outside.
We flick a switch and we get the brain services and that, that era, uh, is
gradually or suddenly coming to an end, which is why I think more people need
to be aware, uh, of this type of technology.
So, um, thank you for all that.
Are there any other technologies like this, uh, what I would call Goldilocks
tech or intermediate tech that you're excited about and would like to at least
highlight?
Sure.
Well, you know, uh, one of my, my side hustles is I've been teaching at Metro
state and the, uh, masters of public and nonprofit administration program.
And I've had some guest speakers who are doing incredible stuff, uh, with
social enterprise, uh, companies and nonprofits.
One of my favorites, it's called Lucky Iron Fish.
And what it was is a public health organization found that in Southeast
Asia, levels of anemia like skyrocketed from, you know, single digits to 80, 90%
of the people going to a clinic visit had anemia.
What they found was people had switched from those big cast iron things that
they cooked over wooden, uh, fires, uh, to aluminum.
And so they lost, and it's an area where there's not a lot of natural iron
in the diet was their determination.
So they went out to Southeast Asia and said, well, here, put this cube of, uh,
of cast iron, and it's a, it's a special, uh, mix, you know, they are all
alloys, a little bit of a lemon juice in there.
And then for 10 minutes, put it in there and then take it out.
And then it would restore the iron.
They did the work where they had people do that, found that very few people did
it. It's the adoption thing, the cultural thing.
And when they surveyed people, why not?
One person said, well, what is, it's a cube.
It's a doorstop. It's a toy.
You know, we don't really know.
It doesn't look like something we need to use.
So they changed it to the shape of a fish, which is considered good luck, uh,
in the river deltas there.
And the reason it's good luck is when you catch it, it's got a natural smile.
It's like, thank you for catching me.
I will bless your day and adoption skyrocketed.
So we're talking, you know, a big cultural thing.
I had to have them speak to my class because it's just, it's, it's the
right combination of studying and applying what you learned to fix a problem.
So somewhere in there is a parable or a microcosm for our entire society
and what we face.
What would be the, uh, the equivalent of that for the United States
conspicuous consumption culture?
I'm not so sure, but, um, yeah, um, awesome.
So, uh, you follow my podcast, uh, let me ask you a few questions.
Um, what advice do you have for people that are aware of all this stuff
and watch episodes that are a little bit of a downer about climate or the oceans
or energy or politics or anything?
What, what kind of advice do you have for people?
Sure.
Well, first I'd say, you know, I'm a natural optimist in spite of, uh, you
know, uh, Rachel Carson influence and all the stuff when I was a kid, uh, I did
see the Cuyahoga River.
We moved to Ohio in the early seventies and they had finally put out the
Cuyahoga River fires, you know, and so there, there has been progress, but it
seems like it'd be three steps forward and two and a half steps back, um, on that
front.
Now, obviously we've just got to figure out how to not use the fossil fuels, but
also just start, start, uh, simple, uh, our backyard brunches.
I did them before I decided to do my, uh, video trips and it was so fulfilling
to see families come and for the first time, see an actual manufactured
cooker, which jumped, bumped it up and their level of respect as something to
use, uh, toward this end.
Uh, so don't give up.
Just reach out to your neighbor community organizer that I was, uh, during
my times with the police department.
The expression other organizers had was each one, reach one.
You don't have to reach the whole world today.
Uh, just reach that one person who can make a difference tomorrow.
And how would you, uh, change that for, um, young people?
You said you're a professor at Metro State and, and I'm sure you interact
with young people on, on your travels.
What, what sort of advice would you give to a young human coming across
these, these big challenges we face?
Sure.
Well, uh, I would say, you know, get, uh, dive in at the deep end.
Cause you won't drown.
It's, uh, get, uh, get familiar with the kind of cookers that are out there.
Uh, tell your friends, uh, I've got two real quick youth stories.
One is we had a couple that came to one of my brunches with their two
daughters and kind of dragged them in, but I had the invitation said,
bring something to cook.
So they each brought their one egg and we cooked them in the
simplicity.
Two weeks later, I called another brunch and instead of the parents
heading the way and trying to drag the kids, the kids ran into the deck with
their batches of cookie dough.
So all they need is to see it, see it and taste it when it's done.
The second one is I was invited, uh, last spring to speak to a technical
college where they had fifth and sixth graders who'd signed up for STEM for
science, the science part of STEM, uh, to hear about this kind of stuff.
And they, and 75 of them in 25 bunches, three, three classes picked solar
cooking for an hour.
And I, at the last, the last, uh, assignment for them was here's a blank
piece of paper, draw what you think a solar cooker should do.
And they were intent on it and they saw the simplicity.
They saw the, the sport.
Uh, and two of them came up with things that I had never seen before and 20
years of collecting solar cookers and being able to tell them, you know, I
got to share this with some people that make this stuff.
Do you mind if I share your information?
They were fine with it.
I mean, they're, they're willing to learn if you don't beat it out of them.
I mean, I've heard that expressed by teachers, by parents, uh, kids want to
know, they want to learn, they want to be in on stuff.
And, uh, and they're, they're hearts in the right place, you know, again,
until they get caught on that treadmill that we all end up on during a lot of
our lives, uh, trying to make a living and so forth.
Yeah.
I, I hear you.
So at, at the core of this is we're trying to get brain services or human
services with using less energy and less materials and less environmental damage.
That's at the core.
But there's, there's our creativity.
I was thinking about making a video that on the same burner and the same size
pan on my stove, there are choices of food preferences.
If you fry an egg or you scramble an egg and you do them at the same time, the
scrambled eggs are done in like 30 seconds and the fried eggs take like three
minutes and that whole time where I live, you're using more propane.
So aligned with all the solar oven options you presented to me is this
change in mindset of wants and needs with respect to food.
And I think there's a lot of things that are possible that we haven't even considered.
Absolutely.
In fact, uh, if I may talk about, uh, heat retention cookers or what your
grandmother called the hay box or hay basket, uh, my grandmother in Grand
Forks, North Dakota would leave there to Cooper's town, two hour drive with her
stew wrapped in blankets in their trunk and drove to Cooper's town.
And five hours later we're eating supper.
You know, they get there about noon, you know, it's still steaming hot.
Blankets around the thing, uh, uh, Mr.
Detector would have something to say about that.
Insulate the body.
Don't heat all the air in your house.
If you can help it.
Um, anyway, uh, I mentioned that because that's, that's the one little kind of
footnote to all of these cookers is one cooker can cook 10, 12 meals.
If you, if you do the other simple technology, which is insulation from wool,
from cotton, uh, from rags.
So yeah.
So, uh, it may sound like a non sequitur given everything else, uh, on this
conversation, but what do you care most about in the world, Luther?
Well, uh, I've got to say, um, I've been married 37 years and, uh, some people
have asked, uh, how do you, how do you get by with this guy who just runs
off and does these month long trips, you know, and she said, I just let him go
forth, you know, and, and, uh, so family, you know, family first, if you know,
if you don't think of your family first, it's kind of hard to extend that to
society or just say the ills that everyone else is suffering.
Well, since my family isn't suffering them, you know, or I don't, you know,
if I can't take care of them, how am I going to take care of the rest of the
world?
So that's first and foremost also, you know, a lot of the organizations that
have been promoting solar cooking, uh, one in particular, uh, solar oven
partners, they're a, uh, a project of the United Methodist Church.
They're all faith based, a lot of them are faith based, not all of them.
Um, but there's all an element of faith to this that people do have to have
that you can just show people, here's what you need and hope that they take
care of it, move on to the next one, uh, you know, just act in faith.
And, uh, and that maybe we won't hit that brink where, you know, the lemming
ahead of us grabs us by the scruff and brings us over the cliff with them.
Uh, that's not the right thing we had put it, but it's just the thought I
have if, if, if all else fails, well, uh, you know, we're all in this together.
You created magic there because I've never visualized a lemming, grabbing
another lemming by the scruff and I had that image in my head.
So nice work.
Um, uh, Luther, if you could wave a magic wand and there was no recourse to
you or your family, what is one thing that you would do to change, uh,
planetary human society futures?
Well, I'm deep into the solar cooking part.
Um, if I could get a solar cook cooker of any way, shape, or form into every
household, um, I don't understand enough about the rest of the problems.
Uh, but, you know, I, I get it.
I see a lot of memes about, oh, this is, this is how they saved a whale.
This is how they saved a flock.
Oh, I remember one story is, uh, in the New Yorker, uh, a woman very devout
Catholic, uh, finally cornered not the Pope necessarily, but Vatican city and
said, you know, where are all of our properties?
Cause we're losing, uh, the, the pollinating areas for bees and they dug
into the maps going back to, you know, fourth century being able to document
where they had, had the properties.
And she said, could we just say these are pollinating places?
Get the churches to put pollinators there.
Everyone's going to find their little niche where they can take care of a
little, little tiny fragment of this worldwide problem.
And she's making tracks with that.
Very inspiring story.
Uh, again, faith-based and it doesn't have to be, you know, Catholic faith.
Uh, any, uh, uh, Deepak Gadia in India with his ashrams, uh, when I talked to
him, one of the faith-based projects that came his way was, uh, people said,
you know, we, we traditionally burn in pires of people here when they die.
Um, could we do that with a, with solar?
And he said, well, I know we can, uh, but talk to your, talk to your
religious leaders first, cause I don't want to set one up and all of a sudden
I'm running a foul and they consulted and found that, yes, you can.
It's, it's, it's burning.
It's a little trickier because even the current process doesn't burn
perfectly, but it will do the job.
And being able to reach out to this one little segment of the
population where they're concerned about that, they're using too much
wood for these funeral pires.
Uh, you know, the secret about it.
My, my concern always with renewables hasn't been, do they work?
Um, and hasn't been, can we use them to meet basic needs?
My concern has been, we're trying to tell a story of continuing the way we
live with 19 terawatt and growing metabolism impacting nature.
And that's not what I think we can and should use solar and other
technology for, um, so thank you for, for forging ahead and, and educating
people about other uses that are more, um, practical and use far less energy
and materials using the free energy of the sun.
Uh, do you have any closing comments for our viewers, Luther?
No, thank you so much for having me.
Uh, I'm trying to reach out to as many outlets where I can get the word and,
and, uh, just a solar cooking.org inspirational story here, a guy who
was a Microsoft programmer, uh, Tom Sponheim in the eighties said, uh,
we need an archive with all this stuff.
We need one place to go.
You know, you try to Google solar cooking and you get every crazy workable,
but you know, it just doesn't inspire, but you got one place where you can
get it, he set up an archive and later converted it to a wiki.
That is the one source.
So don't listen to me.
Go to the wiki.
Don't go to solar cooking.org.
Watch my series.
I'm not monetizing it.
I don't intend to, uh, those are the experts.
They're the ones that really know what they're doing, but the wiki is really,
I tell everyone, go there first, DIY, commercial vendors are on there.
The histories that will inspire you.
So take that to the, to the bank, so to speak, social capital bank.
Thank you so much, Luther, for your insights today and for your passion on,
on this, it shines through and I personally think it's important.
Maybe you come back for a round table on DIY, uh, uh, Goldilocks tech.
Absolutely.
Happy to thank you.
Thank you.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great
simplification.com for more information on future releases.
This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by no troublemakers,
media and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
