Rather than having mysterious models, we will force people to tell their story and they put
numbers on the story. It will be easier to check the quality of the discussion.
Today's guest is recently retired professor of environmental science and technology,
Mario Gempietro from the Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies in Barcelona,
Spain. I knew of Mario's work back when I was getting my PhD on an acronym called MUSEASM,
which stands for Multiscale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism. Mario has
an academic background in chemistry, biology, and social sciences and is authored or co-authored over
100 academic articles and written many books on sustainability, energy analysis, and agriculture,
including the biofuel delusion and resource accounting for sustainability assessment.
I have found that biophysical analysts, perhaps especially Spanish ones, are able to speak truth
to power and I think you will see what I mean by that in this conversation with Dr. Mario Gempietro.
Hello, Mario. Good to see you.
Hi. Nice being here with you.
Congratulations on your recent retirement.
It was a big event.
So, I am now blessed having this podcast that suddenly I get to have conversations
with all the people that 15 years ago when I was getting my PhD were the rock stars in the
fields of biophysical economics, including you. You were one of the icons in the field.
And here we are.
Yeah, we're not too many. Let's put it this way.
Yeah, there's not too many. That's true. But I have had quite a few of them on my podcast.
So, let me ask you, why is it there are so many Spanish people who are energy and collapse aware
of systems versus the total global population? Or is that just my small sample size?
No, it is true that especially in Valladolid, they have a big group. They school G.
I don't know because this is a Spanish acronym. It's about energy and developments of sustainability
is something like that. They had the first one making accounting of the resource use.
And this resonates with Barcelona, where I am located, where they had basically the
first big group of ecological economics, which one Martinez Alie.
And even though that the Martinez Alie and the group here, they didn't do much of
accounting. They were making the economic part, the story, the importance of considering the
but they were not getting into the but that this led to a sensitivity in Spain
with the work on Naredo. Naredo was another important person that works a lot. They had
Margalef and ecologists. It was a sort of autumn. So, there was a sort of background
that make possible to have this school in Valladolid. As a matter of fact, they came
three or four weeks ago in Barcelona because we are trying to
to check the common point of our approach and their approach. And yeah, but then there are
people really, they are buying farms, small farms, because they are waiting for the
catastrophe of implosion. You know, it's kind of like the billionaire in the United States,
they are waiting for the collapse. It's a lot of people are now aware of this. The world has
caught up to the vile physical story that you've been saying for decades. So, let's get into your
work. One of your main projects has been an acronym, I'm not sure how to pronounce it,
but it stands for Multiscale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism. So, I know
you're just a retired professor and you're used to teaching PhD students, but can you briefly
explain to our non-academic viewers for the most part what this work really is about?
I mean, I think that this is something different. No, really different in the sense is an attempt
to use complexity to do quantitative analysis. At the moment, it is embarrassing. People doing
quantitative analysis use differential equations, like Newton, like 100 years ago. And what is the
problem with differential equations? You have only one time scale. So, let's imagine you are
comparing the evolution of China and Europe over 50 years. If you are using data
one year, the one using in economic models, whatever, you cannot get changes like population
structure. Now, in China, now they have 60% of adults because of one child policy and we have 40%
of adults. They work 2500 hours per worker per year. We work 1700. So, basically, China has almost
the double of our work per capita in the economy than us. You cannot do anything against this.
Of course, in 40 years, they will become all retired and it will be a major problem and probably
they will not accept to work 2500 hours per year. Then you cannot see these things if you are using
one scale only. You cannot see, if I see with the microscope on your face, I cannot see your nose
no matter what. You know that. We have to learn how to combine different scales and different
narrative and different representation, like done in medicine. In medicine, you have the x-ray,
you have MRI, you have the blood test, you have a lot of different tests. Nobody would think about
mixing all these numbers in a single mega question or 1000 variable to describe how you are.
So, what this museum does is relational analysis. You have one lens and when you see something,
then with another lens, you see how the lever works. In another, you see the old body, how you
are doing. Then you establish a relation between the characteristics of one view to another to
another. And this is possible. You can say if this is in this way, on the border, there has to be
in another way for this other piece. Okay. So, we have like four different lenses.
One lens look at the effective interaction, the daily life of household. So, the household you
may have with kids, retired of all the adults, and they have to do things. So, you can describe
how much time, energy, technology is allocated. So, you have the total for the household and
now it's allocated across the different things. Then you can redo the same at the whole household
sector when you will have a relation. Okay. Then we have another, and then you see the
desirability of your state. Then you have another level that we call macro scope. And then you have
the whole economy. So, the household sector is a part of the paid work sector in which you have
agriculture. And for each of these, you can go smaller and smaller using the, and for each of
these, you can see how much electricity fuel. But then you are building a Sudoku because the
electricity of all the sector must be total within and across. Okay. Then we have another,
it's called mesoscope. This, how much you are importing? Because if we are not considered in
the import, people are just wasting time when you say, you know, we are dematerializing in
Europe. We are using, embodied in what we import, 140 million worker equivalent. Okay. So, our
workforce is embodying what we import. We import 70% of the feed. We import 85% of the energy. So,
they are talking about we are dematerializing, we are, but within the border of the country,
not including. And the last one is the microscope is the flow of primary flows outside inside what
we are getting from the nature and getting and dumping in nature. And this can be done at the
local level. So, you can have the environmental pressure, it would be how much supply capacity,
how much think capacity you need from nature and compare it with the characteristics of the ecological
fund that you are affecting. And then you can see the impact. So, what happened? You have all these
four things. No, I mean, we did, I mean, we have been working now for 10 years. We are there.
What is fantastic is that you have benchmarks. So, I can say, give me a population. Okay.
How this urban rural, how many are retired and blah, blah, blah. And then you say, okay, you want
healthcare. What type of healthcare you want? The type of healthcare of Sweden or Norway or
Romania or, and then you'll start putting together the piece. And you can say, okay, if you do this,
at this level of analysis, you will need this type of things. How you are producing them?
Are you importing or not? If you are not importing, how we are producing, what are the technological
that we call the sequential pathway, you know, extraction and blah, blah, blah, you do it.
And then you can calculate. And then how does it work? This, you can do one diagnostic to see
how your country is different from another. So, you can really see they are using more
electricity because they have hydro. They are using more of this in Poland because they have coal.
I mean, you can explain the differences. And then you can run scenarios. You know, what if, you know,
we want to cut 70% of emissions. Yes, let me see how you do it. I mean, because you have
things to do, you know, you have a list of things to do. And let me see how you can cut 70%
of emissions. So, it is very open in the sense, we call it a deliberation support, because it's
not even a decision support. It brings you up in the sense you start looking at the fact that
there are a lot of implications, a lot of concerns, and how to prioritize, I cannot do
in English, prioritize concern. So, in order to make good decisions, we have to understand
the problem first. Yeah, that we don't. Yeah, right. Yeah. We are already on policy legend,
you know, the circular economy. The circular economy is against the law of thermodynamics.
I mean, we are making fun of the people that were believing to the flat earth, but believing the
circular economy is the same level. This against the law of thermodynamic. We are metabolic system,
disability system, we must take from our environment and dump into the environment.
It is against anything known that we can close the loop inside.
So, can you expand on that? Why do you use the word metabolism in your core title of your work?
Because again, this will go to the heart of of energetics. Okay.
Transformation of energy are really, really belong to the complexity issue. First of all,
energy doesn't exist. It's a semantic concept. You have plenty of forms of energy, you know,
but electricity is not energy for your car or for a person. We cannot eat electricity. And at the same
way, ham is food for us, but not for an Islamic person. So, there is no energy. No for a car.
No for a car. Yeah. So, there are, first of all, there is no energy. And second, when you get to
the issue of how to use the transform energy, you have always to do a process of autocatalysis.
It's not input output. It's chicken egg. Okay. Let's give you an example. A cow goes to a pasture
to get energy. Okay. First of all, you start with, you must have energy. The cow has to move
muscle and see the things and know how to eat grass. Okay. Then you get grass. Grass is not
energy for a cow. It's the primary energy sources. It's only after you are digesting this, you get
carbohydrate and other things and move the cows. So, in this very simple example, you have three
types of energy and uses the mix of energy carrier information and technology, the muscle,
you know. Second, a primary energy, like for us would be oil, coal or wind or sun. Then you have
energy carrier, electricity, fuel. These things are different. You're old people that do analysis
of energy, energy in, energy out. You do not have this number. This number do not exist.
They make sense only if you are analyzing them inside an autocatalytic loop. How much
you need to do that? Do you have enough capital or technology to do it? How much, you know,
this type of, it's totally missing. I mean, and I think this has been the big disaster of energy
analysis in the 70s and 80s. I'm old enough to remember. I was in the States and the dream
was that energy analysis was the aero part. In reality, it is not that simple because in the
energy return on investment, you don't have a size. First of all, then you have a flow flow. There
is no fund. And then there is no distinction between primary resources and energy carrier
because if you have an output larger than an input, someone has to pay that is the primary
resources is not included in the aero analysis. So what I'm saying, okay, I don't want to get
technical because maybe people cannot understand. What I'm saying is that energetics is the ultimate
complexity problem. And unfortunately, this has been totally missed because when in the 80s,
the energy analyst, you know, but white flags that we are not producing anything useful,
there are papers on science saying, no, it is not energy of any use. Then the economic energy
analysts get in that they do not have any idea what they are talking about. And then these are those
they are running the show now. So on this question, then your point is that comparing energy is not
only apples and oranges, but it's apples and oranges and pears and plums and we process
or either selling it or either eating them. There is a larger context. Yeah, no, I, I understand
and agree with that, which means that not only are you talking about complexity theory,
but this is a complex thing to understand and explain to people. And society doesn't like
complex things because we just like to parse things into dollars and then we or euros and we
make decisions on that. And this is not easy to do with what you just said. It is something that
should start in school. It should start how would we do that? How would we do that? I think that
they should change the way we teach things at school because all the energetics, metabolism,
these are all a little on the discussion of multiple scales. This idea that we have only one
scale is absurd, no, depending on again, if I using a microscope, if I using a telescope,
if I use my eye, I, if I use x-ray, I see different things. And which one is the real one?
Por favor, pardon. All are real. It depends on how I am looking at. So this is something that
should be deserve a reflection. That's what it is. I totally agree. But before we do that,
we have to even teach young people what energy is and why it's important to our lives. We're
still not even doing that. Yeah. Yeah, but we are victim of the success of economics. This is
the point. We are intoxicated because if you imagine we have a discipline, I work with the
Kozoma Yumi, which is a professor of economics. So I respect the category what I'm saying. But
what I'm saying is that economics assume that absolute scarcity is impossible because
works with price. If you have price, there is a moderate scarcity. So you can use technology,
trade the things, those, but if you have absolute scarcity, you don't longer have price. You don't
have a market. You have either war or solidarity, but you don't have market. Okay. So we are using
a science that assume the absolute scarcity is impossible to study absolute scarcity,
how to avoid it. I mean, guys, it's no economics do not is not capable of comparing the size of
process, economic process to the size of ecological process. That ever change?
I don't know. We, you know, the normal signs and post normal signs know when you have a big
success, a discipline became normal. Nobody questioned the assumption. So the physicists
give us the atomic bomb. So whatever they say now that before the big bang, there was nothing that
with the boss on our life will change drama, everyone believe it, even though maybe it is not
that clear. And economics met possible for us to create money out of nothing, you know,
the financial operation. So and this is our life standard, depend on this. So nobody now is
questioning economics. This is delivered. You see, is a is a discipline that deliver to society.
The discipline of economics was born on the backs of the carbon pulse. And ironically,
was unaware of the carbon pulse. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Maybe when the pulse will be over,
we will have a different economics. I mean, I'm saying that economics is is useless. I mean,
forget it. I mean, fantastic. And moreover, economists did huge contribution to ecological
economics. What I'm saying is that as long as we have the American dream as the myth that give us
a group identity, there is nothing we can do. Unless we get into a re discussion of the fact
that the American dream that 10 billion people on this planet will have the same
living standard of United States, and everyone believe it is what keep together glue together
people. If until we believe this, there is nothing we can do and we will be trapped,
remain trapped into economic narratives. Getting back to my question. What is the
relevance and importance of the word metabolism in your in your acronym? Does society have a
metabolism? And why is that important? Of course, the metabolism, the society has a metabolism.
And the metabolism imply that there is an autocatalysis. The system is capable of getting
the energy and the resources that is consuming to express function is made of different parts.
So you have multi scale things. You have the lever is operating as a lever. But at the same time,
is a part of the larger system. And moreover, in that case, you have a group autocatalysis is
the different parts work for each other. Look, in what we do in the in the in the society,
you have that the household is reproducing human activity. Then you have the agriculture is producing
energy for the humans, the endosomatic energy and my energy and mining is producing energy and
material for the exosomatic part of the machine, the infrastructure. Then you have the manufacturing
that is building the exosomatic device. And then you have the service sector that is
generating institution and taking care of the human fund. So you have five organs.
No, I'm telling you, I mean, we don't have time. This is exactly like the structure of an ecosystem.
So if you're using the standard, you know, the Latin talking of relational analysis,
you can define that society is expressing a metabolic pattern exactly like
an organism, even though people believe that this is absurd is a heterodox, but it is.
So so in my own life and behaviors, I have difficulty choosing things to override my own
metabolism. How do societies choose when we have a metabolism or don't we choose?
Look, the society has a list of things to do. And then you can have the least from statistics.
Statistics is the state of the state is how a society learn how to describe itself.
So what the society does, there is a part that reproduce humans household and the part that
stabilize the economic process. Then within the economic process, you have agriculture that
does food. The agriculture is divided in animal production. Every time you go down, there are
the final cause if you are using relational analysis, why you have to do what you are doing.
Then of course, the society can decide to change the type of final cause that we become vegetarian,
we don't produce animals anymore, or can decide to change the priority over the different things.
Because unfortunately, people do not know how things work. But in a society, 100% of the time,
90, 92, 83% goes in not working. So we are operating all the society with 8% of our time,
700 hours per capita per year. If you divide our work by the population, it depends where you are.
Could be 750, 700, 800. And that includes babies and old people?
No, no, the babies are on the order. I'm telling you the working time in the pay work.
So then 76% of these go in the service, you see? Then you don't have time to do real things.
This is why we are importing making the things because for the energy, all the energy that we
consume in one year is generated by 8 hours of work, repeat, 8 hours of work.
Because of our subsidy from fossil hydrocarbon?
Yeah, of course. I mean, the idea is that you divide the energy consumption of a country by
the hours of work in the energy sector, 8 hours. If we had fossil energy like Saudi Arabia,
we had to work more because we had to do the extraction, the refining and things.
We are in Europe, we are just getting energy carriers and we print money to pay for it.
And of course, we may, and the same for agriculture, this is why you have tractors,
you know? What we have in industrial agriculture because you are producing all the food that you
are eating in a year with 40 hours in Europe in the States, much less. In the States,
they are producing like one tons of crops per hour. This is unthinkable talking about a circular
economy if you were serious about respecting the natural cycles, no? I'm telling you, the people
do not know. We are intoxicated by money. We cannot appreciate the importance of biophysical
constraints. Which is why I invited you to be a guest on this show because you've been telling
this story for 40 years and very few people are listening. But now, suddenly with Ukraine and
Russia and now recently Israel and people are worried about Iran and the Straits and Hormuz,
people are starting to understand that money and technology are not the primary drivers,
that it's ecosystems and energy and materials that underpin all this money and stuff. So,
your ideas still might germinate and bear fruit.
You also work on complexity, emergence and adaptive cycles, which is another topic that
people don't know much about and I've not had anyone on the show talk about adaptive cycles.
Can you briefly explain what an adaptive cycle is and why those are relevant to our current
global situation? Yeah, I mean, the adaptive cycle, the idea comes from Bats Oling,
that is a theoretical ecologist. And I would say that this as theoretical ecology is by far the
discipline that got into the evolution. Because everyone talk about evolution, but
and then this requires a little bit to get into complexity. Okay, a complex adaptive system is
not only in material things, there is the only tangible part. It is also not tangible, I would
say the semiotic, let's put it this way, part. So, this was the Simon, the father of complexity,
the first one, was saying, okay, we are in a situation which have recipes, they are making
processes, they are making recipes. Okay, then Prigogin, they are saying there are genetic
information that can make an organism or phenotype that make genetic information. Okay,
so basically you have and then this has been extended to human society by Lumen, the famous
sociologist, German sociology, they said, what is a society? It's a bunch of communications,
they are used to stabilize a bunch of interactions, they are used to stabilize communication. Okay,
we can go into it just five seconds using a biosemiotic is in reality you have on the top
the meaning of things, types, the communication, and the bottom you have
token instances of things. So, basically you have the semiotic appears that you have represented
would be the communication, act, there would be interaction, and then you have an interpretation.
So, in the cycle, you are interpreting your action moving from instance to type to have
better communication. Okay, and then having better communication, you interpret the better
communication to have better interaction, you know, and then you move from type to instance.
So, you have that this cycle is a continuous resonance between type and instance, instance
and type. Margalef, there's a famous ecologist in Spain, called it like the ecosystem send
message to themselves into the future. In the sense, you are giving a genotype in a specific area,
they do something, they organize an ecosystem. In this organization, some phenotype are eliminated
and some are amplified. This change the genotype and this going on and these could be for human
system the same. You are defining social role and institution, then you get into a social
practice, what we do, and then the genius of Lumen is that then you have a psychic structure
that define whether or not you like it. And then is the psychic structure that on the loop
define what communication you like or not, you know, the cancel culture or the political process
basically. So, you can apply, it's exactly the same for ecosystem and genetic information and for
societies. But again, Nate, these things in school, so basically if you start discussing this
type of narrative, people really look at you like if you are coming from another planet.
But these things have been out for 50 years, what I'm saying, what I'm saying, that this is not
normal. We have a sort of filter of whatever is uncomfortable, you know, the famous uncomfortable
knowledge is kept out of our educational system, is kept out of our discussion of sustainability.
Because I mean, I am, I really, I cannot believe that I have to explain how to gather legal loop
or buy a semiotic. This is 50 years old. It's not that, you know, it's a new theory that came out
last year, but nobody knows. That is, if you talk about Kuzner Curse, whatever other
legend that that's completely ridiculous, everyone knows, no?
Well, let's move to that. How is our modern society's
preference for reductionism, especially in the academy and science,
exacerbated the issue that you just outlined, the complexity of working with different scales
on what's really important to to our society? How is reductionism led us astray from what we
really need to focus on? Yeah, I mean, I believe that this came exactly from this adaptive cycle.
In the sense that you need a society that has a very strong group identity is very motivated.
Okay. So what motivated the Western civilization? The American dream and the Cartesian dream.
The Cartesian dream is whatever we want to do, we do it. It's just a matter of more technology,
more innovation. We do it. Okay. So this gives a feeling to people that we are in the right
society. We are in the right group identity. And that, of course, is because of oil,
this made possible to have a better standard of living. So basically, everyone
perceived that the American dream and the Cartesian dream is where to go.
What happened that at this point, this was so strong that whatever was going against,
you remember the limit to grow or something like that, whatever was going against this
was considered as dangerous for society. You know what I mean? Let's make a step backward.
Why we have science? We have science to get new knowledge, but we have science to stabilize
the establishment. Before the French Revolution, you have to pay taxes. Why? Because the king
says so. Why the king knows? Because God pointed the king. After the French Revolution, you have
to pay tax. Why? Because the government says, why the government knows? Because it follows the
scientific advice. So we use science to stabilize the establishment. So at this point, it's very
delicate that the, I mean, I'm telling you, I mean, we can go. It's my retirement. I got a big
product from European Union. And then we were looking at the different narratives used in the
sustainability. And you're looking one by one, it's all pushed. They don't make any sense. They
are not possible there. And then, of course, when we were discussing, because it was European Union,
it was paying, so we were, they say, of course, I had people that told me that we cannot go
on public extent. We know all these hard bushes. We don't have the slightest idea what to do.
I mean, this is not acceptable in, so what do we have? We have Greta that says,
now we have to stop all fossil energies. Okay, guys, how do you feed the cities?
You stop to use fossil energy. I mean, there is a total no divide among what people want to do
and the idea that you have to have how these would be possible. And these cannot be discussed,
because as soon as whoever does not big models back on the envelope calculation,
you see that what they are talking about is not possible.
I agree with that. I think you're pointing out two things, though. Science still does exist,
because you are a scientist and you're modeling or have modeled in your career,
the biophysical reality. It's just the political and economic filter of what science has accepted
is limiting science's positive contribution to our future. Could I say it that way?
Yeah, yeah. But I mean, in a way, this is a tragedy, because even my students have been with
me like years as PhD, if they want to get a job, they have to go in project on circular economy.
If they want to be published, you have to say yes, because I'm old enough. I remember that at
the beginning when I was getting called for research was, we have a problem, do we have idea?
Okay, no, we want to implement this solution. Can you provide how this 10 years later,
10 years later, we are implementing this? Can you prove that we are right?
You know, now the science, the way it gets funded changed dramatically. Now, basically,
we are just supporting the claim of the government or the establishment or what.
We are no longer have a room for maneuvering. I have a model proving that it's not possible.
You will not get money, no matter what. Do you have a hope or a fear that once the European Union
or the global governments of the world figure out the situation we're in, that you will be
called out of retirement to work with people at Valladolid and other biophysical researchers who
actually understand what's going on? Look, I believe that they more or less know that it's not working.
This is what we got. We got 7.5 million. And that probably was to try to check a plan B,
no, to see where the weakness were. We were given money to check the credibility of the
narrative used for the policy. So, I mean, it's obvious that they have a sort of inch that,
how do you say in English, they feel that there is something that is not good.
Again, I believe that it is difficult for them, no, no, no, European Union, all the governments.
I have a fantastic piece of a committee in the States, the state of the Union or the old president
from the last one to Nixon and before, about the fact that they will fix the energy problems.
It's John Stewart daily show clip. I show that to my students.
It is not Europe. The legitimacy of modern states is based on the fact that they know what they are
doing, that they are doing policy based scientific based policy evidence, scientific evidence,
policy evidence, but my question is, there are enough people in the world. It's not a lot,
but it's still plenty that are working on biophysically informed analysis that although
there are no solutions that are politically acceptable with our current situation,
there are a lot of responses and good research and good relevant questions that academic minded
people can be working on. So how do we build that bridge or do you think that's too far of a gap to
ever bridge? Look, I believe that, and this is one of your paper that I really liked a lot,
that ecological economics and all that, we didn't manage to generate an alternative narratives
to economics to explain the interaction of humans, the environment, as a matter of fact,
this bio economics narrative is very, very nice about the fact that you have both the
institution, social practice, the constraints coming from the environment and the constraints
coming from the psychic structure and this is how the system goes to an adaptive cycle.
It is much better to frame a discussion of sustainability, but if you are within the
economic narrative, you are expressing everything in price and things, there is nothing you can do,
you may have information coming from different places, but it doesn't fit in the larger narrative.
We need a larger narrative in which everyone is feeling comfortable though and otherwise you
cannot communicate. In order to communicate, you must have the same identity or cultural identity
or group identity on the person with whom you are talking and then we, I mean,
biophysical allies are autistic, we are not capable of communicating because we do not share
the same group identity with those they are talking within economic narratives.
Nor the same language.
Yeah, it is not language, it's more that there is more. So this is a problem. This is a problem
because unless we remove the intoxication with economic talking of things, because when you
are using a word, the word comes with a lot of baggage. No. Look, for example, in my institute,
okay, it's no longer my institute until last week, I have the degrowth people, I have the
headquarter of the degrowth on this planet, but still what they say, the growth. So this is an
economic narrative. Either you degrow, degrow, aggro, post-grow is the same. You are using
an economic narrative. No, we have to do something else. Okay, we want to have an economy of care,
we have to care for each other. As long as you mentioned the word growth, then it is very difficult
to think about doing things in a different way. So like George Oscalis and them are in your
institute? He used to be my neighbor. Okay, okay. I didn't connect, you were in the same university,
obviously that makes sense. Same building. Same building. And Julia as well? Julia?
What was the last name? Steinberger? Yeah, it's not in the institute. Oh, she collaborates with
George Oscalis. So does this get at something in your work that you call quantitative storytelling?
Yes, this is the things that we propose because when you are doing something very complex,
there is no way that you can have the ultimate uncontested proof. No? Oh, you know, they said
that the smoking was not dangerous for the health for 40 years, you know, the merchant of doubt.
In a sense, you can, if you go on the scientific base evidence, you pay scientists to prove that
the results are not accurate, that it was not enough. It is impossible to win. So we say, okay,
when we are talking about these things, we propose that we are having narratives. We have
narratives and we put numbers to prove them. You know, I'll give you an example. Now in Europe,
we do recycled cooked oil. Okay, recycled oil. If you go around, you're going to Stockholm,
this bus goes on recycled oil, we save the planet, blah, blah, blah. It's okay, but how much
cooked oil we are having, like five liters per capita per year. Okay, we can collect two.
When you're collecting and transforming, it became one oil biodiesel per liter per person per year.
And as we are consuming 1000 between gasoline. So what we are talking about, you know, and we
have a lot of cooked oil. And why is that? Because there is a fraud, they are importing palm oil,
so they are actually cutting the forest in Indonesia to have the bus in the Stockholm
they run. And what happened? We don't need models. We don't need no models. It's a narrative, you
know, the narrative is, is this, there is not enough. Look, these numbers are these. That's it,
let's do something else. We don't need an accurate knowing two decimal. So we use this
in the sense we tell a different story. The quality of the story is whether you
feel that this is convincing, or then you can check your own, on your own, the numbers,
because it's totally transparent. It's not about, you know, doing these models that,
and then we call it quantitative storytelling. And I think that is to me, especially for
having a deliberation with people, is because if you would force all these people to have
magic models, no, they are decarbonized Europe in 20 years, all the models you see, nobody knows.
You can imagine in 20 years you have to build thousands of millions of windmills to new factories,
you know, in all in 10 years, and the reduction goes down. We should have a peak of emission
incredibly high, you know, all the, all the scenarios goes down. So if rather than having
mysterious models, we will force people to tell their story and they put numbers on the story,
it will be easier to check the quality of the discussion. So then you would need focus groups
of people to hear the stories. There are a lot of participatory process you may have, even
cities and juries will be even better, no, like in the trial with people saying in favor, people
against. But then you get to the human behavior section and authority bias and all those other
things because your quantitative storytelling may be absolutely true, but it's also threatening
and a little scary and there's no easy answers. So people will reject hearing it, even if it's
accurate. Yeah, but it's already happening, Nate. I mean, let's, let's face it. People do not want to
hear about, you know, it's much easier. Oh, it is, I don't know. I don't know. Of course, I,
especially for kids, I'm also kids are young people, 25. It's difficult because it's their future
and they want to do, but they are totally disempowered. I mean, if I am in a society in which
technical innovation and market business models define my future, I do not play any role.
And this is why they are taking pictures of themselves just to prove that they are alive.
They are part of the story because they are not part of the story. They are not building
the common identity. Young people are completely out and this is a tragedy.
Yeah, no, I agree with that. So
it is my belief that one of the most underutilized resources in our world today
is young people, smart, civic-minded, graduate students at universities around the world who
can contribute meaningful and relevant research to this, what I call the human predicament,
except as you said earlier, most universities are reductionist, energy-blind,
under the thrall of economic theory. So as a recently retired, very recently, last week,
a biophysically literate professor, can you suggest to any university people listening to
this program, what are some questions or core areas of research should these young humans
who are in their early 20s or mid-20s and agree with what you're saying, what are some good
areas of research that we need orders of magnitude more people looking at?
That's for sure. Energetics, the thermodynamic and non-equilibrium, all the discussion of
the civility system, complex system theory, high-error key theory, the implication of scale,
because we imagine that there is only one scale that is not. All the what we are talking about,
there are scales that go from molecules, chemical reaction to geological year, whatever. We don't
have the slice idea. You have different disciplines that do not talk to each other because they see
different things. So they are living in parallel universes. So what I'm saying, biosemiotics,
for this, this is unbelievable, how powerful it is. I'm sorry to interrupt. Can you define
biosemiotics because I'm not even sure what that means. Because at the beginning, we had
the semiotics, the use of sign, the interpretation of sign, the language, and then at a certain
point came this biosemiotic, what was it, 1907? I mean, really, very old, one ukule.
And then this was about how the living system managed to generate sign and use sign to reproduce
itself. And then this is a general process that is happening at all levels. And then this goes,
this is where you get into the adaptive cycle. As soon as you have a sign, you have a type that
is not material. And why this is... Sign, S-I-G-N, sign? Sign, something that means something.
So in reality, you have an information carrier that will be DNA, a word, whatever,
which has a meaning. So the issue is how to generate the meaning. You can generate the
meaning if you have what is called a functional cycle, something that depends on interpreting
right the sign in order to survive. And basically, this is the way life works and how
human system works, and so on is exactly the same. It is pretty much established, but again,
in scientific terms, they are on the border because they are not considered. I went now in
Copenhagen to the latest gathering, and it was like Harry Potter, you know, this kind of...
They are not considered like serious scientists. And nobody knows why, because in my view, it's
probably the most interesting field at the moment. And then what is very good about biosemiotics is
that basically you can see that you have values that came from passion, from feeling, and then
you get norms that came from the rational part. And then you cannot imagine to run a system only
on rational behavior, model norms. You have to include how the formation of values is influencing
that. So in my view, this is much, much richer than what we have at the moment. At the moment,
we have really something sad, economics is sad. You don't have a room for feeling, you don't have
a room for environment. Really, he's not getting anywhere, I mean.
So in a perfect world, just speculate and imagine that universities around the world
start thinking about scale, have a lot more questions and research on energetics and biosemiotics
and thermodynamics. And we start to create a better map of our reality. What could universities
look like in 10 or 20 or 30 years? And what contribution could they make to a peak and
descent of the carbon pulse? But I believe that what they could do is to involve the society
in the formation of new group identity. Because again, this is not about technology or business
model. It's about forming a new group identity. We have to move from producing and consuming
good services, taking care of ourselves and nature. People have to understand this,
as to feel. This is not about explaining. It's about explaining this on issues that are relevant
for their life in a way that they start feeling it. So this is the issue, because otherwise,
it remains on the top. I mean, I have a lot of students that are vegetarian, eating vegetable
coming from Peru, in refrigerated airplanes. But then they have three mobile phones, they go
on vacation on a ski, on a Samoritz. There are symbolic things that I don't think that being
vegetarian at the moment is a threat from the banking system. Let's be that people do not make
the connection. Because moreover, if you frame the discussion, we need more technical innovation,
more business model. You are saying we need to give more money to the banks. I'm not sure
that this is the right strategy to get out of the trouble where we are now. But it seems that
nobody makes these connections at this moment, no? So at the core of what you just said is,
we're not going to change until we feel the need to change. And hopefully that can be
scientifically and biophysically informed, or maybe there are some break glass plans
from universities like your own. To have disciplines that start in including in the
discussion that there is this aspect, the feeling and the role of emotions. Because otherwise,
I don't think that nothing happened with just information. And moreover, you are telling them
there is no problem, we can do it, yes, we can, more technology. And then you say you have to
radically change your behavior. Why I should? Because if, but I mean, the story is so absurd
at the moment, we are doing innovation to stabilize the social practice. It's ridiculous.
Let's imagine we have cars. No, we don't want to have cars anymore. We have hundreds of millions
of cars. Now what do we do? Hundreds of millions of cars electric. You know, Jesus abolished the
private property of cars. And then they must share otherwise they're gonna go. This is change of
social practice. No, they changed technology to keep the same social practice. You know,
this is a famous Italian novel, the Gatto Pardo, no? After the revolution, they say,
but how did you change everything? So everything remained the same. It is exactly the plan now.
We are doing all these things to keep the status quo.
So you mentioned that Georgios, who is a friend of mine, was in your same building.
What do you think about, you mentioned it briefly before, but what do you think about the degrowth,
post-growth, growth debate, beyond, you know, they're all using the terms of economics?
You have an opinion? Yeah, I mean, the growth, I believe there was a provocation, basically.
Of course, it was not very easy to communicate. As a matter of fact, since they moved from
degrowth to post-growth, they got money. They got 10 millions, no? And immediately,
as soon as they moved from degrowth to post-growth. Because post-growth, at least, is more reasonable
in the sense. Because if you do degrowth, you say more or less of the same. We do not want the
same. We want something else, no? So to me, post-growth is much better. As a matter of fact,
I told them several times to go from post-growth. Again, I see that there is no
an alternative in terms of grand narrative about how humans organize themselves,
and how they interact with the environment. Let alone considering the fact that
different societies are competing with each other to train, no? So the economic narrative
is not good. We have to look for something else, where to accommodate the discussion.
And it is crucial the role of feeling. Because if you have a description of how a society works,
without explicitly having a place where human emotion, feeling, aspiration,
dreams, taboo, fears, are acting. That is basically where they affect policy,
political processes. We do not have it. They are completely separated, no?
So a friend of mine who has been on this program a few times, Nora Bateson lives in Sweden,
she does these things called warm data labs, which is to present a scientific overview of
some problem, but then integrate it with the feelings and responses of the people in the room.
And it is iterative and emergent. And that is kind of what you are talking about.
This is good. The important is that the data coming about the sustainability should be
integrated on different aspects. Like again, the medicine, how is your liver? You must have
information about all your organs before making a discussion of what we do. Because if you do this
only one part of the story is much better than nothing, of course. But it would be important
to have a narrative that can get all the aspects of the problem together. And then on that,
you are asking the reaction of the people. Could this happen at universities that you have
representatives from different disciplines and departments meet once a week and have this
like warm data discussion about how their discipline contributes to this larger backdrop?
They should do that. They should do that. The only problem, look, I try to do that in Naples
about waste management. So we had a fantastic model, how to the different, the network of
process. And then of course, as soon as you do that, you show that what the politicians say is
not possible either one party or another. So what happened when we arrived to the fact that we want
to have an open meeting at a university with the activists, the citizens, concerned citizens,
and the politicians, and the people running the waste management system. And the politicians
didn't want to come because, of course, you have to have this. This is the problem. I mean,
now we are getting in a serious problem. Okay, the future do not doesn't exist. Okay, the future
is created by us. So when you have a problem, you cannot have them map what to do, the target
things, because you have to discuss with people what are viable, decidable, the feasible things.
In general, parties are defining themselves on solutions. Okay, so this makes it difficult to
have a deliberation, because you should have, okay, in what the party A say, there are good
ideas, but this is rubbish. And what party B say, there are good ideas, this rubbish. And
maybe at least enables when we tried, we're not willing to do that. We were really unlucky
because they had the election in less than one year, so there was a delicate moment.
But this is the point. In general, at the moment, we have roadmaps. Everyone has roadmaps. Nobody
checked whether these roadmaps are possible, what the mean for other people. So for rather than
starting with roadmaps, we should have some sort of platform in which people could deliberate about
pros and cons of different solutions. And I believe that this should be done by university, yes,
or it could be done by government or whoever of the different possible actors.
I'm trying to do it in a small way with this podcast, I think, as you were speaking. So let
me ask you a hard question, but with an academic link. So you use in your Moose CSM
multi-scale integrated analysis, but it's very difficult for humans to optimize more than one
variable at a time. And a lot of people now are concerned about keeping GDP growing,
but we're also concerned about equality, and we're also concerned about emissions and carbon.
So is it possible to optimize more than one variable at one time?
The easy question is no. As a matter of fact, I am in Barcelona because I came here in 92
because they had a good center for multi-graderial analysis. So I was trying to link multi-graderial
analysis of my type of models because every time you change something in the lens, you change one
indicator on the radar diagram. But then you get on the bottom line is, okay, you have this
representation on the multi-graderial space, and then how to weight the different factors.
Okay. In reality, the criteria of performance are mapping onto concerns.
So at the center point, you have to map the concerns of people. This is impossible. You
cannot do it with software. I am concerned for my daughter, and other person doesn't have kids,
is not as the same concern that I have, and so on. So this idea that you can optimize
the multi-graderial things is absurd. But even the people doing multi-graderial will tell you
because the real issue is when you get to the weighting factors, how to weight different factors
for the different criteria. But that at its core is what society faces right now. We have been
optimizing one variable, which is dollars and profits, and now we care about ecosystems
and future generations and equality and other things. So we don't, we're flying blind into that.
Yeah, no, I mean, because we are continuing to try to solve the problem with optimization,
find the best possible way. These things do not exist. You have to negotiate. You have to deliberate
to understand the problem of the others, and the others have to understand your problems.
At that point, you can find a solution, but the solution has to be created, co-produced.
So what the scientists can do is helping the society in this process, not tell the society
what is the best thing to do. This is ridiculous. So how do we bring governance on these issues,
whether in Barcelona or in Spain or in the United States or even something
broader like the European Union? How do we bring governance back towards a perspective
that can actually look at the full scale of the issues we face? Is that possible,
can it be done with our current structures of government?
Personally, I don't know. I think that it's not possible with the current structure of people
that we have. People are used to not to get into this type of discussion.
So they hope that there is someone else that knows better. This is why the subject cannot say we
don't know better, like with the COVID. You remember the COVID? They didn't have an idea of what to do.
But of course, they cannot say it. I mean, this is the cultural. We have to learn as a society
to take decisions under uncertainty. Our culture is not based on this. Our culture
is based on NASA, the things they know. They have a computer. And then this makes it difficult
to have a healthy or quality governance because people want someone else that knows better,
tell them what to do. In my opinion, then, this opinion was shaped or began to be shaped 15 years
ago when I was getting my PhD. You are one of those people that knows what's going on.
And so I will put you on the spot on what to do. What types of policies, given what you know about
energetics and thermodynamics and complex adaptive systems, might you recommend that
governments start adopting whether on a local, regional, or national scale,
not to put you on the spot in your fresh retirement?
Look, I mean, I really, I don't know. I mean, what I believe is completely irrelevant.
I cannot decide for other people. There are people that can say, I prefer to do this and I,
rather than do that. And that maybe for me would be more reasonable. What I would say first, to
stop wasting money on this technical innovation that this is a, I don't know,
gravy train, maybe that's all I get in money. Look what happened with the, with the energy
vendor in Germany. This was very interesting. They want to do alternative energy. They spent
300 billions. After 300 billions, they are producing electricity exactly like we're
to do before. Peaker, loader, and the intermittent, since there are no storage,
cannot cover much. So basically they have been building enormous amount of intermittent power
capacity that is all used. So the idea is rather than putting 300 billions given to the usual
multinational, it's okay. I give to all the towns, you know, 100 millions one,
if they came out with some plan to do something, maybe something good here and there would come
out in the sense, stop to do mega plan, especially since they are not particularly
good at making the plans or at making the analysis. Try rather to have, try to have emerging
solution from the bottom that they can be readjust. Try because the more you go to
or regulation, big plan, big money. First of all, the more the lobbies get in and they will get the
money. And second, at the moment, we do not have a good understanding, good analysis,
a good plan, let alone road maps. I would save money and try to use it in a different way.
So that's what we need. First and foremost is a better understanding of the problem and then
inform people at the local levels and give a portion of the money that would have went to
some multinational to try. You want to change social practices, you don't want to
change technology to keep the social practices we are doing now. This is exactly the opposite of
what we have to do. Yeah, I understand that. But then this has to be done at the lab because
when you do a social practices, practice with an S only, you are affecting your neighbor.
You don't do it as an individual. It's not a behavior, a social practice is something which is
within the household, which is a functional type. So if you are a mother of two, you will not have
a behavior. If you are single or a mother of two, it's not about behavior. It's about you are forced
to do different social practices. Yeah, you see, then this is another legacy of economics.
We don't have behavior to change. We have to think what are the social practices they are
acceptable, not acceptable, the people likes or not like. And this imply interaction with the others
is a social construct. Yep, our relationships with others, with the natural world are just
totally not part of our economic system right now. Dare I ask you your opinion on Europe's plans to
scale hydrogen and green hydrogen? Is that another waste of resources or what are your thoughts?
Look, compare with electric cars. I believe hydrogen is much better. It's much better because
you can store it, you can use wind, whatever. You eliminate the problem of intermittency.
For Europe would be the salvation because if they go with electric cars, China will produce them,
they are dead. This will be the last industry in Europe gone. Is it also easier to transport?
It is very difficult to handle. So maybe the idea would be to do hydrogen and with hydrogen do
other synthetic fuels and then use that. I really don't know how is the state of the technology.
I know that especially in Germany, they are investing a lot of money because it's about
surviving in terms of automotive industry. But if I would suggest, I would suggest more to do that
rather than the electrification of the economy. The electrification of the economy is very, very
complicated. Look, half of the labor in the energy sector is in the energy grid. Even though it's
giving only 30% of the energy, use half of the work because it's complicated in maintenance and
especially we start going through low density area. I believe that liquid fuels or things are
easier to handle. But again, I don't know the state of advancement of the technology
in hydrogen production. I have some final questions that I ask all my guests.
Dr. Jim Pietro, you have thought about and are working on these issues as a career.
You understand what we face with the carbon pulse and energetics, etc. Do you have any
personal advice to the watchers and listeners of this program, given this time of what's
happening in the planet? What some would call a polycrisis?
Yeah, I would say to be curious, to be trying to be informed as much as possible, trying to look for
alternative resistance, to check also what is happening outside the mainstream.
But I agree that it's very, very, very difficult, very, very difficult because the assumption
doesn't make, it's not a conspiracy, of course, but I mean, it is not easy to try to get alternative
information in this situation. And what about your students and young people generally? What
do you recommend your students or 20-something year olds listening to this program? Do you have
advice for young humans? Yeah, my advice has been to avoid the, like Mozart, Cosifantut,
that they do not have to do things because the other do, that is on fashion. Or because it's the
only way that I have to get a job is maybe you will get a job in the next four or five years,
but probably in 20 years, you will not be on the edge of what is needed. I mean, we are experiencing
a major change in our situation. And of course, if you start doing things that at the moment are
not on fashion, maybe they will be the one needed in 10 years when you will be on the top of your
career. I understand that it's difficult for young people to go against the wind.
But I'm not sure that going with the wind at the moment is
guaranteeing you a good job in 20 years. So when I taught my class at the University of
Minnesota, I told my students that in the future, they would simultaneously be thanking me and cursing
me. Is that the same story with your former students?
Yeah, yeah, no, I had a very, very nice, the last year, this student, he said,
what they was asked to do and drop in a different place, he said,
when you experience the museum, you never get back.
Does he want to go to conventional analysis now?
It is difficult. You will have to go against the wind. On the other hand,
I believe that as scientists, we are really privileged. We are paid for doing what we like
doing. So it is like a priest, like a vocational career. You have to do what you think has to
be done. And at the moment, I'm telling you, it's really embarrassing. If you
see the things from a big picture, the sustainability science is really, really sloppy.
Yeah, no, I'm aware of that. Mario, what do you care most about in the world?
Oh, this is one million questions. I would say effective interaction, to be able to have an
interaction that we can have a feeling on and stop to marketize everything that we have to have
price, you know, whatever you do, you have to pay for or whatever, to have more personal relation,
that we manage to in the family, outside the family, in the community, whatever we go,
even across different countries, not to always have some sort of affection in
type of interaction that we do. That this is something that is jeopardized at the moment,
no? More agency. Would you call that agency for people to have an agency?
Oh, effective agency. It affects some sort of you in it.
Yeah, yeah. This would help a lot. If you had a magic wand, and there was no personal recourse
to your decision, and you're also retired, what is one thing you would do to improve the future?
Again, this is like what I would do really doesn't matter because I am is my personal opinion.
It's not I don't feel so arrogant to decide for the life of other people. I would like to have
people they are more reflexive. I would have a wave of reflexivity to feel, to reflect about
what they are doing. Because at the moment, this is something that is we are losing
pretty much. I mean, that people do things without having this idea of what they do that.
So we should be more proactive and reflective instead of reactive?
Yeah, and respect the others also know that. And since I'm Buddhist,
in the others, I include also animals and the rest of we should respect more.
I knew there was a reason I always liked you.
Respect for animals is something I want to respect. We don't respect anything like
I don't want to be now impoverished by all these tattoos. No, I mean, you have to respect your
body. The body is not yours. You got it. You got it. And then you have to leave it as in the best
possible condition. I mean, you will not write on on on animals or why you should write on yourself.
I mean, no, I don't know. We don't respect not even ourselves. This is the moment.
So let me if this has been a great introduction to you and your work.
Sometimes I have my guests come back for a second podcast, six months down the road,
where they take a deep dive in some topic that they're an expert in, but it's a little bit
esoteric, but it's also relevant to human futures. Is there any topic that you are just
passionate about that if you were to come back, you could take a deep dive and explain it to the
viewers? I have for sure the extinction of farmers. This is is amazing. I've been in Japan for one
month. The average age of Japanese farmers is 70. Listen to this 70. They do not have agriculture
anymore. In Europe is 60. You should go wherever you go. The farmers are gone. They are going.
You know, I I spoke in Argentina at the meeting on the basically there. They no longer have
farmers. They have people that make exploitation from the city. They rent three, four thousand
actors. They go there with tractors and things. But I mean, the rural communities and farmers
are disappearing all over the planet. And nobody cares. I mean, this is fascinating if they were,
I don't know, lesbian, whatever will protest about the fact that this community is going,
but that the farmers are going is completely irrelevant for the urban civilization that we
are living in. This would be really something. This deserves not one hour, but because I mean,
urbans believe that the food comes from the supermarket. And whatever else happened before
doesn't matter. And the farmers are not economically viable period in the international
market with the pressure that they have. They need subsidies. Otherwise, they cannot and they
don't even do it well with subsidies. One percent of Americans in the United States are farmers
and only one percent of them are growing food they can actually eat as opposed to soybeans and
things like that. I may take you up on that and come back. So let me ask you final question.
It's around dinner time in Barcelona. Can I ask you what I love coming to Spain?
What are you going to have for dinner tonight? Do you have an idea?
No. I think eggplants for sure. Maybe chicken and rice. I don't know. I didn't check that.
Okay. Will you have some olives? A setuna?
All is to start, yes. It's very popular here. Yeah. A setuna.
It's great to talk to you. Thank you for your time. Thank you very much for having me and
congratulations on your retirement. And I think the world is still going to need your
expertise, professor. The autistic scientist. Okay. Thank you very much. It's been fun.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagans, edited by no
troublemakers media, and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
