You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins, that's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy,
the environment and our society.
Together with scientists, experts and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's
eye view of how everything fits together, where we go from here and what we can do about
it as a society and as individuals.
In the future, I imagine having only or at least primarily guests on this program who
are working on responses and solutions to the coming Great Simplification.
But for now, I'm still trying to comprehensively connect the dots how our energy, money, ecological
situation fits together and will change everything in the future.
But today's episode is about responses, specifically the importance of networks.
Today I welcome Marty Kern, a civic organizer and networking specialist to the show.
Marty and I discuss why both networks and communities will be critical to the coming
challenges we face.
How will the social ties we form now influence the outcome of power, peace and new social
organization?
How can we organize ourselves in order to best meet the future that is coming, which
no individual can face on their own?
Please welcome the director of NET-centric campaigns, Marty Kerns.
Marty, good to see you.
So let me get right into it, Marty.
Kind of the end goal of the work that my organization and this podcast are doing ahead of the Great
Simplification is to build networks of reality aware pro-social humans to avert and even better
steer humanity away from the default paths that my analysis kind of projects in coming
decades because I think it's going to be necessary.
But your work takes this end goal that I foresee as the actual starting point that to build
these networks is the primary goal irrespective of what future arrives.
Can you unpack for me and for our listeners your philosophy about this and your work?
Tell us what you do and why.
Yeah, so I'm the executive director of NET-centric campaigns and for the last 22 years have been
working on organizing networks of people to create kind of social and policy change.
We kind of step into these spaces where there's not a single government, not a single group,
not a single business can solve the problem and that within all of these really large,
complex, social problems, there's always network builders.
Most movements can think immediately who are the network builders that you work with.
The problem or the challenge and the opportunity where we focus is that those network builders
need skills, just like any other work, they need a framework, they need knowledge and
they need a set of tools that help them accelerate their work and do it well.
So NET-centric campaigns, our organization looks at these important social movements
and tries to support the network builders in order to kind of transform the strategy
that they're working on.
Real quick so that I can understand what's the difference between a network builder and
a community organizer or what's the difference between a network and a community start there?
Yeah, that's good.
I mean, so there are different lenses to look at people.
So like when you think about community, it's kind of like this group of individual with
some kind of common interest, the common from a particular area, a group of people with
a common characteristic, a common profession, you think of like academic community or scientific
community, those are kind of, there's a commonality and the commonness is the bond.
A network is slightly different.
A network is, in a general sense, it's defined as a set of nodes kind of connected by ties
between them and among them.
All the elements are not common.
In our context, you can have networks of people with ties along seven elements and some of
them are communication grid, trust, common language, shared vision, shared resources,
feedback mechanisms.
We have a way that we tease apart what are those seven elements and any of those can
actually be strengthening, you can have a network that's just built by trust or that's
just built by a communication grid and that's what we think about.
So the difference for me between a community and a network is the way that they're connected
and there are networks within communities and there are communities within networks.
So they're somewhat overlapping definitions in different ways.
By your definition, it seems like a network is potentially, at least at the onset, more
flexible and able to overcome the polarization in our tribal conversations than maybe a geographically
centered or a topically centered community.
I don't know if that's why I differ.
I think that there's a lot that network organizing teaches us about building power and building
capacity and it's really about bringing that knowledge set, that skill set to those network
organizers within movements.
For me, it's not an either or.
People can be in multiple communities at the same time.
You can be a community of podcasters, a community of science ecologists and your local community
and you can be in multiple networks at the same time.
So they're just different lens.
I feel like a community organizer or an organizational builder might be someone who works with the
bone structure and the network organizers work with the nervous tissue.
It's still the same body, it's just different lenses and different kind of interventions
that we'd come up with.
The first thing that comes to mind to me is we're part of a global energy dissipating
network of an economic system pursuing economic growth yet at the same time we deeply lack
community.
Well, you may lack a lot of, so you could lack community or you could say, okay, how many
people in that community that you're talking about can actually talk with each other.
So what's the state of the communication grid among people within that community?
But it's vast with the internet, right?
It's potentially vast.
Potentially vast but potentially and actually are two different things.
And where's the rubber hit the road there, the difference between potentially and actually
with the internet on your work?
For us, networks are very concrete so we can think of a boundary, who's in this network
and who's not and then we can think, what is the state of the ties between the people
within that network?
Can they communicate with each other one to one?
Can they communicate with each other one to many?
Can they communicate with each other many to many?
Can they have those conversations?
Do they have the common language when they say something like collapse?
Do they all mean the exact same thing or do they mean something different?
Do they trust each other?
To what level do they trust each other?
So each of those elements actually give us opportunities to kind of intervene and manage
the growth of the strength of that network so that it can do more.
How did you say you've been doing this for 22 years?
How did you get interested in the concept of networks and what was your aha moment on
how important it is?
Yeah, well my whole life I had been kind of a campaign person, a political organizer,
an issue organizer.
I had started the Georgia River Network in Atlanta, protecting the rivers in Georgia
before that I had worked in politics and the kind of trigger event for me was 9-11.
My wife was 9 months pregnant with our first kid and we were here in DC and 9-11 happened
and I started to read everything I could on networks, some early stuff by Rand, the book
Networks and Networks, stuff by Valdis Krebs.
Just really trying to look at what are we facing here and what I realized was that the
people who had been thinking a lot about networks would have been thinking about how to pull
them apart and that that was actually, I think six months later I calmed down, my kid started
sleeping through the night so I didn't have to read so much and I was like, wow, my whole
movement, I live in networks and the things that they're pulling out is the start of a
reverse engineering document for what we need to build in order to create network power
for good.
Then I think I wrote my first paper then and this guy from the Margaret E. Casey Foundation
found it and was like, you're on to something, don't tell him, David, and he's like, you're
on to something but you don't have it figured out at all.
I go push further and I've been pushing further for 20-some years and that's what got me started.
What at its core, what's the special sauce and why do you think it's so important that
people listening to this in the United States or Europe or wherever start to understand
and act building networks in their life?
Toans, when I run across your work and I think about the super organism, the thing I think
is it doesn't have a functional nervous system yet.
It seems to have a diet and an exercise and an ability to consume but I think one of your
early interviews, Creel talked about the human race had this nervous breakdown and I kind
of worry about that because I was like, I think we're just getting our nervous system
sorted out.
We do work in Ghana, in rural Ghana and one of the things that hit me was on our field
work, you can see people literally like on disconnecting the solar power that was set
up to their water pumps in order to charge their cell phones.
I think somewhere your literature, you talk about the leap to becoming a super organism
and in part that might have been our diet but I think somewhere in there is also we're
still evolving as a species and I think the evolution is this network connection.
It's right there at the foundational base with Maslow's hierarchy is like staying connected.
When you see refugees in Syria or come out of war zones among the first things they do
they grab food that water and they want to hook up to start talking to family.
There is this network connection that we crave that is going to be there forever, it's going
to make it through the collapse because it is part of our DNA.
We're incredibly social species and when you're just sitting there in a day and you feel
fine and you don't have dysentery or diarrhea, your impulse is to connect with your network,
your friends, your community and then if you do get sick you're probably going to re-plug
in those solar panels to the water purifier but tell me more about your experience in
Ghana.
We organized a conference back in 2004 about the use of cell phones and civic engagement,
2004 that was like crazy talk and one of the guys that came was from the DRC and he had
been working on using cell phones in the Congo to fight Lombada, the war criminal about the
abduction of children and the local militias and it struck us as like wait how is this
working like it was an incredible story and you start to realize like there's this connectivity
that people want and that they prioritize it high up.
The World Bank did a study that there was a collapse in cigarette sales when cell phones
hit new markets.
Different mode of dopamine delivery.
Yeah, well or just the value of that connection.
It is really, really high and I don't think we figured out what to do with it.
I know a lot of your guests kind of look at the division around COVID as a failure.
For me that's like the entire world put the brakes on for a month, month and a half.
Nobody predicted that was possible.
Like yes it fell apart and it fell apart in some bad ways but I think in the longer arc
of history we're going to look at COVID and be like wow that was pretty impressive.
In 2014 if you had talked to any scientist, any epidemiology fireologist and said okay
we're going to have an Ebola outbreak, it's going to go across three countries and there's
going to be 24,000 people with it and it's going to have an R of 1.3.
What's going to happen?
They're going to be like it's going to spread, it's going to kill everybody.
It's all over.
It came over.
Cultures, all that.
It didn't happen.
There was no boss in charge of that.
That network capacity is just starting to get tested, it's starting to develop.
So I do feel like that's an important thing for us to think about when we think about
what's happening and how we're going to steer towards some kind of path that is more just.
Okay so let me ask you this.
I don't know if you've listened to the podcast I've done with Tristan Harris and Aza Raskin
and Daniel Schmockenberger on algorithms and polarization and the YouTube and other things
up-regulating certain viral things that are actually not good for building community.
They're good for building animosity and outrage and things like that.
How do you build the pro-social networks that you're working on in the face of this larger
technology super-organism that's up-regulating the wrong things as it were?
Yeah so we're really intentional and I think that's the thing that discipline and intentional
around the process of network building and the skills of network building.
There's real ways you can test is this network getting stronger or weaker, are the quality
of those seven elements social ties, trusts, common language, common vision, shared resources,
actors and feedback mechanisms, are they getting improving in quality and spreading in access?
Does everybody getting access to those?
So that's the way that we build networks.
I don't entirely buy all the narratives on how much more divided we've become.
In a longer time span, we started off as a genocidal conquering
male-dominated mess in North America.
I mean there's no place worse to have started than the early Americas.
The rights and the work that we're doing, I feel like when you watch that stuff,
we're in the last gas of fire where that behavior is being snuffed out in so many ways and it
flares up but I do not feel like it's on a march towards power.
I don't think that's in human nature.
I think when technology fights with human nature, human nature wins and there might be this little
blip in time where those algorithms are dangerous but look at the next generation,
are they falling forward as quickly as the older generation?
I don't think so.
Oh, I'm not so sure about that.
I think they're more prey to the potential addictions and constantly watching TikTok instead
of going and meeting their neighbor and things like that than the older generation.
True, true, but I think the power of those connections are just as real and just as valuable
to their human experience as going to see your neighbor.
But you're not really competing with the YouTube algorithm with your work with
net-centric campaigns.
No.
It's actually using your own software or face-to-face or things like that so you can build a network
without the up or down regulation of the algorithms, yes?
Yes, yeah.
When you think about organizational capacity, organization with good board, good branding,
smart intellectual capital, you've got all these things that you're building on.
If you had somebody who's from a big company come in and talk about that,
you could very say, how do we build our organization?
Nobody's giving you free organizational capacity.
If you talk about building a network and you talk about communication grids,
common language, common narratives, there's a lot of tools and services that are coming
online for free as part of our culture becomes more networked.
And that's what kind of the underdogs, the resistance are exploiting as they're exploiting
that network capacity to increase their power.
I don't know a lot about this, Marty, so forgive some naive questions.
Does Dunbar's number in our ability to only carry a certain number of real relationships
in our brain, given it's 1,300 cc's, give or take 150 relationships,
does that limit the number of networks?
Is there a cap and therefore we have to be selective about which networks we're involved in?
Oh, we're definitely selective about which networks we're involved in because nobody
wants to be in another network.
Nobody.
But they'll all join one that promises more value than the one that they've got.
The lack of barriers of entry and the lack of barriers of exit make networks very,
very powerful.
I don't know, you know, I don't know about that.
I've talked a little bit with people about that, are we limited in the number of networks,
or can we continue to harness information from broader and broader sectors
from people that we don't trust?
I think that's an interesting question.
That's not really what I do, so I don't know the answer to that, I guess.
Is a Google group a network?
No, we have a quiz.
So just, you know, if the nodes in the network are not connected to each other,
if they don't share any of those seven elements, then they're not a network.
So just being on an email list is not a part of a network.
Unless I organize the email list with 37 systems ecologists friends over the last decade,
so it is kind of a...
Common language.
Common language, climate change, energy, trust.
Some trust, some vision, yeah, yeah.
So yes, I would say just based on a cursor, yeah, that's a network.
Do everybody else in there recognize that they're part of that network?
That's another part of it.
So that would be a network.
And it's difficult anxiety producing at times nasty and messy.
Is that one of your criteria as well?
No, no, no.
I mean, you have to...
Just like community, there's healthy and unhealthy.
There's functional and dysfunctional.
There's networks and communities that are used by hate groups and terror cells,
and there's ones used by AA to deliver recovery to millions of people.
It's a structure.
Okay, so would you mind giving me an example from start to present or historically of an issue
or a network that you or your organization were involved in starting from scratch,
and it was a success?
And what did that look like and how did it come about?
So we work with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for four years to start a network,
to build their network around fighting the epidemic of childhood obesity.
They had been doing a lot of grants.
They had a community of people that had similar backgrounds and perspectives,
but they often totally disagreed on what is the solution to childhood obesity.
Some would say it's marketing.
Some would say it was the size of the food.
Some would say it was obesity.
The kids aren't moving enough, so NFL play 60 would be in there,
and others would say it's the marketing to the kids.
So they would fight, you know, you can't have Gatorade.
So when you have a strategy like that where it's a complex, wicked problem,
that solving one part of it actually creates more problems than the other part,
there is no kind of top-down singular approach.
So we went in, we talked with them about that assessment, and we said,
look, you need an all of them strategy, and that's network building.
So we work with them to provide, to organize, to interview people,
to talk about how does leadership shift?
Who are we pushing power to in this network?
How does that power move?
And then we designed the work with them.
That now we're grew to about 3,000 individuals from people working for hospitals,
to people working for food desert groups in Philly to, you know, the American Heart Association.
And in the end, it was working on, you know, 350,000 supporters.
We worked with Let's Move in the White House.
We worked with all kinds of collaborators and pushed for, you know,
policy change at the city levels around food deserts and transportation,
at the state level, around school meals, funding for different programs,
advancing science, providing public comment when their agencies worked on things,
and then leaders within that movement.
So within each of these, it's not us designing it.
It's the network pulling people in, creating a space where they collaborate,
and then once they decide to collaborate, making sure that the network is more successful,
you build a network because you want people in the network to do things and you want them
to be more successful in their efforts because the network exists.
It's not the same as directing it in a traditional kind of campaign, you know, top-down model.
So that network is still going on.
I think American Heart Association works it.
We've done it again in our work with climate and anti-fracking activists.
We organized six years ago, starting in 2016.
There's a lot of tension in the fracking space with leaders from across the country
and across different states fighting.
Do we regulate it?
Do we focus on pipelines?
Do we focus on disposal wells or landfills?
Do we do a ban like they did in New York?
And what do we do if they want a ban and we're in Pennsylvania
and they're flaring stuff in our backyard?
So Halt the Harm is now about 4,000 grassroots leaders, 20,000 activists,
and they are pushing for all kinds of change and reform around the country.
And that's both of those networks we've set up from scratch
and accelerated through that growth process.
And what does that mean exactly?
You were able to see the common interest of this group of people
and then you provided scaffolding or technology
or how did the network come into existence?
What was this special sauce?
Yeah, we always start with listening.
So try and figure out what's there.
What are the networks that are there?
And one of the questions that we ask is, so we succeed.
10 years down the road, you've done it.
You've stopped the harms from fracking.
10 years down the road, you stopped.
You've reversed the epidemic of childhood obesity
and everybody's getting healthier.
10 years down the road, something different has occurred.
You're the governor.
You're the president of the United States.
You can throw a party.
Tell us who you invite.
And that's where you start to get a sense
of what's the boundaries of this network.
So they start saying, oh, well, you know,
we want the people fighting pipelines in the landfill
and all those people would be there at this party
because all of us would have to have succeeded
in order for us to have actually done what we want to do.
And then we go and we look at all the names
and the types of jobs that they've presented
and say, what's the state of that network today?
Do those people, can they talk to each other?
Can they get a message out to each other?
When we did the early work with Robert Wood Johnson,
we went back to him and said, look, the only way
you can get a message out to this vast network of experts
and other people is to get an article in the New York Times.
Is that really where, because that was the only source
that like 40% of the network listened to.
In Halt the Harm, I think was NPR was one of the higher rates.
So you can't get a message out.
So there's no way this network can actually swarm
or do things or collaborate
or that they were not all following the same Twitter.
They're not all following the same whatever.
There's no channel that they pay attention to.
So that was our first option was,
how do we get a channel organized?
That's actually going to appeal to them
and serve them in some way.
And that's what we do again and again
is we try and look for where the communication are.
Where do they build trust?
What tools do they use?
Who do they hire?
What's their next hire?
Where are they blindsided by things?
Where are the turf wars?
And we try and discover that's things that are valuable
and things that are governed poorly.
And that's why you get turf wars.
So that's a great opportunity for doing something around
and organizing the network of the people
who fight the turf wars.
So it sounds like it's kind of a cross between civics
and diplomacy and divorce counseling and PR slash marketing
that you're figuring out the channels
and the pathways after you listen and assess the challenge.
Yeah, I think once we understand the boundary
of who needs to be involved,
it's really about trying to serve them,
trying to figure out what is the thing that we have to put...
What's the honeypot we have to put on the table
to attract them to participate in the network?
To go through that hassle and be like,
I don't want to join in our work,
but that honeypot, that's good enough.
I'm going to show up for that.
And then once they're there,
then you have the other strategy of now they're there,
how do you connect them to each other?
What are the kinds of things that you can do
that gets them to trust each other,
that makes them understand where each other might be reliable,
where each other might be likable.
And that's how trust evolves.
They're likable and reliable.
It's the combination of those.
We all have people there.
So we're lacking in trust in our nation.
I mean, according to my purview of what's going on.
So you're saying that rather than building trust
and then creating network,
you're saying that building a network
and that itself then creates trust over time.
No, I think we have to be intentional about it.
There's a lot of business models,
as you've seen, that make money by ripping people apart,
by putting people in smaller communities
and smaller tribes and making money off of them.
Where are the big national programs
to counterbalance that national service?
You can look at different places.
And we should be doing that at the city,
state and national level.
There should always be a,
how are we building consensus?
How are we building consent to move forward?
We can't move forward until we have consent.
What does that mean?
It means everything goes slower, just means it.
There's not a single fracking project
that had they listened to the frontline communities,
they would have moved forward with.
Because people would not accept,
they would not give consent to be polluted
or to expose their kids to cancer
or to risk their water or their air.
You might have gotten 50% of them,
you might have gotten 80% of them,
but 20% of them would know it's a bad idea.
Our model right now just ignores that.
It ignores the impact on them,
it ignores them because they're poor,
it ignores them because they're different
from whoever's making the decision.
And I think that kind of approach,
very practical, very like,
how do we bring people together?
Build back better, the new bills, the COVID.
Where were the opportunities for everybody to be involved?
Where was government kind of leading the way and say,
look, we've got to repatch this broken fabric that we've got.
I'm not seeing those kind of initiatives
on any kind of scale that we need
in order to combat this kind of other models
that are pulling us apart.
Well, here's kind of a dark question.
Don't, before people get involved in networks
in a pro-social way, like you're discussing,
don't they have to first want to be involved?
Because I see bright spots of people
really caring about these issues,
but I also see a lot of apathy.
I don't care, things are too far gone.
I'm just going to focus on my own little thing.
Every network that we say, we don't say,
join the network because it's a network.
Never.
We have this service that we think people like you,
who we're trying to support, would find useful.
It's a value proposition to the user for immediate satisfaction.
You start with that.
You always start with a lot of services.
In the beginning, Facebook was the only thing
that enabled you to share photos or find your high school friend.
Like they were rolling out new services all the time
because they were trying to attract people.
Now, once all the people are there,
they don't have to, when was the last time they announced anything?
You don't have, they come for the people.
So in the beginning of our networks,
we offer blogging tools, insights, campaign services,
all kinds of things that people who are doing the work need and want.
And they'll join the network to get access to that.
They don't want to be in another network.
And then we very subtly introduce them to other people like them,
introduce them to other people that are reliable,
introduce them to the stories of other people.
And that's, give them opportunities to connect.
Make the right thing the easy thing to do.
I guess that's where it's different from like a knowledge community
or knowledge building.
Like it's really got to be what is that person that you need?
Talking points, you need advertising help,
you need outreach assistance,
you need access to polling and opinion research.
Here's my angle on this.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
I think massive energy surplus and complexity
has allowed us to function without community
relative to our ancestors and cultures of the past.
So that our networks today are trying to get either novelty
and distraction or information in order to make profit
or an investment or a cryptocurrency or something like that.
But the networks aren't really about social and human capital,
the way that they once were,
the way that they are in tougher times or in the global south.
And so my deep suspicion and prediction is that before too long
and probably sooner rather than later,
our country, the United States and many other countries
are going to need this social and human capital again.
And it's going to be one of the most important assets that we have.
And so how do we start to build networks in communities
that are still full of people that expect a George Jetson future
of flying cars and super abundance?
And we're not going to need people so much
because we can just stay in our house with our own loved ones
and order stuff from Amazon, etc.
So what do you think about all that?
Yeah, I think one of your guests cited some research
about a study that they did where he broke down his car,
he brought a car that was broken down
and he saw who stopped to help him
and there were other people with crappy cars
and that all the rich cars wouldn't fly by.
I think we're all going to be in crappy cars, so to speak in this.
And you see that, that the thing that the government really didn't do
with Hurricane Katrina and the Cajun Navy did was activation
of volunteers that work as an extension of the relief effort.
In 9-11, for everything that went out,
it was people coming in and volunteering to do with the dig
and look for survivors.
Like we as a species really do well.
I think some of the work around coronavirus
and all the stuff that people came together
to help each other out through that, that's going to scale as well.
And that's going to scale in proportion to the threat to us.
And then I'm sure it's going on right now in Pakistan.
I'm sure that the government has collapsed, companies have collapsed,
but the networks of people are the ones that were saving each other.
So I do think that we are going to continue to invest
in the social capital and the network capital necessary
to deal with more complex and larger and larger problems.
There is this energy collapse is coming at us
and I think networks will take shape in much larger form.
The question is, how can we get those networks
a little bit of life breathed into them ahead of time
so that there's more scaling and not just a sudden
organization at the last moment?
Yeah, I think we can be intentional about it.
We can start working it in, like I said,
working it into all of our government programs,
work it into the programs that companies use.
There's network building is a skill.
It is a repeatable, as we've shown, process.
You focus on the right things and you create network capacity.
That's it.
And you focus on promoting the use of that network
and you create network size.
Like we've been able to repeat that again.
When you look at organic networks, markets,
farmers markets, those kind of things,
there are tons of networks that people invest in and create and those thrive.
So you've mentioned Pakistan and Ghana.
Do networks work differently there than in the global north?
And why?
What has been your experience and observation?
They use different things.
The work we're doing internationally got started
when I was doing a presentation on our work on fracking
or childhood health, I forget which one it was.
And one of the program officers came to us and said,
you know, I've built water systems all over the world.
We've built water systems.
And one of the fundamental differences between the projects
that succeed and the projects that don't succeed
is the engagement of the local network of leaders around the project.
And he's like, I've never seen this methodology.
He's like, what'd you do?
I was like, I've never worked internationally.
You know, I've worked internationally when I was young,
but I haven't really brought this model.
So a big part of it was going to test it in Ghana and say,
hey, look, I make no promises, but I'm really interested
in kind of bringing my A game to this challenge around developing
capacity to advance water sanitation and hygiene
in these new settlements and settlements.
65,000 people, 140 water wells, really low sanitation practices.
And what we found was it was there.
There was a need for a network and that the methodology
that we've been doing has been growing.
So right now, I think we're two years in on that project,
we have the local government is who we're working with there.
They are building a network to manage customer service
around brand new water, sanitation and hygiene initiatives.
And it's the same seven elements.
It's totally different.
Instead of internet, we're using radio and community
information centers, which are these broadcast
megaphones on a tower.
Instead of campaign contest, we're doing things around
sanitation contest.
It's different.
The methodology is solid.
But don't in a situation like that with 65,000 people
and 100 some wells you mentioned, doesn't a network happen organically?
Doesn't it emerge naturally with all those humans?
Or does it need some scaffolding and direction?
I mean, I think people try all the time.
Networks just like organizations or other government programs fail
at an astonishingly high rate in a roll of the dice.
I'm sure the market women are building networks.
The traditional chiefs are building networks.
The government health service is going around
and talking to people and connecting to each other.
I think if you want that to scale, you want it to be something that you can rely on
and you want it to be something that focuses attention
and builds specific capacities to advance wash,
you've got to be a little bit more intentional about it.
And that's what we're providing the training and support for.
I wonder if the emergent networks that naturally happen scale around power,
both social power and energetic energy per unit time power.
And what you're talking about is a more democratic way of creating a network
with your seven metrics.
I'm just speculating.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I increasingly think that ours is just a way to artificially tease things out.
It's an MRI.
We come into a network that's weak or that somebody really wants to expand
because they're putting more projects in because it's critical.
And we're able to look at it in a unique way
and find those specific capacities and increase them.
So I think it's more a tool of analysis.
I think you build a network to shift who's got power
and to shift who's got access to leadership.
If we have done work in the past and stopped
because the people who wanted to build the network
were not really interested in having new voices
and new people lead new initiatives within the network.
What they wanted was a following.
They wanted a broadcast.
They wanted the power of the network
without actually thinking about building a network so other people succeed.
So this is a tangential question, Marty,
but based on your experience in Ghana and internationally,
there is a large material throughput disparity
between the Global North and the Global South.
We could accurately say there,
the Global South is materially disadvantaged relative to the Global North.
But are they socially disadvantaged?
I could argue that the Global South has already been living
the great simplification in many ways.
First of all, why is it so hard to share life learning across the Global North South divide
and what can we materially rich people listening to this podcast learn
about the social capital that is already very healthy
in some of these materially poorer locations?
First, I'd say ask them.
I've been fortunate enough to travel to Ecuador and Zambia and Zimbabwe
and the people there, yes, they have to deal with HIV AIDS
and lots of uncertainties,
but they're happy, healthy, and socially connected.
And every time I go to a place like that
and I come back to fly to Miami or whatever,
I notice this huge social disconnect.
So I'm just wondering if you have any learnings or speculation on that dichotomy.
I think people refine and build what they can.
We're builders as part of our DNA, just like we're growers.
I think you asked that at one point.
And the thing that's there, there's tons of wisdom and answers there.
There have been people working on the very problem that most of the people who listen
to this podcast are really worried about in some theoretical sense,
be like that the wisdom is out there.
I think there's a saying the future's here, it's just unevenly distributed.
That's right.
We owe each other help.
We can learn from those that are suffering from our bad choices
and listen to what they want and what they asked for.
And I think that's really hard because they want different things.
If they're given leadership, they're going to ask for different things
than we're willing to give up.
And we need to come to terms with that.
I don't think there's any differences in making the transition for them versus us.
I think emotionally maybe for people who have had it and then lost it,
but in reality on the ground, there's no difference in the end state.
You can go to Appalachia, you can go to where I grew up in Scranton.
There's been places here that have collapsed and lost 50% of their revenues
and 70% of their energy and all that kind of stuff.
Like it's happened in lots of places.
I mean, Scranton used to be like Silicon Valley.
They were taking money on the ground.
So I guess that's it is just this idea that we're evolving to adapt
like many species to lower energy, less food and harder habitats.
And evolution happens in generational transition.
So I think the idea that we're going to evolve without that kind of giving up foods
and behaviors and other types, like it's not regression of evolution.
It's not devolution that doesn't happen.
It is the process of adaption and evolution.
And cultural evolution.
Cultural, even species, like this whole idea of being networked
or being less dependent on energy is going to be something our species,
we've gotten taller, we're going to get shorter.
Like, I think there's a whole bunch of stuff that's going to happen.
Yeah.
Over time, we're going to get shorter.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I, you know.
So, but I guess what I'm teasing out here is that the importance of networks
and the examples that you've given, Scranton and Ghana and other places,
is we're such a social species that we take for granted.
All this material stuff is correlated to our future well-being.
When in reality, just the networks and building community and daily interaction
with other humans, we've kind of lost that in this late capitalistic society.
And that is a silver lining that we're going to need that again.
And it's going to be messy, but it's going to be possibly great
because we're going to self-organize in the ways that we need to.
Yeah, I think so.
I mean, I think the other thing is you sit on the side of the opportunities
that you have to connect with the, especially you or some of the people that you like,
the ultra wealthy, the people who think that they're insulated from this stuff.
They're not in a better position.
You know, they're not, like they've acquired shit, but there's not a,
it's not a better position.
They're not, they haven't avoided the kind of full ride on this ticket.
I mean, it's a dead, it's a dead, you know, if we were all at the top and like,
oh, you know, Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk are the happiest, most fulfilled,
happiest luxury life ever.
Those guys seem miserable.
They seem miserable.
Their lives are like train wrecks.
Well, I have personal experience with that.
I used to manage money for high net worth individuals on Wall Street and most of them,
not all of them, but most of them were more miserable than the clerks who were making 25
grand a year processing the trades.
And that realization in my job was one of the reasons I left because I was like,
I thought the goal was to be rich and then you would be happy.
It's just, you have more digits and more worries and a lot of time more compulsion
to grow the amount of digits.
So we're built for simple things like empathy and community,
but our current economic system is pulling us away from simple things.
So in your experience, either just in your network building or in your own life,
how do we as individuals resist this poll and plant seeds of community while this
cultural media Madison Avenue siren song of consumption and stimulation is still
loudly singing.
What are some first steps?
Love the victims.
Love the victims?
Yeah, root for the little guy.
Shift who you follow as leaders and you'll shift away from those leader mindsets.
You can't admire what anybody who's making money and fracking is doing if you know victims
of fracking and oil and gas.
Be a cheerleader for the people who are trying to do impossible things.
Be supportive, give them your comments.
Thank them for their work.
Who you celebrate?
It's literally like a small shift in a mental attitude and all of a sudden all the marketing
and all that other stuff really starts to dissipate.
Reality wins 100% of the time.
And if you look at the real thing and you root for the make sure that the groups at the edge
are being listened to and celebrated, that was enough for me to shift my orientation
in a way that I'm proud of and I'm happy with.
I like rooting for the little guy.
So that also dovetails with intrinsic motivation as opposed to external validation.
That if you are intrinsically motivated to root for the little guy on issues that you care about,
that gives you this kind of shield to repel the glitz and glamour that's on our advertisement
and commercials and airwaves.
If you fall in love with the activist, you fall in love with the people who are standing in front,
who are so pissed off and frustrated that they're getting arrested,
and you follow their stories, it's almost impossible to buy into the nonsense and that
accumulation of capital matters because you see the victims.
You see the people who are getting ignored because somebody wants to make a dollar.
So go down that path.
Tell us a story or two from your experience that what's happened along the way that's
delighted you or inspired you about the human spirit and fed your natural optimism.
Despite what's going on in the world, every time I talk to you, you're just fired up and
have a smile and a laugh despite the seriousness of our situation.
Can you give me a couple examples of what's fed you in your experience?
I mean, it's funny because I thought about this and I was thinking about,
am I optimistic?
I was like, no, I'm not optimistic.
I think that's a different thing and things are going to turn out all right.
I don't think that that's the case.
You're committed with a smile on your face.
I'm cheerful.
You know what I mean?
Like I used to go camping a lot with a troop and there was always like rain and nasty weather
and there would be somebody who would just have a grin on their face.
In every movie that you look at, there's people in ridiculous circumstances that still remain
cheerful. Transition happens. People pass.
There's some people that face death cheerfully and there's some that are horrified by it.
I think they both know they have cancer, they both know what's going on.
So I think we slip from that.
That's normal.
I don't think it's consistent all the time.
We get angry or rage or depression, but I think the answer is to commit to being cheerful.
When I think of the good things and the things that give me hope,
I do think of the progress that we've made as a species over a long period of time as a done
know. We'll be done in my lifetime, maybe not, but a lot of the great works were not done in
one lifetime. People worked on them and toiled away and handed it off to the second or third
generation. When you think about that, that makes me okay.
For all of the worst of this, we're 500,000 votes away in Wyoming.
A statehood in D.C. or a million people moving from New York and California to two states would
drastically change the trajectory of the largest economy in the world. That's an organizing
problem. That's not an insolvable problem. If people can go serve in the military for five years
to go be a part of that complex and solving that problem and protect America, why not everybody
do six years in Laramie, Wyoming? Literally, half a million votes drops two Senate seats
and makes them competitive and all kinds of interesting things. I don't think these are
unsolvable problems. The scientist doesn't tell us that they're unsolvable problems.
There's big change that's needed, and I don't think that that's out of reach.
I think the answers are more community-based than political, because whether Democrats win or
Republicans win, we're still part of an energy-dissipating, hungry superorganism that is now
past peak. I worry about which governance models in coming decades will work. I think we need
civic resolve and better community and better networks that are aware of these things, but
a big difference between your work and mine is I'm trying to build awareness. It's factual and
science-based and integrated, but it still is conceptual. You're doing practical things on
the ground. I'm sure you feel this in your work, but how do you move away from worry as you take
action? Worry is just when I sit with the science, when I sit with the comprehensive science from
fields that you do, you get worried. The only way to get out of that is action. There's no
mental way out of that. I think we're consistently being traumatized. I think the youth are being
traumatized by all this stuff. I totally agree. I mean, my coping is I go for a bike ride or I
hang out with my dogs or chickens or go in the forest, but when you say action, what do you mean
by that? I think it's those personal action at the local level. Being a cheerleader, providing
support, looking for who's the victim and how are you helping them out? Who's the new voice?
There's no seed money and you can be an angel investor and not have cash. Who are the people
that are working on impossible things and how do you support them? How do you support them in
giving them connections, giving them access to things? I think what you can do to shift who's
in charge or who's a leader is really important. Maybe we start a network that would be scalable
at different levels in the United States called impossible things that need to happen. No,
but seriously though, so this is a complex question. Perhaps you can offer your expertise.
I'm a teacher and an analyst, not a community organizer. I know very little about that. So
given my organization's work, what advice would you have about the development of seeing what's
happening, what's likely to happen, we're going to have to deal with a lower energy material
through Put Future in the not too distant number of years. How would you think about
developing a network of like-minded people in Topeka, Kansas, in Rockville, Maryland,
in Red Wing, Minnesota, in Fairbanks, Alaska that would be a network that would be self-sustaining
and self-governing? Let's start there. Would you have suggestions?
Well, I mean, I don't know enough about all the nuances of your work, but when I think about
models that work in that way, they're all focused on helping yourself by helping the new person.
When you think about churches, the 12-step programs, shack dwellers, international mutual aid
programs, microfinance programs that you help yourself by getting together to help somebody
else, the newest person. Those are the kinds of loose distributed networks that grow and spread
because it's baked into their core operating piece. So I think really trying to think through
who's it going to attract? When you look at transition networks or you look at those others,
it's like, how do we find the model of ritual, the model of behavior where we're building it in,
that the first thing you've got to do is help somebody else and that in helping them, you're
improving your skill, you're improving your life, you're getting the value that you need out of
this process. So churches, especially local churches, are a prime definition of networks,
in many ways. Some are functional, some are dysfunctional, but they clearly build social
ties, they build communications, they have shared resources. In my neighborhood,
my mother built a network and she could pull together tomorrow if you're like,
we're going to have 60 people over, she can make phone calls and there'd be lasagna,
there'd be entrees, everything would show up, drinks, you can pull that together. Why? Because
she's invested in that network over 40 years in the same house and neighborhood.
So let me ask you this. So we do those things now, but we do them for Green Bay Packer,
Minnesota Viking football games, but we're going to need to do them on much more serious issues
in the not too distant future. How do we build networks? I mean, my work is based on awareness
and sharing information and knowledge, but very soon we're going to need to be action and change
oriented. But given what I've learned from you on this short conversation, people don't really
need to know about oil depletion statistics or the climate scenarios or these things. They just
need to start building networks and the networks themselves, if they exist, will pay dividends
in the future no matter what future transpires. So what blanket advice do you have for listeners
right now? Well, you said root for the underdog, get started on a network locally to help people
that are the victims or in need. I mean, what else can you suggest? Or do I have that mistaken?
No, no, I think you're right. I mean, I think my perspective is cultural capital is worth more
than financial capital. Agree. Because social capital is worth more than energy capital.
As long as basic needs are met. I think those network capitals are a basic need. I've seen it
in examples. They've unhooked water to stay connected. The second or third thing people
ask for when they get off of a boat is the ability to let people know that they're safe,
find out what's going on, look at any refugee camp, their Wi-Fi spots or other piece, and they're
crowded in the Congo. They would go to mass for three hours just to sit next to the generator to
plug in a phone so they can see what the prices are on the fish. We need to stop thinking that
that's an extra. It is part of our super organism now. Well, and it's also that we live in a culture
right now that if you have enough electrons in the bank or linen bills in your wallet, you can
pay for the things that networks normally would give you in our historical tribal environment for
free. But that area may be ending relatively quickly. I think for the shift is how do we
take that to a strategy level? How do we see the Office of Civic Engagement in the White House
actually leading every initiative around how does this program, this investment that we're
making, whether it's a tax break or an incentive program or a field program, how is this building
social ties among people? How are the programs crafted to capture positive network effects?
Because they're not. That doesn't happen. Cities start with it. I think there's some countries
in Europe that are doing some of this stuff. But I think this idea of creating network power
and network capacity and network resiliency among the people in the country is a strategic
investment as much as our roads. And it's actually more important given the size and the nature of
the threats facing us. We had a community organizer as the president of our nation for eight years.
Wouldn't you have thought that some of this network knowledge and scaling it in our nation would have
transpired? Yeah. I think I'm very curious around the thinking on that. You can go to Washington,
DC. I live here. You can go down the Capitol, which is one of the largest tourist spots in the
world. There's no place for people to facilitate discussions with each other. Actually, we don't
use our greatest place to bring people together to talk directly with each other. That seems like
a lost opportunity to me. Is part of that due to the sheer size of 320 million people in our
country and the type of things that you're discussing work better at smaller scales?
I don't think so. But if it's a core problem, if it's as core as the collapse of energy, if it's
as core as the overinflation, why are we not spending more resources? Why are we not listening
to the people who are working on its scale, who are keeping peace? What are the best examples?
That may be India's greatest export. They know how to live alongside wildlife in a
non-destructive way. That cultural knowledge is invaluable. I think there are places where we
can look at it and say, does this scale? I think democracy, and as true as for me, is supposed
to be that. It was an attempt at that. My A-game, what did 20 years of career enable me to see that
I can share with people? It's that these networks are not fuzzy. They're not amorphous. It's not
let 1,000 people, 1,000 things bloom. You can actually be very intentional and with skills,
share the knowledge and apply technique to build an effective network to create social change.
I think that that's the thing that I feel like my career and work has opened me to understand.
We want to have more network managers. We have a free field guide for network managers.
We have that stuff. We give it away. We try and get involved in more projects and helping people
build these networks and build the skills that they need to manage networks.
So wait, you have a free field guide for network managers?
Yeah, it's online.
And so if we had tens of thousands of people around the nation read that and apply it to start
networks in their communities, I mean, this was always why I favored local currencies,
because it wasn't as a replacement to the US dollar and it may not have been the most economically
efficient thing. But what local currencies did is the proximate goal was, hey, we can pay a little
bit of our utility bill or buy these tomatoes. But the ultimate benefit of the local currencies is
it created ways of people to meet each other and exchange something and look in the face
instead of just this disembodied electronic transfer of digits.
That's the exact same thing that's going on with voting. When we grew up voting was
you stood in a line. There was a little neighbor who had volunteered for two dollars and
she checked you in and then you got over to the thing and there was an old guy there who
checked out your thing and you stepped in. It was all manual. It was all manual process run by
people that you know and you could go down and grab them by the shoulder and say, what are you
doing? It created trust in the process, but it was inconvenient. It was slow. The networks
couldn't get their votes tallyed the same night because it was people counting stuff.
So technological networks have suppressed our natural social networks?
No, I'm not saying that at all. I don't think it's an either or. I also know marginalized people
the technological networks are the bread and butter. They're the thing keeping them sane
and they're the thing keeping them safe. So it's not an either or.
Got it.
If you live in a hostile community, your technological network is your network.
Yeah. Okay, Marty, I have some closing questions for you that are a little bit more on the
personal side, although there's been quite a bit of this conversation has been personal.
Given your experience and your cheerful disposition, despite the difficult work you do,
do you have any suggestions for people listening to this on how they can prepare themselves in
their community for what I refer to as a great simplification or an economically more disruptive
and challenging time than our recent decades of experience? How do we meet the future halfway
in your opinion?
I think focus on loving others. We're in a state where it's easy to see how self-destructive the
super organism is and focus on hating it, hating the separating and I think that hating the other
group and I think that's the wrong that's the wrong instinct. I think this idea that you could
withdraw, build your own thing, isolate, cut off your connection to people is not the answer
and that we're facing the end of an era, an all-hours end and move on and sometimes it's hard
to accept that transition, but if we just kind of mourn the loss and then look ahead to what's
next and say this is inevitable, I think that's key. That's key to not being traumatized and this
is traumatizing and immobilizing for a lot of people and it's happening to a lot. When you're
traumatized it requires incredible support to move ahead in healthy ways. When they say hurt
people, hurt people, we're seeing that at a scale we haven't seen so we are the energy to kind of
fix that in our communities, in our social groups, in our families, with our children and I think
we really need to realize that's not just nice words, that's the pathway and I think that's
how we meet this future halfway is focus on that. I agree with that. I don't know how to do it per
se but I agree with what you just said. What about young people? You've mentioned and I agree with
you that young people hearing all of this especially with climate and the longer-term thing because
they're going to be life expectancy 80 years, there's a lot going to happen in that timeline.
What specific recommendations would you have for young humans who become aware of our energy,
environmental and biophysical constraints of our situation? Be cheerful.
But how can if you tell someone to be cheerful, what's the mechanism by which they can be cheerful?
For me it's like knowing that the world is big. You visit any of the vast spaces like Wyoming
or the ocean. The world is going to continue to spin and the world shifts all the time.
That's not going away. No, what's not going away. Change is a lot easier to accept when you also
understand what's not going away. Know that where we are is not good. We don't want this and
what's next, you probably don't want it either. Wishing for stability is not what you want either
as a young person. This is a nightmare. This change is your friend. Something different
is coming and the question is can it be more just? Can it be better? I think that's key.
The other thing that I would say to younger people is power never moves voluntarily. Organize.
We have a lot of big issues. We have the science. We know what needs to be done.
Organize, organize, speak up. That's really important. I think when young people find this,
this whole you run into something like you're not alone and you're not the first. It's really
important. They feel like, oh, I'm the first person to see this and be like, you're not alone.
You're the first. Old folks like us have struggled with this and we're eager to hand it off
because like I said, that I think it's the only Jewish thing. It's not up you to finish the task,
but you're not free to avoid it. This came upon us in our lifetime, which is almost unbelievable
that since 1960s or 70s is when this really emerged. We've been working on it. We can't
avoid it, but we can't solve it in our lifetime. It's just got to be part of their work.
So in addition to the oceans and Wyoming not going away, there are probably a lot of other
things in our current economy and social structure that are not going away that are actually good
things, some of which you've mentioned on this conversation about social networks and human
capital, et cetera. So there are a lot of good things that will probably remain about our daily
lives. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. I mean, the things that are not energy capital, the things that are
not financial capital, the things that are not propped up by either financial capital or energy
capital, that's easy. Art, culture, history, books, you know, like tons of great stuff are gonna,
they're gonna be here. They're not going anywhere. Families. So I don't know you too well, Marty. We've
spoken several times in the phone, but a personal question. What do you care most about in the world?
My wife, my kids, my family, my friends, being helpful, serving others, you know,
I think that's what I care about in the world. I think on the broader sense, it's that other
people have the opportunity to do that as well with equality, you know, like that's...
Well said. Of all the things that we've talked about on this call and on other calls,
what are you most concerned about in the coming 10 years or so?
I'm concerned about that thing about, you know, hurt people, hurt people, that we might see that
rise at scale and that we need to head on and address that challenges as soon as possible.
How do you address that challenge? Do you heal the hurt people before they hurt people?
I think you avoid hurting people. You know, you start investing in the things that help people
deal with what's coming on all kinds of levels and, you know, you set up kind of programs and
business models and things to address those challenges. You know, I think telehealth is
wonderful. I think, you know, scaling out grandma hands programs like they have in Philadelphia.
There's so many kind of really interesting things about...
I don't know what that is.
Oh, this connection that you talked about, there's a program in Philly that community
health workers where they hire older, wiser women to answer non-emergency room questions
for other women in the community. So if you become stuck with a kid at 15 years old and
whether you're a babysitter or it's yours and the baby gets real ziola and you don't, you know,
if you were part of a large extended functional family, you would be able to be like, hey,
my baby has real ziola and that's why their cheeks are red. But instead they rush in emergency rooms
and clog emergency rooms. So these community health workers are there to act like grandmothers.
There's a program in North Carolina where they pay elder, wiser people with some training to
sit on a bench outside psychologist's office to actually stop people from needing to go through
the whole psychology. They just sit there and listen. I mean, there are much more ways that
we can use the network of people that we have to solve our problems. And I think we just need
to be much more creative about that and follow these good examples and scale them.
Is there a list of all these things that are going on like these networks and maybe the...
I mean, I read somewhere that when people see acts of altruism, they are more likely 300%
more likely to be altruistic themselves. Maybe we need examples of these grandma networks and
Philly and to highlight them nationally so other people know that these things exist and they might
think of something that could apply in their own community. I'm just throwing that out there because
I'd never heard of these things. Yeah. No, I mean, I don't know if you watched...
If you watched... I think that was the guy from the office, of course, because I'm from Scranton.
I got to mention the office. The guy from the office did a program. I think it was called The
Good News and it started during the pandemic and he just covered these stories of health care workers
going above and beyond and those kind of things. I don't know if there's a central place. Yeah.
But they're there. They get award volunteer heroes in a lot of communities. Go to your local
volunteers awards dinner. Well, you've kind of answered this next question,
but in contrast to what you're most worried about, what are you most hopeful about in the coming
decade or so given what you see in your work? I thought about it. I listened to some of your
podcasts. I like it. It's traffic jams and you say, why? Why? Why traffic jams?
In the super organism, they don't understand that it's like predictable chaos, guaranteed
uncertainty. Traffic jams move around. I live in Washington and there's a bell way. It's literally
a circle and traffic jams move like an organism. It's literally the cars leaving the traffic jam
are going slower than the cars coming in. There's not an accident. There's nothing that actually
happened. It's just this mass dynamic that shifts that scientists really try and figure out and
cannot. I think when you think about the US, you can think about Black Lives Matter, say her
name, women's rights. We started as this crazy culture. I think America feels really shaky
right now, but good people have been and continue to work to make this the last gasp of hate.
The haters are fighting for their survival under all criteria. The long view is the
internet kind of screwed things up a little bit, but the long view is there's less of that
shit going on. I think that makes me hopeful in the next decade. We may not win on my watch,
but we will win. Internationally, you look at things that happened. I had a friend once who
gave a speech in Atlanta and he said, culture change happens. Everybody's looking at my culture
change. People are the same. Everybody who ever made an ashtray in school raise your hand. Everybody
over 56 years old raised their hand. Everybody made ashtrays in pottery class when they were a
child. Everybody below that age didn't. When you think about growing up, people used to pour oil
down the drain in their local storm drain when they changed the oil in their cars. That doesn't
happen. Culture shift happens and that gives me hope. Internationally, the end of footbinding,
the end of slavery, like Barry the Change was a book that gave me a lot of confidence.
The whole idea that human rights was only invented in 1948. 1948 is the first time that
term starts to show up. There's a book, I think it's by Stanford professor who talked about the
evolution of human rights. That's where I'm hopeful, but again, I'm not always sure that
hope is the right word for me on the environment or energy. I think it's too tied to optimism.
It's more resolve and it's an outlook. I appreciate your sentiment on that.
I usually close with the question, if you were benevolent dictator and there was no
personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing you would do to improve human and
planetary futures? You can answer that, but also I'll give you an alternative option.
If you were the advisor to the government agency you mentioned, the council on civic
engagement or something like that, either one of those, if you had that authority to make changes,
what sort of things would you recommend or do? I would require consent and consensus with those
that are impacted. They demand it. So many of our problems would have been prevented or avoided if
we listened to all and worked towards consent before we proceeded. We work on halt the harm and
like I said, there's not a project anywhere going on hydrogen, carbon piping, all these things that
like people are raising the flags right now. The science isn't done. There's people getting doused,
potentially sick. That would slow everything down. It would just slow everything down and give us a
chance to raise flags about environmental justice, raise flags about pollution. So I would definitely
require consent. You can't just move ahead without consent of those impacted.
Did you see what was announced yesterday? The UK announced that they were repealing their ban on
fracking and whether there's consent or not, they need the energy because their prices are skyrocketing.
So at some point, will we even have consent when our economies are demanding X, Y, and Z?
I don't know. It's an open question. I mean, I think, well, you said no recourse.
So the UK would not be able to do that. War would not happen. Things that
injure too many people would not. Some people would understand like, hey, I got to take some risk
for in order to save other people. That happens all the time. We are a colony
species. That happens. But I think it would force us to think about education and invest in
different ways about where leadership comes from. I mean, you gave Joan $100 million to spend on
her questions. So when you asked Joan this thing at the end, you were like, hey, what would you
do $100 million? They're like, oh, I'd move a million midwives and yoga and cooks and high
school teachers and programmers to like from New York and California to Laramie, Wyoming and Alaska
and then the rest could go to Florida. And with those six Senate votes, I'd give DC a state and
then I'd finally watch America fix itself. I think it would be very doable to win
quite a few just by moving some pawns around. You're much more optimistic than I am that a
democratic leadership would solve our problems. I think our problems go deeper than left or
right. And I think there's a lot of ideas that I philosophically completely agree with the left on,
but our problems are biophysical in nature. And ultimately that's political, yes.
I'm not sure it's a right or left. It's that by remixing populations, World War II,
the great migrations, the remixing populations, you get more sane decision making. If that
sanity just right now happens to be maybe democratic given the behavior and track record
of the Republican for the last six months. On the other hand, there's no way we get on a better
path unless we get some sane sanity in our decision making process.
Fully agree with that. And I don't know how to do that. And maybe building networks is exactly
how we do that. Building networks and mixing populations. Is that what you just said?
Yeah. Yeah. I think that's a really big part of it. You look at the fallout of the WPA program
or even service in World War II, the millions of people that served, they made civil rights
movement. That was a really important point in their organizing. The bus boycotts where we
remixed how people transported was really key in Montgomery to kick it off the civil rights.
It created the much stronger networks among the people working on the issue because they were
now in small cars and figuring out how to get across town and then also doing civil rights
organizing during the thing. It just brought in tons of power, tons of capacity to be able to
create change. We need to do that on a national level, on an international level.
Is there anything else you'd like to offer our listeners closing thoughts, advice, wisdom?
It comes from my mother who had tough kids and at times probably a tougher husband.
And she advises us to focus on what you love. If you focus on what you hate about someone every
day, you will surely fall apart. If you focus on what you love about someone,
you fall more in love every day. And I think her advice has been the strength for her happy
lifetime marriage with my dad. It's been mine as well for 26 years. And I think it's just as
true for our neighborhood, our country, for humanity. And it's hard when things get so bad,
but I think it's important to focus on what you love about your fellow people.
And the natural world, because I love the natural world deeply and that is what I try to focus on
and it does help me. Thank you, my friend, to be continued and we'll put all your information
in the show notes and I will talk to you soon. Nate, thank you so much for having me. It's a
real honor to be here, especially given all the amazing other guests that you've had. I really
appreciate the opportunity to talk with you. May your work scale and be impactful, Marty.
Thanks again. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
