So is a PFOS considered an endocrine disrupting chemical? There's a lot of news on EDCs. Is
that like an umbrella term for all these or are there subcategories?
Probably, yes. That is not really my area, my field. Endocrine disrupting chemicals,
endocrinology, that's super complicated. And there are so many hormones that give so many
signals to the body. But everywhere where these hormones act, other chemicals can interfere.
And PFOS also do that at some point in some way. But I don't know exactly how and where and why.
The reason I ask is you and I have a lot of friends in common who are scientists. And some of our
colleagues have told me that they can make a plausible case that chemical pollution,
endocrine disrupting chemicals can be a bigger risk to human and the natural world futures
than climate change. What do you think of that assessment? And can you speculate on that?
I wouldn't compare them on a scale because there are different dimensions that they act
in parallel. We are under these stressors, under these impacts. Anyway, from both sides and from
other sides as well. There are other stresses. I wouldn't compare them on a scale of bigger.
Because both of them are happening. We are under toxic impacts and we show the population,
humans show the effects. We see them. There are so many non-communicable diseases that have increased
a lot over the last 15, 20 years. And that is caused by, to some extent, certainly by chemicals,
for sure. At the same time, we see all the climate effects. And this year 2022 is a drastic,
I think, turning point probably. And we have seen so much about all the heat waves and droughts
and the impact. So I think we are under all of this now. No, I agree with that. The reason I pose
the question is we have tens of millions of people aware and working on climate change issues,
rightfully so, both for adaptation and mitigation. But we may have tens of dozens of people working
in your sector. It seems to be just widely unrecognized as kind of an existential risk
in coming decades. So I'm just wondering if this goes unchecked and if it's a slow ticking
time bomb of the impacts, both to humans and to other species, what could happen in the next
50 years with the accumulation of these PFAS, endocrine disrupting chemicals, other things?
What do you think about that? I mean, what would be things that would happen? And by the way,
you mentioned humans and our livestock. Are we seeing the impacts of PFAS or
endocrine disrupting chemicals and sperm count decline on nonhuman species?
Yeah. So first point was the number of people working on these problems. And I totally agree,
the chemicals problem, the toxification problem, I think is underrepresented. It's under, it's not
really addressed in the way and to the extent it should be. And there is a, whatever, a bias,
a certain, the picture is too narrow. But of course, on the other hand, if we have many more people
working on chemicals, we will come back perhaps to this later. We also would have to communicate
all of this. And then there may be also an inflammation overflow. We have to learn about
how to handle all these different messages from the different parts of the problem. But I agree,
more people, more resources, more time and money is certainly needed for the chemicals
problem. And I can tell you why in a couple of minutes, that is certainly the case.
Now, what is coming out of this? And I think it's probably what we already see. As I said,
there are all these diseases that have increased, are increasing, and that's probably just going
on like this. So it is all these cardiovascular diseases, it's metabolic diseases, obesity,
it's reproductive problems like the sperm count, the sperm decline, but that's continuing.
So metabolic diseases, cardiovascular obesity could have origins from the chemical
pollutions that we're consuming invisibly? Definitely. Definitely. How so? There's even the
term, there's even the term obesity genes for chemicals that cause obesity. So somehow, again,
that's not really my area, but what I have learned, what I can say here is early in development of
features or even a newborn, I guess it features exactly it is. There are different types of cells
and, for example, there may be bone cells, cells that will form bones, they are reprogrammed into fat
cells. And then you get obese animals that has been done in animal tests and there is,
there were mice and there was one mouse that was normal and there was the mouse that was
treated and that was three times what the size and the weight of the normal mouse. So we can see
that how these cells are reprogrammed and you turn into fat tissue. Trocking. So this is happening
in utero already before they start eating McDonald's or whatever.
Yeah, but then of course, exactly. Later on, we may add on to this first exposure and do more harm
because there are so many hormonal, there's so many changes that are triggered and controlled by
hormones in puberty and later on in life, where these chemicals can again interfere. So that is
an ongoing process and also testicular cancer in young men is something that happens more and more
often and is a signal here. So you see all of these elements of a bigger picture are already
emerging. I think that is something we have to just project into the future as an answer to your
question what's coming out of this chemical pollution problem. So you and I have known each
other for a long time and you've followed my work and I talk about the biological, the behavioral
aspects of why we are in this mess. And one of them is that we're a biological species that
cares about the present more than the future. So a lot of the risks that we see are emotionally
invisible to us. There's nuclear risk, there's climate change risk, but climate we're at least
seeing heat waves and fires in Australia and British Columbia and things like that. So we get
this emotional reminder or glimpse of what's coming but not so on these microplastics unless
there's a news or an interview like this one they're just totally invisible. So it's just yet
another aspect, another cost of our economic system that is fully back loaded that we don't
include in our everyday prices and decisions. Right, I totally agree and there are obvious
reasons for that because as you said it's invisible. These chemicals are not visible
in the water we drink and the food we eat although packaged or processed and packaged
food may contain lots of them. That's what Jane Munke with the Food Packaging Forum does
and we still don't see them. And then secondly really even if we know about or learn about it
what can we actually do because these chemicals are not part of our lives, they are not a moving
part of what we normally do. We have no agency here really. They are in our environment and
our computers, in our food packaging, in our clothes and whatever, but again we have no agency.
We would have to change a lot to create agency for people to be able to decide what kind of
chemical do I want to have and why and how and what not.
