But you work on microplastics, things that are unseen and kind of unquantifiable.
So can you break it down from the top? What is chemical pollution from plastics, especially on
the micro side? And how does this work, this microscopic stuff, does it fall off of little
household items and plastic bottles or just give us a big overview?
I'm happy to do that. And I may go back to that paper about these PFAS because that is a
first starting point that shows what's going on. In that paper, we summarized findings of
different measurements of these PFAS chemicals in rainwater from around the world. And that
was shocking to many people that these chemicals are in the rainwater everywhere in the world.
And they are not just there, but they are there at levels that may even exceed what's now a
health advisory. So they may actually be of concern. So what we find here is chemicals
that are present everywhere, everyone exposed to them, and they may that may be of a health concern.
So I graduated college with a 3.7 GPA. But I got C's in every chemistry class I took. So please
help me out here. It's not my strong suit. How would PFAS or any other chemicals get into the
rainwater? Do they evaporate with water from really there? So they're that small and they go
with the water. Yeah, exactly. These chemicals and many other chemicals that we have to see to
cover in this broad problem of chemical pollution, these chemicals, they outgas from the materials
they are used in. So PFAS are water repellent and oil repellent. They're used as impregnation
agents for textiles, for outdoor clothing, for protective garments, and for many, many
uses of articles that people have in their hands every day. But they don't just stick to that surface,
but they, as I said, outgas. And then they start a long journey. They travel with air with wind,
they are deposited with the rain, they get into the soil, they get into the water,
they move with ocean currents. So they really have a long journey ahead of them. And because
these chemicals have a special aspect of special property, they are super stable. So they have
a lot of time to travel. That's why they get everywhere in the world. But the basic mechanism
is really they outgas and they start that journey and they go around, they circulate in all media.
We call them multimedia chemicals, air, water, soil, vegetation, food, drinking water, and they go
back, come back into our bodies. My understanding is that these plastic jugs last seven to eight
hundred years before degrading. But then what they degrade into probably lasts even longer.
How long do these PFAS last? And what do they eventually degrade into? That is exactly the
problem. And also what caused the big splash. These materials, these chemicals don't degrade
into anything in the environment. They will never go away. The only way for them ever.
Yes, that is shocking, isn't it? I didn't know that. Yeah. The only way for them to
that the levels could go down is that the chemicals dissolve on dilute or dilute in the deeper oceans
because that's a lot of water that can take up a lot of chemicals. But they still won't go away.
They will just go from where we are here, from our immediate environment into the deeper water.
And what will happen in the deeper water over centuries and millennia?
We don't know. Not much. It's cool and dark there. Nothing is going to happen, really, to them down
there. So that's the shocking thing. And that comes from the fluorine carbon bond that these
chemicals contain fluorine bonded to carbon. And if a chain of carbon atoms where fluorines are
attached and that part, this fluorinated chain makes them so special because this fluorinated
chain does not interact with anything. It's water repellent. It's oil repellent. And that makes them
so strong impregnation agents. It also makes them lubricants because they're not sticky at all. They
make things glide easier. So they are, for example, used in ski wax to make skis glide faster.
But of course, that is kind of crazy, really, because then, of course, they go out into the snow
and again start their journey circulating in the environment. So I think ski wax is
a totally irresponsible application of these chemicals.
So what percent of our products have these sorts of chemicals or related chemicals in them?
That's why I want to start from them because they form a certain group and they have this very
special group. And they are about 5,000 chemicals of that type, more or less. Overall, there are
more than tens of thousands. I think it's 300,000 chemicals that are on the market
commercially globally. So many, many more than these PFAS. Of course, they have different properties.
They are not as extreme, but they have all kinds of properties. They may degrade easily.
They may also be persistent like PCBs, polychlorinated biphenyls. They may be very toxic.
They may be less toxic, whatever. But overall, there is a soup of chemicals that are circulating
around us and also within us. And I think that is now the answer to your question. What is chemical
pollution about? It's really about that messy soup of so many chemicals that we don't even,
that we can't really control. And can't see and can't feel in the short run. Oh my gosh.
Right. You have often said that we are energy blind. But of course, we are also chemicals
blind, which is natural. We're externality blind, my friend. Yeah. But also here, it fits exactly.
It's this kind of blindness. Of course, it's not just physical blindness, but it's also mental
externality blindness. I agree.
