This week, I am pleased to welcome Dr. Martin Scheringer.
Martin is a senior scientist at A-H Zurich and a professor of environmental chemistry
at Mesaarach University in the Czech Republic.
He specializes in research on environmental and human exposure assessment and is also involved
in the science policy debate.
Today, we discuss Martin's most recent paper on PFAS, or the so-called forever chemicals,
which are being found to be much higher than his safe levels for humans in waterways and rivers
around the world. We discuss their various health effects, including endocrine disruption.
And more broadly, Martin and I talk about the risks and scenarios of plastic pollution
to planetary futures and what we might do about it. Please welcome my friend and colleague,
Dr. Martin Scheringer.
Good morning, Martin.
Hello, good afternoon, Nate.
Good afternoon, yes. So good to see you in person last week.
Was it last week? Oh, time flies. Yeah.
10 days ago or whatever. How are you?
Good, busy. We are in the middle of a bit of a tsunami of media attention.
So let's get right into that. What are you and your colleagues working on that's getting this
media attention? Yeah, that was a paper, a scientific paper we published two weeks ago,
and that caused a big splash, much more than we had thought. And this is, paper is about what we
call PFAS. PFAS, the name stands for what's called polyimperfluorinated alkyl substances.
And that's a complicated chemical name. The key here is that these chemicals contain fluorine
bonded to carbon. And that makes them very special and very different from many other
chemicals. And that's what this paper is about. Okay, I want to get into the implications of that.
But let's take a step back first, because I think a lot of the listeners here are familiar with
biodiversity loss and climate change and ocean issues. And they're even familiar with the fact
that plastic now outweighs all animals on earth. And they're the ocean Pacific gyre of plastic in
the oceans. But you work on micro plastics, things that are unseen and kind of unquantifiable. So
can you break it down from the top? What is chemical pollution from plastics, especially on the
micro side? And how does this work, this microscopic stuff, does it fall off of little
household items and plastic bottles or just give us a big overview?
I would be happy to do that. And I may go back to that paper about these PFAS because that is a
first starting point that shows what is what's going on. In that paper, we summarized findings
of different measurements of these PFAS chemicals in rainwater from around the world.
And that was shocking to many people that these chemicals are in the rainwater everywhere in the
world. And they are not just there, but they are there at levels that may even exceed what's now
a health advisory. So they may actually be of concern. So what we find here is chemicals that
are present everywhere, everyone exposed to them, and they may that may be of health concern.
So I graduated college with a 3.7 GPA. But I got C's in every chemistry class I took. So
please help me out here. That's not my strong suit. How would PFAS or any other chemicals get
into the rainwater? Do they evaporate with water from really there? So they're that small and they
go with the water. Yeah, exactly. These chemicals and many other chemicals that we have to see to
cover in this broad problem of chemical pollution, these chemicals they outgas from the materials
they are used in. So PFAS are water repellent and oil repellent. They're used as impregnation
agents for textiles, for outdoor clothing, for protective garments, and for many many
uses of articles that people have in their hands every day. But they don't just stick to that surface,
but they as I said outgas. And then they start a long journey. They travel with air with wind,
they are deposited with the rain, they get into the soil, they get into the water,
they move with ocean currents. So they really have a long journey ahead of them. And because
these chemicals have a special aspect of special property, they are super stable. So they have a
lot of time to travel. That's why they get everywhere in the world. But the basic mechanism is really
they outgas and they start that journey and they go around, they circulate in all media. We call
them multimedia chemicals, air, water, soil, vegetation, food, drinking water, and they go back,
come back into our bodies. My understanding is that these plastic jugs last seven to 800 years
before degrading. But then what they degrade into probably last even longer. How long do these
PFAS last? And what do they eventually degrade into? That is exactly the problem. And also
what caused the big splash. These materials, these chemicals don't degrade into anything in the
environment. They will never go away. Every way for them ever. Yes, that is shocking, isn't it?
I didn't know that. Yeah, the only way for them to that the levels could go down is that
the chemicals dissolve on dilute or dilute in the deeper oceans, because that's a lot of water
that can take up a lot of chemicals, but they still won't go away with that. They will just
go from where we are here, from our immediate environment into the deeper water.
And what will happen in the deeper water over centuries and millennia?
We don't know. Not much. It's cool and dark there. Nothing is going to happen really to them
down there. So that's the shocking thing. And that comes from the fluorine carbon bond,
that these chemicals contain fluorine bonded to carbon. And if a chain of carbon atoms where
fluorines are attached, and that part, this fluorinated chain makes them so special because
this fluid chain does not interact with anything. It's water repellent is oil repellent. And that
makes them so strong impregnation agents. It also makes them lubricants because they're not sticky
at all. They make things glide easier. So they are, for example, used in ski wax to make skis glide
faster. But of course, that is kind of crazy, really, because then, of course, they go out into
the snow and again start their journey circulating in the environment. So I think ski wax is in
totally irresponsible application of these chemicals. So what percent of our products have
these sorts of chemicals or related chemicals in them? Yeah, that's why I want to start from them
because they form a certain group. And they have this is this very special group. And they are about
5000 chemicals of that type, more or less. Overall, there are more than 10s of 1000. I think it's
300,000 chemicals that are on the market commercially globally. So many, many more than these PFAS.
Of course, they have different properties. They don't they are not as extreme. But they are,
they have all kinds of properties. They may degrade easily. They may also be persistent like PCBs,
polychlorinated biphenyls. They may be very toxic. They may be less toxic, whatever. But overall,
there is a soup of chemicals that is that are circulating around us and also within us. And
I think that is now the answer to your question. What is chemical pollution about? It's really
about that messy soup of so many chemicals that we don't even that we can't really control.
And can't see and can't feel in short run. Oh my gosh. Right. That is that is the you know,
you have often said that we are energy blind. But of course, we are also chemicals blind,
which is natural. Because we're externality blind, my friend. Yeah. But also here, it fits
exactly. It's this kind of blindness, of course, it's not just physical blindness, but it's also
mental externality blindness, I agree. Okay, so I have a ton of questions for you, professor. So
when these chemicals were invented 30, 40, 50, 60 years ago, the chemists that developed them
at DuPont or the oil refineries or wherever, they had to know that they would degrade a little bit
into the environment. So was it there was let's just optimize profits. And this is such a microscopic
thing, it's not going to be a big deal. Or I mean, how did that thinking unfold or did it? Do
you have any insight into that? Not really. I have asked myself that same question many times.
How did we end up in this mess? I mean, my grandfather was a chemist in the 1930s and
40s. But we never talked about these aspects. And he made dice stuff. But the people who invented
these PFAS substances, I don't know, I think they could have known, but perhaps it was just
the solution to pollution is delusion. So if they remade the 1970s movie The Graduate with
Dustin Hoffman now at the end, and instead of him saying, plastics is the key to the future,
it might have been the impact from plastics would have been the takeaway line. So let me get back
to your recent paper. Are there two phenomena that are being measured? Number one, that the
concentration of PFAS in the rainwater is increasing. And number two, scientists are
recognizing that the safe level of PFAS is actually lower than we originally thought.
Yeah, mostly the second thing. The first thing is, the levels have been more or less constant
at these concentrations that have been measured many times in different parts of the world.
They have not increased a lot over the last couple of years. But what has decreased exactly,
as you said, is the level where we see a concern, because more and more has been learned about
the toxicity of these chemicals. And they do different things, different types of harm to the
body. So let's get into that. So what, what threat do these and related chemicals pose to
our health and functioning, let's say in a 20 to 30 year time frame, how might we be
compromised in ways that can be difficult to recover from, from the microscopic chemical pollution?
There are many aspects, many ways in which chemicals can interfere with the body. So we were
asked in response to that paper, what does that mean now? And the lowest level, these health
advisories that have been published now by the US EPA, by the way, they were, or they reflect
concerns about immune suppression in babies in infants. So these chemicals, PFAS may lower the
formation of antibodies and the immune response. So that is a very subtle effect that is new,
at least to me, that was new to learn that this is something that is really, we have something
we have to be mindful of. Then what they also do is they reduce the sperm count in men. And so we
do have really different effects in different groups of the population that set in at different
concentration levels of the chemicals. So it's not just we are safe. And then we cross a line and we
are under the impact of these chemicals and, and are massively poisoned. It is different. It's
really that different groups of the population have different effects in their bodies already.
And the higher we go in concentrations, the more happens. So at higher concentrations,
these PFAS, they cause liver damage, kidney cancer, testicular cancer,
a loss of weight, metabolism of lipids is disturbed, many things that also happen at higher
concentrations. But you see, there's this kind of cascade of range of things that are caused by
the chemicals. How would one get exposed to higher levels of concentrations if it's just
kind of dilute in the rainwater and such? Yeah, that is, have you watched the movie Dark Waters?
No. That is the answer, because that is about the DuPont case. I think it was in Parkersburg
in West Virginia, where DuPont had a plan where they made Teflon. And to make Teflon, which is
by the way, is also a PFAS, they use or they needed and had to use another PFAS called PFOA.
And then in the process, wastewater, they released these wastewater containing PFOA
to the Ohio River and the groundwater. And it was everywhere in high concentration, much higher
than what we have found or what people have found in the rain and somewhere else, higher levels.
And then that killed the animals of a farmer. The cows kind of dropped dead. I think that was the
start of the battle. Then there was a lawyer, Rob Bilot, and he actually was working, I think,
in favor of Fort DuPont. But then he saw that case of the dead cows on that farm. And then he
was thinking about all that concern and kind of turned around. And then also people had cancer
and all kinds of really serious diseases in these neighborhoods. So it's a dramatic story
and a dramatic fight in battle. And it's worth watching. Dark Waters and Rob Bilot is played
by Mark Ruffalo. Okay, okay. I will watch it. Though, to be honest, I tend to watch science
fiction or comedy now because my whole life is a drama documentary sort of inbox, as I'm sure
yours is too. So is a PFAS considered an endocrine disrupting chemical? There's a lot of news on
EDCs. Is that like an umbrella term for all these or are there subcategories?
Probably yes. That is not really my area, my field. Endocrine disrupting chemicals,
endocrinology, that's super complicated. And there are so many hormones that give so many
signals to the body. But everywhere where these hormones act, other chemicals can interfere.
And PFAS also do that at some point in some way. But I don't know exactly how and where and why.
The reason I ask is you and I have a lot of friends in common who are scientists. And some of our
colleagues have told me that they can make a plausible case that chemical pollution,
endocrine disrupting chemicals can be a bigger risk to human and the natural world futures
than climate change. What do you think of that assessment? And can you speculate on that?
I wouldn't compare them on a scale because there are different dimensions that they act
in parallel. We are under these stressors, under these impacts. Anyway, from both sides and from
other sides as well. There are other stresses. I wouldn't compare them on a scale of bigger.
Because both of them are happening. We are under toxic impacts and we show the population,
humans show the effects. We see them. There are so many non-communicable diseases that have increased
a lot over the last 15, 20 years. And that is caused by, to some extent, certainly by chemicals,
for sure. At the same time, we see all the climate effects. And this year 2022 is a drastic, I think,
turning point probably. And we have seen so much about all the heat waves and droughts and the
impact. So I think we are under all of this now. No, I agree with that. The reason I pose the question
is we have tens of millions of people aware and working on climate change issues, rightfully so,
both for adaptation and mitigation. But we may have tens of dozens of people working in your
sector. It seems to be just widely unrecognized as kind of an existential risk in coming decades.
So I'm just wondering if this goes unchecked and if it's a slow ticking time bomb of the
impacts both to humans and to other species, what could happen in the next 50 years with the
accumulation of these PFAS, endocrine disrupting chemicals, other things? What do you think about
that? I mean, what would be things that would happen? And by the way, you mentioned humans
and our livestock. Are we seeing the impacts of PFAS or endocrine disrupting chemicals and
sperm count decline on non-human species? Yeah. So first point was the number of people working
on these problems. And I totally agree. The chemicals problem, the toxification problem,
I think is underrepresented. It's not really addressed in the way and to the extent it should
be. And there is a bias, a certain, the picture is too narrow. But of course, on the other hand,
if we have many more people working on chemicals, we will come back perhaps to this later. We also
would have to communicate all of this. And then there may be also an inflammation overflow. We
have to learn about how to handle all these different messages from the different parts of
the problem. But I agree. More people, more resources, more time and money is certainly
needed for the chemicals problem. And I can tell you why in a couple of minutes, that is certainly
the case. Now, what is coming out of this? And I think it's probably what we already see. As I
said, there are all these diseases that have increased are increasing. And that's probably
just going on like this. So it is all these cardiovascular diseases, it's metabolic diseases,
obesity, it's reproductive problems like the sperm count, the sperm decline. But that's
continuing. So metabolic diseases, cardiovascular obesity could have origins from the chemical
pollutions that we're consuming invisibly. Definitely. There's even the term,
there's even the term, obesity genes for chemicals that cause obesity. So somehow, again,
that's not really my area. But what I have learned, what I can say here is early in
development of the features or even a newborn, I guess it features exactly it is.
There are different types of cells. And for example, there may be bone cells, cells that
will form bones, they are reprogrammed into fat cells. And then you get obese animals that has
been done in animal tests. And there is, there were mice, and there was one mouse that was normal,
and there was the mouse that was treated. And that was three times the size and the weight of
the normal mouse. So we can see that how these cells are reprogrammed and you turn into fat tissue.
So this is happening in utero already before they start eating McDonald's or whatever?
Yeah, but but then of course, exactly. Later on, we may add on to this first exposure and
do more harm because there are so many hormonal, there are so many changes that are triggered
and controlled by hormones in puberty and later on in life, where these chemicals can again
interfere. So that that is an ongoing process. And also testicular cancer in young men is
something that happens more and more often and is a signal here. So you see, all of these, these
elements of a bigger picture are already emerging. I think that is something we have
to just project into the future as an answer to your question, what's coming out of this chemical
pollution problem. So you and I have known each other for a long time and you've followed my work
and I talk about the biological, the behavioral aspects of why we are in this mess. And one of
them is that we're a biological species that cares about the present more than the future.
So a lot of the risks that we see are emotionally invisible to us. There's nuclear risk,
there's climate change risk, but climate we're at least seeing heat waves and fires in Australia
and British Columbia and things like that. So we get this emotional reminder or glimpse of
what's coming, but not so on these microplastics. Unless there's a news or an interview like this one,
they're just totally invisible. So it's just yet another aspect, another cost of our economic
system that is fully back loaded that we don't include in our everyday prices and decisions.
Right, I totally agree. And there are obvious reasons for that, because as you said, it's
invisible. These chemicals are not visible in the water we drink and the food we eat,
although packaged or processed and packaged food may contain lots of them. That's what Jane
Munke with the Food Packaging Forum does. And we still don't see them. And then secondly really,
even if we know about or learn about it, what can we actually do? Because these chemicals are not
part of our lives. They are not a moving part of what we normally do. We have no agency here really.
They are in our environment and your computers, in our food packaging, in our clothes and whatever.
But again, we have no agency. We would have to change a lot to create agency for people to be
able to decide what kind of chemical do I want to have and why and how and what not.
So you probably know the stats to this when I was reading up before this interview. I think
it's we create 300 million tons of plastic every year and roughly half of that is single use plastic,
drink or eat or use it once and it's in the garbage. So that's the stuff that ends up in the
ocean gyres and in the landfills and it will last a long time. But are those little plastic knives
and forks and bottles? Is there also the invisible outgassing occurring on those items?
Yes, because the plastics contain, in addition to the backbone, the polymer, that is the hard
material, they also contain lots of what's called additives, chemicals that make them more durable,
for example, UV light absorbers, so that the plastic doesn't get brittle and breaks. There are
UV absorbers in the plastic or just dye stuff or flame retardants and plastic softeners and
heavy PVC is 50 percent by weight is phthalates, not PVC, because to make it soft. So 50 percent
will just outgas. Phthalates are very bad, right? They are well known endocrine supplement chemicals
and are bad, yeah, for that reason exactly. So imagine 50 percent of an item of heavy
soft PVC that will go out in the end, be it the first part during its use phase in a human
environment and an indoor environment, but then when it's out there in the outer environment,
then these chemicals just outgas and circulate in the environment.
I'm just looking around my desk here, my podcast desk and I have this, my bike helmet,
I don't know why that's here, but a vitamin bottle and my eyeglasses and the clickers and the thing
for my phone, I mean, there's plastics everywhere. Yes. I mean, you could argue we are living in the
plastocene. Absolutely. So on other podcasts, I think it was an early one with Art Berman,
we discussed how gasoline is one of many of thousands of products that we get from petroleum,
and if somehow miraculously we stopped using internal combustion engines and went totally
to electric vehicles, we would still need to extract the same amount of oil because we have
demand for all those other products. So plastics that come from petrochemicals, if I recall correctly,
are expected to be 50% of the growth in petroleum demand in the coming 20 years. So is this an
example of where we need an input and its demand creates a byproduct like plastics, and then the
demand for the byproduct, in this case petrochemicals, outstrips the demand for the original product,
like high fructose corn sweetener as a byproduct of creating ethanol. Like what if we stopped
gasoline? Could we stop demand for all these plastics? Can the growth in plastics demand
be halted or does the industry world demand for this have its own metabolism separate from the
transportation sector? That was a big bite, but what do you think about that? Yeah, that's a big bite
and a complicated one. First of all, I mean, Art Berman says oil is the economy. So I don't...
He got that from me, by the way, but go on. Okay, that's fair or whatever. But yeah,
can we really do what you said as a hypothesis or as a thought experiment that we stopped using
gasoline? I think the oil part or the fuels part is much more important than the plastics part.
So what you are saying is that the plastics part may take over if we go down somehow, some way
with the fuels part. But I think the fuels part will always be dominant. In terms of amounts,
right now, the chemical industry takes about or uses about 12% of the global oil production.
And the rest is for fuels, for transportation and heating or whatever. Do you know what the
corresponding number is for natural gas, where we get our plastic bags from and other things?
It's probably higher than 12%. Not directly, but it's probably also a fraction like that.
And now, of course, if there is this scenario that the fuels part goes down, then the chemical
industry may want to scale up the plastics or the chemistry part. But I'm not sure about that.
I don't think that's possible even because we need the fuel, we need oil for the economy
in the function of a fuel, not in the function of a feedstock for the chemical industry.
But if it were the way you said, of course, the industry is pushing for that, but I don't,
there's no real need. Plastic is not the economy. We live in a plastics world that is true,
but that is not necessary. We could also live in our current modern life with many other materials
that would be used to make it the items we use in our lives. So plastic is not the economy,
whereas oil is. So what good progress is being made on that alternative
products made with things that aren't come from petrochemicals? Is there a lot of progress
on that, like using that or other things? That's a big concern for me, at least,
and also a very controversial topic because some people say the chemical industry has to
be decarbonized. And I don't really understand or see what that means because,
I mean, the products are made of carbon and could say, okay, we need to get the carbon from
somewhere else. So we grow bamboo or we grow whatever we can take from the fields. But
given the scale of the chemical industry that we have, we would be in massive competition with
food production, or we'd have to just flatten ecosystems and forests and convert them into
agricultural areas to grow the feedstock for the chemical industry. That would be total nonsense.
So I think that avenue is not there. So I think the only way is the chemical industry has to be
scaled down. And then we may still use fossil fuels because it's a smaller amount that we use for
them to make chemicals, or we may also use some biofuels growing what was grown on the fields.
But then, overall, the footprint would be much smaller. With the current size, it cannot be
greened. A couple of thoughts. Help me out here. So if we decarbonize the transportation
sector, we haven't really decarbonized because all that carbon is still in all our entire plastics
and clothes and textiles and everything else. I mean, in order to truly decarbonize, which includes
the things you're talking about, it has to be a smaller scale and we have to really change the
economy dramatically. I mean, just looking around my house and my refrigerator and my pantry,
I mean, how long will that take to change the supply chains and inputs with all the packaging
that's happened? How do we do that?
Yes, nobody really knows. But I think that could be done. That is a smaller challenge compared to
getting rid of fossil, let's call it fossil carbon right now, as a fuel. Because that is the
function. When you have spoken about that a lot, how many people we have are the slaves that work
for us, the energy slaves that work for you. 500 billion per year, roughly, depending on the
assumptions. And that is still what we are standing on, from which we are working on.
And then still given that input, we could still modify our supply chains for everything else.
Again, we don't have to live in a plastic world as long as we have all that energy input and have
our modern lives. So could we go back 50, 80, 100 years to use
glass reusable milk jugs instead of plastic discardable? I mean, certainly the technology
exists, it would be probably more costly. How much of using plastics and throwaway things are just
because energy has been relative to its value, unbelievably cheap, that we just did it because
it was the most efficient and profitable thing. Yes, exactly. Energy and fossil carbon as a
feedstock has been unbelievably cheap. And that's why it's so easy to make everything out of plastic.
But of course, there are alternatives. And I'm not saying I have a solution that would really
imply we would have to rebuild lots of supply chains in the way we make food and we
distribute food and all that. But still, what's possible is, of course, glass. And glass can
be made lighter because it's possible to make glass much harder so that it doesn't break.
And then you can make it thinner and lighter and the energy needed for transport is less.
So there is progress also here. So then we always have to carry around heavy glass bottles that
lead a lot of gasoline or diesel to be transported. That can be changed. And of course, it would have
to be more local or regional. The transport distances would have to shrink a lot. But that's,
for many reasons, that this is going to happen, I think. There are political risks and other
types of risks that now interrupt supply chains anyway. And we have to rethink many of our supply
chains. So why not rethink them in a way that makes life more kind of, yeah, kind of more
regional and more centered around what people actually really need? Yeah, I mean, you know,
I agree with that. So Martin has a longtime collaborator. You understand the premise of
what I refer to as the great simplification that a number of the core systems we depend on are
going to go through dramatic downsizing, change, transformation. Some of those like big international
agriculture are currently very chemical dependent. So given this landscape, what do you see as the
survivors and replacements within that industry, the international ag industry that uses pesticides
and fertilizers and ammonia and products from fossil hydrocarbons?
Yeah, that's another big one. I'm only asking you big questions, Martin.
I see. Yeah, because again, of course, there has been a lot of debate about what is the potential
of, let's say, bio organic food growing and small scale farms and all that. Is that really
possibility for the number of people we have in the world right now? And I would guess that probably
we would need some amounts of fertilizers and also pesticides less than now, less and fewer,
also does fewer chemicals that are used as pesticides and a simplified way of pesticides.
But to have a sufficient yield, I guess, that is still needed or will be needed. But that may
be a gradual process that we have to really think about what are the priorities? How much
energy can we use for what purpose? And one of the purposes will certainly be agriculture and also
probably to some extent fertilizer. Others would then be still transportation and others would
then still be some kind of chemicals that may survive even under much more limited conditions.
What would be the one, two or three single most important chemical products that make our current
world functionable?
I mean, what would you take with you on an island? I would say we need some pharmaceuticals,
definitely. They are essential.
Do pharmaceuticals come from petrochemicals?
Yeah. But historically, of course, not. They come from plants. Plant-based herbal medicine
was the root of modern medicine. But yeah, of course, the current products come from the chemical
industry. But still, I think we need or humans need pharmaceuticals to painkillers and many
things that just make life much better and help us survive difficult situations. So that would be
one brown, one area. Other things would be just chemicals for practical use. So adhesives and
paints and glues and varnishes and chemicals that you need for building houses. So a lot of
simple chemistry that is very productive and useful. And I think all of this is what people would
figure out. They would see what they need and there is, of course, the knowledge. Now, I assume
the knowledge is still there, how this can be made. So there would be a list of things that would
certainly be given priority. And other things would just disappear because the priority is not there.
And of course, as I said, fertilizer and pesticides would also be probably depending on,
of course, where we are and what's grown, what's the crop, what are the conditions and all that.
If I was on Desert Island, the three things I would bring would be the Lord of the Rings trilogy,
my golden retriever and a good sturdy knife. But I get your point.
Yeah, no chemicals, perhaps some chemicals.
Perhaps some chemicals in the book, not in the golden retriever, other than probably the food
I'm currently feeding the golden retriever probably has chemicals in it.
No, as I went as a fourth item, you may have a bag of chemicals.
Right. That's right. So what about pesticides? This may not be your
core focus. But I remember a few years ago, there was this big controversy about Roundup
and how Roundup was now being illegal in Europe. And I forgot who creates Roundup,
ADM or I'm not sure who, but... It was Monsanto. Monsanto.
But then some executives said it's totally safe. I would be willing to drink it directly. And I
don't know if he actually did that or not. But how much of the impact of these intense chemicals
would be immediate if you got exposed to high levels of it? And how much of it would happen
over 20 or 30 years? Or what I suspect you're going to tell me is we don't know because there's no
funding to do such experiments. Okay, that's an interesting one. There are different answers here.
There is a long tail. And that's something we know even without funding for long-term tests.
Because that's from the persistent chemicals that will be there for decades. Going back
to the beginning with PFAS that won't go away. These chemicals will be around and will cause
damage in 20, 30, 40, 50 years. Similar PCBs. PCBs were made mostly in the 60s, 70s, polychlorinated
bifunals. They have now entered the oceans and they're still there. And they cause massive damage
to whales, in particular, orca whales. Orca populations are collapsing because of PCBs.
Nowadays, there was a dead orca found on the coast of Scotland in 2017. There was a report.
And that whale had enormous levels of PCBs in its blubber. And they said that it was infertile.
It was a female. She never had offspring. And they said that the animal died because it was
caught in a net. Normally, they don't do this. They are so intelligent that they can navigate
the nets and everything. And they said in the investigation that it is very likely
that the cognitive capacity or ability of the animal was also reduced by the PCBs,
which is what PCBs do. We know that. So in the same way that mercury concentrates in
larger fish and they tell us not to eat it, it's PCBs concentrate in the larger top of the food
chain. Yeah, exactly. So that's a long lasting footprint that will not go away and that we
know about even today. So that's one answer to your question. What is the long lasting?
Yeah, let me. Martin, we probably want to keep this to an hour and a half, but I think I could
talk to you for five hours on this partially because it's freaking me out. I've been exposed to
this line of thinking, but I haven't actually had a deep conversation like I'm having with you on
this. There's just so much else, but this is, I feel this is far, far more important than our media
and our cultural conversations are. So I just want to keep poking at you when things come to mind.
So getting back to golden retrievers, I did some research that in the 1950s, the average
golden retriever lived to be 15 years old. And I know that's not remotely the case now. Now,
you could argue that it's due to inbreeding or things like that, but some of the comments were
because of the chemicals and the food supply, etc. But just more broadly, I mean, the amount of
cancer in our world, it seems like everyone knows someone that has or has died from cancer
would we know that the preponderance of cancer could be linked to long-term exposure to
chemical endocrine disrupting chemicals, PFAS, PCBs, things that are invisible to us.
Has there been research on that? What can you say about that?
Yeah, I mean, that is the crux anyway of all this chemical and epidemiological research in
connection with humans because what scientists can do directly in the experiment is animal testing.
So they can apply the chemical on the skin or in the organ of the animals and find out what
happens and what kind of cancer it may develop. But then, of course, there's always this question
of what does that mean for humans? And then we only have these associations. So we can go out and
investigate the population, lots of people. That's what they did in the Parkersburg case with
P4 and from DuPont. They had 80,000 people who were all exposed to high levels of P4.
And then they looked at all the confounding factors and tried to take them out of the picture,
these factors. And what they came out with at the end was a list of, I think it's eight or six
diseases that were highly likely, highly likely caused by P4. To such an extent,
highly likely that they could really make a lawsuit and won. So that DuPont had to pay,
I think, $800 million. So that was really very close to not even, you can call that a proof.
It's a philosophical question here. It's not a causal result from a test in a human. It is just
what we see here in people and what we see here at levels of P4 in their drinking water and food.
And if we move everything, we see there are these eight things that stick out.
Cancer, testicle cancer, kidney cancer, I have the list here, and thyroid disease,
ulcerative colitis, high cholesterol, and pregnancy-induced hypotension. That's what
they found as the ones that were most likely caused by P4. But you see, we're kind of hitting
a wall here in terms of final proof. And that's, of course, what the opponents can always say.
They say, oh, there are so many other factors. There could be electro smoke, somebody is smoking,
there could be other chemicals. So there's P4 and there's Roundup. I mean,
perhaps they are always used Roundup in their gardens. And that's where it comes from.
There's not a smoking gun. There's just a lot of smoke.
Right. Exactly. Lots of guns, lots of smoke, and not clear how many bullets come out of what gun.
Right. So which of the bad actor chemical families have really long, wide tails
that will be doing damage a long time from now? Do we know that?
Yeah. I mean, again, the persistent ones, because they don't go away. So again, PCBs and PFAS.
And then the other thing is really that we resupply lots of chemicals that are degraded,
that would go away relatively quickly. But we always make large new amounts of
phthalates and flammage hardens and things that we always resupply. So if you have always a new
carpet, a new car, new electronic devices, you add more sources of these chemicals to your life.
But that would not have to be in to last. That could be stopped. What cannot be stopped is the
ones that just have these long lifetimes and don't go away. And those aren't so much a personal
consumption decision. Those are just living as a part of modern society because they're in the
water, they're in the rain, right? Yeah. Exposure right now exactly is via food, via water,
because they have been released. We cannot take them back. It's there.
So this puts environmental justice at a whole other level, because those areas of the world
that have not been using these chemicals in their industrial economies, just like they've not been
burning fossil carbon to power their industries, but are going to be suspect to higher temperatures
and droughts and floods, these areas of the world. Well, you just wrote a paper that said the rain
water everywhere in the world has two high levels for safe consumption. Is the environmental justice
community being involved in the global plastic endocrine disruption PFAS story?
I think so. I'm not in that community myself. But I think, of course, that they are working
on this and addressing it. But I have tried to make a connection here myself, because
what I have put in the focus of my work is two metrics of the hazard or of the problem of a
chemical. And one is persistence, which means how long will it be there and what is the footprint
in the future. And the other one is what I call spatial range, or you can call it all the travel
distance, something that measures how far a chemical goes, because both of these aspects
directly address the question of environmental justice, because they show how far in space and time
the burden is transferred shifted away from the people who benefit from the chemical.
So I think these metrics, as we call them, are really making it possible to directly open the
door for an environmental justice discussion. So how does chemical pollution interact with
other environmental issues like ocean acidification or climate change? Is there any
additive effect or synergies or combinatories or anything like that?
When the direct impact of where it adds to the problem massively is, of course, biodiversity,
because we have not talked about the chemical stress on humans, but of course, animals have the
same situation or are in the same situation under the same pressure from chemical exposure.
There is insect decline, there's bird decline, there's amphibian decline,
and chemicals play a role in this. They are not the only factor that is clear now,
but they certainly play a role. So sperm decline in animals?
Also sperm decline in animals, exactly. But also decline of populations and of entire parts of the
of the biosphere. You may have seen that the reports about insects that have gone down by 50,
70% by mass. And that's, we don't know exactly why that is, but pesticides are a large
culprit. Yeah, it's also habitat destruction and many factors, but also chemicals. So here we have
a direct influence of chemicals on biodiversity loss. So biodiversity loss, species extinction,
is certainly impacted by or made worse by chemicals. That is one strong link.
There's another one. Do you want to hear that now?
Yes. But I'll just pause and say, you're one of my favorite people. I'm so glad I got to spend
time with you a couple of weeks ago. And I was really looking forward to this because I like you
as a human. And I'm also feeling sick right now from what you're telling me, even though I kind
of knew it. So it's this bittersweet sort of conversation. But yes, please tell me the second
one. Yeah, no, I understand. And I'm sorry. But yeah, I think we have to face it. Yeah. The second
one is a simpler thing. It's just when it gets warmer, chemicals out gas more easily. So we have
So there's a positive feedback that as we warm, there's more chemical pollution.
Right. Basically that. These are the two links I would mention.
Yeah. Okay. So chemicals aren't largely tested by industry for endocrine disruption
effects before releasing them into products and processes, at least historically.
So what in your guesstimate what percent of harmful chemicals or endocrine disrupting
chemicals or any of these categories, which I don't know their names. Do you think we've
discovered and there are people like you testing them versus some out there that are doing harm
that are not even our radar due to lack of funding or research or just unknown. We don't know about
them. Yes, that's another big one. Because there's another abyss here to look into. It's not just
the testing for EDC properties. I mean, I don't know the answer because there's a wide range.
There are some chemicals that are more powerful EDCs and they are more well known and have been
identified because there is similar to known hormones estrogen, for example. And there are
other chemicals that mimic hormones to a lesser extent, but they still have some potency or they
block a receptor where a hormone wants to dock and it can't because that chemical is blocking
the receptor. And this is all gradual. So there are probably hundreds of chemicals that may have
some weak EDC properties. But as you said, totally true. There is no capacity really to test in a
routine way for them for these effects because they are subtle. The testing takes time. It's not
trivial. But the abyss I mentioned is really that the testing scheme that is mandatory before
chemicals can be put on the market is much too narrow. So there are many aspects that have not
been tested for. For many chemicals, for most chemicals even. So most chemicals have been
on the market for decades and we know basically nothing about their toxicity. Not just EDC properties,
but also other properties. They're just no data. And that is a battle that is very difficult because
this has been behind the scenes. Kind of it was a technical discussion between chemical industry,
regulators and scientists. And for quite a while there was I think the idea that this can be overcome
with new testing and new methods and high throughput testing, as they call it, all of that. But now we
see that there are several hundreds of thousands of chemicals on the market. It's just not possible.
It's too many chemicals. And we have to stop that paradigm of risk assessment, I think here. And
have come up with a new scheme that helps us shrink the universe of chemicals on the market.
And to shrink the universe of chemicals on the market, is this just a bunch of isolated academics
like yourself that are studying this with, you mentioned Jane Monkey, who works for a
non-profit organization. But are there government agencies deeply working on this? And are there
dialogues with DuPont and the other major chemical manufacturers? They have to be aware
of the things that you've been speaking of. Has that conversation accelerated in recent years?
Or is it all swept under the rug? It's at the beginning. I think it's dawning to more and
more people, scientists like me at least, but also I think other regulators, they see that.
They see that their regulatory system cannot handle the problem, cannot do the task. So it's
dawning on people that we have to change course here. So it's not something that is kind of,
that's not existent as a discussion, but it's very small yet. And at the beginning,
but it's gaining some attention. And people are just changing, I think their mindset,
at least some people. So there are some discussion papers about how and why risk
assessment, chemical risk assessment has failed, the paradigm that was in use for 30, 40,
50 years even. So I would have some hope that this discussion could gain momentum and try to at least
change the direction, but not yet more. It's difficult to say.
So if personally, I clean up my life as much as is reasonable. No Teflon, I replace glass for
plastic everywhere I can, safe fabrics and furnishings. How much of my endocrine disrupting
chemical exposure am I removing versus the percentage of my EDC exposure that I can't avoid
without moving into a cave and eating grubs or something?
I think you can remove quite a bit. And that's one of the positive notes here. I think that's a
good message. You can remove quite a lot by not having a new car every couple of years that's
full of you can smell it. There's the new car smell. Or the new car smell is you're inhaling EDCs.
Yeah, right, right, right. Tellites and Flemish hardens, whatever it is that is in the plastics
that is in the car, but you do know that smell. That is the new car smell. There is computers with
Flemish hardens. And if you don't have a new computer and iPhone or whatever that you always
have with you close to your face, you can reduce that exposure. Also carpets of certain types,
I mean, modern carpets that may be impregnated with with PFAS or processed and packaged food.
If that's all reduced, then a lot I think is already at least no longer in your immediate
environment. Of course, there's still something that may not be able to kind of move from the
water or so from your drinking water from the tap water. But still, you can accomplish a lot
by by making a drastic change to your personal environment.
My system's mind was racing while you were saying that that if people became aware of
the risks of all these PFAS and EDCs in our everyday materials, there's going to be a big
movement to just having furnishings and flooring with wood. And then we're going to draw down that
resource as an alternative. I don't know the mass balance of wood and how much wood
would kind of grow, could be grown. 2.8%. The volume of our forest every year they grow
depending on where they are 2.6 to 2.8% is the volume that could be extracted and keep the forest
body intact. And that is a tiny fraction in BTU terms of the amount of fossil BTUs we use every
year, a tiny fraction. Yeah, of course. Of course, as a few, that's shockingly little.
But as a material for building your home where it lasts much longer, it is there's a perspective
for you. No, I'm okay. So you teach both at ATAH Zurich and also at
university in Czechoslovakia. I'm not sure how to pronounce that.
Yeah, Masaryk University in Bruno. Yeah. So how do your students respond to hearing about all this?
And is there a difference between Switzerland and Czech Republic?
Not so much. I don't see a real difference. It's, I think what I mostly see in students, but also in
colleagues in members of faculty and other scientists I talk to is people focus on their
immediate work. They focus on their studies as students, on their exams, on their projects.
Scientists also focus on their projects, on their grants and the things they need to do to
their normal lives. So I think there is, to some extent, a healthy response that people withdraw
from these big questions, the big picture discussions, because they are difficult and not
part of our normal life and our normal mindset. So they can't, it's not easy to handle them.
I mean, you and I have been struggling for this for long. We have spent years trying to accommodate
these things as part of our lives and our work. But that is, that is hard. So I see that reaction
that people would try to keep going, which I understand. And I think, as I said, I think it's
even healthy. But on the other hand, of course, this is a problem because we don't speak about the
elephant in the room, which is the crisis and the overshoot problem and all that. And the longer
we don't speak about it, the worse it gets. The elephant in the room is that the room is full of
elephants and the metacrisis. Right. Not just one. Yeah. So what do you see as the communication
information barrier to making progress on this issue? Do just people, more people need to know
about it? Does there need to be infomercials? Or do you have an opinion on that?
Yeah, two aspects here. One is really just what you said, information. But that has to be produced,
has to be created, it has to be made available. And for example, colleagues and I have worked a lot
in the last two, three, four years to argue for an IPCC for chemicals. So we have now reached a
point that at the UN level, there are negotiations starting that such a panel should be, will be
established for chemicals. Because there is one for climate, and there's also one for biodiversity,
and it's very logical and I think useful that there will be one for chemicals as well.
That is something. And yeah, I can show you much more about that process, very interesting process,
very complicated time consuming. But then of course, the other aspect is where does this
information go? How can it be made effective in people's lives? And that's where, what I said
earlier, where do people have agency regarding chemicals? And as long as chemicals are only
the background of our lives, we can't do much, even if you learn a lot about chemicals. And then
even the information may be counterproductive. See, I think we need a different mindset,
more even than just information. Well, as we unpack all the different aspects of the
back loaded costs of our prior 50 years, economic system, there is a sense of it's too much,
I don't want to hear about it. And I think we're leading with the stick instead of the carrot. And
ultimately, I think we have to design a different way of interacting with each other and with
consumption and with the natural world. And I don't think we're going to do that out of fear.
I think we're going to do it out of this is how I choose to live a different way. And I'm going to
avoid the consensus trance of following what everyone else is doing, stand by my principles and
live this way. But I don't think there are any, we all have a foot in both worlds. And it's very
difficult to extricate ourselves from the many tentacled chemical and hydrocarbon consuming
any midding super organism that we're part of now. That was more of a statement than a question.
Yeah, I like the tentacles exactly. It is tentacles that that's really hard for us to
yuff. So you've listened to many of my podcasts, you know, at the end, I'm going to ask you some
personal questions more broadly about your outlook on life and what you think about. But before I
get there, let me really put you on the spot, Martin. If you were to oversee this future IPCC of
chemicals, swing for the fences, what are some of the things that we really need to do and could do
to minimize this aspect of our future risks that of PFAS, PCBs, endocrine disrupting chemicals,
the lot? How would you, how would you frame that problem and response?
Look at the IPCC. The IPCC is important, has been important all the time, but of course,
it can't do wonders. So in the end, this is an information mechanism. It's a platform for
information sharing for building consensus for identifying uncertainties. It's a lot about science
and the process of science, how, what we understand. And of course, as a scientist, I would love to be
in that role. I can clearly say, but I'm not sure that really, it really would help us actually
solve the problem. It would certainly have a strong, it could make a strong contribution
by providing much more of the older information that we are lacking right now. And then we would
then ask for people to just generate that information, do the testing, create the data,
put them all together, create the bigger picture. I think in alternatives, in scenarios of how many
chemicals actually need to be used. Right now, there's a big discussion about something called
the essential use concept. So what are the essential use of chemicals? And what are the other ones
that we can drop? These kinds of conversations, I would try to trigger to stimulate. But again,
look at what the IPCC has accomplished and what it has not accomplished.
Two things there. I think we could do the same thing for fossil hydrocarbons. I mean,
there's a difference between cost and price and value. Price is what consumers pay. Cost is what
the oil companies pay to extract and refine it out of the ground. But the value is what
it's providing to society, which is orders of magnitude more than the price or cost. And so
there are certain uses that are vital over a millennial timeline, and we're just pissing it
away because it's nearly free. I'm sure you could make the same case for many of the chemicals.
Does such a hierarchy exist that if you take 100 products that are made from petrochemicals,
that maybe these five are critical and these 10 are largely useful and these 85 could be done away
with? Does that already exist? No, it doesn't exist as a list like this. I think that's exactly
the right thing to ask, totally. It would be a very, very interesting discussion to have,
and we would get very different lists probably, but then there could be even an intersectional
overlap of these lists, and there could be a core part where the list would even agree. It would be
very interesting to learn. So taking a step beyond the potential IPCC of chemicals,
what if you were benevolent dictator and had some simple choices to make on reducing these
risks to society? What would you do? I'm afraid I can't step out of my shoes as an academic.
Even as a dictator, I would go for information, but I would probably run a campaign,
so with advertisements that tell people about all this in a way that is not just dry and scientific
information, but really makes the connection to their lives and tells them the story about what
could be done and how it could be improved. That would be a huge thing to do, and if I had the
means for that, I would go for that. Moving on to the personal questions part of the podcast,
Martin, do you as a teacher have specific recommendations for your students or young
people globally listening to this podcast who have become aware that they are going to live
their lives during a period of energy, environmental, biophysical constraints and risks to,
what encounter to what our cultural stories are telling us? What advice do you have for young people?
I would say, and I try to do that also where I teach in some conversations that may happen
in between, I would say that people should try to accept these many or look at these many
elephants in the room and make these problems and these topics part of their work at least or their
academic thinking and learning. So they should accept that this exists, all of this, and that
they should talk to each other about it and to their teachers and they should form groups,
networks, they should write about it, they should try to insert it into the communication or the
conversation, sorry, in the wider society. I mean like fighters for future, but perhaps more
targeted as a learning process, not just as to be activated as an activist and try to force
something, because I think it can't be forced, we have seen that, because we are all in that boat
and we can't force something against ourselves, we have to learn and we have to, and young people
at the universities I think are the right ones to talk to about all this and they should learn
to talk about it among themselves and then develop a critical mass of people who can think about
all that better than we can right now. Well, we and our colleagues are trying to breathe life into
that conversation, so thank you. Exactly. So more broadly now, I'm not just talking about
plastic pollution, but do you, someone who's very fluent in the poly crisis and how all these
things fit together, do you have any suggestions for people listening to this show and how they can
prepare themselves and their communities for the coming great simplification,
how we as individuals and communities might be able to meet the future halfway?
Yeah, similar to what I would do with the students, I will also, again, because we have that silence,
there's this big void, there's this silence, people, even people who privately would say,
I am scared, something is going very wrong here with many things, they don't say that openly,
so again, I think the first step has to be the people talk about this more openly and somehow
make it real, because right now it's not real, it's an unreal conversation in most parts of the
society. Not here, you have facilitated this and I think it's a great piece of work that you're
doing here with these conversations, because that is what we need, I think, really that people can
talk about it in a structured and organized way without being just overwhelmed or be in their
partisan camps and fight each other and all that. So again, I would ask people to learn and talk and
then, of course, form their networks and try to be more resilient, but we don't know what's coming.
I like that answer, thank you. What do you care most about in the world, Martin?
I mean, the obvious answer is, of course, my family, because that's what we all do, we have our
immediate environment of people we love and we live with and I try to help my two sons to
navigate the mess in which we all are. But beyond that, I think it's much more, because we are all
connected to the bigger world and when I see all that destruction, the clearing of forest, the
Amazon destruction, the fires, the dying animals, but also dying people, people starving,
I find that extremely hard to take and to handle. So I think we are all connected with the world as
a bigger environment and now this is going, this environment is being destroyed and so we all,
I think, we care about that, but how can we emotionally really handle that? I don't know,
that's a big challenge for me. I've long worried that people that are empathic like yourself,
in contrast to people who don't really care about those things, will burn out because it is a big
cross to bear to not only see this in the news, but to professionally work on it like you do every
day looking at statistics on the environment and pollution, etc. So on behalf of our listeners,
I thank you for your work. Again, outside of plastics per se, but what one issue in the world
are you most concerned about just in the next decade or so?
I think, yeah, we can see it right now in a way, it's war and it's the
progressing, the accelerating, runaway climate disasters. Again, I think this year is a turning
point probably and things are accelerating a lot and that will cause a lot of migration,
upheaval and whatever is coming, that is disturbing.
And in contrast, in your communities in Switzerland and also in Czechoslovakia,
what are some things that you're most hopeful about in the coming decade or so?
I think people can adapt if they have to, if they really have to, if they see what's coming and
what's in front of their eyes or if it really changes their life or threatens their lives,
they can adapt to a lot of things. So I would hope for this adaptation on the smaller scale,
I would hope for common sense, normal people having common sense and coming up with common
sense reactions to all the mess, because right now we don't see common sense reactions, we see
political action that is not common sense. Perhaps it's impossible at that level.
I think we're going to need realists in society and we're going to need better governance somehow
and I don't know how to get there, but governance kind of underpins all of our
issues that we discuss on this show. So I'm going to give you one more chance,
not on chemical pollution, but if you were just generally benevolent dictator on this planet
and there was no personal recourse to your decisions, what one thing would you do
to improve human and planetary futures?
I think there's not one thing I could do here, I could find, because that would be the magic bullet.
So you would delegate your benevolence to someone?
Correct. I would consult with people.
Well, I mean, with you.
I mean, is it possible that we could have some sort of technocracy in the future that there was
a council of elders that had scientific exposure that was politically neutral or bipartisan
that could convene on these poly crisis risks? Is that something that our culture is capable of?
In principle, yes, I think, yes. We should go, we'll hope for that.
Thank you. We should do this more often and I appreciate your time and your work. Do you have
any other closing thoughts or advice or wisdom for our listeners?
No, I would just like to thank you that I could speak here and also for the entire
great simplification work that you do that I think is wonderful and important and please keep going.
I intend to and we will have lots of resources and show notes for people that want to take a
deeper dive into your work and the more broad risks and research on endocrine disrupting chemicals,
PFAS and other chemicals. Thank you so much, Martin. Enjoy your weekend and let's talk soon.
Thank you. Bye.
