This may not be your your core focus, but I remember a few
years ago, there was this big controversy about roundup, and
how roundup was now being illegal in Europe. And I forgot
who creates roundup, ADM, or I'm not sure who but it was one
center, one center, but then some executives said it's totally
safe, I would be willing to drink it directly. And I don't know
if he actually did that or not. But how much of the impact of
these intense chemicals would be immediate if you got exposed
to high levels of it? And how much of it would happen over 20
or 30 years? Or what I suspect you're going to tell me is we
don't know because there's no funding to do such experiments.
Okay, that's interesting one. There are different answers here.
There is a long tail. And that's something we even know, we
know, even without funding for long term tests, because that's
from the persistent chemicals that will be there for decades.
We go back to the beginning with PFAS that that won't go away.
These chemicals will be around and will cause damage in 20, 30,
40, 50 years. Similar PCBs. PCBs were made mostly in the 60s,
70s, polychlorinated bifunals. They have now entered the oceans
and they're still there. And they cause massive damage to
whales, in particular, orca whales, orca populations are
collapsing because of PCBs nowadays. There was a dead orca
found on the coast of Scotland in 2017. There was a report. And
that whale had enormous levels of PCBs in its blubber. And they
said that it was infertile. It was a it was a female if she
hadn't she never had offspring. And they said that the animal
died because it was caught in a net. Normally, they don't do
this. They are so intelligent that they can navigate the nets
and everything. And they said in the investigation that it is
very likely that the cognitive capacity or ability of the animal
was also reduced by the PCBs, which is what PCBs do. We know
that. I mean, the amount of cancer in our world. It seems
like everyone knows someone that has or has died from cancer.
Would we know that the preponderance of cancer could be
linked to long term exposure to chemical endocrine disrupting
chemicals, PFAS PCBs, things that are invisible to us. Has
there been research on that? What can you say about that?
Yeah, I mean, that is the crux in a way of all this chemical and
epidemiological research in connection with humans, because
what people, what scientists can do directly in the experiment
is animal testing. So they can apply the chemical on the skin
or in the organ of the animals and find out what happens and
what kind of cancer it may develop. But then of course,
there's always this question of what's got what does that mean
for humans? And then we only have these associations. So we do
we can go out and investigate the population, lots of people.
That's what they did in the Puckersburg case with P4 and from
the point, they had 80,000 people who were all exposed to
high levels of P4. And then they looked at all confounding
factors and tried to really take them out of the picture,
these factors. And what they came out with at the end was a
list of, of I think it's eight or six diseases that were highly
likely, highly likely caused by P4. In such to such an extent,
highly likely that it was they could really make a lawsuit
and one so that the point had to pay I think $800 million. So
that was really very close to not even a you can call that
a proof. It's a philosophical question here. It's not a causal
result from a test in a human. It is just what we see here in
people and what we see here at levels of P4 in their water and
drinking water and food. And if we move everything, we see there
are these eight things that that stick out cancer, testicle
cancer, kidney cancer, I have this here, and thyroid disease,
ulcerative colitis, high cholesterol and pregnancy induced
hypertension. That's what they found as the ones that are were
most likely caused by P4. So that's, but then you see, we are
we're kind of hitting a wall here in terms of final proof. And
that's of course what the what what the opponents can always
say. They say, Oh, there are so many other factors. There could
be electro smoke, somebody is smoking. There could be other
chemicals. So there's P4 and there's roundup. I mean, perhaps
they are always used roundup on their in their gardens. And
that's why where it comes from.
There's not a smoking gun. There's just a lot of smoke.
Right. Exactly. Lots of guns, lots of smoke and not clear how
many bullets come out of what gun. Right. So which of the bad
actor chemical families have really long, wide tails that
will be doing damage a long time from now? Do we know that?
Yeah, I mean, again, the persistent ones, because they
don't go away. So again, PCBs and PFAS. And then the other
thing is really that we resupply lots of chemicals that are
degraded that would go away relatively quickly. But we always
make large new amounts of phthalates and flame retardants
and things that we always resupply. So if you have always a new
carpet, a new car, new electronic devices, you add more
sources of these chemicals to your life. But that would not
have to to be into last that could be stopped. What cannot be
stopped is the ones that just have these long lifetimes and
don't go away.
