So you probably know the stats to this. When I was reading up
before this interview, I think it's we create 300 million
tons of plastic every year and roughly half of that is single
use plastic. Drink or eat or use it once and it's in the
garbage. So that's the stuff that ends up in the ocean gyres
and in the landfills and it will last a long time. But our
are those little plastic knives and forks and bottles? Is
there also the invisible outgassing occurring on those
items?
Yes, because they the plastics contain in addition to the
backbone, the polymer that is the hard material, they also
contain lots of what's called additives chemicals that make
them more durable. For example, UV light absorbers so that the
plastic doesn't get brittle and breaks. There are UV
absorbers in the plastic or just dye stuff or flame
retardants and plastic softeners and heavy PVC is 50% by
weight is phthalates, not PVC, because to make it soft. So 50%
will just out gas.
Phthalates are very bad, right?
They're well known and look like something chemicals and bad.
Yeah, for that reason. Exactly. So imagine 50% of an item of
heavy PV soft PVC that will go out in the end be it the first
part during its use phase in a human environment and in indoor
environment. But then when it's out there in the in the auto
environment, then these chemicals just out gas and
circulate in the environment.
I'm just looking around my desk here my podcast desk and I have
this my bike helmet. I don't know why that's here. But
vitamin bottle and my eyeglasses and the clickers and the thing
for my phone. I mean, there's plastics everywhere.
Yes, I mean, you could argue that is we are we're living in the
plastocene.
Absolutely.
So on other podcasts, I think it was an early one with art
Berman, we discussed how gasoline is one of many of
thousands of products that we get from petroleum. And if
somehow miraculously, we stopped using internal combustion
engines and went totally to electric vehicles, we would still
need to extract the same amount of oil because we have demand for
all those other products. So plastics that come from
petrochemicals, if I recall correctly, are expected to be
50% of the growth in petroleum demand in the coming 20 years. So
is this an example of where we need an input, and its demand
creates a byproduct like plastics, and then the demand for
the byproduct in this case, petrochemicals outstrips the
demand for the original product, like high fructose corn sweet
sweetener as a byproduct of creating ethanol. Like what if
we stopped gasoline? Could we stop demand for all these
plastics? Can the growth in plastics demand be halted? Or
does the industry world demand for this have its own
metabolism separate from the transportation sector? That was
a big bite. But what do you think about that?
Yeah, that's a big bite and the complicated one. First of all,
I mean, I art Berman says oil is the economy. So I don't
you got that for me, by the way, but but go on. Okay, that's
fine. Fair or yeah, whatever. But yeah, can we really do what you
said as a as a hypothesis or as a thought experiment that we
stopped using gasoline? I think the oil part or the fuels part
is much more important than the plastics part. So what you are
saying is the plastics part may take over if we go down
somehow some some way with the oil with the fuels part. But but
I think the fuels part will always be dominant. In terms of
amounts right now, the chemical industry takes about or uses
about 12% of the global oil production. And the rest is for
for fuels for transportation and heating or whatever we use.
Do you know what the corresponding number is for natural
gas, where we get our plastic bags from and other things, it's
probably higher than 12% not directly, but it's probably also
a fraction like that. Okay. And now, of course, if there is
this, this scenario that the fuels part goes down, then the
chemical industry may want to scale up the plastics or the
chemistry part. But I'm not sure about that. I'm not think I
don't think that's possible even because we need the fuel, we
need oil for the economy in the function of a fuel, not in a
function in the function of a feedstock for the chemical
industry. But if it if it were the way you said, of course, the
industry is pushing for that. But I don't, there's no real
need plastic is not the economy, we live in a plastics world
that is true, but that is not necessary. We could also live in
our current modern life with many other materials that will be
will be used to make it the items we use in our lives. So
plastic is not the economy, whereas oil is.
So what what good progress is being made on on that alternative
products made with things that aren't come from petrochemicals?
Is there a lot of progress on on that like using other things?
That's a big concern for me, at least. And also a very
controversial topic, because some people say the chemical
industry has to be decarbonized. And I don't really
understand or see what that means, because I mean, the
products are made of carbon, and could say, okay, we need to get
the carbon from somewhere else. So we grow bamboo or we grow
whatever we can take from the fields. But given the scale of
the chemical industry that we have, we would be in massive
competition with food production, or we'd have to to just
flatten ecosystems and forests and convert them into into
agricultural areas to grow the feedstock for the chemical
industry, that would be total nonsense. So I think that that
avenue is is not there. So I think the the only way is the
chemical industry has to be scaled down. And then we may
still use fossil fuels, because it's a smaller amount that we
use for them to make chemicals, or we may also use some biofuels
growing what was grown on the fields. But then, overall, the
footprint would be much smaller. With the current size, it
cannot be greened.
