So can you just give an overview of the environmental,
ecological threads within Christianity
and other religions, especially in the Eastern religions?
Sure.
Well, I was going to begin with.
Is that an impossible question?
No, no.
It actually follows from the first.
Because what we were trying to do at Harvard
is exactly answer Nate's questions in our own.
In other words, there was no field of religion and ecology
25 years ago.
So we were trying to establish a field that
would explore what these religions had to say
on the environment.
And we also wanted to encourage a force
on the ground of projects of carbon-based audits of churches
and synagogues.
So there's a theoretical and a practical side of ideas
and action continually flowing through this.
And what we discovered in the religions,
where we had both environmentalists and scholars
and practitioners, this wonderful fusion,
what we did discover, there's enormous resources
in all the world's religions.
Some people will highlight indigenous traditions
or Buddhism and so on.
But really, all the religions have something to say.
And if I could begin with Christianity,
because that was the largest conference,
it's the largest religion in the world, 2 billion people.
One of the key things is we've begun in biblical studies,
more than begun, well-established,
the research on Genesis.
So on text, reinterpreting dominion as stewardship,
as creation care, not as overseeing and exploiting.
So texts had to be reinterpreted.
In Islam, it's a notion of trusteeship
for the whole community of life, a beautiful word,
trusteeship.
And then, again, we come to Christianity and theology.
So now we've got robust eco-theologies
of the sacredness of creation.
On our website, there's enormous numbers
of books and articles published on this,
and divinity schools and elsewhere are using this.
And then even liturgies.
There's liturgies, now, a season of creation
to celebrate creation.
There's an earth mass that was done in New York with Paul
Winter for 20-some years, bringing in the animals,
and so on.
So fantastic changes in liturgy are beginning to happen.
And then this flows into ethics, because we have not really
had an ethics for the more-than-human world.
It's very human-centered, both in our philosophy
and our religions.
So now we have eco-ethics, a whole new field
in religion and philosophy.
And one of the most important developments from that
is that it's not just social ethics now.
It's ethics for the environment.
So it's moving towards eco-justice
that combines a sense of care for the earth
and care for humans.
So this new synthesis is hugely appealing
to young people, environmental justice and eco-justice.
Whether they're religious or not?
Oh, definitely.
Definitely, because environmental justice
actually began with the Christian communities
here in this country, in Warren County in North Carolina.
And we've just had the EPA create a whole new section
on environmental justice.
But it was the religious communities in minority areas
that pressed for this, in the Cancer Alley in Louisiana
and on and on and water issues.
But I want to say why these ideas are
moving into practice very rapidly with these traditions.
And that's the really hopeful sign.
So in the institutional changes, you
have these energy audits.
You have measuring carbon footprints.
And religions around the world have
some of the largest institutional footprints
of schools, of educational places,
and certainly of places of worship and so on.
So as they change, that's going to be a major shift.
As well, they have financial leverage.
The divestment and investment in sustainable energies,
again, the religious communities are all over this.
They started socially responsible investment
because they wanted their pensions
to be in responsible areas.
So we have now $40 trillion in divestment
from fossil fuels, for example.
And a third of that is from the religious communities.
It's quite astonishing and continues
to be a powerful moral force.
And finally, there's all kinds of restoration projects
that religious communities are working on.
Wangari Nathai, for example, who won the Nobel Peace Prize
in Africa, was both a Christian and indigenous.
And those roots contributed to her tree planting,
the Green Belt Movement in Kenya, which won a Nobel Prize.
She was empowering women.
She was reforesting and so on.
And of course, that has spread in so many communities.
And River Cleanup is an easy thing to do,
even in urban settings, and religious communities
are doing that, and restoration projects.
Inner-city issues of water, Flint, Michigan, Jackson,
and so on, religious communities are very involved
on the ground in these kinds of issues.
I'm going to get back to that,
but I want to highlight something you said a few minutes ago.
Again, Mary Evelyn, we are friends,
but I know just the scratched surface of your topic,
so forgive some naive questions.
But while you were speaking, I just
looked up on trusty Google here, Genesis 1.26,
God bless them and God said to them,
be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it,
and have dominion over the fish of the sea
and over the birds of the air, and over every living thing
that moves upon the earth.
Well, from an ecological systems perspective,
I would say mission accomplished.
We have done that.
But what you're saying is now religious scholars
are changing the perception of the text,
of the words, of what was meant by subdue and dominion.
And then a related question is when
these words were written by humans all those centuries ago,
the earth was not full ecologically.
And so it was a different environmental time
when those things were written.
What do you think about all that?
Well, that's exactly to the point.
And that's why I led with the dominion passage,
because everybody comes to that.
So you're hitting the really hot spot.
And we have to remember, though, other religions
have a passage close to that.
And when we get to the Asian religions,
I'll illustrate that.
So this text is definitely being reinterpreted
and widely reinterpreted.
It's not to say some people don't still
hold to this very anthropocentric human-centered view.
And it is a problem.
There's no question.
And it's not only religions that have had this view.
Economics, progress without limits,
all of that has contributed to it.
So dominion has its footprint in many, many fields
of politics, economics, society as a whole.
But in reinterpreting, we like to say,
we're reinterpreting text, re-evaluating
their present circumstances and relevance,
and reconstructing.
And that has gone on in religions forever.
That's why theologians, that's what they do,
biblical scholars.
We've had to do it for women's issues.
We had to do it in rethinking slavery and civil rights.
And that's why, to me, I was very involved
in the civil rights movement in the 60s in Washington DC
and so on, in anti-Vietnam War.
And when the religious leaders came on to say,
segregation, separate but equal, is not justice,
is not, we had an apartheid society.
So the moral force to change a worldview
is gonna still take a long time.
But that's what we're trying to inflect into, infuse
into, be in dialogue with environmentalists,
policy people, like yourself.
What is this energy transition?
But I wanna come to your other really important point
about population.
And I think that is still a hot button issue for everyone.
People in the environmental movement don't wanna touch it.
The women's groups are very sensitive about it and so on.
But there was a project at Marquette led by Dan McGuire
to look at population issues, natalism and fecundity
and so on in all the world's religions.
So even that is being reexamined and so it should.
My husband and I don't have children
and we feel our students are our children.
I feel the same way.
I think there's many, yeah, many ways to nurture, right?
So we face many cultural conversations right now
where the quiet part cannot be said out loud
because it's too jarring with the roles
and rules of institutions and government people.
With respect to population and ecology,
our current pope deeply cares about animals and nature
and climate change.
But the quiet part out loud is the population thing,
which I don't think he can really go to
because how do we protect current nature
and future generations of nature
with an ever-growing human population
and an economic system that grows?
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Yeah, and I want to kind of move past this topic,
which is a really, really important one,
but it can be a blockade too.
But I think the pope has said,
people, it wasn't exactly a felicitous phrase,
but people shouldn't just reproduce like rabbits
if you recall, he said that quite a few years ago.
I didn't know that, but go on.
Yeah, yeah, he did, he did.
So he understands this issue and almost,
most religious people that I know
understand this to be exceedingly important.
Again, I want to put it in the context though,
limits to growth got so much pushback.
Economic limits to human consumption,
there's all kinds of limits that we have not dealt with.
And that problem that you're putting your finger on,
but I just wanted to extend it,
is maybe one of the key problems
that religion may in the longterm help with,
because they've understood limits
that materialism, consumption,
consumerism will not satisfy the human
and something deeper is needed.
