You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins. That's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy, the environment, and our society.
Together with scientists, experts, and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's-eye view of how everything fits together,
where we go from here and what we can do about it as a society and as individuals.
On last week's podcast, Ayan Mahmood, a Muslim, remarked how there is an environmental ethic embedded in the Quran, which I didn't know.
This week, religious scholar Mary Evelyn Tucker unpacks this from an academic perspective.
What do the roots of environmental ethics and religions all over the world look like?
How could we learn from the uniting power of religion to help us organize and mobilize against impending global crises?
Mary Evelyn directs the forum on religion and ecology at Yale University and is also the co-creator of the film Journey of the Universe.
She is, as you're about to find out, infectious in her grace, warmth, and positivity.
I hope you enjoy this conversation with religion ecology scholar Mary Evelyn Tucker.
Mary Evelyn Tucker, great to see you.
Wonderful to see you, Nate. Looking good.
You as well. We have interacted over the years just in anonymous, not anonymous, but blind emails.
And I never met you in person until this summer.
And now when I'm seeing your face, it doesn't conjure up religion and ecology, which is going to be the topic of today.
It conjures up Danish beer and vegetarian food.
Exactly.
That's the mental memory I have of our great conversations this summer.
I love it.
So let's get right into it.
So 25 years ago, you founded the Forum for Religion and Ecology, first at Harvard and then now at Yale.
So was your interest and passion always at the nexus of ecology and religion?
Or did you begin with religious studies and then realize this critical dimension of faith in our relationship with nature and that faith is a powerful tool for being shepherds of the planet, etc.
In any case, maybe tell us about the project, why it was started, what it is influenced, and what's going on with the project now.
Great. Well, thanks for a chance to talk about something close to my heart and my energies.
And my husband, John Grimm and I were trained as historians of religion in our PhD work.
He specializes in indigenous traditions and minus Asian religions.
And, you know, we came to a post-10-year moment and we said, what can we do that might be efficacious, helpful for the environment?
We're not scientists, we're not policy people, but we have studied these religions with extraordinary teachers.
And I mean all the religions and we've traveled widely in Asia and elsewhere to study them on the ground.
So we went up for a sabbatical to Harvard at the Center for the Study of World Religions.
We said, let's start some conferences that would examine what the religions have to say.
We began with Buddhism, you know, interdependence, interbeing, as Thich Nhat Hanh likes to say.
And Confucianism, which is my own specialty, what's the common good?
What can we contribute to the society as a whole?
So we began with those two conferences.
They were challenging, but wonderful conferences.
Someone came up to us and said, you've got to do this for the rest of the world's religions.
I was like, oh my goodness.
And so we began a series of 10 conferences there and 10 volumes.
And this was very collaborative work.
You know, I want to say that over and over again.
And everyone to a person said yes, they'd like to come, they want to contribute, and no one was paid anything, you know, except their airfare, etc.
But it was this sense that if we've studied these traditions, not just for our CV and some new article and so on,
but it's how they can be partners with this huge environmental movement that was already well underway.
So we like to say in some ways religions were late, but necessary, and science alone is necessary, but not sufficient.
So we need this moral force.
We need this engagement of values and worldviews.
So we examined the texts and the history and the traditions.
And I can stop there, but go on there.
We, you know, established a website and we've got online courses and so on.
But that's the framing, the beginning, the foundation of this work, if you will.
Yeah, well, we will highlight all your course material and your website in the show notes.
So I think I told you this the last time we spoke.
I grew up Catholic and I got my environmental education, though not on Sunday mornings at church,
but on Sunday evenings watching Marlon Perkins Mutual of Omaha Wild Kingdom.
I honestly don't even know what the ecological teachings in Christianity are and how those compare with other religions.
The other thing is a mutual colleague, Ayan Mahmoud, I just did a podcast with her who instructed me
because I'm naive in these things that there is an environmental ethic in the Koran
with the trees and the animals and the creatures, which I was also unaware of.
So can you just give an overview of the environmental ecological threads within Christianity and other religions,
especially in the Eastern religions?
Sure.
Is that an impossible question?
No, no, it actually follows from the first because what we were trying to do at Harvard is exactly answer Nate's questions and our own.
In other words, there was no field of religion ecology 25 years ago.
So we were trying to establish a field that would explore what these religions had to say on the environment.
And we also wanted to encourage a force on the ground of projects of carbon based audits of churches and synagogues.
So there's a theoretical and a practical side of ideas and action continually flowing through this.
And what we discovered in the religions where we had both environmentalists and scholars and practitioners, this wonderful fusion.
What we did discover, there's enormous resources in all the world's religions.
You know, some people will highlight indigenous traditions or Buddhism and so on.
But really, all the religions have something to say.
And if I could begin with Christianity, because that was the largest conference, it's the largest religion in the world, two billion people.
One of the key things is we've begun in biblical studies more than begun well established the research on Genesis.
So on, you know, on texts reinterpreting dominion as stewardship as creation care, not as overseeing and exploiting.
So texts had to be reinterpreted in Islam.
It's a notion of trusteeship for the whole community of life, a beautiful word, trusteeship.
And then again, we come to Christianity theology.
So now we've got robust ecotheologies of the sacredness of creation on our website.
There's enormous numbers of books and articles published on this and divinity schools and elsewhere are using this.
And then, you know, even liturgies, there's liturgies now a season of creation to celebrate creation.
There's an earth mass that was done in New York with Paul Winter for 20 some years and bringing in the animals and so on.
So fantastic changes in liturgy are beginning to happen.
And then this flows into ethics, okay, because we have not really had an ethics for the more than human world.
It's very human centered, both in our philosophy and our religions.
So now we have eco ethics, a whole new field in religion and philosophy.
And that one of the most important developments from that is that it's not just social ethics now, it's ethics for the environment.
So it's moving towards eco justice that combines a sense of care for the earth and care for humans.
So this new synthesis is hugely appealing to young people, environmental justice and eco justice.
Whether they're religious or not.
Oh, definitely, definitely because environmental justice actually began with the Christian communities here in this country in Warren County in North Carolina.
And we've just had the EPA create a whole new section on environmental justice.
But it was the religious communities in minority areas that pressed for this in Cancer Alley in Louisiana and on and on and water issues.
But I want to say why these ideas are moving into practice very rapidly with these traditions.
And that's the really hopeful sign.
So in institutional changes, you have these energy audits, you have measuring carbon footprints.
And religions around the world have some of the largest institutional footprints of schools of educational places and certainly of places of worship and so on.
So as they change, that's going to be a major shift.
As well, they have financial leverage, the divestment and investment in sustainable energies.
Again, the religious communities are all over this.
They started socially responsible investment because they wanted their pensions to be in responsible areas.
So we have now $40 trillion in divestment from fossil fuels, for example.
And a third of that is from the religious communities.
It's quite astonishing and continues to be a powerful moral force.
And finally, there's all kinds of restoration projects that religious communities are working on.
You know, Wangari Nathai, for example, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in Africa, was both a Christian and indigenous.
And those roots contributed to her tree planting, the Green Belt movement in Kenya, which won a Nobel Prize.
She was empowering women. She was reforesting and so on.
And of course, that has spread in so many communities.
And, you know, river cleanup is an easy thing to do even in urban settings and religious communities are doing that.
Religious restoration projects, inner city issues of water, Flint, Michigan, Jackson and so on.
Religious communities are very involved on the ground in these kinds of issues.
I'm going to get back to that, but I want to highlight something you said a few minutes ago, Mary Evelyn.
We are friends, but I know just the scratched surface of your topic, so forgive some naive questions.
But while you were speaking, I just looked up on trusty Google here, Genesis 126.
God bless them and God said to them, be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it.
And have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the air and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
Well, from an ecological systems perspective, I would say mission accomplished.
We have done that.
But what you're saying is now religious scholars are changing the perception of the text of the words of what was meant by subdue and dominion.
And then a related question is when these words were written by humans all those centuries ago, the earth was not full ecologically.
And so it was a different environmental time when those things were written.
What do you think about all that?
Well, that's exactly to the point.
And that's why I led with the dominion passage because everybody comes to that.
So you're hitting the really hot spot.
And we have to remember, though, other religions don't even have a passage close to that.
And when we get to the Asian religions, I'll illustrate that.
So this text is definitely being reinterpreted and widely reinterpreted.
It's not to say some people don't still hold to this very anthropocentric human centered view.
And it is a problem.
There's no question.
And it's not only religions that have had this view, you know, economics, progress without limits, all of that has contributed to it.
So dominion has its footprint in many, many fields of politics, economics, society as a whole.
But in reinterpreting, we like to say we're reinterpreting texts, re-evaluating their present circumstances and relevance and reconstructing.
And that has gone on in religions forever.
That's why theologians, that's what they do, biblical scholars.
We've had to do it for women's issues.
You know, we had to do it in rethinking slavery and civil rights.
And that's why, to me, I was very involved in the civil rights movement in the 60s in Washington, D.C. and so on in anti-Vietnam War.
And when the religious leaders came on to say segregation, separate but equal, is not justice, is not...
We had an apartheid society.
So the moral force to change a worldview is going to still take a long time.
But that's what we're trying to inflect into, infuse into, be in dialogue with environmentalists, policy people, like yourself.
You know, what is this energy transition?
But I want to come to your other really important point about population.
And I think that is still a hot button issue for everyone.
You know, people in the environmental movement don't want to touch it.
Women's groups are very sensitive about it and so on.
But there was a project at Marquette led by Dan McGuire to look at population issues, natalism and fecundity and so on in all the world's religions.
So even that is being reexamined and so it should.
My husband and I don't have children and we feel our students are our children.
I feel the same way.
Yeah, many ways to nurture, right?
So we face many cultural conversations right now where the quiet part cannot be said out loud because it's too jarring with the roles and rules of institutions and government people.
With respect to population and ecology, our current Pope deeply cares about animals and nature and climate change.
But the quiet part out loud is the population thing, which I don't think he can really go to because how do we protect current nature and future generations of nature with an ever-growing human population and an economic system that grows?
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Yeah.
I think the Pope has said, wasn't exactly a felicitous phrase, but people shouldn't just reproduce like rabbits if you recall.
He said that quite a few years ago.
I didn't know that, but go on.
Yeah, he did.
He did.
So he understands this issue and most religious people that I know understand this to be exceedingly important.
Again, I want to put it in the context though.
Limits to growth got so much pushback.
Economic limits, limits to human consumption, there's all kinds of limits that we have not dealt with.
And that problem that you're putting your finger on, but I just wanted to extend it, is maybe one of the key problems that religion may in the long term help with because they've understood limits that materialism, consumption, consumerism will not satisfy.
The human and something deeper is needed.
If you know my work about the great simplification and how we're going to have to respond as individuals and as communities, there's a lot of overlap with what Jesus was saying.
I mean, it's about community and not possessions.
It's about belonging, not belongings.
So these insights have been known for a very long time with our forebears.
Yes, exactly.
And you know, I want to pick up Josh, your point about Pope Francis, because his encyclical, Laudato Si, is, according to Bill McKibben, one of our great environmentalists, the most important document of the 21st century.
And in part, because again, what you're pushing towards and highlighting, which I'm grateful for, because that document is the first one to bring together what I was speaking about earlier, that we have social justice in many of the world's religions.
We have environmental concern from the science community and policy community, but these have not come together.
And that's true even at our school of the environment here, where environments strong, divinity, social justice.
But finally, what that encyclical did was put forward what he calls an integral ecology, where the key motto is cry of the earth, cry of the poor, this eco justice.
And that came out of a book in our series on ecology and justice by Leonardo Boff, Brazilian theologian of some note.
And that's the title of his book.
And it was because Thomas Berry said to him, our teacher Thomas, he said, Leonardo, we can't save people or help the poor without healthy ecosystems and so on.
So that conjunction of people and planet is now gaining traction, again, both in theory and in practice, and that's a huge contribution of that encyclical.
And all the world's religions, by the way, have made statements to affirm it.
Our dean here had us do an incredible public seminar on it even before it came out.
So there's been a great deal of interest in that document, which is beautifully written.
Amitav Ghoshli, a leading literary figure in India, highlights it at the end of his great derangement book and so on.
So there's lots we can build on from La Dato Si, care for our common home.
Just a personal question. In all of our years of emailing and interaction, you are one of the most gracious, kind, respectful, nice people that I've ever come across.
Were you always that way or did that happen when you started reading religious texts and such?
Oh, that's a very dear question. You know, I don't know exactly.
Exactly. My grandfather was a diplomat. He was a professor at Columbia of European history.
He was asked by Roosevelt to be our ambassador to Spain in the Second World War,
and that is diplomacy on a huge level because of Franco and the Germans and so on.
So diplomacy was a very important thing in our family. Both my grandmother and mother were very, very gracious,
and sometimes they had to tame me a little bit because of my strong political views.
But, you know, working in academia, where you know the frustrations and the silos are always going to be present,
I have to be that way, but I've got a great sounding board in John Grimm with every meal we're talking about.
How can we do this? What's the next stage? He calms me down.
Excellent.
It keeps me balanced.
Excellent.
So getting back to what you were saying, you mentioned Catholicism and the Laudato Si.
What is the environmental ethic or the teachings in some of the other major world religions?
Well, thanks for that question because, you know, I left the U.S. after the 60s when Nixon was elected,
and I went to teach in Japan with great disillusionment, by the way,
and worry about our democracy, frankly, just as we are now.
And I wanted to kind of seep, dip myself into the culture and the religions and practices of Japan,
and it was terrific, and in a college you learn so much from the students that way.
So I began practicing Buddhism, Zen Buddhism, Kyoto, none of these places were touristed like they are now.
So Buddhism, for example, is a tradition where it has a deep sense of interiority calming
so that you can actually feel and sense the interbeing of all reality, the interdependence,
which is their fundamental teaching.
So there's no static self.
We are constantly in relationality with everything.
Now, it's a fantastic teaching and it has a lot to offer our environmental movement.
So they don't say it as such, but it's a systems ecology kind of lens.
Beautiful.
I would say that's exactly right.
And Joanna Macy, one of the great systems ecologists, was trained in Buddhism, too.
So she puts this together all the time.
That's fabulous.
And the other tradition that really grabbed me from East Asia is Confucianism,
because when I came back to the States and began studying with Thomas Berry and Columbia,
with his friend Ted Berry, he was a Confucian scholar.
And I was like, Buddhism is terrific and it's still important in my life.
But I wanted to also know what is the social and political and educational teachings
where you can actually make change in institutional change.
And Confucianism has that.
It's probably affected more people over time than any other tradition,
just because of the size of the population and the antiquity of the culture.
So Confucianism has this magnificent and very simple, clear idea
that we are part of the cosmos, earth, and humans.
We complete that process.
We are responsible minds and heart of the universe, which is really a beautiful idea.
Students love this.
And concentric circles put us in this relationality to family, society, education, politics, nature,
and the cosmos itself.
Everything that we cultivate in ourselves, spiritual, moral, but also educational,
affects this larger concentric circles, mutually affecting.
So the cultivation, I'll stop here because I love this tradition,
but the cultivation of the individual is for a larger common good.
It's not for your nirvana, your salvation.
It's to be in communion with, in connection with in an efficacious way.
And it's why education is so important in the Confucian tradition.
So relative to Christianity, Buddhism is by definition less anthropocentric?
It's a great question.
The way one of the great Confucian scholars puts it is anthropocosmic.
It's an anthropocosmic tradition that puts us in these dynamic living ecosystems
and the beauty and extensive space of stars and galaxies and so on.
So you can see a connection to evolution and our film and journey of the universe,
last showing had online 77,000 people listening to it
because they have already a cosmology that's coherent with evolution and so on.
So how we put these together is also of great interest to us.
How many people are Buddhist or generally Buddhist in the world roughly?
Do we know?
Gosh, that's a great question.
I don't know if I could say 15% because of course it's all over Asia.
By the way, the religions in China are coming back in great force.
There's huge numbers of Buddhists.
There's even Christians in China now.
What do you mean they're coming back?
Okay, so when Mao took over, he wanted to get rid of all traditions.
Buddhist Confucianism and some people felt Confucianism was holding China back
from modernity and so on by some of its ideas.
Like all religions, they've got progressive and conservative notions.
So Mao wanted to wipe out religions.
There was burning of books and all kinds of things.
Anti-intellectual, intellectuals really suffered.
But now, since the 80s, when religion was declared possible and so on,
there's a huge resurgence of Confucianism, for example.
Many philosophy departments in China are keenly interested in reexamining it
because they're not so interested in Marxism per se.
They want to see what it is that their traditions have to offer.
So there's a movement called ecological civilization in China.
I've been to many conferences on this topic.
And against great odds,
because China has become a huge consumption society
and a huge exploiter of natural resources and so on,
and the Belt and Road project all across Central Asia and into Africa
is the largest industrial project in human history,
of which Americans know almost nothing.
But the counterpoint to that, again, is this effort,
and it's towards limits and culture and cultivation and values.
Is this revival of Confucianism?
They have, they're teaching it in their schools now.
They're literate with their classics, which had been lost.
And this revival is not just on the horizon.
It's right now. It's quite fascinating.
I don't know that we could ever eradicate a religion.
I think it's in our DNA to have strong beliefs and strong community,
and so that self-organizes somehow around a community of beliefs.
Yes?
Yes.
Yes.
And if I could just affirm that, and your word DNA is so perfect, Nate,
because Du Wei Ming, one of the great Confucian scholars,
a teacher and colleague of ours,
who was at Harvard all through our conferences,
and then he went back to Beijing,
to Beijing University to set up an institute for humanities,
and he's been part of this revival.
Huge spokesperson.
And he calls Confucianism the DNA.
Not only of China, but it's all across East Asia,
Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore.
They're all imprinted with these values that I described,
a family and society and a common good.
So you can't eradicate this, right?
And the other example would be, again, this is more complex,
but the Orthodox traditions, not only in Russia,
but the Greek Orthodox tradition.
One of the great leaders in this movement of religion and ecology
has been Bartholomew.
It's called the Green Patriarch.
And he's the one who's led eight conferences on water issues,
bringing together scientists, policy people from the EU,
the UN, religious leaders.
And he says, Earth is icon.
Earth is sacred.
And he says, what we are doing are crimes against creation.
This is ecological sin.
And he's a very good friend of Pope Francis in this.
So you watched my Creatures United video from last week.
Yes.
So based on what you're saying,
it almost seems like that message that the natural world is sacred
will be way more effective coming from a religious tradition
than from a scientific one
to change people's minds and hearts and behaviors.
You know, that video is so beautiful.
The pictures, your words, carefully chosen, beautifully spoken,
all the statistics, it's a marvelous and hugely important video.
And as I said, you know, our friend Tom Lovejoy,
who invented biodiversity, he would have loved it.
He and E.O. Wilson just passed away in December,
as we know, around Christmas time.
But this was so close to their heart.
So I want to just say some scientists would use this language.
Certainly Tom Lovejoy would.
And it's very important, even that you used it in that beautiful video,
because it says the language of what we value,
of what gives us awe and wonder and beauty,
it's not just over there with the religions.
It's a human response to this extraordinary biodiversity.
So I think, and this is where we need the extension of ethics,
you see, to include the value, intrinsic value,
ecosystems value, all kinds of new valuing for species.
Not to get too far down sidetrack,
and I don't remember the exact quote,
but E.O. Wilson, in social conquest of Earth,
had something along the lines of the one thing
that can never be reconciled in the human sphere
is the clash or the dissonance between religion and science.
But it almost seems on the environmental issue
that we are discussing,
and that the Pope wrote about in Laudato Si,
and the world is becoming more aware of,
that we do need such a merger of religion and science,
at least on that issue.
Yes, well, absolutely.
And of course, this is a thank you for the very important question.
This is a long-term discussion.
Steven J. Gould at Harvard used to say,
there's two magisteriums, you know, separate, not equal,
and that's part of the issue.
I mean, I think the hierarchy that's been established in academia,
science and engineering on the top,
and everything else, especially humanities,
way at the bottom, has not really helped this conversation at all.
And I'm not saying it's simple.
I don't have an answer in a box,
but maybe we can talk a little bit about Journey of the Universe
as an attempt to go beyond that kind of dualism and silo mentality.
So Journey of the Universe is a film that you created.
Right.
So it's a film.
It's a book that Yale published in their science division.
It's a series of online courses.
It's a website.
It's a newsletter.
And in some ways, it's a movement among people
who are trying to have that sense of the unity,
of the extraordinary gift of science
in understanding ecosystems much less galaxies and stars.
So it's affirming scientific knowledge and approaches.
But it's also saying, you know, we are meaning-making animals.
We are dreammakers.
Imagination lights us up.
Look at the response to the web telescope.
Scientists were weeping.
Why?
Because it's all wonder, beauty, mystery,
dare we say, deep mystery.
And a scientist years ago said, you know,
I love your film, Journey of the Universe,
in that fusion of all wonder, beauty,
and a suggestion of meaning.
And he says, but I can't talk about beauty in my class
or all our wonder.
I'm like, why not?
You see, this is part of the problem.
So my co-writer and the narrator is Brian Swim,
who has a degree in mathematical cosmology
and physics of the early universe.
And he spent 10 years studying the science of evolution
from stars and galaxies down through geology,
biology, and the human.
And he did a book with Thomas Berry called The Universe Story,
which is the first to say, this is a narrative.
This is a story.
All societies have had creation stories.
So let's look at this as our story.
And Berry said, we need that new story.
So then we made it into a film.
It was on PBS for three years.
It's on Amazon and a little book.
That's very poetic, I would say.
And that's the project.
I can talk lots more about it.
But I hope it will be helpful and useful to people.
It's inspired a lot of our students,
because one was here in my office,
and he starts to read a passage from Journey of the Universe,
and he starts to weep.
And he says, now I know where I belong,
which is where we end the movie.
We belong here.
We've always belonged here.
So that sense of alienation, dissonance, dismemberment
that a science-religion mentality leaves us with,
that it's all random, purposeless, meaningless, mechanistic,
reductionistic.
Have a nice day.
Where does that leave us for the work that we need to do
and be inspired to do?
That's the question.
OK.
So, Mary Evelyn, we were recently together
at a polycrisis conference,
talking about all the aspects of the human predicament.
What sort of insights does your lifelong study
of comparative religions offer
with respect to our current polycrisis?
Wonderful question, and quite a conference it was.
Well, I think we have the science on climate,
many, many other issues.
We have lots of policy papers and ideas and think tanks.
We've got law, the legal system, even though it works slowly.
We've got new green economics emerging.
We've got technology that's really emerging,
and you know that well.
So the transition is in place in certain ways.
But I still feel this a sense of norms, values,
a moral force is not quite there.
And that's partly why we can't get political action too,
because we're very stuck.
But if we can somehow go deeper and say it's a question
of where is the true transition going to come from?
And everything is driven by the way people think,
feel, act, and their worldviews.
Every society is saturated with worldviews and values.
That's why religion and culture interact all the time.
So we need this new synthesis.
We need to come out of our silos.
And we very much need the science and policy people to say,
we can't do this alone.
I can give you examples certainly of this,
a rainforest group that emerged after the Norwegian government
felt after 12 years and $4 billion of assistance
for protecting rainforests,
they couldn't do it without the human and values piece.
And this emerged at a Vatican conference on Laudato Si.
The rainforest action people were there, the NGOs,
the Norwegian government environment and UNDP,
our religion and ecology group,
and they went back to the Norwegian government and said,
we need to form an Interfaith Rainforest Institute,
IRI, Interfaith Rainforest Institute.
And from that has come an amazing partnership
where the leading stewards of the forest,
indigenous peoples are highlighted,
protected from human rights abuse,
and the voices of other religions
are coming in as partners in this work.
So it's the first of its kind
that's leading with the science of forest deforestation
and so on, an ecosystem disruption.
But it's saying, who are the people who have lived there
for centuries?
Traditional environmental knowledge
and their spiritual worldview is critical
to the future of these regions.
And so that collaboration in the Amazon, in Indonesia,
and in the Congo has created on the ground working groups
to bring together science, policy, religion,
worldviews and so on in remarkable ways.
So is it possible that there could be
an Interfaith ecological movement?
In my experience, people that are religious
kind of accept it that there are other religions,
except for atheists, they're kind of a separate group.
But could there be an Interfaith ecological movement
like you were just describing?
Is that possible on a much larger scale
than you just mentioned?
Definitely, and people are proposing this actually.
So it's a great question.
You know, there's been groups who,
Religions for Peace is an international group
and now they're doing peace in the environment.
Everyone's moving into this space.
It's a United Religions Initiative
and people have called for a UN type of movement of this sort.
So the good news is what we, with many collaborates,
have tried to identify is what are the resources
in each one of the world's religions
and indigenous traditions,
but also this multi-religious movement
that has emerged, frankly, in the last 60, 70 years.
You know, before even Vatican II,
there was a sense in the Catholic tradition
there was no truth outside of Catholicism.
That has shifted hugely.
Interreligious dialogue has grown
between all the world's religions
and now panels wouldn't even be possible
on this topic of the environment
without representing as many of the world's religions
and, you know, realistically.
So that is an extraordinary new movement
of interreligious interfaith dialogue
on the fate of the planet.
We have said for years there's nothing more important
for religions coming together
if it's not for the intergenerational justice
of all species, of all life.
So it is pulling communities forward
that formerly we're not even talking to each other.
Well, to me, you mentioned earlier
the importance of meaning.
To me, that is the meaning,
is the sacredness of our one blue-green planet
that is rotating.
Yes, exactly.
And I just love that
and that's why your species video is so important.
You know, another example of this
is in the Middle East
there's a group called Eco-Peace Middle East
and they're working with
the Abrahamic traditions, Judaism,
Christianity and Islam
on the Jordan River
and all kinds of water issues in the Middle East.
They've proposed a blue-green plan
which Tom Friedman, New York Times
reporters picked up on and so on
and we had a conference in Rhodes
a few years back
where we had representatives of all these religions
and other academics
who are specialists in the region
and it was amazing Nate.
It was the first time
Israelis and Muslims
had been in the same room for some of them
and it was this human connection
over, oh my gosh, what's going to happen
if we don't have water, etc.
So it's coming together
leaving some of the political divisions behind
and it's an extraordinary movement there.
So the groupish nature of us
from an evolutionary perspective
and the tribal nature
is kind of cooperation
within the group
and competition between other groups.
So it's almost like in an economic story
we're competing with other tribes
or other nations for resources
but maybe
if we view the natural world as sacred
that might be something
that we could unite around
that's not a competitive way.
Yes, exactly, exactly
and water is just one huge example of this.
I mean the rivers in India are considered sacred
and yet they're polluted.
We did a conference there on the Yamuna River
and went down to the birthplace
of Krishna, Vrindavan
where religious leaders
are trying to work on this issue
and we also worked with hydrologists
at Terry University in Delhi
and it was so interesting.
Again this personal connection, Nate
the scientists in Delhi
all of a sudden on the second day
we're talking about their ashrams
and their religious practices
and they left behind their scientific
so-called objectivity
and something new emerged
and they were like weeping
with this conjunction
that still has a long way to go
but it's a conjunction that's possible.
So on Coursera, Mary Evelyn
you have many online classes
on religion and ecology
and in the intro
on your website you offer
some teaser questions
which I'm just going to ask you briefly here
and perhaps you can share
just a short answer or thought.
One of the questions is
what orients and grounds humans
Well from my view
it's the cosmos, it's
earth and our human role
that's what many religions
have said and it's what orients me.
What motivates and inspires us?
A sense of belonging
to something larger
and participating in that
sense of dynamic
living ecosystems that we can
hopefully restore, work with
and with the energy
is energy systems
air, water, soil
and so on.
How can we make sustainable energy?
We're working in alignment
with these ecosystems to do that
so wind power, water power
and so on, solar power
it's all using the powers
of earth
for a more flourishing
future. I would argue that that flourishing
future is going to have a much smaller
material and energetic footprint though.
Yes, definitely
Absolutely and that's the importance
of your work, the great simplification
no doubt, exactly.
Oh my gosh, are you a diplomat?
No, no, no, that's
absolutely true though.
It's not like we can all get
EV cars and plug five cars into
or it's crazy.
Yeah, I know, I know.
A couple more of your teaser questions. What awakens
our imagination?
The natural world, the
all wonder beauty and so on.
You live in California because
of the beauty. You go out
wherever you might be on a beach
to see the sunrise and sunset. Everybody
is moved by these kinds of things
and so awakening
our imagination to the
complexity of these
systems and some humility
that we barely understand them
and yet we can
work with them and
we can say less is more.
Back to your point.
Less is more
assuming that you're already above some
minimum threshold.
Less is bad.
So the last question
on this that you have on your website
is what moves us to action?
That's a big one, right? That's a hard one.
It is a big act.
It is big and I think
story that we feel we're part
of something that's coherent,
mysterious, sacred
beyond our full understanding
that moves us to action.
And as well, I think
the call to justice in many
of the world's religions is very, very
important. Again, next generation
are all about
they want the action.
They want to do something. We're very
pragmatic in the U.S.
but this eco justice is
creating all kinds of new
communities, movements and so on.
You know, green faith is a great
acumenical and interreligious
movement that's calling
young people and leaders and
communities to action on these issues.
I have to admit, I've never heard
of any of these things that you're mentioning.
Maybe I'm too siloed in
my, you know,
biophysical economics world, but
I think it's great to hear of them.
So
what role do you think religion
is going to play in coming
decades as more people
in the world recognize
or feel
physical limits to growth and ecological
limits to growth? It seems to me that
in times of anxiety and
transition
that people, like you said,
about China, they move towards
a religion as opposed to
away from it. What is your speculation
in coming decades?
Well, I would say there's two
possibilities. I'm not trying to be a futurist
because no one can predict things are
so changing. But I do think
if 85% of the world's people
are part of religion
they can't, we can't take it off
the table. This is, as I say, it's the problem
with academia that does. It's the problem
with secular environmentalism.
Completely dismisses
people who might identify as religious
as benighted, as
stupid, really, which is
so condescending. It's just incredible.
So I think we've really got to
identify that blockage and
that problem. And even if
it's instrumental, Ed Wilson
was very instrumental in a certain way, he would say
Mary Evelyn and John, bring
the religious people on board. We need them.
And, okay, that's all right.
But we have to go deeper
than that. He wrote a book,
I'm sure you've read it, called The Creation.
It's on my bookshelf.
What an iconic figure, right?
He was born a Southern Baptist and then
invented sociology
and everything. I mean, what an
amazing story. Yes. But he
was limited to, and we said this to him
at Harvard with great respect,
Ed, your Southern Baptist
upbringing does not describe
all religions. And most people don't
get beyond their
initial, you know, up to
12, 13 years old and later
they just leave it behind because it seems
so simplistic.
So you can't make
judgments about religion from your
early childhood experience. And I would
say, by the way, just to answer your question,
we need to attend to
bring forward the
liberating ideas of religion
from the world's
religions. And we also have to
speak to be in attunement
with what the spiritual
not religious, which are many, many
of our youth. And I think
there's enormous possibilities
here in the nature
writing movement. We did
I just want to insert this here
because it's so evocative.
We did a webinar here at Yale
with some of the key nature writers,
Robin Kimmer, Braiding Sweetgrass,
Rob McFarlane, great UK
nature writer, and David Haskell,
Song of Trees. They were all
talking about the communication
of trees and forests and so on.
9,000 people signed up for
this webinar. Yale had never said anything
like it because
the sense that it's a living
animate communicating world
is something that's emerging
from science.
Suzanne Simard's talking about
the forest in this way
and that many
of this
weaving of knowledge
like braiding sweetgrass,
scientific knowledge, indigenous knowledge,
a communicating
living world of which we have
reciprocities and obligation.
So that is
hugely evolving and very important.
So at Yale
you span
divinity and ecology.
Do you think
the Academy writ large universities
around the world
could potentially embrace
interdisciplinary ways of understanding
and solving problems?
Can they play a role
universities in the poly crisis
or are they structurally
too hierarchical,
siloed and reductionist?
There's days when I think this
reductionism and siloed
and others, I'm like, okay, there's possibilities
and we consider ourselves, Nate,
ninja in these
different silos and a very
bureaucratic Yale.
And we feel we've got one foot at Yale
one foot outside of Yale so we can
be in touch with and learn from
people like you and what's going on.
But yeah, you had a question
that follow up. Well, I was just going to say
as you're speaking, I'm visualizing
that the answer to our
ecological crisis is a lot
more of humanity needs to become
Buddhist ninja.
That's great. I love it. I totally
love it. But I do want to just say quickly
the hope here
is, and it's definitely happening
at Yale, the Divinity
School students are all over this. They're pressing
for more hires in this area.
You know, there was no
graduate programs. There's no field
25 years ago. There's now 14
MAs
certificate programs across the country,
which is we just discovered this
two months ago. It's amazing.
So the next generation and new
hires, we have some great
great people emerging at Yale,
both here at the School of the
Environment and the Humanities program.
So that gives me a lot of hope.
They're already fusing
going beyond silos, which is great.
So given your
lifetime of personal and community
experience on these issues,
do you have any personal
advice to our listeners
at this time
of a global poly crisis?
I think we have to have, you know,
realism and we call it hope.
So there's realism about what we're dealing with
and yet hope with people
who like you are doing
interview after interview, trying to bring the knowledge
forward, highlight different ways
of knowing. And this is one of
the things that did come up at our conference.
One of the first talks
was on the need for different ways of knowing,
not just scientific
materialist reductionist
knowing. And I think if we
can keep open this
true respect
for various ways of knowing, we
are going to release
the creativity,
imaginative creativity,
technical creativity already is,
financial creativity.
But it's the creativity of the human spirit
that represents, I think
if I'm not saying too much,
a certain kind of breakthrough
in world views
that says, okay, we're at this moment
of breakdown, but we can also
breakthrough. That's the great
hope of new community
coalitions and creativity.
Can you just briefly explain
to me what you mean by different
ways of knowing and if people
know things differently,
how do they arrive at a unity
of response and
action? Great question.
Different ways of knowing means
all the disciplines within
academia, you know, science,
social science, humanities,
technology,
engineering, all of these
need to have more fusion,
more dialogue. That's one thing.
But, you know, I'll give
an example, since we love
species clearly,
the animal behavior world
has completely exploded
to say, ever since Jane Goodall
said, these chimps
they have relationalities, they have
personalities, she named them. That
changed the face of science
as some objective study, okay,
and she was not well received.
Neither was Suzanne Simard
in studying forests and so on. So the
breakthrough is partly
this sense that
how do migrations happen?
What's the intelligence
there in the world beyond us?
Turtles, fish,
how do salmon find the same river
up and lay their
eggs and so on? These are
astonishing intelligences
from the world around us.
So different ways of knowing that are
emerging from
animal behavior, from forestry and
the various sciences, people
are keen to understand
this. It's exploding all
around us. And if we
tune into that, I think
we will have a sense we're not
the only
in so-called I think therefore
I am, this split
of Descartes has been
disastrous. Because we
live within multiple
intelligences, varied
sentiences
and that sensibility
will fundamentally change the way
we value nature,
care for it and use it wisely.
That's what we have to do.
So the sentience,
the interiority of
everything, plants, animals,
water, birds, fish
that's part of our re-entering
as kinship
that you also used in your video.
That's very exciting.
We're belonging. How marvelous.
We're not just standing outside.
So you've long been a teacher
as well as a scholar and you're currently
at the Yale School of
the Environment. So you have had
a lifetime of interacting
with young people. As you mentioned
you and your husband view your students
as your cultural children
as do I.
What specific recommendations Mary Evelyn
do you have for young humans
18, 20, 23
years old who become aware of
limits, climate,
the environment, what's happening
in our human enterprise
with respect to the natural world.
What advice do you tell your students?
Well, I just gave a whole
series of talks yesterday at a university
down near New York called Iona
and I think many of us realize that
eco-anxiety
is really overcoming many people
but especially young people,
COVID's been so difficult and so on
and they are massively worried
of course about the future and so they should be.
But what gives me hope
is those who are standing up
Greta Thunberg
and the whole Fridays
for the future and extinction,
rebellion and sunrise movement
these are very, very important
but the question, and it came
to me early on because I was so politically
active in these issues of civil rights
and anti-Biet, not more
we can't burn ourselves out
you know and that's where
you know there's chaplaincy now
at the Divendi School for eco-anxiety.
What does that mean chaplaincy?
It means like, so psychology
has been talking about eco-psychology
for some time and now
the anxieties that are emerging
especially with young people
and exploding in the need for
therapy, for care and so on
so it's not chaplaincy for your soul
it's chaplaincy
for how you
can be a
happier, more integrated human being
amidst the problems we're facing
I'm sleepless myself about these problems
so I understand and identify with them
and I like to say we're giving you
a generational handshake to do this
together, to make this transition
a great simplification
but I think there's all kinds
of ways, you know, meditation
tai chi, chi gong, swimming
lots of ways we can take care of ourselves
through this process
So you just mentioned that you are often
sleepless, as am I
of all these issues just out of
curiosity, what are you most concerned
about in the coming 10 years or so?
In the proximate future
democracy, to be honest
you know, that's a huge, huge issue
and we can't do a lot
without better democracies and around
the world, you know, the populism
of authoritarian figures is
really horrific but that's part
of this pulled back to
fundamentalism, to something secure
and so on and
so again, with some compassion
if we can midwife
and birth a sense
of a future that's inclusive
and that's not
just consumptive
that's part of what religions
can do, I think, but
it's going to be quite a task
and not an easy one
and I think, you know, to see the destruction
of ecosystems, to see
the environmental injustices
is heartbreaking
continually heartbreaking, to read
the newspaper, for me, I just read the
headlines and try and absorb what I can
but I filter. I can't watch
some of the nature shows that I grew
up watching now, like the shows now
like BBC Planet Earth
are just so stunningly beautiful
I get sad when I watch them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, well
I didn't grow up with television and
in our marriage of 44 years we
haven't had television because I think
while it... Me either, I have no TV
not since 1998. Yeah,
so interesting Nate, you know
we have to protect ourselves
sometimes but you can stream so much
for sure. Yeah, exactly.
That's part of the self-care though
you know, filtering
the assault of sad bad news.
So I know we're just
about out of time but I have a final
question. If you were
benevolent dictator and there was no
personal recourse to your
decision, what one thing
would you do or implement
to improve human and
ecological futures?
Well, I'd like to
maybe respond and compliment
to your great simplification
and your commitment
to energy
in an equitable form
and so on because I think this is
one of the great transitions but
I also would like to suggest
that it's the physical
transition of energies, right, from
destructive energies to creative
energies aligned with
Earth processes but it's also
a human energy
transition and that
human energy transition that hasn't
yet been fully visible
not yet integrated into environmental
thinking means that
we have to sustain
something for the long term
we have to sustain
the eco-anxiety
and the despair
threats type of thing
and what is that going to require?
I mean it's why we made
Journey of the Universe, okay to be honest
I would say that
our grandparents didn't know this well
and even our parents, you know, that
this is a 13.8
billion year
unfolding process
10 billion years just of galaxies
and stars
the web telescope is giving us these amazing
images
4.6 billion years of Earth evolution
1 billion years for the
first cell
I mean every sentence there
needs unpacking in the
both the science of it and the awe of it
and that
sensibility
I feel is one
generating sensibility
for human energy
to be aligned with
work with to do what
Thomas Berry calls the great work
and this will give us
a zest for life
amidst the poly crisis
which we need deeply
a zest for life
a friendship with people
like you Nate who are doing
such amazing work in this regard
and so I see it as very complimentary
if the religions
can step up to
and match that energy
transformation
and the simplification
that you're calling for
what an amazing collaborative effort
you know that could be
I will say amen to that
do you have any other
closing thoughts, advice
wisdom for our listeners today
this has been super great
and informative and I
so respect your
grace and enthusiasm
and energy on this
topic of our lifetime really
well I'm just to riff on
what I just said I'm so grateful
for what you're doing
because it's a space that other people
aren't really speaking about
just for more growth etc
but and so what I do want to say
again is that
how we can
mutually enhance
support, synchronize
and synthesize
these different perspectives
will be increasingly important
and how
these mysterious energies
of mystery
where we're dwelling
that we can allow that to infuse
the practical changes
the principles and the moral
force and the mystery
somehow coming into conversation
even though they're going to be doing very different things
but just saying like I like to say
okay market based solutions
are going to be important I just heard an incredible
talk about that for Forrest
at noon I want to affirm
the solutions that are out there
and say here's
one that can be
a yeast
to these various solutions
it can be a compliment
it can energize and broaden
the solutions that are already on the horizon
thank you so much
please let me know in the future
kind of offline we should continue this
to see how we can integrate our work
because I hadn't heard a lot of the things
you've said on this and I do think
that this is
a fertile pathway
to change our consciousness
in what we face so thank you for
your lifelong work on this
and continued work
thank you Nate it's just a pleasure
I really look forward to those conversations
online or offline thanks a lot
thanks Mary Evelyn
if you enjoyed or learned from this episode
of The Great Simplification
please subscribe to us on your favorite
podcast platform
and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases
