Greetings! Last week I did an Earth Day talk called Words of Our Lives and it
cataloged three dozen or so terms like fossil fuels that from a systems
perspective actually have different meanings like flammable fossils, consumer,
human, economic growth, metastatic cancer. After reflecting on that exercise it made
me wonder what words in our culture don't exist but maybe should. And I just went
for a hike with the dogs looking for morale mushrooms. All I found was some
deer ticks and wood ticks but this is all fresh in my mind so I'm just gonna
riff here on on some words that that should exist in our culture. And when I
say culture I am a citizen of the world one of 8 billion people alive today but
I am actually a citizen of the United States so this is a reflection on my
culture in the United States but also applies more broadly. For instance there
is a Swedish word that's Lagom which stands for enough or just the right
amount. We don't have lagom in the US cultural lexicon.
Okay so here are some of my thoughts. When we think about the future you can
look at the future from a tech and normative money progress lens or from
the vantage point of living during the carbon pulse and the ecology of the
world. So what what does that mean? What is that vantage point? How do you
describe those people that view the bottlenecks and the opportunities and
constraints of the 21st century from the lens of the carbon pulse which
requires an energy understanding systems ecology understanding human behavior
etc. So that's one word that I think would be nice to to view the future from
the carbon pulse and all that entails. Another concept is the future itself. We
don't have an emoji that represents the future of the thousands of emojis you
can find on your phone. There is no concept to represent the future. In our
materials DJ White and I came up with a a tee with an arrow through it to
represent tomorrow. But the reality is like the Inuit have 10, 20 words for
different kinds of snow. Our culture should have 10 or 15 words for different
futures. Horrible futures, apocalyptic futures, decent futures, barely liveable
futures and some sort of a range to describe the coming decades and centuries
because the future and the lack of the ability to describe it with nuance and
delineation may be part of the problem. Another word missing in our culture is a
concept for the energetically unfeasible. I think we've already kind of coined the
term energy blind which is we don't realize how energy particularly fossil
energy underpins our our lifestyles. So to have something about the amount of
energy it costs to do something and the complexity involved in a otherwise
ostensibly cool idea. That idea is front or something like that, meaning it's
energetically unfeasible. I think we need that word in our in our culture. And
building on that, I've started to rephrase the trajectory of continued
growth by kicking cans, by adding more gross energy to our system. But all that
energy gets directed to the mining energy sector of the economy, taking it away
from the rest of the economy and destroying the environment in the
process. I think we need a word for things that create gross energy, but the
net contributions to our culture are minimal or even negative. That would be
an interesting word to have. Building on that, I think there's also a word
energy porn comes to mind, but all kinds of things that give us massive
amounts of dopamine, but the energy and materials and non renewable inputs to
create those sensations are akin to internet pornography from a cultural
standpoint. And that is a whole lot of the activities in our culture. So I
don't think energy porn is going to become in our cultural lexicon anytime
soon, but something to represent turning billions of barrels of ancient sunlight
into microliters of dopamine. That's a catchy concept and phrase that probably
more people should should think about things that way. And then an offshoot
from that is maybe looking at some of the technology and as Steve Keane says,
technology without energy is a sculpture. Some of the technology that will
without energy be purely decorative curiosities. Maybe that's not bling.
It's blank or something like that. But to view technology in that sense that we
really have technology in tandem with almost too cheap to meter energy inputs
from Earth's past and it's the combination of those things. And so what do we
really want to use those fancy tech things for? The term woke is popular.
It's actually been co-opted now, but it the original intent was to become aware
and understand and own and empathize with the racial and social inequalities of our past.
And it was meant to just be aware of that and its implications in our lives and our futures.
I think there's missing a term, and I don't want to create it here, of ecologically systems woke
that includes our impact not only between different demographics and our current culture,
but between cultures, between the Global North and the Global South,
between generations, those generations that will live on the downslope or well after the carbon pulse,
the other species that are downstream of the carbon pulse.
And to be alive and aware of the depth of how all that fits together is like wider systems awareness.
And I think the giant red pill, I don't know, we're missing a phrase for that.
Another term that I think we need is someone who is content with absolute versus relative wealth.
There is a word that I think originated in the polyamory space called compersion,
which is to be happy for someone else's well-being and success and not jealous.
I think our entire culture, Western culture has a driver of envy, status, marketing, advertising.
You don't have this thing other people do, you suck.
If you buy this, you'll be better.
At the same time, we are the richest generation ever to live in material standards on this planet.
And to have people be happy with absolute wealth and material standards,
as opposed to comparing themselves to others, that would be a cool word to have.
I just, a couple hours ago, finished that podcast with a Lebanese woman, Jocelyn Katie, it was fantastic.
Their economy is down 50% in the last three years.
Their currency has collapsed by 98%.
80% of people in their country are in poverty, and she is relishing the good things in life.
She's going to have some sardines with her dad tonight, and she's working in the garden,
and she's happy with absolute things in her life instead of comparing herself to what people in other nations have.
And I think as we go forward, there's going to need to be a concept for that.
As far as our behavior, maybe there needs to be a term that is neurotransmitter diversification.
There is a four-legged stool of our main neurotransmitters, dopamine, endorphins, serotonin, and oxytocin.
And most people are on a one-legged stool, which is dopamine.
Dopamine drives our addictions, our behavior, our food, our social media, all kinds of things.
How do we refer to people, to humans, that are kind of a quarter, a quarter, a quarter, a quarter of dopamine, serotonin, oxytocin, and endorphins?
And they're well-balanced, they're not constantly seeking, they're not in fight-or-flight mode, they're not unbalanced,
but they have the ability to use Daniel Schmackenberger's defer the second marshmallow terminology.
They're more neurotransmitter balanced.
Maybe there's a term for that.
A couple more, and then I'll call this a rant.
What about those things that we do in our culture that in order to monetize something, we destroy something that is sacred?
This should be something deeper than bad or illegal.
This should be kind of referenced as a deep sin in our culture.
The monetization of the sacred earth groves of old growth forests or habitat for an endangered species,
or the abyssal oceans that are home to diverse ecosystems, or I can't even think of and articulate all the things.
But in our pursuit of maintaining a 19 terawatt global energy metabolism,
there will be many things that still in this diminished superorganism casualty of a global natural system
is still a wonderful, beautiful, amazing place of treasure, diversity, and stunning beauty.
And to destroy that in the name of additional profits, there should be a name for that, a term for that.
Lastly, there should be a name for people who are aware of the circumstances we're in
and choose to not pursue wealth or fame or notoriety or fortune, but to do what's right and to act as stewards of life, as earth stewards.
My colleague, DJ White, many of you that follow my work know of his success stories,
saving a million or more dolphins from the ocean.
He was the first guy that was thought about being willing to take a harpoon in his chest from a Russian whaler to protect a whale,
who he would never know, and lots of environmental success stories.
In our culture, our word for that is like environmental wacko.
That's not a good word to represent the deep earth life ethic in people like that.
And I think we're going to need a lot more of those champions, those stewards who resist the siren song of status in our cultural narrative
of what we think is the most important and follow their own intrinsic path to what they know is important and sacred to them.
I think we need a word for that, an inspiring word.
Okay, that's enough for today.
Back to regularly scheduled, frankly, analysis on the world situation next week.
Thank you.
