Greetings. Welcome to the world premiere of the project we've been working on for
how many months, many months. So I would like to give you a brief overview of what I have planned
for the next hour. For those of you who don't know me, I'm Nate Hageins.
I'm the director of energy and our future and we made this this animation. The plan is a brief
introduction. I'm going to go through the reasons why we made this movie, our hopes and plans for
the future. I'm going to introduce the team that was involved in its creation. We're going to show
a few short clips from each of the four acts of the movie. I'm going to talk about how this
sets into the work of our organization in helping navigate the great simplification.
And when we're done with all that, my colleague Kyle Saunders will emcee a Q&A from all of you.
And I'm about to introduce everyone and he'll tell you what to do about that.
Looking at the names in the list, it's like my inner circle has joined this Zoom call,
which is heartwarming. So we just made this movie. Let me introduce the team.
Justin Richie is a longtime colleague of mine. He just finished his PhD in climate and energy
at UBC in Vancouver, but he also has a side gig of producing music and videos and podcasts.
Justin, say hello. You're off camera at the moment, but...
Hello, everyone.
Justin runs an organization called Jumbo and the illustrator and animator and artist of this
entire project works at Jumbo. One, Elliot Wilkes, who kind of tripped me from wanting to do two
three-minute trailers. He was so talented and artistic that we decided to spend a lot more
time on making something larger. Elliot, say hello.
Hey, everyone. Thank you for joining us tonight.
And then my former student, Lizzie Siriani, who, as of June 1st, will be a full-time
member of our team here at Energy in Our Future. And she was the brutal editor and utility infielder
who helped me navigate the multiple edits and other problems with the script. Lizzie?
Hi.
And Kyle Saunders, long-time colleague, founder of the oil drum. Kyle and many other people who
can't be on the call were very instrumental with the script and advice on this. Kyle?
Pleasure to see all of you.
Kyle, did you want to give any instructions?
Yes, please. And also, just when we do get to the Q&A section, which will be in about a half an hour,
be sure to hit the Q&A button down at the bottom of the screen there if you'd like to submit a
question. And we will go from there. Thank you. One person who was integral to the success of this
but had plans tonight is my program manager of Energy in Our Future, Leslie Bat Lutz.
And there is no way this project would have happened without her forcing us all to meet the
deadlines. She was at the end of the day, made no more changes. This is done. Otherwise, it would
have been going on forever. So let me tell you a little bit about the genesis of this film.
So our organization has kind of four audiences. That's how I like to think about it. There's
the advanced policy for politicians and leaders. We're going to have to make important changes
in the future that are currently not publicly or politically acceptable. So we have to educate
what might be needed that society would not accept at the moment. There are students. I used to teach
a class at the University of Minnesota called Reality 101 and we're now working on a 10-hour
video version of that for anyone in the world to take for free, to understand how our system
fits together and also give some avenues for personal and career involvement in what we face.
There are community leaders who are kind of accessing this and then trying to build social
capital and networks and communities. And then there's the scout team, which is you all on this
call. The people that feel the truth of this and feel the urgency and the preciousness of time
and want to play a role in this. And so I decided last year, actually, Kyle Saunders on this call
was someone who was pushing me in this direction to speak to that fourth demographic. And what we
wanted to do was create a podcast. And so because of my network of people, we just thought it would
be easy to be able to grow a following that understood what's happening and the great
simplification. And so what we said was, let's make a couple of two-minute teasers for the podcast.
Two-minute animations. I talked to Justin. He's like, yeah, we can do that at Jumbo. We'll do a
couple of two-minute teasers. While we started writing the script, and any of you on this call
who know me, brevity is not my ace in the hole as it were. So the script kept getting longer and
longer and longer. And I'm like, wow, this is not going to fit into two minutes. And we didn't
really have the whole script done when we finished the first video, energy blind. And I almost thought
that was going to be it, energy blind. I mean, that is kind of important to tell our society,
because we think about money and technology. And since energy has been so cheap and so abundant
during our lifetimes, we've never realized how important it is. But then we ended up expanding
the script so that it ended up being, I'm sure Justin and Elliot, you know this better than me,
but it was like 160 scenes. And I am not kidding. It was like 75 versions of the script
that it was honed and sculpted like a samurai sword. Many, many different takes on the voiceover.
I had to get a voice coaching because I sounded like monotonous blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And I still don't really like some of the voice, but you know, this was never intended for the
general public. This was just intended as a framework for people listening to the podcast.
But I am so pleased, seriously. I think Justin's team, especially Elliot, was just kind of a diamond
in the rough. I didn't envision that the images would not only convey the scientific concept of
what I had in mind, but in many cases, did it in such an artistic way. I've watched this thing
40 times and sometimes I still get goosebumps. So we're going to show a few of my favorite clips.
But even on like some of the stuff Elliot came up with himself, it's not what I had in mind.
Most of the stuff I was pretty anal about, like my garage and my house and my car are a freaking
disaster. But I am a little bit of a stickler for details on this stuff. And I'm sure my team
was a little fed up with my little, gotta switch this, gotta switch this. But I'm pretty happy
with the final result. And in some cases, I almost think like the plume of energy coming out of the
ground in the first video, that was exactly what I asked Elliot to do. But what he did that I didn't
anticipate is there's almost a religious nature to it that humans are looking at this power source.
And we've organized our entire world, our entire society, our entire expectations around this
plume that it's going to be depleting. And it was almost this spiritual, like this is what
we're worshiping. And I never intended for that. But and maybe Elliot, you didn't either, but that
kind of came through. And there's a bunch of those things that are kind of magical. So
I'm very happy with it. I had no idea, no idea how much work goes into these things. I was like,
oh, yeah, well, what we do, we write a script, we give it to Justin's team, he's got some animators,
and then in a month we'll be done. No, that's not how it worked. We had bi-weekly meetings, Leslie
had just spreadsheets on all kinds of things that this scene and this music and this inflection,
it was a lot of work. I really hope this gets widely shared. I think it may be a little too
dark for high school and college students, yet the world is rapidly converging on this story.
So I might be wrong about that. I think we have a huge amount of resources and references that
will back up the story that was told here. And I think it's appropriate. I think if this would
have been more hopeful, it would have been dishonest. And if it would have been darker,
and if I had any conflict with Elliot, it's that he, his natural artistic tendency is a little more
goth than mine is. But we navigated that pretty well. And I think to be joyful is also inappropriate
for the times that we face. So I think this was a good balance of scientific synthesis,
context framework for the work that we all have to do in coming decades, and some realistic hope.
So I love it. I'm proud of it. Now we got to move on to the next thing, but we're pausing at
least tonight to have everyone on the team, especially Elliot Wilkes, take a bow for a lot
of hard work. And with that, why don't I hand it over to the team to say a few words of their
experience or thoughts or anything you'd like to say? Who would like to start, Justin?
Sure. Yeah, I'll just say a few things. And I mean, I remember when I first met you in person,
Nate in Vermont at an ecological economics conference. And I just knew that someday you
were going to have a podcast because not only did you have a great voice, but you also had a story
to tell that just needed a little bit of assistance, a leg up, maybe some encouragement from people
like Kyle to reach out to to folks. And at that time, I was in the process of working a lot of
podcast projects myself. And so I just kind of had that eye where I was like, yes, Nate's got it,
and he's he's going to run with it. And it took a while, but he's finally got it going. So I'm
super proud of that. And so then it was really in mid 2020 that he reached out to me and started
talking about just telling the story, not only in a podcast format, but in a video series of
taking his work and the work that he's done with his Reality 101 course that he taught at university
inspires so many interesting students to learn about these topics. And how do we translate
that to video? And so we got to work in the middle of last year, really translating that to
storyboards. And as Nate was saying, at the top of the webinar of the session, it just went, you
know, it went from let's do maybe two minute video or maybe a few two minute videos. And then
now we've got our mini documentary here. And, you know, I'm just super impressed at Nate and
the iSoft team pulling it together and having that kind of rigorous discipline to
end the storyboards when they needed to end and pull all the pieces together.
And I'm just super proud of Elliot and the rest of the Jumbo team on all the work they did visually
to make it work so good. I've been familiar with a lot of these concepts for many years.
And, you know, I stand by just that this is the best visual storytelling that's ever been done
in this space. And so I hope a lot of people can watch it and really resonates with them. And
it has some legs. So I'll turn it over to Elliot now.
Thanks, Justin. Yeah, it's definitely started off being a pretty small project turned into
a very, very big one. And I'm so thankful for it because, you know, I just not only did I like
I sort of progress myself sort of artistically and creatively, but I think I actually learned
like a lot along the way because this stuff has pretty much drilled in my brain every day for
a lot of months. And it sort of subconsciously sort of clicked with me and, you know, and I have
friends and things asked me like, oh, like, what are you like working on? Like, with your design
skills these days? So hard for me to explain like what this project was. So I'm really happy now
that we have something that I can show them like why I've been inside doing all the stuff so long.
So yeah, I'm glad it's done. It's been a pleasure.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Elliot. Elliot, did you have any like personal favorite scenes? I've
never asked you that, I just wonder. I think this scene that's playing right now is actually one of
my favorites. Well, we had like nine takes on that one. We eventually nailed it. That was hard.
The energy in itself is like really hard to come up with. It took a while to sort of
get it right. And then once we had it right, it was a pretty good feeling.
Just kind of the iridescent, purpley type shimmering thing. Just trying to represent
energy is a tough thing to do. But I think we landed on a pretty good sort of concept.
Yeah, excellent. Thank you so much. Elizabeth, would you like to say a few words?
Sure. I mean, I started learning this story at the beginning of my college experience when I took
Nate's class at the University of Minnesota. And I have since graduated. But this story has kind
of become like a central focus of what I've learned and also the work I've been doing for the past
year. So getting to see this story come together in such a creative and frankly, beautiful way.
It was really exciting. And I just kind of think back to when I took that course and like,
if this had been there when I was first learning that, that would be amazing because
while reading lots and lots of journal articles and Nate's writing, it's fun seeing something so
illustrative and metaphorical really helps process the story.
Thank you. And Lizzie is a much more concise writer than I am. And so the script, this is only 32
minutes. Without Lizzie, it would have been 47 minutes. I think college classes could use this
video, but it would require the college teacher to understand these things enough to facilitate
the discussion, I think. And there are some that are already using it. There's a high school class
in Minnesota that's using this material already. So I'm encouraged about that. Kyle,
would you like to say anything or? No, first off, I want to remind everyone on the call to
do feel free to, if you do have some questions on the, either on the substance of the video or
questions for Nate on other things, do throw them into the Q&A. I've had a few questions
shot to me in the back channel. So I've got some ready, but there's nothing in the Q right now.
So if you do have a question for Nate, do throw it in there.
You know, it's been interesting watching this evolve as a project and also just
watching Nate grow in this space with regard to how willing he is to
put all of his life energy into this. And that came through in the multiple iterations that I
have seen and the scripts that I have seen and the work that all of you have done also on this
call. It is, it is a massive effort. And I hope that everyone understands that it does take a
toll when you invest yourself into something so much. And I know that Nate's heart
been working with him for over 15 years now. And I've unfortunately known from the beginning
that how good of a guy is. And it's just great to see all of these manifestations of your work.
So keep it up. Thanks, brother. I couldn't do this work without dogs. So this is Frank. Amen.
My former students. Here comes mine. Okay, so Justin, are we ready to share clips?
We just chose like a 30 second, 45 second clip from each of the four
movies. And Justin, are you ready to share those? This is a clip from the end of the first video.
The benefits from carbon energy would have appeared indistinguishable from magic.
And instead of appreciating this giant one time windfall, we developed stories
that our newfound wealth and progress had emerged purely from human ingenuity.
We had become energy blind. That's still one of my favorite sequences. We went over that a bunch
of times right in that 30 seconds is the core fundamental flaw in macroeconomic theory,
where we truly allocate all of our wealth and productivity as a function of our capital and
our labor. But as economist Steve Keane says, labor without energy is a corpse and capital
and technology without energy is a sculpture. And so this fundamental aspect of our reality is we
just don't recognize energy. And I thought the way that our team came up with that and then Elliott
eventually landed it visually with the Aladdin's lamp to signify magic, really fossil carbon
and hydrocarbon is indistinguishable magic on human time scales. And then we had the books with
the technology and the brain and the cleverness and the energy blind just landed with the music.
And I still really love that part. So that unfortunately, when we saw that we're like,
oh God, now we got to really nail the rest of the script because this one was really good.
Does anyone else want to say anything on that?
No, yeah, I agree. That's one of my favorite scenes as well.
Yeah, cool. Well, let's just move right on then. Justin, would you like to show the scene in the
second movie? Second act, economic stories assert that with more money, we can create more of
anything. The truth is we cannot create energy. We both extract it and burn it faster by using
technology and printing money. Natural capital, particularly energy, is the true foundation
of our monetary systems. As we create more money, we don't create more resources. We merely access
them faster. So that was when I started thinking about the second video, how energy, technology,
money, and the environment relate to growth. That was like the first visualization I had as we
want to show a dollar bill where everyone thinks it's just a dollar bill. But then when we open
it up, we see that it's supported by the fossil plume. And of course, I'm not making the claim
that money is energy or that energy is money. There's lots of things, the productivity of our
society, technology and innovation, materials are vitally important. But the whole thing,
when we pile up these financial claims, which is exactly what's going on now in the world,
we are doubling our debt every eight and a half years. And we're doubling our GDP,
which is the income stream that is required to service and maintain the debt every 25 years.
That right there is a huge mathematical reality problem. But that's even when energy is still
increasing. Once energy starts to decrease, and arguably peak oil was November of 2018,
that divergence between financial representations of reality and our underlying physical reality is
going to widen until it recalibrates. So I thought that like suspenseful kind of release of the
unexpected reward is, oh my God, like, what is money anyways? Money is a financial marker that
represents the things that we really value, natural capital, social capital, human capital,
built capital. But energy is required for all that stuff. So I'm hopeful that that will at least
make people think about that. And environmental challenges stem from a mismatch of hunter-gatherer
minds inhabiting a competitive consumer growth culture. Together, these human universals have
led to incentives and behaviors, which have created a metabolic super organism whose objective
is disconnected from the well being of its parts, us. We are walking around in a modern novel,
super materially rich culture with neural scaffolding that is very similar to our ancestors
20,000 years ago, and still quite similar to our ancestors from two or 300,000 years ago.
And we're trying to get our same neurotransmitter cocktails in the same emotional states of our
ancestors in a totally novel environment. And so the things we do aren't the real objective,
but the ultimate objective is just to match the same feelings our ancestors got. I think that
little scene makes that clear. The other thing that it makes it clear or at least gives rise to
is that we aren't bad people. Like, right now we've got climate and we've got biodiversity and we
have poverty and all kinds of crazy things going on. It's not because the humans alive today are
bad or worse than they were 100 years ago or 10,000 years ago. It's A, that there's more of us,
and B, it's the economic system that we're a part of. And the super organism dynamic doesn't care
about the constituent parts. So we're going through these motions of this system that's imposing
downward causation on our behaviors. So I thought the little Tristan's coming out from the cloud,
and I never asked you to do that, Elliot. That was brilliant, where you kind of merged the human
into the super organism shape. I thought that was really cool. So yeah, I mean,
video three was so challenging. And they did by far the best they could have with that. The
challenge was set when I wrote the script because there were eight or nine aspects of human behavior
that I thought were relevant to our societal challenges. So each one was like 15, 20 seconds.
And then they like, then I stopped and did another, you know, steep discount rates and
social reinforcement and optimal foraging. And it was like, eventually we put a little pause
in between them to make the viewer, okay, now there's a new topic coming. But I put a crapload
of content into that eight minute clip. And that's the problem with this entire video is it's too
much information to readily convey in a half hour. And yet we have to be able to try to do that.
Lizzie took my class that was 150 hours of stuff that she had to sit through.
I would love there to be a three minute version of all this. But in three minutes or five minutes
or 30 minutes, you can only give a microcosm of a hologram of the larger picture. So as far as
hitting the highlights of why a human behavior is central
to our predicament, I thought video three did a good job.
A technology lens promises a shiny road of comfort, novelty and prosperity enabled by
future inventions, innovation, artificial intelligence and a vibrant metaverse will
sidestep any energy or resource constraints. We envision future humans breaking free from
the confines of earth and enjoying high tech lifestyles with the biggest problem is runaway
robots. These lenses are all optimistic, but misguided. All these lenses are energy blind.
The real paths ahead can only be seen by integrating energy awareness with biology,
sociology, physics and everything science has discovered. We need a systems lens to read the
map. The thinking wasn't just to go and describe what the great simplification is likely or possibly
to be, but really to describe why other demographics and groups in our culture are going to ignore and
deny this stuff. And the big ones are economists and financial people and technologists. This one,
in case you're wondering, Elliott did a couple drawings for me on last year's Earth Day Talk,
where I said we're headed for a more to our economy eventually, unless we change our
cultural objectives, we're going to spend more and more energy on extracting the energy
and more and more energy on mitigation like sucking CO2 machines and other waste removal.
So I just kind of half jokingly said, at some point in the future, half of our energy will be
getting energy and the other half will be cleaning up our waste. So he drew a space shuttle sort of
thing with a vacuum cleaner. And that's what's going on here. Those things are sucking waste from
the towers. And Elliott, I never told you this, but I love the little spaceship that kind of zooms
in front of the camera. You just like threw that in there. You did a bunch of that stuff. And there
you go right there. Whoa, what's that? So, you know, economists, any macroeconomists watching
this video is just going to not even finish it, because this is counter to a lot of the things
that not only they believe, but their status and their careers are attached to.
Justin cautioned me on the saying stock markets at all time highs
portend a rich and virtuous future for all because he said at some point stock markets
won't be at all time highs. And on the launch date May 19th today, we are 20% down from the
highs. But I think the point is still relevant that the stock market is not, I mean, GDP is
actually a cost. It's not a benefit. And so I was trying to get that point across. But I thought
these three little lenses were pretty cool. And I'm sure we could have dove in a lot more on those.
So, yeah, those are my comments on the script and these little clips. And we have
24 minutes left for your questions. Excellent. There's some really good ones in the chat.
Nate, you mentioned CO2 a couple times in the production and climate change only really a couple
of times. Given how critical climate change is, why didn't you highlight it more prominently?
Good question. Two answers. Number one, a lot of people know about climate change. A lot of
people are speaking about climate change. Not too many people know about our energy, money,
growth dependence, and not too many people know about the systems ecology nature. The second reason
is that climate change isn't the problem. Climate change is a symptom of the problem. The symptom
of the problem which is overshoot, which is we have eight billion humans consuming a
bolus of fossil sunlight that has been, all we had to do was pay for the cost of extraction.
We need systems change, not climate change. But the third reason is this, and I'll just be very
blunt. After I die sometime this century or before I die, the thing I care about most in the world
is the ecosystems of this earth and the 10 million species we share this planet with
and the viability of future beings. Because this is a lonely spaceship floating in space.
And of all the complex life in the universe, it is all here that we're aware of. And most of it,
most of the species of complex life are in the oceans, which are basically the garbage dumps
for our waste streams of the human economy. So I would say that climate change and the
related risk associated with our many orders of magnitude, the largest risks that we face this
century. Having said that, I don't think they're in the top five in the next decade. I think we have
a great simplification where the flow chart of how the future fits together is if central banks
can do this, if some new technology, if we can continue to continue to grow, then we have these
impacts. Any one of these things that doesn't allow us to continue to grow, we have a massive
recalibration financially. And that's going to change our political situation. It's going to change
our international supply chains. It's going to change our civic relationships. And so I don't
personally think there's anything that we can do to keep carbon in the ground as a social
political activist. So I want to prepare, I'm going to do two things. I want to prepare society
for what's coming. And I want to educate and inspire a new form of cultural consciousness
awakening that this is not what humans needed to be or were destined to be. We have a lot more
flexibility in our genome. And so that's why I highlighted climate change because I really
care about it, but it is not the focus of this movie. And it's something that needs to be integrated
into the whole thing. We're not going to solve climate change by just switching out to renewables
and keeping everything else the same. So I hope that answers your question.
Yep. The highest upvoted question in the chat is from Jared O'Connor.
Thanks to everyone involved. It's really great work as his first sense. But after that,
he asks the question of all of us, how would you recommend us share this information and talk to
our friends, our family, our community about all these realities? I'm primarily asking for those
of us on the scout team and wanting to do our best to be community leaders or even just communicators
to help level set our collective view of reality. I've always been a better analyst on putting the
pieces together of the constraints of our problem than I have about the solution. First of all,
I don't think there is a solution. I think there's a whole lot of different things that will contribute
to our future. The way that I think about it in my head is we have three timeframes. We have triage,
which is the next few years. We have transition, which is the next 10 or 15 years. And we have
long term, which is kind of the next 50 years. And different things are going to be required
during those different times. With those three horizontal, there's also four on the vertical
scale. There's global response, there's national, there's community, and there's individual.
And so, okay, we'll put a pin in that. The other thing that I've learned,
first of all, I know a lot about our situation. And the more I learn, the more I know that I
don't know. And that's why I'm trying to learn things in fields that I don't fully understand.
I think energy, ecology, and human behavior are the core, but there's a lot of other aspects that
come into play. But one thing that I have learned is over 20 years of doing this, I have a pretty good
measure of the general responses to this message. Now it is changing because the world is changing.
But some people, like many of you on this call, this like makes sense to them. It calls to them.
It's clear to them. It's like, well, yeah, duh, that makes so much sense. What can I do? And they
want to roll up their sleeves and get involved. There are people that are going to watch this
movie, and I've already gotten some feedback to this extent. They are paralyzed when they see this.
Even this movie, it's so dark and fearful that they're frozen. So there are a wide disparity
of political opinions and worldviews and expertise of people in the world. But there's also a wide
disparity of temperament and personalities and psychological fortitude. And I, to this day,
have not figured out the formula for that, which is one reason why I started this podcast and I
made this video as a beacon to you all who are on this call tonight, that we need to start talking
to each other and branching out. And I think your question is central. The other thing I've
noticed is there's a trade off between being accurate and being helpful. Find common ground
with people, and there have to be things that you agree on. And then you take a little step in a
more difficult direction at a time. I do think there is a huge risk, though, that telling a story
like this, and I'm kind of jumping all over the place, Jared, here. But there is a big risk
that not only polarization is an issue with our political body and on social media, but polarization
is a huge issue on this topic, on systems ecology, resource depletion, climate change,
because two things are happening. Number one, we are a tribal species. We want to do and say what
our groups and our friends do and say. And number two, the human brain hates dissonance.
And so people out there that resolve dissonance with a story, technology will save us. There's
near term human extinction, there's nothing we can do about it. Those things are functionally
equivalent because they resolve dissonance in the brain. And this story gives dissonance in the brain.
And so it will never be a super popular thing because there are no clear paths and there's
clear answers. There's only directions of where to go. Long winded answer. I've been doing this for
20 years. I still don't know how to have this conversation with more people other than what's
happening in Ukraine and Russia right now is going to make our population a lot less energy blind.
What's happening with climate change and fires and pine die offs and other things. And what's
happening in Sri Lanka, people are going to start waking up pretty soon to this stuff. And I think
we have to have metaphorical rocks in the river and communities. We have to meet the future halfway.
The single biggest thing we can do is create social networks, link up people talking to each
other. And the people don't have to have all the answers. They just have to understand how the
things fit together. And the major implication of the great simplification, the great simplification
will unfold over centuries. But I think what happens this decade is a 30% drop in our standards of
living. And whether that will be across the board or whether that will be unevenly distributed
is still an open question. But imagine yourself living with 30% less money and to maybe practice
that once in a while. Boy, I'm like giving a homily here to your question. There at the end
of each one of your great simplification podcasts, we're going to turn the tables on you, Nate.
What are you most fearful of and hopeful for in the face of our future?
Yeah, I kind of like doing that on my podcast. To others.
Well, because everyone has such different answers. And I want to make this not only about the
scientific facts of our situation, but also the humanity so worried about nuclear war in the next
decade. It almost seems inevitable to me that something is going to happen, the hubris and
and just our tribal us versus them and just the gaming of it all. That's what I'm most worried
about. And I don't know what to do about it. I've had Chuck Watson on my podcast a couple times.
If you all haven't listened to the latest one on Chuck, it's intense, but I would recommend it.
I think nuclear war would be my biggest risk in the next decade. The other one that's right up
there is polarization. And because I'm a scientist and I'm a teacher. And so I like to do videos
like this. I like to make presentations that use scientific facts to build a story. But if we have
polarized so far because the algorithms uprate for extreme divisive hate as opposed to collaboration,
collective empathy, creativity, et cetera, we're optimizing for the wrong things. And this isn't
anyone's fault. This too is an emergent property of our system. But I really worry that if we can't
have discussions because everyone is so tribal. It's something that I've really tried to do the
last five years or so is I have my own political views. I have my views about what I care the most
about, which is the natural world. But I try and suppress that and listen to other people
and get their opinion. And so I'm trying to not be political on any of this stuff,
even though my politics is probably implied, but we need to be able to talk to each other.
As far as what I'm hopeful for, I'm hopeful for emergence on something that we just can't imagine
right now that bubbles up in our society. I'm hopeful for the response from young people,
especially that I see from my students, who understand this and they don't need all this
wealth and trappings and stuff to be happy. And they already see that. So I think we could
have a significantly smaller throughput economy. And actually a lot of people,
assuming we navigate the roller coaster between now and then, could be happier and healthier in
such an environment. I have a deep hope in the human spirit. And those of you that are on this
call tonight, I don't know all of you, but I recognize many of the names are an embodiment
of that. It's almost like we had to experience the last 200 years. And we had to experience this
Las Vegas smorgasbord of dopamine and Amazon trucks and Netflix and chill and all that
to realize where we came from and what we're doing and what we're capable of.
And I think it's a long shot, but it's always been a long shot that small groups of humans
can change the future. And I don't think we're, I'm not naive enough to think that we're going to
have some ecological kumbaya moment, but I think people deep down feel what's happening. And I think
there's a lot more people in every city and every town that are good people and they feel
the wrongness of the direction we're headed. You know, on the ecology front, babies and toddlers
don't have Amazon and Walmart stickers on their walls. They have giraffes and whales and elephants.
And we've kind of lost our tether to nature. And we're so rich that we've lost our tether
to the social nature of our communities and people. And we're going to need people again.
So yeah, there's eight billion of us. And that is a problem with a finite resource.
But I do ultimately have hope in the human spirit. And we have kicked the cans. Thomas Malthus
didn't know about fossil fuels. Paul Ehrlich didn't know about debt and globalization.
Then we hit the 2009 financial crisis central banks took over. We're running out of cans to
kick. And I think the next can is not a physical one or a technological one. It's in our brains.
It's in our minds. So a cultural change in consciousness is possible. And I'm trying to
play a role in that. And I hope you all do too. What do you see as the direction of the organization
as well as your own work over the next few years? Like, you know, do you want to break
it into that 18 month versus transition versus something like that? I don't want to do this.
But I recognize the critical necessity of informing politicians about what's coming.
And so I think someone needs to have this advanced policy initiative. And I've got very high level
contacts in DC, but they're so busy. And they're playing whack-a-mole every day.
And that needs serious funding and serious organization. But here's why I know it's
central. Because when you talk to these former senators and governors one on one,
they don't disagree with what I'm saying. It's just when they get in a group of other high-profile
people, they can't say these things. So that tells me that there is a huge leverage point there
that needs to be galvanized somehow. The problem is exactly what do you do? And I'm not going to
talk directly on this call to that. But I have some ideas. My wider network has ideas on what we
might do in such a financial recalibration. But there are no easy answers. Everything is kind
of speculative. That's another thing that I'm more comfortable talking about the problem and
getting more people thinking about it. That's another thing I would really like to influence is
we need to change the conversations in universities. Universities are miniature superorganisms.
They're optimized for endowments and research money and paying the deputy dean of student affairs,
200 grand or whatever. It's not preparing young people for the future. That's no longer their
objective. Our entire education system is going to have to change and should change. So I would like
to tell a story like told in this video as a way that professors can apply shift their work a little
bit in this direction and midwife and chaperone their students' minds towards applying to these
challenges more. I don't know how to do that. But that would be one thing that I think I saw if
our organization could influence. The other thing is, like I said before, some sort of a toolkit
for communities like an updated, more video credible version of Transition Town. That's
like 2022 instead of 2007. I think that's necessary. I have to say I'm so freaking happy this video is
done. At the same time, I'm going to miss it because doing creative things like this and
I think John Michael Greer and I got an argument 15 years ago because he talks about magic. I'm
like, dude, magic isn't yours. I remember this conversation. I was like, dude, magic? But magic
is just the ability that you use some phrase or do something that shifts something in another person,
their perception or their understanding. And so I think doing creative visual things to tweak
and alter and shift a little bit the hearts and minds of a lot more humans. That may be all a
small organization can do. I am certainly no guru. I am not a charismatic Tony Robbins sort
of person. I just like being behind the scenes. And Kyle, you know me well enough. I fortunately
have a huge network of really smart, influential, cool, friendly, nice scientists. So I think I
would like to grow the podcast so that more people can sink their teeth into all the different
aspects that comprise our situation. How do we connect this community? How do we
continue to build not just these relationships, but also to continue to enhance the consciousness on
this and bring people together? And I know that's something you and I have talked about a lot about
how information flows, which is part of the podcast idea, but also how we build interconnected
interconnected people, those social networks that are basically driving our society these days.
That's the core thing is what social networks are you in? How do we build one around this,
whether it's the podcast or whether it's your messaging and your team has been playing a part
of that. And then I know Justin and I are very much on the same page with regard to
how the podcast does drive that. You've had different guests on giving different pieces of
the puzzle and it provides this synthesis for the community. But how does the community
orient and build around that for their own, whether at the local level or online communities or those
sorts of things? So again, that's just something that seems like it's a particularly prevalent
theme in the chat, something for you to think about.
Dennis Mockenberger told me last week that I'm like, I don't understand why people on Facebook
and Twitter aren't like responding to like some of this really good content. And he said the
algorithms are downrating your stuff. And only 3% of your Facebook and Twitter followers will see
your posts. I totally don't understand how all that works. But I do understand that this stuff is
complex. It's threatening. It's abstract. It's in the future. Amber Heard and Johnny Depp and Beyonce
are not saying these things. But I think it could be like one of these sorts of diagrams where, oh
my God, all of a sudden this is like a phase shift and ecology is cool because we weren't
taught this stuff. We didn't need to. We wanted to be taught stuff and go get a job. And now
the planet is full and there's a bill that's due. So that's going to change everything.
I'm just kind of a Midwest systems analyst that's trying to put the pieces together. I don't have
all the answers. I don't know what to do and I don't know how to grow the movement. But I'm
learning on what doesn't work. And I think the podcast in this video is a good springboard
with which to think about and grow from this and change people's hearts and minds. Gratitude
to my team for all the hard work and creativity that went into the creation of this. It's a
documentary, but it's also a piece of art. That is squarely on Elliott's shoulders with
the Jumbo team. Very proud of your work, young man. And I'm happy to collaborate on this with you.
And I really hope this can be shared and used at universities. And the one regret I had about this
process is I kind of ran out of funding to do a social media publication publicist blitz.
Thank you, Nate. It's been wonderfully unique.
Thanks so much, Elliott. And thank you all for tuning in. And I'm sure we will be in touch and
maybe do more of these in the future. Spread it around. Yeah, please do share the video.
Thanks, everyone. Thank you.
