tell me about energy blindness. Energy blindness is the fact that our society misunderstands
energy in its role in our current living and our expectations. There are four aspects. One is that
energy underpins everything in nature and everything in human systems. We need energy for
everything. And number two, that we don't realize the scale of how much energy we use
effectively four to five hundred billion human workers equivalent of fossil energy. The third is
that this stuff is depleting very rapidly and culturally we're treating it as if it were interest
but it's actually a principal a bank account that is being drawn down millions of times faster than
it was built up. And the fourth aspect of energy blindness is that when we burn all this energy
to give us the modern conveniences and transport and consumption there is a pollution and a waste
that comes with that. And I think our cultural stories don't include any of that. And yet so
much of our future and our expectations and institutions and culture depend on energy.
So we're energy blind. And I've sometimes heard you say that energy is the currency of life. Yes?
Yes. In nature those organisms and ecosystems that have surplus energy have had advantages.
So there's lots of things important in life but if you don't have energy you can't move or eat or
do anything. So energy is the currency of life and it always will be. I fully agree on that.
And so then if energy is the currency of life tell us about the carbon pulse.
Well the carbon pulse began when humans started to discover first coal then oil then natural gas
and farm under the earth instead of on top of the earth. And if you look at a 300,000 year
aerial view of our species this little sliver of time where we're drawing down this ancient carbon
and propelling our civilization using it can look like a pulse like an EKG pulse
that is starts from nothing goes to a high amount and then goes back to nothing. And we're all living
in the middle of that probably near the peak of that. And that is another thing that's not included
in our cultural conversations is you know on a 500 year time scale we're a couple hundred years
into the carbon pulse and what will the downslope of the carbon pulse look like. So I think this is
an ecological deep time framing of the human cultural situation that is so prevalent in
our lives but we don't talk about it. So if we are somewhere near the peak of this carbon pulse
what's the story with the economic superorganism what is that?
So there are superorganisms in nature like a termite mound or an ant colony where all of the
individual organisms collaborate towards a larger unspoken goal. So the human superorganism is not
an actual biological entity but what it ends up being de facto an economic superorganism
that humans in this culture self-organize as families, as small businesses, as corporations,
all the way up to nation-states and the whole world to maximize profits. That is our marching
orders by our culture and those profits are tethered to energy. There's a 99% correlation between
GDP, our economic output, and energy consumption and 100% correlation to material consumption
and that energy is over 80% still tethered to fossil carbon. So what we're doing is rushing
forward trying to optimize profits and GDP and we've built all of our institutions and
expectations around that without any other plan and what's happened is the momentum of that system,
the momentum of that way of doing things is stronger than the individual wisdom and
restraint that people within it try to imbue on the organism itself. In other words,
we're in a runaway train shoveling more fuel into it and there is no conductor. There's not
a politician or a billionaire that can say, wait a minute, this is the wrong objective,
we need to change it. So the superorganism is this metabolic system that is out of control
and all it wants is more the lowest cost energy and other material things to power growth.
