Greetings. Flipping a coin of sorts, whether to record this, frankly. But I've been an
observer of the human problematic for the last 20 years since I left Wall Street, and
I tend to focus on what I think is the biggest risk while keeping a view to the long term.
I think the biggest risk in the next couple months, in the next year, is World War III,
is nuclear war between NATO and Russia, and even if it doesn't go nuclear, it probably
would go there in a conventional kinetic war. The reason for this, frankly, and I'm leaving
in a few hours to go on a 10-day trip, and I wanted to record this because events are
accelerating, is because I think, at least living in the United States, we have been
lulled into a sense of complacency by the public and political narrative about the Ukraine situation.
I wanted to give some context with the core message, which I may repeat two or five times
in the next 10 or 15 minutes, is that at this point of the war, a year and three months into it,
there's lots of background of 1992 and 2014 Medan Revolution, and Crimea, and
all the various Minsk agreements and what happened before. It doesn't matter who is right
at this point because the risks to our civilization, the risks to our global
very fragile financial system, the risks to the biosphere in case there is nuclear exchange,
far, far, far outweigh any provincial blaming of some outgroup or ideologies of what some downtrodden
ex-group cares about, or whether Putin is a thug, or any of those things are irrelevant to the
stakes that we face.
So, first of all, the narrative. I'm not naturally a counterculture person. I am with respect to
macroeconomics and neoclassical economics because I think most of it is bunk, and it has led us into
a global ecological overshoot that's worsening with a cul-de-sac as far as our options.
But generally, I go with the flow because the flow often makes sense. I hate to speak out in this
way, but if I have a brand on this channel, the great simplification, it's trying to get at the
truth of the situation, mostly in the natural sciences, but also in systems, and I'm branching
out into a little bit uncomfortable territory with geopolitics, but that's because I have a
large network of people that are confirming that this is what's going on. So, as far as the narrative,
first of all, the United States totally messed up the narrative of public perception in the
Vietnam War. Colin Powell knew that, and he changed the policy. There's a book that I'll put in the
show notes, I can't remember the name of it, where he specifically changed the propaganda and PR for
the Iraq War to make sure that the American public was on the side of the government.
I think that happened again in 2002 with Iraq War II, and it's happening again.
This situation rhymes with Iraq and with Vietnam. I also know that people that really know what's
going on are either trained not to speak out, or they can't because it's their jobs, or they're
afraid to because to go against the strong narrative by the White House and our administration,
Putin is Hitler, Russia needs to be defeated, is dangerous to someone's status, their paychecks,
their credibility. It's very, very difficult. Jeffrey Sachs is one of the people that's talking
about this reality. There are others, and thankfully there are some voices that are starting to be
heard that are urging kind of an end state that is stable. The other example is in our media,
we're led to believe that Russia is on the verge of collapse, or their military is running. Look
at, they're using these 50, 60 year old Soviet tanks, they must be out of resources, and the
journalists today don't take a deeper dive in these things. Yes, they are, they do have 20,000
tanks from the 1950s or 60s. They also have millions and millions of rounds of 100 millimeter
ammunition. They're not using the tanks as tanks because they would be crushed versus an Abrams
or a Leopard. They're using the tanks as mobile artillery shelling vehicles, and they're cannibalizing
them for parts. So Russia, at least on that note, they're not desperate. They're using the resources
they have in a very effective way. I think it's really, really dangerous that the United States
thinks that we have such uber military superiority in this situation. This is on their doorstep.
They fight differently than we do, and I think the larger problem is nobody is afraid anymore.
It was 80 years ago when the bombs fell in Japan, and the horror and misery and just absolute
shock and tragedy is three generations gone, and we have faced risks like this in the past 50 years,
but they were always averted. There were people like Stanislav Petrov and Vasily Archipov,
who should have holidays named after them because they disobeyed orders and stopped the
escalation of what would have ended up in the nuclear war, but it never happened. So it's an
example of risk homeostasis that, oh, the zeitgeist is that the nuclear risk are always far more
remote and unrealistic prospects relative to reality, but this psychological belief in our
leaders and in our population reinforces itself to get worse. The more fear and consequences
recede into our distant historical past. The risk is very real now. I'm coming back on the 11th.
On June 12th is going to be the largest NATO military exercise in history called Defender
23. I'm sure it's truly an exercise, but with all these things, you never know when there's
going to be a flub up or a mix up or a mistake, and then that mistake has to be retaliated against,
and all of a sudden we're on a path to escalation. I'm not predicting that. How could anyone predict
that? I'm just laying out the fact that accidents happen always, and the war games that have happened
in the past, proud profit and other ones, have indicated that very often, to the point of being
almost always, once there is a nuclear exchange or an escalation, it ends up going strategic.
Chuck Watson, a friend of mine, analyst, a Russia expert for the last 40 years, was on the podcast
outlining the risks of a moderate nuclear exchange. It would destroy the biosphere. It would drop
global temperatures 15 to 20 degrees Celsius for a few years, block out the sun, effectively being
much like the asteroid 66 million years ago threw up enough soot to pretty much kill
all life on earth as all that debris came raining down and was fire on the earth.
Where is this in our public discourse? When I was a kid, we had the day after
scared the crap out of me in eighth grade watching this nuclear war thing. We are so
blasé about the greatest fricking risk ever to face our species and our world with 13,000
nuclear warheads around the world and military exercises and the US, UK governments are not
being and saying friendly diplomatic things to Russia. Lindsey Graham is bragging about dead
Russians are a good investment. What? So I'm very, very concerned about this. Even if we go to war,
which would mean boots on the ground, which frankly I think boots on the ground in Ukraine,
like officially because there's boots on the ground now, but officially large boots on the
ground eventually ends in war unless it ends in some sort of a stable broken up Ukraine where
we have a new Cold War and that could be a stable state. But even if we don't have a world war,
this sort of event triggers all the other risks that I've been talking about in this podcast.
We are financially very uncoupled from our biophysical reality. Russia is responsible for
almost a quarter of global natural gas and oil exports between Ukraine and Russia.
They account for over a quarter of world grain exports. So for most countries in the world that
are not watching CNN or Fox, Russia is perhaps more important than the United States from a
physical resource standpoint. We don't ever hear that perspective in the United States.
So I think there was an article a few weeks ago in The Atlantic saying protecting Ukraine is not
enough. We need to take it to the Russians and cause Russia to collapse, paraphrasing.
That is unbelievably systems blind. First of all, Russia is not going to allow this to happen.
This is not 1992 collapse of the Soviet Union. They learned a lot from that. This is Mother Russia.
This is existential for them. And there's lots of calls for Putin to be overthrown or whatever
who replaces Putin, which would probably be Petrushiv, would be worse, very anti-West and
more aggressive. So personally, I think we have to find a way for Russia to reenter the global
ranks of respected nations. I live in the United States. I love my country. But respect to this
situation, I am not pro-USA. I am not pro-Russia. I am pro-life. I am pro-future. I am pro-complex life.
So somehow I think we have to find a way to get Russia back into the international order.
In any case, it is not just Putin who is threatening the human and non-human future.
It's also NATO and, by extension, any nations who have significant nuclear weapons that are
backstopping their geopolitical situation. The truth is, we do not have the right to risk nuclear war.
It doesn't matter whether Putin is a thug or not. It doesn't matter what ideology you believe in.
It's utterly irrelevant versus the scale of consequences which most humans, based on our
media, based on my observation, are blind to. And stepping back, of course, with the things that I
care about most and perhaps why many of you are following this podcast, this is not even primarily
a human issue. It is a biosphere and complex earth life issue which will affect the next
half billion years of life, where life goes and where consciousness goes, if at all. It's as if
there were red squirrels and gray squirrels had acquired the ability to destroy the world over
which nut tree they had access to. It is just exactly that absurd. And it doesn't freaking
matter in the intermediate term, even to the squirrels, even though at the moment it feels
completely existential to them. The point is that the nuclear alarmist in our world,
of which, in my opinion, there are far too few, even if they're not 100% right. But even if there's
a tiny percent chance that they're right, we have no right to continue this game of chicken
with the world's future. So from a biosphere ecological perspective, it doesn't matter what
sort of human misery there is in the next 100 years versus the consequences of a global strategic
nuclear exchange. I think this needs to be accepted by more people, by more media, by more
humans and leadership positions, and maybe by today's Vasily Archipof and Stanislav Petrov,
who might be in some positions today in any of the evolved nations.
Okay, I said those uncomfortable things. This is how I view things. We're in a fragile,
systemic, global situation. We're all alive, paying attention, living our lives. This risk goes on
beyond our ability to influence. But I think it's better that more people know how tenuous
the situation is, how there's a lot going on behind the scenes that we're not hearing about.
And ultimately, at this point, 15 months into this incursion into Ukraine,
it no longer matters who is right. What matters is how we get out of this situation.
Thank you. I'll talk to you when I get back.
