the biomass of all insects combined in the 1970s, then measured it again in the 2000s,
and they found a 75% decline in insect biomass. I mean, this is, I mean, it's just
mind-boggling and frightening that insects can be declining this quickly.
Professor Nick Haddad is the co-lead of the long-term ecological research site at Kellogg
Biological Station. He is an ecologist at Michigan State University studying how
landscape diversity affects biodiversity, especially of insects and plants and ecosystem
services, including pollination, biocontrol, and decomposition. For the last 30 years,
he's led the world's largest experiment testing the role of landscape corridors in increasing
dispersal of plant and animal species. He's written books about butterflies and his
comments with me today on the insect apocalypse, why butterflies are the canaries in the coal mine
of the greater insect population, which we are losing insect biomass at 1 to 2% a year.
This is another aspect of the metacrisis that is not often talked about, is the role of insects
in our current world and in the future and what is happening to them.
Please welcome Professor Nick Haddad.
Professor Haddad, welcome to the program.
Oh, it's great to be here. Thanks for having me.
You're one state over from me.
Awesome. Separated by the big lake.
We're surrounded by 20% of the world's fresh water.
Is that right?
Yeah, the lake, the Great Lakes, 20%.
Wow. Yeah, I think I might have heard that somewhere. That's quite something,
isn't it, on a water planet?
Well, it is. Yeah, it makes us a climate refuge because we have water,
we don't have natural disasters, and it only gets nicer as it gets warmer here.
Yeah. I mean, I have a lot of questions for you. We're going to talk about insects,
but since you bring up the Great Lakes, how much of the research on insects is
terrestrial versus aquatic? Because I imagine the insect populations are huge in water.
So, I would say that I don't do any work on insects in the water,
but I'm around the water all the time. So, in fact, some of the most important
butterflies I study are located in wetlands, like bog-like habitats. So, I'm wading in water
often, and then others are out on islands in the ocean. So, I'm surrounded by water,
but not in water. There's a lot of great studies on insects in water, especially in rivers and
streams, where insects are used as indicators of environmental change, but I'm much more work
as done on insects in the land. Yeah. So, let me take a step back from you being a professor
at Michigan State to you as an eight or 10-year-old kid. You are a terrestrial ecologist with
particular scientific specialty on butterflies. So, when you were young, were you one of those kids
that went around with butterfly nets and was obsessed with natural systems? I kind of was.
Well, I was obsessed with natural systems, but never with butterflies. I was obsessed with one
invertebrate, which was blue crabs. And so, my love for nature started when I was growing up,
spending summers on my grandparents' farm. So, they had a farm. They didn't farm it, but they owned
a farm on the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, and right offshore, we could get out there and catch
blue crabs. Well, the interesting connections then to the butterflies, well, there are two. One is that
blue crabs are invertebrates, and then the other is that it takes a big net on a stick to catch them.
So, I can't really claim that there's a direct line, but there's an uncanny coincidence. But I
spent a lot of time on that farm in nature running around in the water on land and doing a lot of
fishing and hunting, actually. So, it wasn't thinking about butterflies, certainly not thinking
about rare species, except that things like Canada geese were declining when I was young.
It's a common thing with people in my circles that somehow we were blessed or privileged or
lucky enough to be imprinted on nature or nature imprinted on us when we were kids.
And maybe that's why, you know, 50 years on, we're working on these issues.
Because some people... That's for sure the case. For sure the case.
Do you think? Yeah. I mean, for me, it is. I remember being... I floated around between majors as an
undergraduate from engineering to economics to biology, thinking molecular biology. And then
one day I was walking at Yosemite National Park and it dawned on me, man, I could study this stuff
that's around me and make a profession of it. And the stuff that I love. So, that's what I do.
I mean, the great thing about my research is every day I'm doing things that I love in environments
that I love to be in. And so, hey, it's the greatest job in the world. The other thing that,
by the way, surprised me about now looking back, not being a butterfly enthusiast, that many of the
biologists I know, whether they're in ecology or others of biology grew up as butterfly collectors.
And I'm a collector of many things. As that eight or 10 year old you asked about, I was collecting
baseball cards, coins, stamps, but never butterflies, ironically. So, anyway,
surprised... There's some surprise looking back that I wasn't a butterfly person.
So, give us an overview of your work, including a prominent book you published in 2019 called
The Last Butterflies, A Scientist's Quest to Save a Rare and Vanishing Creature.
What's that about? What's your work about? What have you been doing since 2019 in that book?
My work, when I started in ecology, it was on conservation of nature, conservation of biodiversity,
conservation of ecosystems. And again, when I was an undergraduate, I never thought I would be working
with a life on butterflies. But I ended up being steered on that path. I could tell you that story,
but going to your question about what my work is, I'm an experimental ecologist. So,
that factors heavily into my work on rare butterflies and other things. And so, I'm
interested in understanding long-term dynamics of ecological systems, including butterfly
populations. So, I conduct studies that last for decades. That includes on rare butterflies.
And I went through a series of steps in my PhD and other work that took me to butterflies as a
study system. It turns out that, like we think of lab rats or fruit flies as model organisms,
butterflies are model organisms, but for studies of global change, whether it's in climate or land
use. And so, that's what got me into butterflies. Once I did, once I knew something about butterflies,
I was called pretty quickly to answer questions about how to conserve rare butterflies in the
places I was. And so, that got me started when I arrived as a professor in North Carolina State
University in the early 2000s. I was called by a group that was interested in conservation
of one endangered butterfly called the St. Francis Seder. And the group that called me was the U.S.
Army. And they called me because this butterfly is endangered and it was found only on one army
base in North Carolina, Fort Bragg. And to further complicate matters, most of the butterflies were
found in one area of the army base, the artillery range. And so, it's got this complicated
feature that the bomb ranges are actually protecting the butterfly. So, that got my
foothold into it. Why is that? Because no humans go there. Yeah. Well, that's one reason. But that
is an important reason, but not the most important reason. So, it turns out that the bombs are
beneficial to butterflies. And it's totally counterintuitive. When I walked out into the bomb
range, and I'm the only civilian that has access to the artillery ranges to go do work on these
butterflies and help to keep the army in compliance. When I walked out there the first time, I thought
it'd be working, walking onto a moonscape, right? I mean, that's what bombs would create.
But I'm actually not walking into the places where the bombs land. So, then I think of it more
like a doughnut with a hole, and the hole is the places the bombs land. I'm walking into the doughnut
part. And what's interesting about the doughnut part is that people are kept out, as you said,
but it's also a place that is disturbed by the bombs, but not directly by the bombs hitting
those areas, but by the bombs creating fires that burn out through the landscape. And the habitats
that I work in are maintained by frequent fires. And so, naturally, there would have been fires
in that landscape every one to three years. But there aren't now. People stop fires. They stop
fires because, of course, we don't want them burning through our cities or our fields. But in
doing so, they change the nature of the habitat. Well, bombs just amazingly do a great job of
replicating what nature would have done naturally. Are we going to have an explosion of butterfly
populations after this year's Canadian wildfires? Oh, that's a good question. So, it's not, that's
you know, I get this question about fires and wildfires. And the natural fires that occurred on
the landscape were quite different. So, I like to make the point that it's natural disturbances.
Whereas the wildfires, like those in Canada, I mean, they are catastrophic fires that are started
not because of the natural dynamics of the ecosystem, but for many reasons of human influence
on the landscape. And so, no, the catastrophic fires in Canada now or in California two years ago,
that's not the catastrophic. That's not the, that doesn't have the beneficial effects that I'm
talking about where I work. And in many of these landscapes, including in the boreal regions or
in California, there naturally would have been fires. But on a regular basis, where that cadence
would help to maintain the ecosystem properties and ecosystem dynamics, but work far from that in
most places. Well, I'm saying this, which is, you know, I'm kind of laughing at myself as I'm
saying this because now I'm talking about bombs creating the fires and they're far from a natural
disturbance. But those bombs happen with regularity that simulates the natural dynamics of the system.
So I don't know, go figure. It's one of these unexpected events. And I stumble upon it frequently
in my conservation of insects, butterflies, that there's something that we think, man, this must
be the most terrible thing for conservation. And yet it turns out to be an important feature
of the landscape that humans have introduced that keep like this butterfly from extinction.
I get the army worried sometimes that, oh, because this endangered species are here, I might
recommend to curtail their activities in these ranges. No, it's the opposite. If they stopped,
the butterfly could be extinct. So I have lots of questions. Has anyone studied the butterfly
populations in Chernobyl? That's a good question. I can't answer about butterflies, but my colleagues
at in South Carolina at the Savannah River ecology that I do work active work in Chernobyl.
And it turns out that military lands across the world can be safe havens for many threatened
species and ecosystems. And why is that? It's because it gets back to your first point, it keeps people
out. And also, like in where I work in North Carolina, they're trying to maintain habitats that
simulate natural environments that soldiers might be fighting in. And so all of a sudden,
you've got these areas that, well, they can be a wealth of diversity. And they're huge areas
across the United States, you know, tens of millions of acres across the world, and the
hundreds of millions of acres. And so they can be refuges. So do we know roughly how many species
order of magnitude of butterflies there are in the world?
About 20,000. So that's comparable. Yeah, it's more than the number of some vertebrate groups,
like birds or mammals that we'd worry about. It's less than many other insect groups. So
as an example, there's about 10 to 20 times more moth species than butterfly species. So if I say
20,000 butterflies, then there's 200 to 400,000 moth species. What is the scientific
differentiation between a moth and a butterfly? Great question. I get that all the time.
There are some that, like, what do you think of when you think of moth butterfly?
Butterflies are more colorful and more daytime. Yeah, daytime. That's like the very first
obvious differentiators. And in many cases, probably in most cases, you get that right
by using that. But it's not always the case. There are colorful moths. I'm thinking about
Luna moths is one that people might know. There are others that are even more colorful.
And then there are butterflies, moths that fly during the day. And butterflies,
butterflies don't fly at night, but they can fly at dusk. There are brown butterflies that fly
towards dusk. Anyway, the key differentiator is the antenna. So the antenna of butterflies
are straight. They're like strings. The antenna of moths are feathered. So they're much more
complicated. So there's 20,000 species, give or take, of butterflies. How many of those are
endangered or critically endangered, do we know? We only know of a small number that are
critically endangered. And the answer, like in the US, the critically endangered number is less
than 30. And that's 30 out of around 1,000 butterflies that occur in the US. In the world,
there are a good number that are recognized as in need of, that are endangered, critically
endangered, threatened into the hundreds. But I have to say, we don't know as much as we need
to know to have that good statement. We just don't know enough about the insects. We know more
about butterflies than any other insect, but we still don't know enough about the insect.
Why is that? Why do we know more about butterflies than any other insect?
So butterflies are, they're easy for, first, they're easy for people to know and understand.
And so they're colorful. They're fun to look at. They're big. They fly in places where people are.
And so going back to what we talked about earlier, butterflies were the way people knew the natural
world going back to the time of Darwin and after. Butterfly collections were a huge way to understand
natural history. But then beyond that, people, scientists or non-scientists can contribute
to understanding about butterflies. So in the detailed science, I told you that butterflies
are the model organism for understanding how landscape change and global change affect populations.
But more broadly, people are getting involved in understanding the numbers of butterflies
out in the world. And so I can tell you about studies by citizen scientists and scientists
that happen across whole states, across whole countries, where people are going out to survey
butterflies every week of the year when butterflies are flying. And so they can generate enormous
amounts of data about butterflies and their, their plate. We probably don't have the same
evolutionary response that we do to spiders per se, because butterflies are slower and we know
that they don't really bite us. Can butterflies bite some species or not? No, no butterflies bite.
So, and plus spiders are really fast and you don't know where they're going to go and butterflies,
you can just kind of watch. Butterflies can be fast. They can be fast. I know from having
tried to catch them, but yeah, I understand your point. Yeah, you know, I mean, there's an unexpected
nature of spiders that you don't know where they're going to go or where they are. And
there's a vigilance to humans. I don't want to get too far off of the topic that I want to address
with you today. It's a global insect population, but, but I'm just wondering
what was our evolutionary history with insects generally? Do we have a sense? Because clearly we,
those evolutionary psychologists that look at the modular mind think that we have snake detector
modules and still in existence now because our brains were built up and forward and it's still,
you and I somewhere are subconsciously looking for snakes. In fact, there's a funny video on YouTube
cats and cucumbers. If you hide a cucumber, the cat will like freak out. But, but, but I wonder
what our ancestors might have thought about the, at that point, must have been a cornucopia of
different insects in our ancestral environment. Did they not like them and step on them and stuff?
Because there wasn't any worry about decimating the global insect population back then. Do we,
is there any anthropological stories or evidence on that? So two things. One is that they brought
up snakes. There are butterfly caterpillars that mimic snakes. So the caterpillar, I call it the
cutest caterpillar in the world. It's of a butterfly called the Spice Bush Walletail.
It's long and green, has big black eye spots. And then when you touch it, it puts out what looks
like a fork tug. It's not a fork tug. It's chemical receptors. But nonetheless, they're trying to take
advantage of people's fear of snakes. The response to insects, I think it's more specific than you're
saying. First, I think people know, almost no insects. I mean, think about this. How many,
I would ask you how many insect species could you name, but how many butterfly species could you name?
I was a naturalist growing up. I could probably, I could probably name 30 or 40 million.
Yeah. Good. So you're in the, you're in the, like, the rarefied group that can name more than one.
So most people, most, most people can name one butterfly, the monarch. And if they know a couple
more, they would know cabbage whites because they're past their cabbage, or they would know
tiger swallowtails. They would know maybe painted ladies because they raise them and release them
into the wild. But it's a very, very small number. Well, if people can't name butterflies,
how many of the other 5.5 million insects in the world could people name?
Okay. So there's, there's 20,000 butterflies and there's 5.5 million other insects.
Yes. It's a huge group. I mean, there's 20,000 butterflies, 40,000 moths, and then many more
flies, wasps, beetles, which are the most diverse group. But so people can't name or don't know the
butterflies. And I'll give you another example in a sec, but getting back to people's fear or
dislike. With the, I mean, I think we can all agree that people will fear things that are venomous.
So then that gets to some, the spider issue. Some spiders bite or venomous. Many are not, but
I had a student who studied the Argyapi spider. It's also called the zipper spider. It's got
like the zipper. The black and yellow ones we have. They're huge, right? They're huge. This
time of year too, in the fields. Yeah, this time of year. They look terrifying. But then she would
just grab one off the web and show people, you know, how you can handle them. They're
never going to bite you. No, but still we're scared of them. Like they're in our face and
we're going to avoid them. Yeah. And then, but so many of the insects that we know are pests. So
then that's another reason to dislike them. So if they're cockroaches or they're mosquitoes or
the other things that we can name, that things that spread disease or consume our food or degrade
our other things around where we're living. So I don't think there's an innate fear of all insects,
but it starts with the things that we dislike. And then that can like amplify to a bigger group,
like from a few spider species to all spiders or a few bee species to all bees. I mean, that's the
sad one. Yeah. Because if I, if you or I went out to survey bees, like we all care about pollinators,
if we survey bees, you or me, I mean, here I am a person who studies insects, I could identify
just a few species of the dozens that would be out in the prairie outside of my backyard,
without catching them, kinning them, identifying them under a microscope or not.
So that's the bad side. I think there is a positive. I think there's a change that's happening
within sex and the change is happening because of pollinators first. People care about pollinators.
So they might not know all the pollinators that are out there. What pollinators can we name? We
can name honey bees, bumble bees. Maybe the butterflies aren't so effective as pollinators,
but a few butterflies. But still, we know that pollinators have beneficial effect and people
are doing active conservation, just even individuals in their yards or in their farm fields to benefit
pollinator populations. So I think there is a change happening as we recognize the beneficial
effect and the potential of the loss, like how that loss could impact human civilization.
I want to get to that, but I want to bring up a personal example. Without naming names,
someone in my family, when they were young, was petrified, even if a moth was in the bathroom,
to the point of being unable to physically move until I removed it or killed it. I always removed
it. Can you speculate on the current cultural human disconnect with insects specifically?
And maybe it's a U.S. thing because I was at a conference where there was a wolf spider
and I was like, why can someone shush this away? Those are scary looking.
They're scary looking, but this German guy, Stefan, just came over and put it in his hand and cupped
it and removed it. So maybe it's a U.S. phobia, but do you think that humans have always considered
invertebrates, pests, and it's just now like you were saying, you think?
No, no, I was asking that rhetorically always. I think some insects, for sure, as long as there's
been stored food around people and also disease spread by insects, then they have to be, have
been considered pests. But then you get to questions like, Maz, I have students or I've had
students who are terrified of butterflies. Now, I say often we'll say, who does not love butterflies?
How can you not love these beautiful things that are flying around our gardens? And then I had
more than one student say, I am terrified of butterflies. And I ask why and I don't get a
good reason. So maybe it does trace to just an eight fear of insects. I don't know.
Butterflies is a hard one for me to understand. So getting, getting to the core of why I invited
you on the program, other than that we have mutual friends. How do butterflies act as, and
butterfly populations and the research that you are doing and your colleagues, how do they act
as a canary in the coal mine for general global insect loss? And I know you're a butterfly expert
and not a general insect expert, but I have read that we are losing global insect biomass at
something like one to 2% a year, which is a horrifying statistic. And I know, of course, we,
I mean, that's another thing I want to ask you. It's not like we have 2.3 million entomologists
scouring the planet counting species. So this is probably underfunded and underknown. So we have
to have an order of magnitude guess, but it seems like insects are not doing well.
No, they're doing, it's horrific, the rate of loss. And so we know, so I'll tell you more about
butterflies and say we know most about them. We know less about all the other insects, which are
the great diversity of insects, but all the numbers align that what we see with butterflies
represents what is happening with other insects. So I should start by telling you the insects,
they are the canary in the coal mine because, well, first, they're the canary that we can observe.
And why is that? It's because people, thousands, tens of thousands of people can go out and collect
in data on butterflies that is used by scientists to understand decline. Now, what do I say? What
do I mean when I say that? You know, we don't have all these scientists walking out there
with their rulers in their pockets and, you know, whatever other instruments you might want to have
to collect data, they're out there with their binoculars and a pad to record the number of
butterflies. And they're walking standard paths that anybody could do. I could set you up, you up
to do this in, you know, a couple hours. Yes, it'd take you a little time. Well, you know about
butterflies, but it would take an individual some time to learn the butterflies, but not much time.
And then they could be going for the year, for years. And that's what people do. They're fanatical
about butterflies once they start. And so I'll give you an example of where I started was in
the state of Ohio, where I started with data. So other people had collected the data and there are
places across the state where people have set up paths that they walk every week of the year.
They've done it every year for 20 or more years across the whole state. So we have data from
people. These are citizen scientists. They're not all scientists. So when you say it's under
funded, well, it's underfunded, except that people love doing it. So it costs a lot less money.
And what we found, then we can bring together all those data and ask, what is the status of
butterflies in the state of Ohio? And that's been going on for how long? It's been going on for about
25 years now. So what we found is that butterflies in Ohio are declining by, just as you said,
2% per decade per year, 2% per year, over 10% per decade. So in the 25 years since these surveys
have started, they've declined by over 30%. Now, what does this mean? I mean, 2% per year might
not seem like a lot. Like you go in your backyard, and you see 100 butterflies, what? You never see
100 butterflies. But if you did one year, and then 20 years, one year later, you might see 98.
Well, that's kind of in the noise. But 10 years later, you'd see less than 90. And 25 years later,
you'd see less than 70. And I mean, it's a huge change over a fraction of our lifetimes.
And so we did this in, the interesting thing about Ohio is what I'm telling you is the numbers,
if you summed up all the butterflies, so not by whatever the species is, you just add them to
the total number. But I bet some of them were down 90%. But the interesting thing is that when we
looked at individual species, well, some are increasing, but most are declining. But the
declining species are things like, well, monarchs, we know monarchs are declining. But also butterflies
like the cabbage white, the cabbage whites and introduced past species that if any species is
doing well, it should be thriving on people's broccoli and cabbage. But it's also declining.
So then we did the work in Ohio, other since have done work in US states like Illinois.
And in countries in the world like, like the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
Spain, Catalonia, and guess what, every long term decades long study has found
2% decline per year, or tens of percents per decade. And so it's not something somebody
could make up. Like it's not me going out and designing a study and collecting all the data
and doing it in some way that's biased. It's hundreds, thousands of people that are collecting
the data that are scientists, non-scientists, and reporting back and finding this 2% per
year decline. I mean, it's nuts. It's going on so regularly and for so long, and we don't see
the end. Like it's brutal. So one can presume that if butterflies are declining at 2% per year,
that whatever is doing it is also affecting many of the other insect species, the 5 million
species that you mentioned. Yeah. Or is that possibly a fake, a false assumption?
Right. I mean, that's an easy question to ask. Are butterflies canaries in the coal mine? I mean,
butterflies, they are different. I mean, we know them. So they have to be different. They're bigger
flying things. But a recent study came out in 2020, where they assembled all the long term,
decades long insect data sets in the world. So this is across all continents, across all types
of insects. And guess what they found? Insects on land declining by 2% per year. So what we've
learned for butterflies have lined up exactly with what we're now seeing for other insects.
I mean, you brought up a study that was in Germany. This set up off the alarms about the
insect apocalypse. And it was about a different measure, not the number of individuals, but the
biomass of insects. And they found an even more shocking decline. So they measured,
this is in forests in Germany, the biomass of all insects combined in the 1970s, then measured
it again in the 2000s. And they found a 75% decline in insect biomass. I mean, this is,
I mean, it's just mind boggling and frightening that insects can be declining this quickly.
It's really, and yeah, it's one of the challenges of our time, one of the grand scientific
challenges to understand why those butterflies are declining and all insects are declining.
It's really frightening. Yeah, that's why I invited you, because I'm very concerned about it,
because given our everyone, everyone should be concerned. I mean, that's, we have to get the
word out, because it's, like you said, people don't know, we talked about it, people don't
know insects so well, they know butterflies. My neighbors are all the time asking me,
you know, oh, why are the butterfly numbers down? I'm not seeing butterflies in my garden.
And 15 years ago, if somebody said that to me, I'd be like, yeah, maybe, maybe they are. But
thinking in the back of my head, oh, you just went out on a bad day, or you went out in some
year where something different's happening. Now I know that my neighbors, these are just people
looking out in the backyard at things in their garden, they're right, butterflies are declining.
I have so many different questions for you. Let's start with this one.
What if the St. Francis butterfly went extinct? Big deal or?
Yeah, you had to ask me that question. The answer is depends on what the big deal is. So
is it a big deal for ecological systems? No, it is not a big deal for ecological systems.
One species, not a big deal. Not no, some species, it would be a big deal. Like,
we could go to a different one, like a monarch or others that are more abundant. But St. Francis
ator, there are at most 3000 adult butterflies in the world, 3000. So this is a number that's so
small that they'll have trivial effects on ecosystems. I mean, if I took those 3000 butterflies
and wadded them up into a ball, the ball would be this big. Like this is how much butterfly there
would be. So from the perspective of what they're doing for ecosystems, they're functionally extinct
already. Functionally extinct. They are not pollinators. They're not food for predators.
And so if they're lost, their impact on ecosystems, yes, they're functionally extinct.
It's inconsequential. But the bigger, there's then a more cosmic question. What is the effect
for people? And I think that effect is profound, that people should not be the cause of loss of
whole species from the face of the earth. I mean, that's the crux of things. And so it's
getting to a non, like not a functional or other kind of value, but the, the just core value of
do we cause species to go extinct? Well, I don't know how much you know of my work, but I deeply
concur with that. But I'm trying to build a logic with that question. Okay, let's say we lost
all the butterfly species. What would be the impact then?
Then, I mean, well, starting with the butterflies, and then you could go on to all insects with
butterflies, but with butterflies, butterflies and other insects, they're just foundational to our
ecological system. So butterflies, what they're consuming plants, they're prey for predators,
they're pollinating. I have a former collaborator who studied pollination of cotton. And we often
don't think of butterflies as big pollinators. It turns out that butterflies are responsible for
10% of cotton pollination. They're worth over $100 million a year in Texas alone for pollen crops.
And so if you lost all butterflies, you'd be losing the pollination that other pollinators can't do.
Butterflies can pollinate those parts of the plants that others don't. So they're pollinators, they're
food for predators. I mean, we now know that bird declines. We guess how fast breeding birds in the
U.S. are declining. I believe that went for you. Oh, well, it depends on whether it's an insectivore
or other types of birds. But I know the insectivores are dropping faster than others because they
don't have enough to eat. I would guess they're down the 30 or 40% in the last few decades.
Yeah. So you're right. You're right on. And I asked that question. It was an unfair question to
pop on you. But birds, breeding birds in the U.S. have declined by, guess what, 2% per year.
The same rate that butterflies are declining. And further than going to your point, we've shown now
there's been big analyses done recently of all the studies of effects of insects on bird
performance at nests. So do chicks survive? And do they leave the nest? And a strong factor affecting
their success at nests is, is there an abundance of insects around for them to prey on? And so it's
not like we can talk about, yeah, the insects are declining, but it's not just the insects. It propagates
to the whole ecological system. Birds are the most obvious recent example. People have estimated
that there are currently 3 billion fewer breeding birds in the United States. Well, what causes
that? We can think of a lot of reasons, but it turns out the rate is exactly the same as loss
of insects. And we now know that scientists know that insects are critical to performance of birds.
How important are insects really? It's somewhat of a rhetorical question. I remember there's
an Albert Einstein famously said, if bees were to die out, humans would not be far behind.
Just forgetting about the values and the ethics of it, can humanity survive and thrive if we are
losing insect biomass at 2% a year? No, if insects are lost, if the rate they're being lost, then
no, that it will fundamentally degrade the Earth's systems in ways that humans can't
can't tolerate. Can you give us some examples on some of the impacts? The thing is that if
here's, I mean, this is taking it to a logical extreme, but we're talking about 2% decline per
year, consistent over decades since the 70s and no end in sight. So now we have 30% loss
and we can talk about the loss of 3 billion birds or whatever. But if we lose another 30%,
which we're on track to do in the next 20 to 30 years, and then another 30%, there's a point where
the end comes. And so then what's the effect? Well, we know that what there are 200 pollinated
crops in the world. Well, if there aren't insects to pollinate those crops, then what's happening
to a large fraction of our food? And insects are to great, they're responsible for health of our
soils through decomposition. There's, I mean, so many ways that insects just weave into the
fabric of our lives that it's hard to see how those functions can be performed without those
insects there. There was a video that I showed my students when I taught at the University of
Minnesota. I'll have Lizzie put it in the show notes. But it was a thing with plants and ant
species. And it showed the complexity. And the system would maintain stability as we lost ant
species. There were other ones that could pollinate and do things. But once there went below a
certain level, there was a phase shift and a collapse. Even though there were plenty of species
available, it was the interconnectedness of the web of life that was transformed by the loss. And
I expect something like that also could happen with insects in a way that entomologists and
terrestrial ecologists like you don't really know yet. Oh, no, we don't know. Well, that's, I mean,
we don't know because like even now with a 30% loss in butterflies and then in all insects to the
extent that we know that insect populations are changing, well, how I ask people, well, how can't
we see the just profound ecosystem consequences? And I think those are starting to arise like with
the birds as a big example. I mean, we're losing birds so fast and it's so tightly related to loss
of insects. I mean, there are other factors, of course, but nonetheless, it's a big driving factor.
I'm sure you've been asked this many different times. There's even cartoons about it because I
think it's become obvious to people that are our age or older. When I was a kid in the 1970s in
Wisconsin, we would drive up to our family cabin and my dad would have to stop. You know what I'm
going to say? Yes, I do. We would have to stop at the gas station halfway out and get those squeegee
things and get all the dead bugs off our windshield. It is, that never happens ever. No, no, it never
happens. And it's, it's kind of like, well, people are here's the other thing. Do you remember? Well,
let me ask this. Do you remember? I was telling the story one time and then it was to an older
fellow and he said, oh, yeah, we used to have screens over the grill of our car to keep insects
from going through the grills of the car. Do you remember those? Then there would be butterflies or
other things impaled on those grills on those screens. So this is, I don't know if you know
Daniel Pauley's work on fisheries, but he invented the concept or coined the term shifting baselines
that we see what this year is very similar to last year. And next year will be similar to this
year, maybe a 2% drop. But we forget even a generation ago, the unbelievable web of life
that has been compressed. And so we, we emotionally miss the significance of the
die off of the natural world. And I think that applies to insects as well, even though insects
are not a favored species in our culture. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, I think, yes, I think we do see a phase shift. See, I mean, there's two sides of this. But first,
like when you say, I'm going to push back a little bit on not a favored group, I think you're right
in many ways and for sure around our houses and when we think about
pests or mosquitoes or whatever. But I think there is a change that's happening. And I think it's
driven by pollinators specifically. I think people love pollinators. They know the benefits of
pollinators and then that's extending to a broader group of insects. So I'm very happy to hear that,
Nick, but I will also push back that you are in the middle of that choir, because those people
are reporting to you. I think the general person doesn't give a crap about insects.
Okay, so let me, let me give you an example. I work in farmed landscapes where farmers plant
native prairies within their, within their corn and soy fields. And they do it for primarily
these two reasons. One is to prevent erosion. And the other is to increase water quality.
Right. So those are two sensible reasons that also affect bottom line of agriculture. But
people have done studies on why people might do these and measured all sorts of ecological
responses. And it turns out the third most important reason not far behind the erosion
control and water quality is pollinator conservation. And so that is not part of the choir that I'm
preaching to. I think it's, I think it's a bigger thing than, I don't know, maybe I'm an optimist
though. I am, I am a hopeful person. Well, I like the fact that you're an optimist, but farmers are
like one to one and a half percent of our population, but that is also good news. That is also good
news. Okay, so why is this happening? We understand we're losing insects one to two percent biomass
per year. It's not a Michigan thing. It's a global thing. Why do we know why? Yeah, we know more now
than we did and even just a few years ago. So if you pick up one of these scientific papers that
talks about insect apocalypse or insect decline, then the last few paragraphs inevitably say
insects decline because habitat is being lost, because the climate is warming or becoming
wetter drier or because of pesticide use. Yet there's no next step. Like which of these three big
global changes is having the greatest effect? So recently, like very recently in the last
couple of years, a group of students I worked with compiled all the long-term butterfly datasets
I've already talked about. And in the same counties compiled the land use data, so understanding
where habitat's been lost. That's pretty easy. There's land cover datasets. They've compiled the
weather data. Well, anybody can get the temperature precipitation data and the use of pesticides
in every county where the butterfly data has been collected over a 20-year period. And there's
different kinds of pesticides. There's herbicides. There's insecticides. And there's different kinds
of those. Well, the person I was working with was able to get records of the specific pesticide
uses across all these classes. So then we could put all these data into one big analysis and ask
what are the most important factors affecting decline. And what came out is on the top is a new
class of insecticide. It's kind of mouthful to talk about, but neonicotinoids are what they're
called. And these things showed up on the scene in the late 90s. And then it's not surprising that
we see a correlation between increased use of neonicotinoids and the decline of butterflies.
But still, other things have been changing. So this came out on top. And now I can say with
good certainty that neonicotinoids are a main driver of insect decline. But
are those neonicotinoids used planet-wide and in every state? Are they quite...
They are almost ubiquitous in corn, soy growing regions in the United States. We
do research at our station that investigates different types of cropping systems. It's hard
for us to find seeds that don't have this class of chemicals coating the seeds before they're planted.
And then it's beyond... We can track, to some extent, agricultural use. It's also used in
people's yards. It's a huge source of pest control to keep those unwanted insects that people don't
like to keep them out of their spaces. And so they're ubiquitous. They're used over large areas and
they're used by... What are they trying to kill, the neonicotinoids?
Well, they're trying to kill the pest insects. So they do a good job of keeping corn borers out of
corn or aphids off of soybeans or wheat. So they do a good job. They're starting from the beginning,
from the seed of having the compounds absorbed and taken up into plants and then being there
through the life stages to kill or keep off insects. But the problem is they're not stuck just on the
agricultural plants. So at one time they were sprayed and people were realizing that they
could have negative effects. So a solution was to stick them in the seeds and then bury them in
the ground. Well, the two problems with that, one is when the seeds are being planted, a dust
flies up of this powder that's on the edge of a seed and then that spreads to the environment.
And then they're also resident for long periods of time in the soil. And so they become ubiquitous.
They come out as the leading factor and decline of insect abundance and insect diversity.
A couple of follow-up questions. Actually, I have like 10, but I want to be... I know. Dude,
it's horrible, but I want to highlight it because we talk a lot about what's happening with climate
change and the oceans and biodiversity loss. But insects is not usually a front page story.
Yeah, I'm going to let you talk more about that in a second. Here are my two questions.
So of those 5 million insect invertebrate species plus or minus,
how many are in the soil? Ooh, that's a good question. I don't have a great answer to that.
A lot are in the soil. And so are those being impacted too by the neo-nix on the seeds?
Well, think about this. The soil insects, what are they eating? They're in the soil,
but they're either eating plants that could be eating roots or crawling out of the soil to eat
plants or they're eating their predators of other insects that are eating plants. And so,
yes, it's affected throughout the food chain. So you work at ADM or Coggill or some big food
company and your shareholders want profits and the profits are linked to reducing costs and
selling corn and soybeans at a high enough price and processing them. So neonicotinoids from a
profit standpoint are quite a good thing, quite a good investment. But that's because you're trying
to kill aphids and corn borers, but it's like using a bazooka to kill a squirrel. You're also
taking out a lot of other species and having ecosystem impacts. So the fault is that we don't
value those things in our ecosystem, in our economic system. What would happen to our yields
if we stopped using neo-nix? That's a great question. I was out at our research plots today. We have
research plots that we've been studying for 35 years that go from business as usual agriculture
through all different kinds of what's called regenerative agriculture, so more sustainable and
best practice and through to organic. But one of our plots has 30% the level of
insecticides, herbicides, and nitrogen added as to the business as usual plots. And guess what
their yield is? It's about equal. And so what that tells you is what we're over applying. Even so,
first, does that plot need more human labor input? No, they're farmed exactly the same. It's business
as usual, plot minus those. What? So there's other evidence that pesticides, so there we are
using some pesticides. There's other evidence that pesticides are, that's even still an over
application of pesticides. So on that spot where you have 30% only of those things applied,
do you see a difference in the insect populations? We don't, but we also don't
generally have problems with pest insects. I think the answer is no, we don't see major pest
impacts because we're not applying more nitrogen. So there's that nitrogen, what nitrogen do, but
pesticides. And so I think the key messages were way over applying pesticides. And so then to get
to your question, well, sure, do we need pest control? Yes. But we're applying it well over
the rate that's needed. It's thought, and why is that? Well, it's thought of and part of the
security blanket too, like have the stuff there when it's not needed so that it's for sure there
when it is needed. But when you bring up the companies that need to make money from selling
pesticides, well, they're taking some action too. And that's in part because it's forced on them by
governments. So in Europe, these neonicotinoids have been banned. And so there the mark, the force
has to go against two other types of pest control. So neo-nics have been banned in Europe, but not
in the United States. And when was that? I don't know the exact year. Sometimes it's because
citizens and scientists got together and lobbied and advocated for the importance of our complex
ecosystems in our continent. Yes, there's that. And of course, we are worried about just the
nasty chemicals that are out in the environment. And is there any evidence that that has stemmed
the decline in some of those regions of insects? So that is a great question. So I'm an experimental
ecologist. This was not a true experiment, but it's as close as we're going to get to understand
effects of insect declines and the effects, the ability to recover from the threats we've
imposed on them. And so to me, it's a great experiment. And the other great thing is we have
that we're accumulating the data through these butterfly surveys that are happening every year.
So we should be able to detect change in response to change in application of pesticides. Now,
will it be immediate? No, we're not going to see it right away. And so I would want to see a decade
or more of data just as we're seeing this slow decline of 2% per year, it might take as long
for those populations to recover. I would also, I mean, the nice thing about insects is they have
the capacity to recover rapidly, because they can produce so many offspring, every insect can
produce so many offspring. And we see that in the record of monarchs, for example. And so we know
monarch populations are down, but they were way down. So they went from in the East Coast,
Eastern half of the US, they went from about a billion monarchs, down, down, down to at one
point about 30 million monarchs. So 97% decline, 97% decline. Well, guess what? They've rebounded now
to about 200 million in the last year. Well, 200 million sounds like a big number, but it's still
an 80% decline from where we were 20 years ago. So, you know, it speaks, it's like,
two sides of the same coin. One is that, yes, butterflies can recover rapidly, but
still the long term trajectory is downward. So I've, I mentioned Daniel Pauley before,
who's an ocean scientist who has told me that if left alone, fish populations can swiftly recover.
So if for some reason we were to ban pesticides or even reduce it to 30% of what we're using in
the business as usual case, that that theme could play out with insects around the world.
And would that be welcomed by people or not? I think we go ahead.
I think welcomed because, you know, pest species, well, they're likely going to do well because
we create environments for pest species to thrive in. But that's just a few of the total
species. And besides that, when people go out to see their butterflies or their pollinators or
the effects of pollinators, people will relish that. I mean, frankly, they need it to sustain our
populations. So does the half earth concept popularized by E. L. Wilson apply to insects as well?
That's a great question. The answer, well, for sure, yes. So I said,
pesticides are the greatest cause of this rapid decline. But for sure, habitat loss has
driven declines. I mean, the thing we're seeing is that the recent declines have happened
concurrent with the advances in these pesticides, but habitat has been lost for
decades, centuries. And that's caused a change in the insects that are out there,
including the loss of St. Francis Cedar butterfly that I've studied and other of the rare butterflies.
But then, so the question is, should we be pushing towards half earth? Well,
we know that to save biodiversity, we're going to need more habitat than is currently on the planet.
And so half earth is a great vision. What I've noticed in the US and other countries and
worldwide come up recently as this idea of 30 by 30 conserving 30% of habitats by 2030.
And I do think, well, that'll benefit insects and other other place other types of species
on a biodiverse planet. But yeah, I think we like that is in reach the 30% conservation by 2030.
And I think that will be critical to protecting butterflies and other insects.
We have amazing scientists that work at these labs and they come up with all kinds of modified
GMO corn seeds and whatever. Is it too far of a stretch to imagine that there's a targeted
pesticide for aphids and corn borers alone that doesn't affect other insects or is that kind of
fantasy land? No, I don't think it's fantasy. I think those types of things are in the works.
And I'd love to see them. Some pest control is going to be necessary. I'm not saying that we
should never control pests. But if they're targeted at the species we don't want, then great. I'd love
to see it. Will that happen? I do have some hopes that I mean, I've seen signs that those kinds of
pesticides are being developed. But we'll see how long it takes for them to be deployed and
effective. But I'm, yes, I am all in favor of technological solutions to reduce applications of
the most dangerous pesticides. I mean, it's interesting. Yeah, I'll leave it at that.
Go ahead. Well, I was thinking about neonicotinoids. They were developed to replace
other insecticides that were harmful to people. And so there was a environmental benefit of
developing neonicotinoids. The problem is they ended up being too effective for the other insects
that we want. And so then the worry is, just as we could develop other insecticides that are more
targeted, that's the dream, we could also develop more, we could ban neonicotinoids and come with
even more toxic chemicals to put out in the environment. That would be disastrous.
Well, the reason I think your work is critical and why I'm so happy to have you on the program is
I think part of this comes with a change in awareness and a change in consciousness and a
change in perspective. I hope so. In my own life, and I'm, you know, as my dad would say,
an environmental wacko. But I remember when I was a kid or a teenager, if there was a wolf
spider in the house, I would step on it or kill it. 10 or 20 years after that, I would ignore it
and let it be. 10 years ago now, until now, I would actually trap it in a jar and bring it outside
and now, now only in the last couple of years after learning about all this,
I kind of just stop and I look at it for a few minutes and I watch its behaviors and,
you know, it's not my peer or anything, but it's part of the web of life and I'm just stopping
in the moment to appreciate one of the other creatures on the world and that's a progression
from stomping on them when I was younger. And maybe our culture needs to go through some
mental progression like that, not only with insects, but with all of the other creatures on the earth.
Yeah, I agree. And I mean, I see it happening in small, you know, small steps and hopefully it
can become more progressive, I think so. But I mean, just think about people planting pollinator
gardens. Did you see that when you were a kid? No. People planted flowers, but they didn't
plant pollinator gardens now. So how can someone listening to this start that? I'm sure you have
resources available that we could put in the show notes, but if someone's listening and they want
to just do a little bit of citizen science and do what's right for their backyard to encourage
pollinators, but also be friendly to other insects, how would you recommend they get started?
So first, I think, just as a general rule, and I can talk about other ways this is true,
that some of the best places for conservation are hidden in plain sight. And one of those
is our yards. So I think we can all be excited about some diversity in our yards, even pretty
flowers that are in our gardens or might be attracting pollinators that we see like monarchs.
But what I recommend to people is, hey, if you don't want to tear up your whole yard,
just start small. Make a small pollinator garden. Maybe it's the size of, I don't know,
a coffee table or the size of a room, just a small area of your yard. And if you do that,
there's two benefits. One is, as it builds on other small areas that are across the community
and across the world, well, that's in the end going to have a net benefit for pollinators.
But then also, you're going to see and learn more about your environment. So I think of insects.
Of course, I think about butterflies. I love butterflies, but you'll see more butterflies
and start to understand them. I think butterflies are the new birds. We can,
in my yard, there might be as many butterfly species as bird species. And I can pick up a
nice field guide like butterflies to binoculars, and I can learn them. And then, you know, gradually,
I might learn something about the other bees that are there, not just the honeybees or bumblebees.
But if we start in small steps, maybe it expands over time, or maybe not. But even
those small steps are beneficial. And I think we can all do that. We can all benefit nature
and the natural world by making those small contributions. And if people do that, and there's
a lot of people in a neighborhood or something, but that neighborhood butts up against a industrial
corner or soybean field, does that matter? Does it help that it does? No, I think it does. I get
that question all the time. I struggle with it because we recommend planting native plantings
through corn fields and through soybean fields. And then, of course, the question is,
is there a negative spillover? And what we know is that, well, if there's no habitat there,
there's going to be zero butterflies. So if there have to be more, and then the question is, though,
are we going to attract butterflies to these places, and then they get whacked by the chemicals
nearby? And I think the net effect is going to be positive. And so, yes, we go for it.
How far do butterflies fly in a day? Good question. It depends. So if you're a
St. Francis State or butterfly, it might be 50 to 100 meters, the length of a football field.
Or less. I mean, it could be just meters. But if you're a monarch, it can be 100 miles a day.
It can be a long distance. Literally 100 miles in one day?
I think 100 miles is probably an overestimate, but maybe not by much. They have to travel
3,000 miles from South America. So if they travel 100 miles in a day, that would be 30 days to get
from Michigan to Mexico. Okay. Yeah. So they go a long ways. Have you been to Mexico to see those
trees with it? Oh, it's tragic. How can I not have seen that yet? Have you?
No, I haven't, but I'm not a world butterfly expert. But it's a miracle of biology, so everybody
should see it. Yeah. No, I've not seen it. It's tragic. I've seen good numbers. I've seen, I've
traveled just this last year. I've saw three of the monarch overwintering sites in California.
So there's an eastern monarch. That's what we're talking about now, but there's also a western
monarch that's doing worse than the eastern monarch. But it overwinteres on coastal California,
and I visited three of their sites, and they cluster like the eastern monarch does in Mexico.
But the balls are this big of clusters of butterflies that maybe are hundreds or
a thousand butterflies together, not millions of butterflies clustered in the same tree.
Right. So what you're advocating for, I'm a little dense, but what you're really saying is
for people who want to take a stand for biodiversity and ecology, and who maybe are a little overwhelmed
at the decimation of nature, that a really good starting point is just start a garden for
targeting pollinators, and start there, and you learn from it, and you're actually increasing
the insect abundance in your neck of the woods, wherever that might be. And that acts as a microcosm
of extinction rebellion on the micro level of sorts.
I think that's, it is a starting point. You asked what any person could do, and I think that's what
any person could do. There, of course, there are the next steps beyond that, becoming advocates
for biodiversity conservation, doing grand conservation through a bigger conservation
organization, doing butterfly surveys once a week. I mean, anybody watching this could
identify an organization that runs these butterfly surveys. So that would be the real next step,
is to do something like that, that might take a half hour, an hour a week, and you contribute to
your knowledge of butterflies and your knowledge of science. So I don't want to be too superficial.
How much is planting a butterfly garden going to change the world? It's just a small piece,
but still, I think it's something active that people can do to think about conservation of nature.
I'm going to do it. I live in a farm, but I don't pay much attention to the butterflies. I don't
think I see too many, but I'm going to try to identify them like a half hour, an hour a week,
like you said. But on the back row level. What kind of farm do you live on?
I live on the border of Wisconsin and Minnesota, and we have some land that we own with a friend
of mine that has nine acres of, used to be soy and corn, but now we have a variety of plants. We
have buckwheat there this year. We also have hundreds of hazelnut plants that I planted 10
years ago. So we have hazelnuts, and then there's forest around those fields.
I should send you our, so worth, as I told you, thinking about prairie strips through agricultural
fields. That would be a big way you could start by planting a mix of these prairie plants that
have benefits in the prairie themselves and to the surrounding croplands.
I'll do it. Thank you. So on the macro sense, before I get to my closing questions for you,
you were an active advocate against some of the recent changes to legislation on the Endangered
Species Act, which were later rescinded. Can you tell us a bit about the current state
of conservation policy in our country, the United States, and how that compares to
global conservation regulations? Great question. So I study Endangered Butterflies,
so my starting point is the Endangered Species Act, which is up for reauthorization soon. It's
getting its 50-year anniversary, which is cool that it made it this far, and it's done a world of
good for conserving species. It's been done a world of good for conserving vertebrate species most.
It's had a harder time getting a foothold in with the insects, so there's less than 30 Endangered
Insect Species, and they often get listed as endangered when they're so close to conservation,
to extinction that it's like they've fallen through the last safety net. Hold on a second.
We're losing insects at 2% a year, and out of 5 million, there's only 30 that are endangered?
So this is just in the U.S., and so in the U.S., there might be a thousand butterflies,
and there's 30 that are endangered. It's almost all, yeah. And so, yeah, a small fraction is
endangered or considered endangered. But as an example, the St. Francis Stater that I told you
about numbered in the few thousands before it was listed as endangered, I study a butterfly now
called the Power Chic Skipperling that was spread from where I live all through Michigan to where
you live, Wisconsin, Minnesota, all the way up to Manitoba, and hundreds of populations as recently
as the early 2000s. Now there are three populations left in the world, two in Southeast Michigan,
one in Manitoba, all the others were wiped off the earth, and all in a blink of the eye. And
it took till almost all were gone till the butterfly was listed as endangered.
So one issue with the Endangered Species Act that is problematic is there's no
standard for being listed as an endangered species, and that's one thing that's different
from global standards. So the International Union for the Conservation of Nature has a
red list of endangered and threatened species, but the criteria are published. So
if a species has a high rate of population decline, it's listed as endangered. If it has a high rate
of range loss, that is the area that it covers becomes restricted, then it becomes endangered.
And so there's very clear criteria that lead to conservation recognition. And in fact,
the monarch was listed as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature,
but not on the U.S. Endangered Species Act that is being evaluated. But there's also no
teeth to that. They're identified, recognized as endangered, but that doesn't lead to
national recognition. So the point is that, yes, it's wanting instead of world of good
for some species is wanting. But I think also that conservation is moving to also consider
ecosystems more holistically. Like right now, there's an assessment called the National Nature
Assessment that's ongoing underway, and it's going to be released I think in 2026. But it's
comes by an act of Congress to ask the Office of Science, Technology, and Policy to incorporate
the value of nature and understanding the costs of doing business. So these are called ecosystem
services, the values that nature generates for people. And so this assessment's happening now
to feed back into federal policy for conservation. Well, that's not about endangered species, but
in conserving the rest of nature, hopefully many of those endangered species will come along.
So I just had a thought. I've had many, many thoughts on this conversation. Climate change
is going to affect the entire planet and the oceans. But our response to insects decline
could be wildly different on different continents and different countries in different regions,
right? Yeah, I could. And we also know, I mean, I've been talking about butterfly declines,
but where we know most about them is in Europe and the United States. And so,
you know, where the most butterflies are and where the most insects are, we know the very
least about their rate of change. Right. So it's possible that that 2% that we're measuring in
those countries that can afford to have the science to measure it, it might be worse elsewhere.
It might be worse elsewhere. There's no reason to think it's better. So just as an example,
the three biggest soy producers in the world are the US, Argentina and Brazil. And so,
you know, the same threats are happening there as happening elsewhere.
Yeah, yeah. Well, this is fascinating, heart-wrenching and profound, but
it's deeply, it should really, it should be a deep concern to everybody. The rate of loss and
the trajectory of loss is so fast. And the end is unknown at this point. It's, we're really heading
in a direction that, well, ecosystems can't tolerate.
Thank you, Nick. I have some closing personal questions if you have a few more minutes.
You have obviously cared about these things for a long time. You've chosen to be an ecologist
as a profession. Do you have any personal advice to listeners just more broadly on the times that
we're alive in with global upheaval and anxiety and climate change and species loss and economy?
What some people might call the poly crisis. Do you have any advice to listeners?
Yeah, so they, I mean, there are so many threats coming in around us that, I mean, it really is
hard to bear. It's hard to look at the news every day. It's hard for me and my friends, colleagues,
to think about not just the world we're living in, but the world our children are going to be
living in as all this is changing. So it's easy to get gloomy about what prospects are. I mean,
we see the change happening so rapidly that what, how do we change it? Well, we can do our little
things to make our contributions. I think there's value there, but that's not going to reduce global
change or produce climate change just at an individual level. We all need to be in this
together. So what advice do I have? I think my main advice is to be involved just personally as
ourselves to our little contributions, but also to get engaged at whatever level that
you're interested in, whether, I mean, I brought up butterfly surveys that's contributing to science
that's having broader understanding or to bigger policy initiatives work with the
conservation organizations that are around your community or in bigger ways. I don't know,
it's hard because there's, these are big problems. They're hard to get our minds around,
but we can all do just our little parts. And you're a college teacher and I have recently
been one. So I know that these issues, environmental issues are, are very prominent in young people's
minds. I think older people are very split on climate change, but I think both conservatives
and progressive young people care about climate change. What do you tell your students
at the end of the semester after they've learned about insect apocalypse and everything? What,
what sort of advice do you give to your 18, 19, 20 year old?
I, I do, I will say, I try to stay away from advice, but I am telling them, like you said,
there's a whole semester about impacts of global change on ecological systems. And you're right,
it's in every one of these places. And I, like I said, I mean, that my, the irony about me,
personally here, I'm talking about all these negative effects of environments and I see it in
all the science I do. And yet personally in my heart of hearts, I try to be optimistic and
look forward to a positive future. And so then how do we do that? It's becoming harder and harder.
And I really feel bad for myself and for what my kids and their kids are going to have to
wrestle with what we're leaving with them within the future. What I know about human psychology
and physiology is 10 years from now, even if things get worse, you're still going to be a
pretty cheerful, positive guy. It's just who you are. Yes, it's who I am. Yeah. What is getting
harder though? But I get this question at the end of seminars now, like what, and it's usually the
youngest people. So it, you know, as an audience full of faculty and postdoctoral researchers,
students, graduate undergraduates and the youngest people who ask the question,
what can I do? Like how, given what I'm seeing, what can I do? And I've,
I used to have what I thought were compelling answers and now I'm kind of stuck
to stop short to say anything. I don't know. I've got to, I've got to have a better answer.
I'm in the same boat. I think you first have to understand and be aware. And then you have to
care. And then there are other steps. So I think education is still very important. So I'm very
happy that you're doing what you're doing. Well, I love it. I mean, I do teach a 200 person class.
I've taught it for 25 years and I love it. What's the course called? Which is ecology. It's
general ecology, but ecology can go towards basic biology, but I always infuse understanding
how global change affects the ecological systems we live within.
So if you were king or prime minister and you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal
recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you would want done to improve human planetary
futures? The one that I am on a bandwagon now for is taking all of the unproductive agricultural
land out of production and restoring it to natural habitat. Now, why do I say that? These are among
those areas that I talked about that are hiding in plain sight on any farm. There's areas that are
not productive. They might be in areas that were water impounds or at the tops of hills that become
dry or near the edge of fields. And on any farm, it might just be a few acres or a few tens of acres.
But across the Midwestern US, it's 20 million acres. So with my magic wand, I would see 20
million acres conserved. And then if we go from the US Midwest to the world, then we're talking
about many times that. So that's my magic wand is conservation of what would end up being hundreds
of millions of acres by taking out agricultural lands that are consistently under-yielding.
It's not implausible. Let's hope something like that could happen.
Yeah, I think it's possible. I think it's possible.
Yeah. Thank you so much for your time, Professor Haddad. And we will be in touch and maybe I have
you back for a roundtable on this incredibly important and hopefully more people see it as
important issue of butterflies, insects, and the complex ecosystems of Earth. Thank you so much.
Thank you. I'd love to talk more about it. And I really appreciate you having me on the show.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
