in your books, you reference the sacred often. Could you explain what that means to you? And
in the future, could there be something that everyone commonly understands or feels is sacred,
or is this concept varies from person to person? What do you think?
Well, you know, I chose the word the sacred because it has less baggage than the spiritual
and certainly is a distant relative of the religious. I grew up without any religious training,
and what I discovered relatively early on was that nature was the place that I went to for
sanctuary for refuge when I needed to be healed to feel better. And then as we started doing
Bioneers, I began to realize that I love nature in a way that I don't even want to call it nature
anymore because we are nature. It puts nature separate from us and we are nature. But my love
of this life and the land and the globe that we get to inhabit is so deep that I thought,
if I ever show this to anybody, they're going to think I'm crazy. And then the more that I learned
and was mentored by native peoples, the more I saw that they relate to everything on this earth
as sacred and as a relative. And so the sacred became for me a kind of a way of referring to
what I care about most deeply, what is most important to my heart. And you know, that doesn't
preclude people. I love people and I'm very devoted to them. But I think our loss of the sacred in
modern culture, in modern Western culture, is a root source of what's awry in the world today
and what has led us to this point. We're mentioning Native Americans and how they are
tethered and view nature as a connection and their relatives. So if you take a six to ten-year-old
native child and a standard six to ten-year-old child in Santa Fe or Chicago or Minneapolis
or something, I think they both feel this connection to nature, right? It's in us. It's almost been
forgotten. So I assume that the Native cultures are continuing with the education and the rituals
and the ceremonies and the stories. And we've just exercised those from our current culture,
or is it something deeper than that? Well, I mean, from my limited understanding of where
indigenous cultures are in this country at this time, they're beginning to reclaim
their language and their ceremonies. They are in a deep process of healing and recovery, frankly,
because part of the hidden history of this country, of course, is our sequential genocidal
tactics to eradicate Native culture and Native peoples from this land. We didn't really learn
that in high school either. No, we sure didn't. And so I think that they are in a process of
reclaiming it. And there's a wonderful illustration of this that I like to point to that's actually
a very short YouTube video that's called, The Mycelium is Listening. And it tells the story
with Paul Stamets' voice of, yeah, who you know, right? Or know of him. I certainly know of him.
There was another movie last year, something about mushrooms, I forgot what it was. Fabulous Fungi.
That one I watched, yeah. Okay. Well, this is a very short YouTube video. And what it describes
is that science has now proven that the Mycelium deep under the earth, which are, of course,
you know, the sort of roots of mushrooms and which are unseen but have enormous ecological
functions, that they actually respond to sound frequencies. And the sound frequencies that
they respond to the most are the really low frequencies like drumming. And so you can imagine,
right, that our ancestors or native people's ancestors doing ceremony on this land,
when they would do their seasonal ceremonies to express gratitude and to call in the rain,
that drumming spoke to the Mycelium and all of nature is listening, right? I mean,
it's kind of a remarkable, wonderful illustration of how much we don't know.
