I mean, emergence is what we're talking about.
It's basically consequences of things that have been brewing.
So you have these situations, and they
get into various configurations, and then there's consequences,
and they are emergent.
And so things happen.
That knowing what's going to happen
is nearly impossible, because you can't actually
see all the ways in which these relational processes are
going to come together.
And so you get surprised by emergence.
And some of those surprises are like life.
A forest is in an ongoing state of emergence.
It's constantly responding, from the trees, to the ferns,
to the forest floor, to all the beasties and birds
that everyone is responding, and creating
an emergent, ongoing process of life
that's different yesterday than it was today.
In order to continue, things have to discontinue.
So emergence offers this wildness of life.
Now that's the romantic version.
Emergence is also the root word in emergency.
And emergence is not always pretty.
And you can see the opiate crisis as an emergent situation
that has been brewing through the conditions of all sorts
of things, from economics to relationship to pain
to the cartels, to notions of what
it means to be healthy and happy and successful
and how people are responding to that,
to the increase in use of Adderall in universities
and high schools, to sports injuries, and so on and so
forth.
So you get these conditions, and then you
get emergence that comes out of it.
So is education a way to change the odds
that future emergence might be on the positive side,
as opposed to the negative side?
And I noted in a recent paper you wrote,
you used the concept of the word pre-emergence.
Can you tell what that means?
Yeah, and I think, for me, this pre-emergence
is what I'm really interested in.
Because by the time something has emerged,
it's been cooking for a while.
And so pointing to things that are emerging and saying,
look, this is emerging, and that is emerging,
is kind of late to the story.
What I think is interesting in right now
is to ask the question, what about these past couple
years of being in pandemic world?
What is submerging in us?
What habits have changed that we're not noticing?
What ways of being?
What sorts of things have shifted that we may not
be paying attention to?
But then those things will later turn up
as emergent situations in other ways.
And I think that's a question that
gets right at the heart of, well,
it's kind of two things, isn't it?
What's in the presuppositions?
What are we assuming is true?
And therefore, our actions become a direct product.
Our decisions, our way of approaching a problem
is already prescripted in our assumptions
about what's happening.
Isn't that what you and I are trying
to do with our work as pre-emergence in our conversations
and our discussions with people is
to change the initial conditions of emergence
that will occur in the future?
Precisely, precisely.
But we're not with a whole lot of company,
because most folks are looking at the problems and saying,
hey, we have a problem with education.
Let's fix the problem in education.
But the problem in education systems
is not in education systems.
What is it?
It's in culture.
It's in economics.
It's in what?
The older generation expects of the younger generation.
So the education system is downstream
of our cultural values and goals.
And so we just can't change that without changing
the rest of it.
And you could actually point to any part of this
and say it's downstream.
So this is why, for me, it keeps coming back
to this notion of what got into the water with industrialism.
Energy surplus is my answer.
Energy surplus is a drug that we got really high on.
And it actually infiltrated absolutely everything.
