Greetings. I do not want to do this frankly, but my conscience compels me to. Each time I do a
frankly on the Russia situation, which is almost two and a half years unfolding, I swear to not
do another because it's not my wheelhouse. It's extremely polarizing. There's a huge information
gap between what we hear and see in the media and what's actually happening. And then two months
later, we're in a worse spot. And I feel like using this tiny little platform, the sandbox,
which is this frankly playlist to share some thoughts and questions with the viewers. To be
clear, I do not want this channel to sell fear or be a catastrophe channel. My goal all along as
I want this channel to stay rooted in science and current events and offer these dialogues to
cover all facets of the human predicament. Geopolitics potentially World War three is a huge
piece of the conversation about sustainability. And as long as things are moving in the direction
they're moving, I'm going to keep commenting on it because I think it is the mother of all
elephants in these conversations. Okay, so let me start with an update. And then I'm going to
offer seven questions on war and sustainability and our civilization and the future.
If you've been paying attention, and it actually surprises me how few people know the things I'm
about to say, and I don't know why that is. But in the last couple weeks, Britain, France,
the United States, and the NATO general on Jen Stotenberg, all announced that they're planning
to rescind or walk back the rule of not using NATO weapons and technology to direct attacks
inside of Russia. When this was announced, Russia called the ambassadors for these three countries
to a meeting and handed them a diplomatic pouch, a demarché with legal language saying,
if you do this, we will retaliate in kind, meaning we will retaliate not in Ukraine,
but against you. So there's that. Also, a few days ago, the head of Estonia, who is a NATO
nation, said that Russia would be best carved up into 19 or 20 odd states so that the resources
could be better spread around the world in the open markets, similar to what happened in the
Soviet Union. This is echoing what a rand report last year wrote about. Most importantly, over the
weekend, two of Russia's early nuclear detection platforms were taken out by Western missiles
inside of Russia. These are to detect if there is a nuclear attack, and early warning is really
important in the game theory calculus and all this stuff. Not only that, but this technology
allows Russia to detect stealth fighters, which is both the stealth fighters and the nuclear
detection have no benefit to Ukraine. They're only a benefit to the West if they're planning
something larger. Of course, I have no data or intelligence on this, but if I was Putin, I would
be really scared at this amalgamation of new events. And to be clear, I have to utter this
phrase again. I am not pro Putin. I am not pro Russia. I am pro complex life. I am scared and
respectful of the military power and abilities of this country. And we are really poking a bear
with these little things I updated. So today, I'd like to offer seven kind of rhetorical questions
that we should be asking about this situation. First of all, question zero. And I have my little
list here is who is the we that should be asking these questions? And I think that's the rational,
pro future listeners of this podcast and citizens in the world who want to play a role in our
collective future. We have to understand the calculus. So it's as simple as that.
Question number one, should we even be discussing this war, this nuclear threshold that we're at?
Because individual people seem to have no agency. This is all at the very top, top, top
of decision makers. And it's just depressing to add potential nuclear war to climate change and
ocean issues and inequality. And I can't pay my bills. And there's no meaning in our society
right now. This just is another block to carry around. And yet I feel that we need to understand
someone needs to understand the risks and what's going on. We used to have a very active anti war
movement in the West 50 years ago. I don't know what happened to that. Either people got tired,
or it's a risk homeostasis thing. We warned about nuclear war for so long that we didn't think it
was a risk anymore, like running 10 red lights in a row with nothing happening badly. The odds are
still quite bad, though, given that any miscalculation or misstep or small escalation based on, well,
kind of like Matthew Broderick and Wargames and the AI modeling now and the proud profit
exercises, any small miscalculation or small retaliation eventually results in full on
nuclear escalation called a strategic exchange. So I'm torn whether to talk about this or not.
I'm actually calling people that are quite high up that I know in hopes that they can
influence conversations in their own world. But for now, I think to ask the questions I'm about
to ask is borderline net positive. At least that's how I'm thinking about it. Really,
there are three scenarios. One is that we have a nuclear war, in which case all the work that I've
worked on is for naught. Number two is we don't have a nuclear war and I was a chicken little
warning about this and the super organism was so strong and so smart that it understood this risk
and avoided it, in which case we all go back to our energy transition work, which is really a cultural
transition on our values and our relationships and our consumption and our interaction with the
natural world. And then the third scenario is a scenario that there is no nuclear war and there
isn't one because some people had conversations and persuaded others about the logic and the
game theory and the risks and that intervened in what might have been a nuclear war. In the
tiny, tiny possibility that that is the case, I think it's worth discussing and passing the
baton of this understanding. Second question, what does winning this war between NATO and
Russia look like? Well, Russia could win, in which they would accomplish their strategic
military objectives of denotifying Ukraine and creating a buffer between Russia and NATO.
I don't know that they will just stop at that at this point, but some sort of a buffer between
them and NATO. What does the West winning look like, meaning Russia losing? I actually think
that would be an Armageddon scenario and I don't know what we think the end game is, but there are
people that I've talked to that truly believe that the West can beat Russia militarily, conventionally,
and if we can't, there's nukes. They also think that we can do a first strike and take out almost
all of Russia's nuclear weapon capacity, the key being there almost. I don't believe that's true,
but even if it were true, even if one of the thousands of missiles escaped, it would mean
millions of casualties in the United States or in the West and millions of casualties given
the Rube Goldberg machine makeup of our current civilization would crash our economy,
our economic system, and society. You would have to be 100 percent certain for this to happen,
and I don't think anyone can realistically give such a certainty. I think winning probably to
some people in the West looks like weakening Russia so that the real adversary in the geopolitical
game of monopoly in coming years, China, has a weaker ally that can't team up against a unipolar
United States. Again, I'm speculating on that. What is winning for the rest of the world look like?
Stability. Winning looks a lot like stability. I'm not a big fan of Henry Kissinger who just
passed away, but one thing he always said was stability above all. Given the circumstances
in our world, I think that's pretty wise given what's happening in Ukraine right now.
Third question, what is winning for whom? Who is doing the game theoretical calculations?
Because for us, clearly a war is bad, but for certain people, it might actually, the costs
and the benefits of such a war might give them completely different calculus. One of the things
I'm afraid of as growth ends and we go into the downside of the carbon pulse is our evolutionary
game theory matrix, which I've talked about before. Real briefly, if I do something and you do
something and we both benefit, that's called cooperation. If I do something and I benefit
at a cost to you, that's called selfishness. If I do something at a cost to myself and you benefit,
that's called altruism. If I do something that hurts myself, but it hurts you more,
that's called spite. But from an evolutionary standpoint, spite is adaptive because it increases
your relative fitness. I'm worse off, but my competitors are worse, worse off. Therefore,
on a relative basis, I'm better off, except in a nuclear war, the absolute fitness of everyone
would be zero. But I'm afraid that the people that are calling the shots are a tiny, tiny, tiny,
like a few people in our societies that no longer speak for or have the same objectives
of the rest of us. And I don't know how to stop that or how to change that other than to talk about
it. Okay, fourth question. As it pertains to XYZ, and XYZ could be the issue in the world that
you're most interested in, climate change, net zero, social equality, better governance,
a better political, no money in politics, or whatever the issue you're concerned about,
what is the conditional probability of that issue with respect to the Russia-NATO war
ending in some sort of a benign scenario? Because if it doesn't, it trumps all of the other things
we're talking about. How can we even conceive, and I think net zero is delusional from a material
standpoint, let alone plus the carbon policy is going to be declining, but how could we get all
the minerals, metals, and complexity in a global supply chain if Russia is offline and or China
and or Iran or anything like this? So we've got this really complex system built up that is very
fragile. And we tend to think of things in silos, but this nuclear situation, this war situation
between NATO and Russia affects all of our plans, which is why I've called it one of the four
horsemen. Fifth question, how do we reframe the concept of war? When we talk about wealth,
we talk about increasing our wealth and growing our portfolio and things like that. The deeper
question of reframing is starting to happen in our society, which is what is wealth? All that
monetary stuff is just a marker for the things we really care about. Same thing with growth.
Yeah, we want more growth. Growth is good, but a reframe of that topic is what kind of growth?
Do we want to grow pollution the same as everything else? I think we want to grow
collaboration and technology and well-being, but there's a lot of things we don't want to grow.
The same thing with war. We just assume that war is a part of the human condition,
but what is war for? Is it just for power? Is it just for a winner take all?
I think a new conversation around war needs to happen urgently.
Sixth question, when we talk about solving the various geopolitical wars that are brewing in
the world, the answer to that is the same as the answer to the end of growth and the climate
change and many of the other challenges we have. We need a new form of governance, both nationally
and internationally. Otherwise, I don't know how we're going to solve the problems of AI and ecological
degradation. To be honest, we are murderous fire apes genetically. Our past, if you look back all
the way from the Neanderthals, we have gone to war when things have been presented opportunities
and constraints for our tribe or whatever it was. How can we break that cycle? Can we break that
cycle? I think really deep analysis of different forms of governance is something that will take
a generation, but we only have months or weeks. I'm just throwing that out there that I think
governance is at the root of all of our existential issues. Lastly, how do we expand the Overton
window of war in the short time window we have? Right now, the conversations about this in the
world are really limited to three, proxy war, conventional war, and nuclear war. As long as
that's the extent of the drawing, this tends towards conflict in the wargame sort of profit
scenario. Things tend to escalate as they have been escalating since I've been commenting on this,
but how can we expand the spectrum of possibilities, maybe add some things like cold war or cold
peace? These are conditionally stable states. Even to expand the spectrum, the Overton window
further, what about passive cooperation between nations or active cooperation between nations,
or even close cooperation and integration at this time of the human predicament,
the species level conversation? These things actually flip the momentum and create a tend
towards cooperation. I think we need to really change how we're talking about the war situation.
Again, this is an ominous topic, and I don't have any solutions to this. It makes me feel
2% better to talk it through with you, the followers who many of you have followed me for
over a decade. You know that I deeply, deeply care about the natural world and the environment,
and I think a nuclear exchange would be the Armageddon scenario of all environmental scenarios.
My next, frankly, will be on something milder and more insightful into things that we can do,
and I hope you're all well. Thank you.
