The world has always been dependent on minerals. That we know, right? Like if you use a spoon to
eat your yogurt, which is made of steel or aluminum, you're like, this is a product essentially
from the mineral economy. But what we're facing at the moment with the decarbonization process and
even more so with the twin transition between digitalization and decarbonization is that
the demand for critical raw materials is about to explode. I take a few examples in the TED talk
extracted from different sources from the World Bank, the International Energy Agency, but
an electric car uses on average six times more material inputs than a conventional car.
The level of electrification that we need for our grids requires nine times more materials than
we currently rely upon for fossil infrastructure. For certain types of materials, we're facing,
you know, like a 500% increase in terms of demand by 2050. We're talking about graphite and lithium
and that kind of thing, especially for the world of batteries and anything related to
individual and collective mobility. So that has two combined effects. One is obviously that we'll
have to dig deeper and in more places in the world in order to meet that demand. The ecological
effects of digging deeper or digging in different parts of the world differ in terms of the type
of material and the type of technologies that we use. But we have to be very clear that any type
of mining is environmentally invasive, very water intensive and tends to have very strong
effects, some of which are fully known, some of which are less known in terms of air pollution,
ecological pollution and sort of disturbance to biodiversity of different kinds. And that will
have, this is something that is not yet fully computed in terms of what are going to be the
first, second, third hand effects, especially as climate disruptions come with full force at us,
especially regarding the use of water. We're sort of, at least as far as I'm aware and I've asked
a number of different experts and mining actors, the notion of how climate impacts will come and hit
any type of given context where mining is taking place is not understood in terms of how it will
affect the availability, quantity and quality of water today, five years, 10, 40 years from now,
and especially whether repercussion is going to be on local communities. So that's the ecological
part. The geographical part is, and I invite all your listeners to actually sort of watch the TED
talk where I show sort of an overlap of different maps. If you look at the concentration of ore
and deposits in the world for different types of minerals that we need, and we need a lot of them
and a lot of different types of materials, we can see that they're actually located in
Latin America, in Africa, in Central Asia, in Indo-Pacific, and in some places in Europe. And
obviously you've got also like the three, four big polls between China, Australia, Canada and the US,
and then you've got Greenland and the sort of Arctic, right? But I focus a bit less on that
because that's less of the issue when it relates essentially to high densely populated sort of
countries. But the part that I, the reason that got me to really delve into this topic is that
when you look at the overlay of data, you find that the deposits are located in context which
score very high in terms of corruption indices, in terms of fragility indices, in terms of
water stress, in terms of climate vulnerability, which are all foundations essentially for anything
going bad. And those things are happening now, not in the future, they're happening now. Absolutely.
And they are, you know, like it's one thing, so maybe one additional thing, one additional layer
of complexity. It would already be bad if it were happening in a world where geopolitical
tensions were not running that high, because we would still have a number of different sort of,
you know, extractive companies sort of, you know, going into different places where
governance systems and the application of certain standards around environmental,
social and governance standards are not very strong. But the dangers are that much higher
as a result of the sort of power systems fragmentation at a geopolitical, geoeconomic
and geostrategic level. Because when you look at the fact that a number of supply chain sort of
both from extraction to processing refining and exportation are allocated in China or in Russia,
and that this is the backbone essentially of the system's rivalry and the way in which power
sort of redistribution or competition of power over power is taking shape, then you realize
essentially that you've got different models actively sort of competing in those countries
with disastrous environmental, social and governance effects.
