Doesn't the world writ large need a lot more mediators at every
level? I mean, we are so lacking in that skill, aren't we?
We are. But here is the catch. And that's an interesting one.
Technically, if you look at the type of conflict resolution
that sort of framework that I was active into, it is the product
of a certain era. It's the product of one, you know, the
aftermath of the Second World War, and even more so, the
aftermath of the Cold War. With also this notion that the more
you did economic interdependency linkage, the more you
could, you know, sort of create peace. It's this notion of
liberal peace, actually. And mediators, as part of the UN
system, or the OSCE, or even the European Union, the African
Union, have inherited that sort of ideological DNA, to a
certain extent, with exceptions, but it's been a bit of the
sort of running framework. That must be questioned. It must be
investigated as to whether or not the framework still stands.
Mediators essentially that we're trying to negotiate different
types of peace, which we're essentially trying to negotiate
political and economic equilibriums that had a
tendency actually to inscribe further natural extraction
within peace processes or peace agreements, that had a
tendency to essentially rely on certain types of development
pathways that would serve as backups, essentially for the
political processes behind mediation. All of this needs to
be reviewed. I think that there is a lot of room for
reinvention, not on the principles of mediation, right?
Because mediation is a is a practice that is established
within non violence. And, you know, if you read, for example,
the works of Galtung, or other scholars who have tried to
sort of, you know, direct humanity towards what we
call positive peace rather than negative peace. Negative
peace is essentially the absence of war or conflict.
Positive peace is what you create over time by essentially
sort of like creating societies that benefit from exchanging
with one another from co creating and co imagining the
future. And that is something that involves education,
culture, arts, literature, etc, etc. But we have a lot of
things to reinvent also in our relationship to one another in
terms of societies, communities, etc, etc, but also as
humanity towards nature, and nature was never actually
really included within that notion of peace, right? So we do
need a lot more mediators, we also need a reinvention of what
mediation is supposed to do.
Hmm. Well, more what I was getting at is on top of our big
bio physical environmental challenges, we have polarization
and AI and GPT chats and things that are just splintering what
normally people would agree on. And I almost think like teaching
mediation and conflict resolution or co creation of positive
peace as teenagers as a thing would be like a really helpful
thing for humanity. That's where I was going with that
question. Yeah. Were you always like an expert in this like as a
child? Or did you like, go to university and say, Oh, I care
about this, I want to learn how to be a mediator.
Well, I suppose that we are all somewhat influenced by our
personal sort of backgrounds and family frameworks, right? And
I, my family was very impacted by different wars, starting with
the Second World War, and then going on to the Algerian war of
independence. So my father grew up in Algeria. And I've seen the
way in which conflict can impact people in very diverse ways
and in very deep ways that inform their political view that
sort of, you know, frame their psychology, their understanding
of the world, their emotional resilience as well. And I was,
I suppose lucky to have on the one hand, maternal grandmother
who had enrolled in the resistance and who was the
epitome of life and bravery and purpose for me. And my paternal
paternal grandfather who went to a concentration camp during the
Second World War and who came out of it profoundly traumatized
and who had a difficult relationship with humanity. In all
sense of the world. And so observing these two adults when I
was a child gave me a sense of the way in which, you know, like
each individual history can be marked by history written with
capital letters, and how we're all a part of it, whether or not
we want to be a part of it, or all the actors and observers of
it. And I was lucky that in spite of the difficulties that sort
of both sides of my family experienced, I was raised in an
environment where I was told that the future was Europe. And
Europe was based essentially on this peace project. It was based
on this notion of reconciliation, which is still ongoing, which
we still have to reinvent on an everyday basis. And that became
my first school. And then I decided to turn it, I mean, it's
sort of I was led something was gnawing at me within myself. And
I, I let it lead me towards this path, which I'm still on, which
is essentially guided by this question of what is peace. It's
very, very complex and philosophical question. And it's
a very personal one at the same time as being a very political
one. So it remains my sort of everyday bread.
