You know, we are people. That's the beautiful thing.
We can choose. We are creative. We are imaginative.
We know how to feed ourselves.
We know how to have a forestry that respects the right of the forest to still be a forest.
But we don't do that because we think it's not profitable or too slow or not efficient.
And that's what we have to change.
Today's guest is my friend Pella Teal, who lives in Sweden.
She previously was on this podcast on a reality roundtable on local food systems.
Pella is a maverick ecologist, part-time farmer, full-time activist and teacher in ecopsychology.
She is also the co-founder of Swedish hubs of international networks like Swedish Transition
Network and End Ecoside Sweden, as well as a knowledge expert in the United Nations
Harmony and Nature Program.
Today we talk about ecocide as a global legal framework, as well as the rights of nature
and other legal strategies to defend the ecosphere and the denizens therein.
Please welcome Pella Teal.
Pella Teal, god moran.
God efter middag, Nate Hagens.
After middag, for you.
Yes.
I have Sweden highlighted on my globe for you.
Oh, thank you.
So welcome back.
You were on a roundtable with Dugald Hain and Chris Smedge on local food systems.
And I know you're the founder of Transition Town Sweden or one of the co-founders.
You work in agriculture, transition, sustainability, but your main focus
is on ecocide and the rights of nature, which is why I invited you back
for a deep dive on that topic.
So your work is for ecocide to become an international crime.
What does that mean and how did that work start for you and how did you get to this place?
Yeah.
Well, there are many ways to tell that story, but I have a background in ecology.
And I did my master's thesis fieldwork in Ecuador.
And that was kind of a childhood dream for me to go to the rainforest.
And I went to a national park called Yasuni,
which may well be the most biodiverse place on earth.
So while we have in Sweden, I think we have like 43 species.
We are very species poor even compared to where are you?
Wisconsin.
Wisconsin, yeah.
I think you have some 103 species in the U.S.
But in Yasuni, they have 600 species per hectare.
So I did a earthwatch trip to Ecuador and we trapped birds.
I haven't told you this before, but Ecuador, the country is about the size of Minnesota
and Wisconsin combined.
There's 1,800 bird species there.
And there's only 800 in the entire United States.
The United States has seven species of hummingbirds.
Ecuador has 250 different hummingbird species.
Unbelievable.
It's orders of magnitude different.
So I went there and I was so delighted.
And it's a long journey.
You go with a bus and then with a car and then with a motorboat and then with a canoe.
And when you get there, you find these huge signs with the shell on them and Chevron.
And I was like, you know, I was so shocked.
It took me years to sort of, I'm still processing that experience.
And I thought, if we can't protect a place like this,
then actually there is nothing that we can protect.
And so I have been looking for ways to, like credible ways to shift this
culture and protect what needs to be protected.
And then I met with a remarkable British lawyer called Polly Higgins.
And she told me about this work to make Ecoside an international crime.
And Ecoside, the word means, so Ecos is the home and it means killing the home.
And that's what we are seeing.
And I learned that one of the first people to mention the concept of Ecoside was the
Swedish prime minister, Olof Palme, who gathered the international community for the first UN
conference, the Stockholm conference back in 72, where he spoke of Ecoside.
And that's over 50 years ago.
And it's still not just legal, but we are continuously investing in Ecoside.
And we cannot continue with that.
So the work we are doing with an international network is to
have Ecoside acknowledged as a fifth crime against peace at the international criminal
court in The Hague.
So there are currently four crimes there.
And those are the gravest crimes, the crimes that are so bad that the whole international
community has to care when they are committed.
So even if you have all the power in a country, you can't do anything to your population.
And it took, I mean, this discussion sort of got, it started after the Second World War,
when the world woke up to an industrial killing of people.
And we had to agree to do something.
And that's where genocide and crimes against humanity
were started to become codified.
And then they became codified in the Rome Statute, which is a document behind the
International Criminal Court.
And the International Criminal Court was inaugurated in 2002.
So.
What are the four crimes?
It's so genocide, which is then the parallelist Ecoside that we're talking about,
and then crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression was added a bit later.
And when you go about your work and you go to a meeting in some city and discuss
Ecoside, is that word becoming known?
Like how many people have even heard that word?
Are you often asked to define it?
I mean, in English, it's sort of self-explanatory, I think, isn't it?
If you hear it, do you get what it is?
Yeah, exactly.
It feels bad.
It's quite a strong, emotive word.
But I think also it seems like out there, like, oh, there's Ecoside happening over there.
Yeah.
It's like not in my backyard.
We don't have Ecoside here, but it's over there.
Yeah, I care about that.
But it is both planetary with the biosphere, and it is also in micro-local regions,
like Ecuador, for example.
Yeah.
So in Swedish, it's a bit more complicated because it's not self-explanatory.
So yeah, I have to define it, but it's sort of a, as you say, it's a big word,
and it's sort of a deterrent because it sounds bad.
And that's kind of, it works in our favor because you pause.
I don't think you forget it when you've heard it.
But it's also something that people maybe don't like to think about so much.
How do you say it in Swedish?
Ecoside.
So when we talk about it, we talk about it as mass damage and destruction of nature.
So there's lots of, not that I'm an expert in this, but there's lots of international laws
and treaties dealing with the environment already.
Like how is this different, and how would it be effective?
What are your hopes?
Yeah.
So that's a good point because we have actually, I think it's around 2000.
Different treaties and conventions just on the international legal arena.
So not to mention all the domestic law on the environment.
The thing with those is that they are obviously not working.
And that's because they are soft law.
So they are not enforceable because states are sovereign.
So as you know more than anyone, since 1972, the global economy has really expanded a lot
and really become global and transnational.
But we don't have corresponding legal frameworks.
We don't have corresponding legal governance to protect the ecosystems.
And that's why, I mean, it's more or less a cowboy economy when it comes to the relationship
between the ecosystems where we get our resources.
The superorganism is running wild without a leash or a muzzle?
Yes, exactly.
So what's different with the Ecoside law is that it's criminal law.
So there is a clear accountability and it's criminal law is targeting individuals.
So the Rome Statute is concerned with individuals who has the most responsibility
for the decisions taken that may risk being Ecoside.
And when I think about this, it's really powerful because in two ways.
One is that it shifts the risk landscape where those decisions are taken.
So I picture like a room with a board of a large transnational company and they may have been working
on this potentially very profitable but also potentially very destructive project for years.
And then there starts to be an international discussion of Ecoside becoming a criminal activity.
And then suddenly, because you may be there, let's pretend that you are the CEO of that company
and your daughter is now sitting in front of the city hall every Friday
saying that you are wrecking my future.
And if you let this proceed, I will not talk to you again.
And then you can tell that to your board and they say, well, you know,
we don't care about you and your relationship with your daughter.
We don't care about the global environment.
That's not our thing.
We have to protect our shareholder value.
That's what we do.
That's our responsibility.
But if you can say that I respect, I mean, I know that we have our shareholders to think about,
but actually now Ecoside might soon be an international crime.
And that means that I could go to jail.
I could be put to accountability in the Hague.
And so could you, who are the chairman of the board.
And I don't think anyone is interested in that, certainly not our shareholders.
I have a ton of questions.
I mean, you and I are friends and I know you're working on this,
but we talk about transition and sheep and podcasts and our mutual friends and things
like that.
We really have had a deep dive on this topic.
So here comes a flurry of questions.
Let's stick with Chevron and Shell and Exxon for the moment.
There are the quote unquote crimes or the ecological damages to a native jungle ecosystem
in Ecuador.
And then there's also the emissions from hydrocarbons that are going into the biosphere in the ocean.
But only around 10% of those emissions are from the fossil fuel companies themselves.
The other 85 to 90% are by us, those who take planes and cars and everything else.
So isn't part of the Ecoside fault on the consumers, the citizens who are using the end
product?
Can this all be directed to the chairman or CEO of a company that is just following out
the cultural laid out rules and structures that existed from the past?
So Ecoside law obviously is about changing those rules and structures.
And I think that we have wasted decades by focusing on the end product of fossil fuel
extraction emissions, which is sort of the wrong end to start with.
That's where it's already becoming waste.
And we know if we are continuing to dig up hydrocarbons and if we are continuing to
explore new ways of digging up hydrocarbons, those will turn into emissions.
So in a way, I think Ecoside law is targeting this problem from a systemic viewpoint,
saying that we have to start where this problem is emanating from.
And there is also the case that, yeah, sure, we are all culpable because we are all using
this stuff, but we don't have the same responsibility.
We don't have the same power to influence those decisions.
And there is a whole ecosystem of things that has to happen before you open a new coal mine,
or before you go exploring for new oil in the Barents Sea or something.
You have to have insurance to do that.
You have to have funding to do that.
If you ask a bank, for example, how come that you are still using my pension funds
to dig for fossil fuels, which we all know is putting all our collective future in danger?
And they will just say, well, it's profitable and it's not illegal.
But when this starts to possibly become illegal, then you'll just shift the whole system
in a more healthy direction.
So the thinking is instead of waiting for education and a change in consciousness and a change in
values which would lead to a change in policies and prices, you start at the root and try to make
a planet damaging behaviors illegal, which then indirectly would put pressure on changing
incentives, prices, and behaviors from the top down.
You're starting at the other end of the equation slash problem.
Yeah, that was my other point.
So for me, it's powerful in two dimensions.
One is that it directly influences decisions.
But the other thing, the other powerful dimension of why I work with this at all
is that it does change values and norms and behaviors.
So it's really a systemic act.
It's probably more powerful to have a new law saying that, yeah, sure, we used to
destroy nature to get what we call development, but that was before.
Now we know better.
Now this thing is illegal and there is a powerful, I hear that you have a lot of questions,
but I just want to have this really powerful comparison, which is that in Sweden,
up to when my parents were young, it was legal to beat up your kids and most kids actually got
beaten by grownups. And then I think it's like 90% actually.
And then that was made illegal in the 70s.
And that totally shifted what you saw as the right thing to do when raising a child.
And now it's less than 10% that gets beaten.
So law is a very powerful tool in shifting how we view the world.
Applying that anecdote to natural systems, one could argue that we've been beating up our
children for a very long time in nature. So where do you draw the line on
mini ecological infractions versus major ones? Because if you make any type of eco,
if you make a wide boundary eco-side of law, the entire economy would ground to a halt and
we wouldn't do anything. And then humans would, society would collapse and we would take down
the rest of nature, laws be damned. Yeah, exactly. That's a very good point.
And so eco-side, I mean, obviously international law is only dealing with the big things,
the big stuff. And that's also where you have to begin, I think.
But so I should also just say that when I started this work, that's about 10 or 12
years ago. And I spoke to my friends, I was very involved in the environmental movement.
And I spoke to my friends, like the environmental lawyers. And I said, have you heard about this
thing? Eco-side, it seems very promising, very exciting work. And everyone was like, yeah, well
that sounds good, but you know, it's totally utopian. It will never happen. And that has
changed completely. And one thing that made it change is that Stop Eco-side International,
which is our international movement, they put together this independent expert panel defining
a crime of eco-side. So this is a proposed definition of the crime. Let me read it to you.
It's fairly short. For the purpose of this statute, so the Rome Statute, eco-side means
unlawful or wanton acts committed with the knowledge that there is a substantial likelihood
of severe and either widespread or long term damage to the environment being caused by those
acts. So it has to be severe and either widespread or long term. And those are terms that are
recognized previously within international law.
Could you give an example of something that would clearly qualify?
I mean, to me, I live in an island in the Baltic Sea. And to me, the industrial fishing
of the Baltic Sea is eco-side. I didn't think there were any fish left in the Baltic Sea when
I was there. There are some, right? There are some, yes. But they are actually,
you know, they are collapsing one by one, the fish stocks. So it's really, really bad.
But that's one and you could argue like
some mining activities are really damaging, some forestry activities. But the thing is that
this will be up to the courts to define and they will be informed by experts. So this is a
growing legal practice that we'll have to develop.
And if you are successful, what is kind of the best case or a positive outcome,
say, in the next decade? What could you foresee happening and what impact would it have?
I actually think that it has an impact already. I mean, let me just say that it's amazing to
speak today because the last two weeks has been phenomenal. Two weeks ago or something,
Belgium became the first European state to legislate nationally for eco-side as a national crime
and as an international crime, even though it's not recognized yet on the international level.
Last week, the European Union, they adopted their new environmental crime directive where
they have eco-side level crimes in it. And I have been gathering the faith communities
internationally for faith for eco-side law. And last week also at the yearly summit in the
United Nations Environmental Program, the Muslim world, they released a new report called Al-Misan,
it means balance, a covenant for the earth, where they also say that eco-side should be a
crime on par with genocide. And another thing actually in Sweden here, six, we have been working
to get business behind this initiative because we think that, you know, business people,
they also care about nature. But as long as it's legal for someone to destroy ecosystems,
that will mean that to have a conscious and a careful and respectful business will be more
difficult. So we had six CEOs in an article saying, telling the Swedish government that please get
behind this initiative and please other corporations also support eco-side as a crime.
So it's moving very, very fast. And you gave me a 10 year time frame. And so it could be actually
that at the assembly of the state parties of the ICC, they gather every year in December,
it could be that it becomes formally put on the table this year.
I think it would be good if it was, you know, some time before that happened, but it will
probably happen within five years. And this discussion is already changing, you know,
the discussion internationally. So I definitely hope within 10 years that it's becoming
recognized international law and that there is also, you know, supporting bodies and institutions
to really get it implemented. So before I had four questions, now I have seven.
So let me start with a comment. You were at my presentation at Norken. And I did point out
that humans wear different hats. And we wear our, we want to be good stewards of the earth hat.
We want to have a good life and a family and a community. And also we need to make incomes for
our jobs. And so you point out that even these CEOs care about the environment and the earth,
they do. However, they are the most constrained because of what you said earlier, their shareholders
the super organism is such that if one CEO, if he or she does the right thing for nature,
the corporate structure will just kick them out of the organism and replace it with someone else.
So let me ask you this. Human rights were and a lot of environmental laws were adopted
and taken seriously just in the last century or so that correlates with this huge energy abundance.
My friend, Wes Jackson has a quote, leisure is a great enabler of virtue. So do you think the idea
of ecocide and the resulting laws that would ensue can only come about during a period of
energy and economic abundance? Or will something like a great simplification shake the foundation
of these international laws past the point where they can be effective? Or how do you
marry those two trajectories? There are two ways to answer that question. I think that
many cultures, I mean, most human cultures have had laws that protect their living
the living systems that they are part of because we recognize that it's so important. So for example,
if you fish in a river, there will be rules to protect the fish in the river. And that's what
we have lost in our culture. But having the type of international institutions that the
International Criminal Court is, I think, I mean, those are probably, they will go very early in
a great simplification. But for me, the work I do is about, you know, trying to prepare us all and
our worldviews to what you call a post-tragic position. And a lot of the, you know, we have
to protect nature stuff. That discussion can't be had. Like if where you were at Norsken, talking
at Norsken, if you would talk about protecting nature is one thing, but talk about ecocide becoming
an international crime, that sort of is more on that level of understanding. So you can, it's
kind of a Trojan horse for another way of relating to the world, I think, even if the
International Criminal Court may not be the institution that enforces it in the long term.
Who would enforce it? You and I.
You and I would enforce ecocide law. People will have to be the stewards,
people will have to be the guardians of their landscapes, as they have always been.
So is your hope that there will be a macro and a micro versions of ecocide, like
in the island, in the archipelago where you live to have a version of ecocide law that applies to
the rivers and the Baltic Sea and the forest? I mean, there already are those where I live,
it's called the DNR, the Department of Natural Resources. And there are guidelines on hunting
and fishing and forest lands and things like that. You just started talking about something
stronger. So I mean, that's really revealing what you said, the Department of Natural Resources.
Yeah. So that brings us to the sort of deeper level. Ecocide law is a very specific legal
invention in a very specific institution. But the work that I like most is the deeper work,
which is that we think about in our culture, we think about nature as object, as resource,
as property. And that's a very crazy way of relating to the living world.
That we have to change that. I mean, it's so silly. It's like we have based our whole culture,
because this is a foundation. It's not just anything. It's a foundational piece of the western
civilization from the old Greeks to the Christian faith, viewing humans as the crown of the creation
created in the image of God and as the only one with a soul. I mean, this is just one way of
interpreting Christianity, but it's actually the dominant way. And then along comes the enlightenment
saying that, yeah, well, God is good, but we are also humans and we can try to understand the world
in our own capacity. And we do that because we are the ones who can think. We are the
rational ones. And thereby, we see the world as being made for us, being made as property, as
resources, giving us ecosystem services. And I think, you know, I suspect that there's only
one culture in humanity that sees the world in that way.
So, given that, your hope is that ecocide international law is a stake in the ground
that then pulls our value system forward with international laws and structures and treaties
and cooperation and all the legal hoopla. But generally, it moves us away from
department of natural resource type of thinking to department of the rules for protecting the
sacred type of thinking. I mean, so ecocide law is interesting because we need global rules at
this stage that says, first, do no harm. Like we are in this predicament. We don't know really
where to move now, but we can all agree on first, do no harm and protect whatever we care about,
whether it's climate change or equality or human rights or biodiversity or peace,
we know that we need healthy living systems. This is where I really bogged down because
my heart and my spirit is completely aligned with what you're saying. But to do no harm,
like we need to stop and reduce emissions now to do no harm, there is zero chance of that happening.
Not 1%, zero percent chance because our entire lives are built on carbon right now. So I think
doing less harm is the goal and doing no harm in the distant future based on some new cultural
ethic that makes it through the bottlenecks of the 21st century is a good goal. But I think doing
no harm from the perspective of ecocide is an overton window expansion sort of idea,
but I don't know how practical that would be. What are your thoughts?
I just want to tell you two things. One is that actually the ICC, the International Criminal Court,
they are making now a policy paper on how to deal with environmental crime within the existing
framework. And they have specifically asked Stop Ecocide International to come in with a commentary,
which will obviously be that existing framework is not enough, we need a new crime.
So from the ICC, I mean, the message we get is that this isn't the case of if it's about
when and how. That's one thing. I also want to say another thing that happened I think in November
in Panama. So Panama is they just got rights of nature in international legislation in just
I think two years ago, 2022. And they've had a Canadian mine operating in this Mesoamerican
rainforest belt covering Latin America. And it's obviously very destructive copper mine.
And there has been thousands of people protesting on the streets last fall because they got the
renewed permit. And then what happened was that the Supreme Court of Panama,
they took up the case and they specifically said that since this project is violating the rights
of nature, we cannot extend this permit. You have to close the mine. And this is not any mine.
It stands for 1% of the global copper exploitation, 5% of the Panamanian GDP.
It's not a small thing. It's not a small decision. So I think it's actually showing its teeth.
If we view humans as separate from the living systems and we see what's happening in the world
now, how destructive we collectively are, then we tend to think that what we can do is to do
less harm and to say that we are maybe innately bad. We become a bit misentropic.
And I love people. And I think that people are a part of a living whole. So it's not so much about
fulfilling human needs. That's not innately harmful because we are part of something.
But if you start having the discussion that maybe not just doing less harm, but actually see,
okay, how can we as being part of this living whole also make it more healthy, more beautiful?
How can we do good instead? Because I think as soon as you start saying that, oh, well,
we need to, it looks like we are very harmful. We should do less harm. We should shrink our
footprints. We should really do very little. And that's not engaging. You don't bring people with
you from that point of view. So instead, start to think like, how can we act to make the ecosystems
where that we inhabit become more flourishing because we are there? How would we fulfill human
needs by making the living world a more beautiful place? Which is more complex, but not impossible
at all. And how would we do that? I mean, I know that you have had guests, amazing guests on
regenerative agriculture. And that's how I see that as key. Like all kinds of regenerative practices.
I brought this picture that I love. This is the Donella Meadows leverage points. I think you recognize
them. The iceberg where you have, if you want to have leverage to transform systems, you have to
work down here in the deep water of mental models, assumptions and worldviews. And that's what
ecocide law and rights of nature is doing. It's also working with the design of the system, the
rules, what we think is right and wrong and what's prohibited or not. Which is also powerful
leverage. And this is about the governance part. So here's the worldview, here's the governance,
and here is the practice. And we have to shift all of this. But if we start with down here,
with the worldview and with the rules, we will have a lot of leverage then to change the practice.
Because I think, you know, we are people. That's the beautiful thing. We can choose. We are creative.
We are imaginative. We know how to feed ourselves. We know how to have a forestry that respects
the right of the forest to still be a forest. But we don't do that because we think it's
not profitable or too slow or not efficient. And that's what we have to change.
Like the case of industrial fishing in the Baltic, you know, that fish is, I think it's
basically like 25 fishing vessels taking the fish, feeding it to minks. And this little,
yeah, the little martens that you make fur of. Yeah. And salmon that you will then feed to
people. Instead of having living fisheries, like outside of here, you don't have, like the last
fisherman is now 83 and he's retiring. The last. So we don't feed ourselves from this fish because
there are 25 boats feeding mink. That's crazy. So that the mink grow up to be harvested to make
clothing? Yeah, I call it clothing is fur for excuse me, but rich Russians.
Yeah, I didn't know that. So as you and I spoke to each other on WhatsApp earlier in the week,
this could be a four hour conversation. So let's treat this as a part one because I have a lot of
questions. So tell me a little bit about the Baltic Sea because you and your colleague Jonas,
I believe, are working also on trying to get the Baltic Sea as an entity on some corporate boards
so that decisions are made with that as a potential stakeholder. Did I say that correctly?
Could you tell that story briefly? Yeah, I think the story is bigger than that. But let us begin
with the embassy of the Baltic Sea. So what we want to do is to. What's the story with the Baltic Sea
firstly? Yeah, the Baltic Sea is a brackish sea. So it's been developing since the last
ice age being salty and then sweet. And now it's kind of brackish. It's the largest body of
brackish water in the world. It's also possibly the most polluted sea in the world. And I think
that's a shame. And it's due to chemical pollution and runoff from agriculture and overfishing. And
yeah, it's just it's it's it's a dying sea. And there used to be, you know, my grandfather,
he used to go fishing every week. And now I haven't seen I haven't seen a cold since I was a kid.
And we have been fishing herring. And I shouldn't feed my kids fish because it's so poisonous.
And now, I mean, still, I, if someone had told me like just five years ago that the herring,
which is, you know, a small fish, very abundant, but that is now going the same way as the cold
population crashing. I wouldn't have believed that because it's so crazy. And this is what's
now happening. Even the herring population is now crashing. So is it more from overfishing or more
from the industrial pollutants or a cocktail of a bunch of things? It's a cocktail. It's very difficult
to say. It's complex. Yeah. So what what we are working from here is sort of the wider
legal framework from Ecoside, which is saying that nature has the right to exist. So nature,
like humans have rights, nature, other living beings, they can also have rights. And those rights
can be acknowledged in law. And actually, it's the same like with Ecoside law. I've been working
with this for a bit more than a decade. And in the beginning, it was seen. I mean, I also thought
that, you know, I can work with this my whole life. I will never see any difference because
it's so far removed from the general conversation in sustainability thinking. But it's exploding.
So there are now more than 30 countries having legal provisions, acknowledging the rights of nature.
The first one actually being Ecuador, which is still the only one having rights of nature in
their constitution. But Sweden is a country with very old institutions. And it feels like,
I mean, yes, we are seen as a forerunner in sustainability that picture is now eroding,
sadly. And it feels very, you know, even I think that it will take a long time to get rights of
nature acknowledged. So we are sort of skipping that step and saying that if nature would have a
voice in human society, it needs representation. So it needs someone we can't bring the Baltic Sea
into into a court or into rooms where decisions are made. So it needs someone to represent it.
The herring needs someone to speak for it. And if you have a transnational
setting, a regional setting, then how do you do that? Well, you have embassies. So we want to
create an embassy for the Baltic. You know, even though you and I and a lot of people listening
to this podcast hear the voices of the oceans and the seas and the forests and the dolphins and
the other creatures, they are silent in the courtrooms. So who specifically would represent
the Baltic Sea? Lawyers or citizen activists or how will their voices be heard in a courtroom?
In this case, there is no legal provisions. And as I said, I think there will be,
there will probably be a decade or more before that exists. I don't know. I don't want to be
weak in faith, but to be realistic. So this is like,
maybe it's just a game. Maybe we take it seriously that as human beings, we always
live according to narratives. Like one narrative is money, for example. I give you a piece of paper,
and we all agree that this piece of paper will buy you a meal, for example.
Yeah. I mean, building on that, what if it's just a story or a narrative that changes people's
consciousness that we have an ocean or a forest or a giraffe or an elephant on a corporate board?
And obviously, that can't physically happen because they don't speak English or any human
language. And we don't know what they're saying, but we know that if they could speak,
they would not be happy about their habitat disappearing if they were aware of it. But
if we had some human voices that would state, this is what this ecosystem, this body of water,
this forest, this species would say, and of course, it would be toothless in the face of
the profit-maximizing structure of these entities. But over time, it would maybe
change the awareness of decisions being made by the people. What are your thoughts of that?
It's already happening, Nate. This is what's happening. That's why Rights of Nature is so
powerful as a framework. That's why I'm working on it because it really shifts the relationship
between, okay, so let me take the long story. I will get to your answer.
There is this, one of the pioneers of this movement is a Catholic priest or was Thomas Berry.
I'm sure you have his books in your bookshelf. And he said, we must say of the universe that
it is a communion of sub-subjects, not the collection of objects. You've heard this.
And everybody knows that. We know that the trees and the elephants and the moose and the herrings
that they have interest, that they have needs. But the problem is that with the anthropocentric
worldview that our Western civilization, as I said, is built on, like it's a foundational
assumptions that we are making. And we are probably doing that and upholding that because
then we can colonize the world, you know, because then there will be nothing stopping us.
Like we have to go to Mars because there's no, we don't know how to stop ourselves. You know,
the super organism doesn't have a break. So by saying that actually, well, it's not just humans
who have needs and interests and thereby rights, but everyone who's alive has that. And it's not
something that we grant them. It's something that's innate by their existence. So we can
understand that and we can acknowledge that and we can change the rules, the laws accordingly.
And laws, as I said, very powerful. And there is this another pioneer who's still alive in the
rights and nature movement, South African lawyer, Korma Kallinan. He wrote a very
influential book called Wild Law and he says that laws are the DNA of society. So when you change
the laws, you change how we collectively behave. And this is happening beginning, one of the most
powerful and earliest decisions was by Ecuador, including rights of nature in the constitution.
But there are now, I think, soon almost 40 countries, as I said, who has these on various
levels. And I was involved in the Convention on Biodiversity. They recently rewrote their
framework, their sort of action plan, like how do we work with the convention. And we were a group
of people with, among others, the Earth Law Center, US organization working for rights of nature.
And they actually included rights of nature, which was the first time in international policy in
the Kunming Montreal framework in 2002. And so back to your question, because a lot of people
will be also weak in faith, they will say, well, yeah, okay, that's nice. And I mean,
it's maybe it's mostly just nice words on a paper. It's not like environmental destruction has
stopped in Ecuador, for example, because they have it in their constitution. So, you know,
that's nice, but it's not really efficient. It's not really implemented. So last autumn,
two things happened that I think is really interesting and shows the potential power
of this as new collective rules for us. One is from Ecuador, where there was a referendum,
actually, on oil drilling in Yasuni. A public referendum where 59% so a clear majority voted
to end oil drilling in Yasuni. And I don't think that would have happened if you didn't have the
strength of something else than just being nice to nature because we need it. And obviously,
Ecuador is a country with strong indigenous populations. So this is an idea and a movement
that is inspired by and informed by and largely driven by indigenous populations.
But is that a central part of the story that it has to be coupled with indigenous populations?
And that pulse of sacred devotion to the land is important in making these things happen,
or can they happen in other areas too? That's the thing, I think, that yeah,
I don't think it would have happened or it wouldn't have developed now without being informed by
indigenous populations. But the beauty with rights of nature is that it sort of carries that
cost-movision that you will find with indigenous populations that humans are part of a larger
whole and you have to respect that larger whole. But it's kind of a bridge between that understanding
and Western institutions, Western legal institutions, laws and courts who don't have
a problem at all recognizing that a lake or a river or a forest can be a legal person,
as well as a corporation, which is just a fiction, can also be a legal person.
So, it's like very a practical tool in that sense.
So, do you think that rights of nature, if they were truly adopted, would they actually-
But they are truly adopted. That's what I'm telling you.
They are truly adopted in Ecuador.
In Ecuador and in other countries. Okay, tell your question and I will give you another example.
Well, I'm just wondering if they're held to the same standards as human rights
in a world where the dominant culture holds humans over the rest of the planet,
as you explained earlier. What happens when human rights and the rights of nature come into conflict?
So, Thomas Berry would say that human rights are a subset of rights of nature.
And you and I know that there is no chance to uphold human rights if we don't respect the rights
of nature, because we are totally dependent on healthy ecosystems.
So, we have to respect the rights of nature as a culture in the long term.
But, of course, this doesn't make anything simple.
It just recognizes the complexity of being alive in a living whole.
And we are, you know, as a culture, we are like, we are death, we are autistic
in relationship to the living systems that we are a part of, and then we will destroy them.
And that's bad. And so, to me, this is kind of a moment of atonement.
And if you take that word, atonement, and you put in some space in it, it becomes atonement.
So, maybe this is for us to, you know, understand that we are actually a part of something great.
We are, we are, there's one living community on the planet.
When you were on the roundtable a few months ago, I think you said something to the effect of
the land is asking us what we can do for it or something like that.
To be honest, I've never listened to one of my podcasts. I only remember in real time what was
said. Can you refresh my memory what you said, because I recall it being quite beautiful.
Yeah, you're amazingly present in your podcast, though. I said that landscapes,
lands are calling for their people. Like, they miss us, they miss us. They need us to come back
and to listen to them and to speak for them. So, I feel that that resonates with me.
How are you working for the rights of nature specifically in Sweden and Scandinavia with
your work? I know the Hague and this ecocide law, that's an international framework, but are you
doing anything more for Scandinavia and Sweden in particular? I'm mostly writing and speaking
and just trying to inspire people, because I think that this is really a major shift,
a paradigm shift, and people often find it very hopeful, like a direction to take in
otherwise rather hopeless space. So, the work that I'm focusing on is the embassy for the Baltic.
That's how I will work for rights of nature. I wrote a book also,
which is sadly only in Swedish. It's called Naturalagen, a very humble name, The Law of Nature,
Nature's Rights and Human Possibilities. And we have actually in the front pages this
Buckminster Fowler quote, that you don't have to fight the existing models, but you have to build
an alternative that makes the previous one obsolete. And I think that's really what we have to do,
because there is the predicament and the great simplification. And I actually played with words
a bit before this conversation. And so I think that the great simplification is also a great
complexification, recognizing that we live in a complex world, because the living world is really
complex. And then also how you work for changing society also becomes maybe another,
you know, that sometimes you can think that major change is more difficult than small change.
And I'm not sure that's true. That's not how living systems work.
So on your bio, on your website, the very first thing that is said about you is that you are a
maverick ecologist. And I'm guessing our listeners and viewers have a sense of the reality of that.
But could you maybe describe why you are described that way? What does that mean to you?
I think it's a great word, maverick. We don't have it in Swedish. But someone said that ecology is the
subversive science, because it puts humans in the context of nature and deals with all of those
relationships that the rest of our culture, our laws, for example, only deals with relationships
between people and then between people and their property, while ecology deals with, you know,
this whole network of relationships. But in my ecology training, the way we did that was a lot of
measurements and just viewing the world as this very complicated, but still, you know, a machine
that you could understand and you could measure it and you could foresee what would happen and you
could then also exploit. And so maverick to me means that that's a misunderstanding too. I mean,
the world isn't like that. It's much more exciting and alive and wild.
To me, maverick also implies bravery. And I think you have to have a strong calling and a strong
care about the things that you're working on. But you also have to be brave, because you are,
this is a David and Goliath task that you've dedicated your life to. Are you ever afraid?
Because there's a lot of rights of nature, ecological activists in South America that have
lost their lives, because this was a threat to certain business interests, etc. Can you,
you know, respond to that sentiment a bit? No, I'm not afraid. And I also think because of
what you're describing that when you are sort of privileged, like I am being,
living here on my farm and being fed by the lands here, it's sort of my responsibility to do whatever
I can. And when I do that, like when I make that commitment, it's amazing what you actually can
achieve, what things can shift from really trying to shift things. And, you know, I mean, most of the
resistance that I meet, it's not even resistance, it's just cynicism and not believing that you
can change. So we are sort of holding ourselves collectively in this trap of not believing in
that the things that need to change also can change. And I think I found this quote by Angela
Davis, I think she's an American activist and author. You have to act as if it were possible to
radically transform the world. And you have to do it all the time. I'm sure, I'm 100% sure that
there are viewers of the past hour that resonate deeply with what you're saying. So what advice
would you give them to take a step towards acting in alignment with the things that you've been
describing? Any personal practices or advice or recommendations? I think actually just get out,
get out, spend time, even if it's like two minutes every day, get out into somewhere where mother
nature is more visible, more that you can sense her more even if you are in a city. And just notice,
like be present, be attentive and notice what happens with you when you are in that presence
and that attention. That's a gift that we are giving to the world, that we attend to it,
that we don't play deaf. Even if our society is deaf, we as individuals don't have to be deaf.
And then when we do that, I think we may find that that is so healing. When we give that attention
to nature, actually, we get so much back. And again, I mean, to quote an American Indigenous author,
Robin Wall Kimmerer, she's saying that when you don't just care for nature, but understand that
nature also cares for you, that develops your care to a sacred bond. And I think we need that
sacred bond, like to attend to those relationships as a practice, because it's also, you know,
it's difficult to be present like that. It's not easy. It sounds easy when I say it, but it's not
easy. It's a practice. And just to nurture that sense of wonder and awe.
I hear you and I understand you. And I also will say that you live in a very privileged spot to
elicit those feelings in yourself. Because I visited you on your farm and the little daily
walk you take is one of the most stunning landscapes I've ever been on in my life.
So it's no wonder you have a reverence because you have a cathedral out your back door
there in northern Sweden. What about young people that are learning about the ecocide
that is slow motion happened before they were born, becoming aware of all this
and the magnitude of what we face, but they're in their late teens or mid-20s.
What would you say to those young humans? I mean, it would be the same advice, actually. And
adding that, like, when you do that, and I fully agree, I mean, and that's also what keeps me going,
is that I have the support from the landscape that where I can go and
renew myself and just keep with my senses. But for young people, when you get out
and you attend to how that feels in you to be close, even if it's just to be close to a tree or to
attend to a flower, notice what happens in you and understand that the wisdom of Mother Earth,
she's so old. There's so much wisdom there that's larger and greater and deeper than humans have.
So to tap into that wisdom and also see what happens with your, I mean, to trust the wisdom
from within yourself when you are in touch with the wisdom from Mother Earth. And also to add
what Angela Davis said that actually you have to act as if it were possible, because then it becomes
possible. And then you have to actually trust your own sense-making and your own capacity.
And I really think that, you know, young people, when they do that, they become quite powerful.
Because then when you do that, you start to see the total craziness that we are living in. And then
you put your faith and your hope somewhere else. So with respect to young people, is this awakening
or this sense of the spirituality of the sacredness of nature that you were describing,
is that something that is a personal epiphany or is it helpful for young people to find others that
feel the same? And is that something that needs to happen in a group? What are your thoughts?
Thank you for adding that. Yes, this is not something you do for yourself. I mean,
maybe you can, some people certainly can, but it's much more difficult. So find the others,
absolutely. Even if you have to find them through the internet, find a group that's supporting
you. And I suppose you have a community around you where you can find others. Because I actually
don't. You're my community and you live across an ocean. I actually don't have too many people
locally that feel this way. Well, I don't know about that. Maybe there are a lot of people that
feel this way. I just haven't met them. I don't find people that are acting this way
locally as much. Yeah, I mean, I have probably the same. Well, but no, I have a local group,
actually, I do. But I would say, you know, for people like myself, and like you, I think,
we are so humble. We have so small needs. We only want to not feel crazy all the time.
Isn't it? So because I think, is it how is it? Is it is it just me that's crazy? Or is it the rest
of the world? It's more likely that it's just me. So that's why you have to find people who hold
each other in the craziness that you then apparently share, that you understand that the world is
so beautiful and so sacred, and it's meant to be, to keep that way.
I totally agree. Actually, that is the first step is if you find enough other people to have you
as a person feel that you're not crazy observing and thinking these things, that itself is empowering
and enabling you to act in whatever way you see. I don't know if you listened to the podcast I did
with Alexa Fermanish a couple months ago. I did. In that podcast, she suggested a practice that I
did in India and I've started to do, although I've been sick and only been back for a few weeks, but
I every day on my hike, I now stop in the same spot. It's my sit spot. And I do that for 10
minutes or so on a log in this little spot. And it's different than just taking a rest on a hike
because now I stop at the same place every time. And I've started to know the different trees and
the different species and the birds that frequent the area and the grasses how they're changing
coming up. And I feel like it's almost like a temple that I'm coexisting with or something.
And if you just stop on a hike and look around, that's different than revisiting the same place
every single day. Yeah, thank you. I mean, I also lead a one year eco psychology program. And that's
actually a practice that we that we encourage our participants to do. They find we call it a secret
place that you find as close to home. And for me, I'm terrible. I mean, as you said,
I have a daily walk and I also have a daily practice with with the animals that I care for.
But I'm terrible with my sit spot practice. I should probably do it more.
Pella, if I know you've watched a lot of my podcasts, so you know this question is coming.
If you could wave a magic wand and there was no recourse to your status or safety or anything,
what is one thing you would do to change human and planetary futures?
So I don't care so much about my status or safety. And even if I did, it's easy. And I've already
said it, I would make ecocide an international crime. And I have to say two things. So that's
on the sort of global micro level. But I think it has to be coupled by the local micro level.
And it's also easy. I would make every school to have a garden.
Every school needs to have a garden. And a lot of education can happen in that garden. And none
of these things, I mean, it's not even expensive. It's so possible. I don't have, I don't even need
a magic wand. Well, maybe I do. But I wonder how many schools, what percentage of schools have a
garden now? Because I like to think of schools having gardens, but maybe it's very few as a
percentage of all. I don't know. I think so. Yeah. I think it's so few and it's fewer who actually
also use and develop it. Imagine what it could be. Like Eden was a garden, wasn't it? Paradise.
The word paradise means garden. Because that also gives us a sense of what humans can create
together with the other living beings. The beauty, the abundance is amazing.
So, I don't want to put words in your mouth, but we just scratched the surface here. So,
is there any topic that if you were to come back for a round two that you would be willing to take
a deep dive in, and you just a few moments ago mentioned that you teach a one-year course on
ecopsychology? I don't know much about that, to be honest. Yes, you do.
I don't know much about the academic backdrop of that, but maybe I live it on my podcast.
But what would you like to come back and do a deep dive on? Any topic that is near and dear to
your passion that is relevant to the great simplification and what's ahead?
Yeah, I would really like to explore how to think about change in living systems
and the role of desire and seduction. Okay, maybe just give us 30 seconds more on that.
I think, you know, because we are in this turmoil and this huge change,
and I think we are quite coerced and not so sophisticated in how we deal with that change,
how we try to induce that change and how we perceive it to be possible or happening.
And a lot of people that I may try to push for change, and I think that's futile. I think you
have to seduce and I would like to talk about that. I think that's what Mother Earth is doing,
you know, the whole rights of nature framework is about seducing people into doing things
differently and encouraging each other in doing things differently.
Let's do it. I just wrote a note to Leslie to invite you back for
Ecosychology, Desire and Seduction with Pelletil round two.
Irresistible.
Thank you so much for your time and for your work on behalf of the creatures
and the beings who don't have a voice. Do you have any closing words, Pelletil?
No, just likewise. Thank you so much. It was wonderful. And I think, you know,
just this thing that we share with each other, what things are actually happening that are so
powerful and hopefully so important and the podcast you have is such a powerful place for
that to happen. So thank you so much.
How do you say thanks in Swedish? Tack?
Yeah, you know Swedish.
Yeah, I know Tack and Bra and God moran, that's all I know.
The most important words.
To be continued, my friend, thanks for all your work.
Thank you.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification, please follow us on
your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com for more information on future
releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No Troublemakers Media and curated by
Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
