You mentioned one to me the last time we spoke about the the
grasses in the shallows in the ocean. Can you remind me of the
details of that? What's happening there?
Sure. One of the really alarming aspects of the modern day
and again, look, you and I both know that you can talk
yourself into an ever greater sort of free zone of horror. My
wife, Barbara, watching the Conjuring last night horror
movie, she finally said, turn it off, turn it off, don't go
down to the basement, right? So you can make you can make so
scared. But there are scary things happening. And the scary
ones that are close to home. And I had a grad student, Ricky
do will you be better? Ricky's PhD was to look at the shallow
water grass fields in the oceans. And so we have huge what
used to be huge areas of seagrass is called. And there's a
couple of species, one is osstra, solastinoids, those things
are grass that looks just like your lawn grass, except they're
in the ocean. So water for the very shallow. Why are they
important? Most of the world's important fisheries, baby fish
hide in the seagrass. Seagrasses is a hugely important
aspect for fisheries and don't get me started in fisheries,
of course, but if we want to have lots of fish, we want these
seagrasses. So what's happened in Puget Sound, and I live in a
place where the native, the most common forests were old
growth, gigantic cedar trees, and enormous Douglas firs. And
these are big trees. I mean, we are talking big trees. They
those forests went all the way down to the shoreline. There are
a couple of wonderful books about how the first people to
Western Washington, they hated the forest because it's they're
really dark, where the first where they live, they're
underneath this canopy, we get low light clouds all winter. It's
like nighttime in an old growth forest. They hated it. And they
did a very good job of cutting down most of it. Where they cut
down first, where the places you could get the trees, big trees
out fastest on the shoreline, you could cut down the trees that
were right to the shoreline, right to the ground, you've got
your boat right there, you haul it off to the mills. The first
trees to go lined Puget Sound, which is hundreds and hundreds of
miles of glacially cut, beautiful shoreline areas with bays and
inlets and all this stuff. And then there's rivers. Well, when
you cut down all those trees, trees grow back. But what grew
back and what is common everywhere are gigantic big leaf
maple trees. This was a conifer forest replaced entirely by
deciduous leaf dropping trees. Puget Sound, the estuary, every
fall now has untold tons of leaves falling into it that never
fell in it before. Never. All those leaves fall into the shallow
area, they get buried quickly, and they rot. As they rot, they
produce hydrogen sulfide. It's very toxic gas. So Ricky, and
we had this instrument, you poke it in the sand, it tells you
how much H2S is there. Everywhere in these places that used to be
sea grass are now completely bubbling up a toxic killer gas
hydrogen sulfide. It's killed the sea grass. It's not just here,
sea grass is dying all over the world. This is a huge global
problem because sea grass does what? It takes CO2 and it turns
it into oxygen. We're removing one of the biggest areas for it's
like a rainforest in the ocean, the shallow marine. Those are
going away.
So my my understanding is a year old, at least on this, but I
think oxygen in the oceans has dropped by 2% in the last 40
years. Is that correct?
I don't keep up with those figures. You are a much better
figure person than I am. I just know that I look on the I do
look and I see the ecological changes taking place around here.
And we think of oxygen in the atmosphere as as a constant
number it is. But remember that in water is a whole different
situation. The water doesn't mix. And so if you're at a low
oxygen content, even in shallow water, that can be completely
decoupled from the atmosphere above it. So yes, we could have a
lower oxygen level. We're still 21% in the atmosphere. But the
shallow water areas are themselves lower. And it is
dropping. So I really it's going to be a case by case basis,
dear number. But the lower oxygen and marine systems really
affects a lot of stuff. And the other aspect that is affecting
us to Nate is acidity. As you know, I grew up in Puget Sound.
One of the great pleasures here is to walk around and get an
oyster off the rocks. The area at the North Pacific is no now
so acid rich. I mean, the acidity is so high that oysters
can no longer naturally grow in this area that have been have
oysters for literally millions of years. The spat are so tiny,
the little dealership larvae, they've got a little bitty shell
in the back. The acid is so high that the shell dissolves off
their back and they die. We can't grow oysters here anymore.
When when you talked about earlier this summer when
Seattle hit 107 degrees, wasn't there that those weeks there
was like several billion sea creatures died from that heat
wave, including oysters and mollusks and everything.
Way more than that. I actually had a student apply wants to be a
grad student with me. And she said, What's the best problem
you can think of? I said, Well, we've just had a mass
extinction event here. You could look at the inner title from
Seattle all of Puget Sound, but go all the way up to BC all the
way to Alaska. What happens to those untold billions of
shallow water animals that during the low tide, they heat
fried them and cook them in their shell. Do you imagine the
stink we had the rotting smell, the hydrogen sulfide. But now
we have a layer that we can go back to one day. This is a dead
salt.
