Greetings! Today I'm going to talk about probability, uncertainty, and perception.
This is how I think about the world and I've thought about this frankly topic
for a while. This is going to be graph heavy. All of the graphs in this
presentation are conceptual except for the nuclear war impact on climate and
the IPCC climate projections. If you're like me, imagine you being in a room
with 20 or 30 of your friends, your family, your neighbors, and asking them a
question, what do they think the temperature relative to pre-industrial
would be in the year 2100? What would the size of the global human economy be in
the year 2100? How many of the current 6500 species of mammals will still
exist in the year 2100? Probably there will be an extremely wide variety of
responses even with people in your family and your friends. Let's start with
yourself. What does your city look like in the year 2050 or 2100? What is the
temperature and the environmental future going to be in the in the deep future?
All of us have discrete views on this ranging from a very specific thing to I
have no idea. I just want to pay this month's bills. But the point is there
will be a reality for your city, for your region, for the planet in the future.
And when you think about it, you might think that there's a single point, but
in reality you are imagining a distribution of futures and just voicing
the single point. So instead of confusing with climate or GDP or animal
populations, let's start with an easy example. Who was in this year's
Super Bowl in the United States and who was their opponent? If I had asked you
that one year ago, how would you have thought about this question?
Well, there's 32 teams in the NFL, 16 in each division. So 16 times 16 is 256
possible outcomes. If you knew nothing about football at all, which probably
many people listening to this podcast don't, you would think all 32 teams and
all possible matchups were equal chance. So each point on this white line would
be one 256th chance of being in the Super Bowl. But not all teams and scores
have equal chances. The distribution of 32 teams and likely matchups creates
kind of a possibility of outcomes with the best teams before the season making
up the fat middle part of this distribution and the long shots represented
by the tails. And all the probabilities under a curve add up to one or 100%. If
the shape of this outcome is normally distributed, the odds will look something
like 68% will be in the fat tall middle, 27% will be in the shorter next tail and
a few tiny percent will be in the small tails in the left and the right with a
far smaller chance. So as the football season goes by, there's more clarity on
who the best teams were. And some bad teams were mathematically eliminated
from the playoffs in the Super Bowl. By the time the playoffs, the number one
seeds had the highest odds and the distribution became much tighter and
taller. Until after the Super Bowl was played, the distribution had collapsed
into a single discrete outcome. Kansas City defeated Philadelphia. In a similar
way, a distribution of possible outcomes exists for nearly any issue that we
discuss in this podcast or that we care about in the future. And these
distributions don't need to be normal in shape. They can take all sorts of shapes
depending on physical events and perceptions of same as long as the area
under the curve adds up to 100%. Okay, so I'm going to outline three ways to
think about these probability distributions about the future. First is
the probability distribution of the actual future reality. This cannot be
known by any human or group of humans, but it exists nonetheless. Second, I'm
going to talk about the best science by humanity applying all we know to come
up with a distribution of possibilities. And finally, there is a probability
distribution of our own individual perceptions of this reality, both as
individuals and as a cultural aggregation. Okay, here we go. So there
exists some sort of probability distribution for all events or issues at
discrete dates in the future. The tales of this distribution shrink as time to
the future shrinks. At the final future date, there is no longer a
distribution, but a single point. There will be a specific reality for future
events. No one on earth knows it. So a hypothetical distribution of global
temperature rise in the year 2100 might look like this now in 2023. And after
seven more years, some more information and policies and earth's responses have
occurred. So the distribution it tightens a little bit. After 50 years, many
things will have happened. So this distribution narrows further until the
year 2100. There will be some discrete outcome, and we don't know what it is.
For ease of understanding in these graphs, we're going to show bad futures
relative to today on some topic to the left of the graph and better futures in
the realm of the possible to the right. So this dynamic pertains to all issues in
the future. But let's focus on climate for now measured by the average global
temperature increase relative to pre industrial times in degrees Celsius.
There is an actual probability distribution of what earth's climate will
be in the year 2100. No one knows it. But for illustrative purposes, I will
create this black curve to represent this future reality, which can change over
time based on physical and human influences. Furthermore, standing here
today, there also exists some sort of probability distribution for all events
in the future. Global things like climate GDP or biodiversity or plastic
pollution or average income or amount of topsoil, et cetera. Any human event or
policy that suddenly shifts the distribution on future temperature to
the right, meaning cooler planet, a more benign future outcome is not
independent of all these other future issues. In effect, the graphs of future
events move in sync or inversely, not on their own. What is good for poor
people may not be good for dolphins or forests. It is generally true today that
policies good for environmental issues will be bad for economic ones and vice
versa. Okay, no one can possibly know the future. Too many variables, too many
unknowns. But in most cases with an important caveat, I'll explain in a
minute, the aggregate distribution of scientists and experts is the best
humans can get at understanding and predicting physical reality. So global
temperature change from CO2 emissions is obviously a very important issue in
today's world. This graph is from a real scientific paper showing an aggregate
proxy of IPCC models of global temp versus preindustrial in the year 2050. The
midpoint of this distribution is centered around plus 1.8 C or so with
over 60% of the outcomes between 1.8 and 2.2 degrees Celsius. This is a real
chart made by scientists attempting an aggregate distribution. Note while there
is close to zero chance that temps will be above three degrees Celsius in 27
years from now, there's also zero chance of temps lower than plus one degree
Celsius. The boundary of this distribution starts at around 1.2
Celsius. If we extend this analysis to the year 2100, another 50 years of
emissions and lag effects from prior emissions, and we see the distribution is
flatter and wider, the green chart. More uncertainty with a higher midpoint. The
midpoint is now around 2.8 degrees Celsius. Note that the odds of something
like five degrees Celsius are low but still higher than plus 1.5 degrees
Celsius, which the climate models show are effectively zero. First of all, as an
aside, and note your own reaction seeing these charts. Depending on where you are
in the climate discussion, you will think these numbers are either very
conservative or highly overblown or possibly just right. I'm going to get to
that in a minute. So in my opinion, and it's also a truism, for most scientific
topics, the aggregate of science is the best prediction of probabilities that we
can input into our cultural decisions. However, here is the caveat. Most scientists
are experts in one field, so they're a bit siloed in how other events might
impact their issue. Not to mention the fact that conventional economic and
business as usual assumptions and the political pressure that underpins them
are relevant to many long-term projections, especially on things like climate
change. So the systemic implications of these distributions may be overlooking
key variables. I'm not a climate expert. I have a PhD in natural resources. I've
read 50 or 60 climate papers, but I am not a climate expert. However, I have spent
20 years looking at systems. And I can point out at least three reasons that the
future probability distributions from the aggregation of IPCC climate scientists do
not accurately represent the real distribution. First, as often mentioned on
this podcast, society, including most climate scientists, are energy blind.
There is not a single integrated assessment climate model that shows negative
economic growth from today to 2100. Viewed from the perspective of the carbon
pulse, the optimistic economic and technological outlooks for income and
wealth in the coming eight decades, given a likely near-term peaking in the
master research, which is crude oil, are optimistic to egregiously optimistic. So
this systemic addition would tend to shift the future climate reality to the
right or less dire temperatures in the year 2100. On the other hand, since there
are no scenarios in climate scientists showing declining growth until after
2070 at the earliest, there are also no models that factor in increased access of
forest biomass for fuel and timber. As shown in Easter Island and recent economic
downturns 2009 in Greece, 2022 in Germany, tough economic times and not enough
money or natural gas leads to people desiring wood and coal. And if humanity
access is the standing forest on earth today for fuel in a large way, we not
only burn the stored carbon, but we remove the forest carbon sinks in the
process. So this in turn shifts the probabilities back towards a worse
temperature distribution. Another aspect not figured into future science
distributions of global temperature is the increasingly non-zero possibility of
a nuclear war, even a large strategic nuclear war. There are multiple scenarios
that are hard to gain, but in my own personal analysis on this, there's at
least a 20% chance of this happening in coming decades. And I hate to say that,
but based on what's going on now between NATO and Russia, I think it even could
happen in 2023. A strategic exchange of nuclear weapons would have catastrophic
impacts on the global biosphere, including models show up to a 15 to 17
degrees Celsius cooling in the short term and a cooling of one to two degrees
Celsius over longer term horizons. So this shifts the global temperature graph
modeled by IPCC to the right. Not only is there global cooling, but it would
largely stop global emissions. While this would be a good scenario for
temperature, it would be absolutely horrific and catastrophic for all other
economic environmental distributions and life on earth. This would be a sixth
mass extinction. So summarizing those three little things that I've added on
here, relative to the consensus climate science, my own mental distribution for
future temperatures would look something like this. But that's my reading of
things. I could be slightly to completely wrong, but that leads us to a central
point of this, frankly, and perhaps the most important aspect of this little
analysis. When you think about, for example, temperature or the size of the
economy or your own income or world population at some future date, you say
out loud a discrete number or prediction, but in your mind is really a
distribution of the sort I've been illustrating here. Each of us, without
realizing it, has a probability of different events in a distribution in
our minds. We say, I think temperature in 2100 will be 3 degrees Celsius
warmer than today. But what we really mean is 3 degrees Celsius is the middle
of my mental distribution of what the future will be. And by definition, each
of us believes that our distribution about a certain event or issue is the
correct one, or else we'd adopt someone else's view on the fly to be our view.
So as you might imagine, the diversity of opinions on things like temperature
rise, economic growth among billions of human individuals is very wide. The
aggregate of individual perceptions, kind of the average of all of us is
represented here in the dark purple. Humans prefer certainty. We also want to
be socially accepted. So we often adopt both narrow distributions to avoid
energy and time of our mental bandwidth use, worrying about some outcome. And
we also converge around the opinions of people in our accepted social groups.
Social media has had at least three impacts on these cultural distributions
of perceived reality. First, we no longer get together personally in our shared
spaces as much. So we don't have the anchor of real relationships, tolerance,
past interactions of trust back and forth as much as we used to.
Two, people can find their own beliefs supported by information online, pretty
much on anything. This confirmation bias echo chamber reduces the uncertainty
that was present in the pre-social media world. And third, in addition to
narrowing the openness to new beliefs, social media's impact that via upvoting
of extremes for clicks and dollars for social media companies has polarized
opinions on most issues. What have I told you? Basically three things. Let's
summarize. Predictions and expectations about the future are not binary, yes or
no, but all form some sort of a distribution, the shape of which is
influenced over time by natural, human and emergent phenomenon. There is an
actual reality distribution that none of us can know. There's a scientific
human consensus aggregate distribution, and there's a whole lot of
individually perceived opinions about the future. The human brain prefers
binary. Nuance and complexity are physically uncomfortable, especially if
the information is outside of what one's tribe is saying. Social media selects
for both more certainty, which is the narrowness of the distribution, and more
polarization, which is the left and right directional movement of people's
distributions. The result is that most people cannot no longer even talk to
each other, because there's no overlap of their mental perceived
distributions on most issues of consequence. Okay, why did I do this
kind of convoluted graphical depiction of what's in my mind? Why does this all
matter? There are five things I can think of. So what is the purpose of this
podcast, the great simplification in this work that many of you are doing around
the world more broadly? Well, first of all, it's to shift some people's
understanding and expectations more towards reality on the economy, energy
and material reality of coming decades in order to make better choices in our own
lives. And as a culture, we have to converge at least some of us on a
systemic curve representing possible and likely futures. This is going to be
especially difficult as the end of growth will quite likely imply the
beginning of something other than democracy. And science also is at risk.
Science and principles of enlightenment might not function well in such an
environment, which is why it's important to get people at least having a common
language to describe things. Third reason why this is relevant. I think over time,
we have to attempt to break the inverse relationship between interventions on
what's best for humans and what's best for the environment to be more aligned.
Could we imagine a point in 10 or 20 years from now where some things good
for the environment are also good for the human system and vice versa? Another
point is that if we consider the above blue graph to represent an aggregation
of all human and ecological events in the future, it may be more dystopian than
modern culture and politicians are able to understand or willing to admit. But
there are many possibilities still under that curve. So an understanding of this
might shift your individual focus of interventions, preparations, prosocial
projects for those watching this. If you think there's going to be a near term
human extinction, you're unlikely to work on advanced policy type of issues. If
you think humans will soon be colonizing Mars and living like George
Jetson, you probably aren't going to be planting a garden or talking to your
neighbors a lot. So if your own personal distribution of possible futures is the
red curve or the green curve, how certain are you and how much of your
efforts are assuming that your future that you expect will 100% arrive? And
lastly, and ultimately, the purpose of this podcast and our work is to shift the
underlying reality towards better odds and outcomes. Thank you for listening. I
hope some insights made it through. And if not, you have a little bit of a
better understanding of what goes through my mind as I visualize what's going
on in other people's minds and these distributions. And that fact plus $10
will get you a coffee in New York City. I will talk to you soon. This is Earth
Month. There will be a new Earth Day talk coming up in a couple of weeks. Thanks.
