Greetings and happy solstice, Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa holidays to you, the
followers of this podcast, The Great Simplification, wanted to do a
brief end of year reflection after the first year of this podcast.
First of all, my team keeps reminding me to tell the listeners that on every
episode and on every, frankly, on the main site, TheGreatSimplification.com,
there are copious show notes and references of every episode that we do
that my team puts together along with the scientist or the interview.
So every fact that is stated here is referenced.
So check that out if you haven't all the way back to episode one.
So here we are after 51 episodes of this podcast.
Let me start with some reflections.
One thing I've learned this year is that I like and respect all my guests and
they all offer something to the unfolding story of the human
predicament that I call the coming Great Simplification.
I don't agree.
In fact, I disagree with all of my guests on something and I agree with all
of them on something, something I feel strongly about is having a diversity
of opinions, but tethered to the fundamental logic of energy, ecology
and human behavior.
So this podcast in many ways is attempted to be an everything bagel
where we look at lots of different things and how they interrelate.
And many of you watch my podcast with Thomas Bjorkman.
I think I'm becoming a meta-modern thinker in that I try to incorporate
multiple ideas into my worldview.
We're going to be talking more about that next year.
But it's very fascinating to me to see the viewership of this podcast grow.
But people love certain episodes and other people really don't like those
episodes and it's almost the case on every episode.
And that gives me insight not into my, I'm not only into my guests, but into
the global demographic of human beings paying attention to our story
as everyone's got different lenses.
And the goal of this podcast is to converge those lenses towards the
biophysical story of what we face.
And that will be one of my first franklies next year.
Second thing that I learned is that with many of my guests, I learned
something new and usually it's something that further constrains my worldview
and outlook from Tristan Harris.
I learned about social media and polarization from Aza Raskin about what
AI is going to be doing from Daniel Schmockdenberger about, you know,
CRISPR gene editing and bio weapons and from Chuck Watson, a nuclear war,
which I'll mention again a bit later.
As, you know, we expand from the energy money growth nexus, which is kind
of my expertise and you learn about other things.
Boy, the whole thing gets more complex and a little more scary, but let's continue
forward on that.
Lastly on the reflections, but there was an ad, I can't remember when it was
20, 30 years ago where this guy was a balding gentleman and he had a hair
product to grow hair.
And at the end of the commercial, he said, not only am I the hair club for men
president, but I'm also a client.
And I feel much the same way about the great simplification.
I'm here trying to share insights, data analysis, and maybe some inspiration
to other humans around the planet on what we face.
But I'm also living it.
I am a human going through this myself and I don't have the answers.
And it's a lot.
So one thing that I'm thankful for is, is the tens of thousands of followers
of this program make me feel less alone.
And that itself is a way to cope because we are a community of people,
you know, trying to roll up our sleeves and navigate a way through what's
coming.
So, yeah, I am personally not sure about what to do.
And I have animals and a farm and gardens that are not taken care of
because I'm doing this podcast.
So I'm also navigating a great simplification.
Okay, moving on to predictions.
Everyone does these end of year predictions.
By definition, I kind of don't do near term predictions because the story
that I'm telling about the carbon pulse is going to unfold over decades.
I do still strongly believe that we have a financial recalibration of epic
size in the coming decade.
But you all know the general landscape of, of how I see the future.
Some specific learnings from this past year that, that give me predictions
for, for next year, you know, I've learned a lot.
I've long known about evolutionary biology, the earth's biodiversity,
oil depletion, the Wizard of Oz kind of nature of our monetary system,
the coming warming of the earth and the cultural bill that's coming due to,
to the ghost of dopamine past.
We're soiling our nest and taking more than our share.
These things are known.
What I didn't know and a little bit to my sadness and horror is I think now
the greatest risk to humanity and planet earth is none of the things I just said.
But it's the game theoretical now lit fuse of the 12,000 nuclear warheads
between US and Russia.
And I think the biggest news of 2023 will be a hot war between NATO and Russia,
or hopefully the biggest news in 2023 will be that we avoid a hot war between NATO and Russia.
In the latter case, it probably won't be news because it'll be another example
of risk homeostasis that, that we avoided.
But this is really, really fricking serious now.
And I'm afraid that it's going to take US troops looking at Russian troops
with no Ukrainians in between before things really have a chance of deescalating.
But I don't know, but I'm very worried about it.
What other predictions for 2023?
Well, I think AI is now here and here to stay.
We're going to have this chat GPT and people are going to eventually have their own AI
and that accelerates some of the polarization and wealth inequality
and income inequality issues because eventually we won't need low and mid level
programmers or artists or things like that because AI can do it for us.
I think that's going to continue to be an issue.
I think we're going to have wider and deeper poverty in 2023,
not only in the United States, but around the world.
And this is already accelerating and how we navigate that
after we've had the the hangover from the super sugary stimulus packages post COVID
is going to be a central question.
Lastly, I think it's clear now, especially with what happened in February of this year,
that we are approaching a biophysical phase shift where instead of looking at the world
in strictly a monetary and technology lens,
now it's an energy resource geopolitics lens.
And I don't know how this is going to shake out,
but there will already be negative feedbacks to some of the main trends
and themes, for example, electric vehicles, because power prices are going up.
There's going to be a negative impact on demand for those sort of things.
So the environment and the economy and the decisions we make are going to be,
you know, more prominent.
You will see during the year, and my franklies, many more of my predictions
and outlines of how to think about the future and events.
So finally on intentions, you know, one thing I feel strongly about
is having a diversity of voices, but not just diversity for diversity's sake.
I really want to highlight
people and ideas that are very creative and diverse,
but tethered to the reality of wide boundary ecology
and the biophysical story that we're presenting here.
In other words, I really, oh, and the third part,
I want to interview good people, good human beings.
So there are some people that are very creative and articulate
and do understand our biophysical predicament, but they're assholes.
And I probably won't have them on the show.
But what this means is I want to my intention is to have not produce
a podcast and a frankly every week, because that's what we do.
But I want to have a high signal to noise for the listeners.
And that means and it's already happened sometimes that I record a podcast
and I decide not to release it for various reasons.
It also means that I don't want to go the way of Jordan Peterson.
Not that I'll ever be that popular,
where his audience dictated what they wanted to hear and he went that route.
And now he's, you know, brilliant man, but a bit sensationalist
and catering to more of the far right.
I will continue to be a political on this show.
But I really want to stick to the fair way of what I view as the great
simplification as well as give voices to environmental scientists
because that often is not highlighted.
They don't get a microphone to talk about their specific issue on oceans
or plastics or or whatever.
So please send suggestions on who I should interview, but understand.
I'm going to I'm going to focus on what fits under this this umbrella.
I also realize that this podcast and my voice will never really be popular.
So the reason I did this podcast is to find the seekers, you listening,
watching this, who are very curious and passionate about understanding
the truth and the truth is an asymptote that none of us understand
and we're all working towards.
So I recognize that I will never be popular in the public.
I'm too goofy and scary and complex for a general audience.
So I this organization, Energy in Our Future will be working on
campaigns to help navigate the great simplification.
But many of those won't have my voice or face involved, but I will continue
to do for the seekers who find and subscribe to this channel,
either on YouTube or Twitter, or I have a sub stack, you know,
this kind of fire hose wide open sort of thing.
Lastly, as I mentioned before, I'm not only the hair club president,
but I'm a client.
I personally need to have more balance.
The irony is, as I'm telling my listeners that our society is dopamine
centric and we're neglecting the other parts of our neurochemical portfolio
of matching our successful ancestors, oxytocin, serotonin, et cetera.
But in the process of doing that, I am actually heavily weighted on dopamine
because of the social media, because of the deadlines, because of the
social media, because of the deadlines, because of all the emails.
I need to find more balance.
And so I'm going to take breaks from podcasts.
In fact, I've got 12 podcasts in the queue right now that are already
recorded so that I can take a little time off in January, not time off from work,
but I have to travel in January and February
for Isof.
But I think all of us need to find a balance between thinking and acting
on behalf of the future and living in the present moment,
because otherwise we spend too much time doing and not enough time being.
So and I may from time to time do it, frankly, on how I'm doing and what I'm learning.
And I do plan on having more psychologist type people on the show.
Robert Sapolsky has agreed to be on the show.
I have a lot of great episodes coming up.
Bill Rees, George O's, Collis, Olivia Lazard, David Sloan Wilson,
Jonathan Haidt are in the near term docket.
I have a lot of great, frankly, is planned.
I want to talk about nuclear fission and nuclear fusion.
I want to talk about a probabilistic future, both from a science standpoint
and what's in our minds.
I have a flowchart of the future choreography of how things fit together planned.
But I'm going to try to take the advice that I give all of you, which is to be kind to yourself.
So if there are some Fridays without a, frankly, please send me your
namaste's over the ether.
Thank you all for sharing this journey with me and happy new year to be continued.
