Today's podcast was one of my favorite that I've ever done, possibly because it's on a topic I
don't know a lot about, which is the metabolic health of humans as individuals and what our food
system is doing to change our health relative to obesity, metabolic syndrome, etc. My guest
is Dr. Robert Lustig, who is a professor emeritus of pediatrics, the division of endocrinology at
the University of California in San Francisco. He specializes in neuroendocrinology with an
emphasis on the regulation of energy balance by the central nervous system. You'll see during
this podcast there is a mapping or a parallel path of how our food system changes our individual
behavior, mapping on to the global energy-hungry superorganism. This was a fantastic conversation.
I look forward to hearing more about Rob's work and changing the food system. I hope you enjoy this.
Hello, Rob.
Nate, my pleasure. Thanks for having me. This is delightful.
Well, we have mutual friends, and it seems the world is converging on multiple threats and risks
to the human predicament, and I don't know a lot about your field, but I have read your book,
Metabolical. I love the title, and it's heavily marked up. You've put a lifetime of vertical and
horizontal expertise and wisdom into this book, so my very first question is, what did you have
for breakfast this morning? I'm curious. No one's allowed to ask what I eat, but I'll tell you that
today, because it's Passover, I had whitefish salad on matzah and a black coffee.
Matzah, is there a lot of carbs in that or no? Oh, yeah. But what else are you going to eat?
It's Passover. Okay. So can you, I'm sure you've done this often, can you give our listeners
two to four-minute overview of the main thrust of your new book, Metabolical,
The Lure and Lies of Processed Food, Nutrition, and Modern Medicine?
So I'll try to sum it up in a couple of simple concepts.
We're getting sicker and sicker by the day, and healthcare is going to hell in a hand basket,
and no one knows why. And everyone thinks that modern medicine should be able to solve
all of these problems. Well, unfortunately, the chronic diseases that are chewing through
all the healthcare costs, so they are type 2 diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular
disease, cancer, dementia, fatty liver disease, polycystical variant disease, this now accounts
for 75% of healthcare costs, and none of them have a cure. And none of them actually even have a
treatment. We only treat the symptoms of the problem, we don't treat the problem. So for heart
disease, we have high LDLs, we have statins. Well, it turns out the LDL is the symptom of the problem,
not the problem. For high blood glucose, diabetes, we have insulin and oral hypoglycenics.
Well, it turns out the glucose is not the problem, it is the symptom of the problem.
For high blood pressure, we have antihypertensives. They are the symptom of the problem, not the
problem itself. The endothelial dysfunction that causes the hypertension is still going on.
And that's why we're all 40 years old with two stumps on dialysis, waiting for our next stroke.
And that's where healthcare is gone, and that's why Social Security and Medicare will be broke by the
years 2026 and 2029. The reason is because all of these are the diseases of mitochondria.
Mitochondria, the little energy burning factories inside each of our cells. And when our mitochondria
are working right, we'll be 110 playing tennis. And when our mitochondria are working wrong,
we'll be dying a slow, miserable, early death and costing the healthcare system
for 20 years while we're doing it. And we can't afford it. And it turns out it's all about the
food. And when you understand the science of the food, you understand the science of nutrition,
and you understand how those ultimately impact on this greater problem called metabolic health,
then you realize the food's the problem. And it turns out the food's a problem for the climate,
too, because of carbon dioxide production, because of methane production, because of
soil erosion. Bottom line is the environmental crisis is the food crisis. So I would argue that
food has to be part and parcel of any conversation around fixing the big problem.
And that's why I'm very happy to be here.
So you mentioned mitochondria. I certainly remember that from biology class. But how does
mitochondria relate to the human physiology and food and our health?
So mitochondria are where the chemical energy comes from the powers yourself.
Mitochondria make this compound in your cells called ATP, a Denizine Trifosphate. And each of
the phosphates, and there are three of them, each store energy. And that energy gets liberated,
and that's what powers the cell. If you don't make enough ATP, your cell's starving. And if
you're cell's starving, it does things you don't want it to do. And it turns out that's what's
wrong in chronic metabolic disease. Mitochondrial dysfunction. So the question is why? If we're
eating enough, we're eating loads, why is our cellular powerhouse going down the tubes?
And for that, you have to understand the biochemistry of food. You have to understand
what's actually happening. You have to understand how specific compounds in the food are actually
interfering with mitochondrial function. The main one being this sweet molecule and sugar,
fructose. Now, fructose wasn't always the bad guy. Fructose was a good guy before ultra-processed
food. Fructose actually helped our species survive winters, because we would eat all the fruit
during harvest, and we would lay down all this fat, and we would live on it through the winter.
Camels do it in their hump. Polar bears do it. This is actually what allows
various species to be able to go prolonged periods of famine was fructose. But when we started going.
The camel hump is like a Tesla battery. It's when you run out, you have a little storage there.
You have storage, exactly right. So these were actually adaptive processes, and fructose was
a driver of this adaptive process for billions of years of our existence. I shouldn't say billions,
millions of years of our existence. We weren't around for billions. But only in the last 50 years
or so with the advent of ultra-processed foods and the addition of sugar to those ultra-processed
foods to make them palatable, because if the sugar wasn't in the ultra-processed food, you wouldn't
eat it. It would taste like dog poop. I mean, it would just be awful. And so food industry knew
they had to do something to make their food palatable. What they do, they added the sugar,
and then they learned, hey, the more sugar we add, the more they buy. So they added more,
and more, and more. And so now we are consuming 25 times the amount of sugar that our ancestors did
200 years ago. That has to have metabolic consequences. Well, it does. It is affecting our
mitochondria. It is causing them to, instead of burning fat, it's causing them to store fat,
especially in organs like the liver, which are then causing the liver to be dysfunctional,
which is then causing the pancreas to make extra insulin, which is then causing problems all over
the body, including the brain. So ultra-processed food is responsible for all of those diseases.
I mentioned that the outset of the program, it is responsible for all of the healthcare costs
going through the roof. And it is responsible for our early decline. If you've noticed,
lifespan in America has been declining for the last five years in a row. And it could be
all traced back to mitochondrial dysfunction. So if there are two people, Person A doesn't
eat any sugar, and Person B eats the same diet as Person A, but has a lot of processed foods that
have added fructose and corn syrup and other things, how does the mitochondria differ in
those two people? Like what mechanically happens? So there are two enzymes in the mitochondria
that can up their, up its game. It can actually cause mitochondrial efficiency. It can cause
mitochondria to burn better. And that compound is called glucose. Glucose is in carbohydrate.
Glucose is in, is half of sugar. Glucose will stimulate two enzymes. One is called ampicinase,
which is the fuel gauge on the liver cell. So when ampicinase is stimulated, the liver will
make more mitochondria. Muscles will make more mitochondria. We think the brain will make more
mitochondria, although we're not sure of that yet. But in any case, ampicinase is a stimulator
of mitochondrial function. Also, there's an enzyme called HADH, hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase,
which helps burn fat so that you basically can utilize the fat that you've stored to generate
energy. So these are good things. Glucose is, for lack of a better word, good. On the other hand,
fructose, this other molecule in sugar, the sweet molecule in sugar, the addictive molecule in sugar,
the molecule we seek, because glucose is not very interesting. You don't see people going around
chugging carousel syrup, do you? That's glucose. Okay? They're chugging. What's in, what's in like
Gatorade? Is that glucose or fructose? Well, which Gatorade are you talking about? We're talking
about the original Gatorade from 1965. Oh. So Dr. Robert Cade, physician at University of Florida,
sports program, invented this oral rehydration solution back in 1965, and it was a combination
of water, sodium, and glucose. It's the same oral rehydration solution we give to cholera victims
in India today. And in 1972, the Florida Gators went on to win the sugar bowl against the
Auburn Tigers, and Gatorade made a big splash. And now everybody was interested in Gatorade
because national championship. Okay. If you ever tasted the original Gatorade, it was purchased
by Stokely's from the University of Florida, Stokely's Gatorade. It tasted like tiger piss.
It was awful. Because can you imagine, I mean, glucose and sodium and water, it didn't have,
I mean, it was horrible. You couldn't get anybody to drink that, except maybe a dehydrated athlete.
So let me guess, the modern formula of Gatorade is more tasty and less healthy.
Exactly right. So in 1992, Pepsi buys Gatorade, and they say, how are we going to market the
swill? So what do they do? Two things, Michael Jordan and high fructose corn syrup.
There's high fructose corn syrup in Gatorade? Of course. Absolutely. I never looked. Well, go look.
So there's so many parallels here to what you're saying and my work. First of all, yet again,
the trying to optimize for dollars, first and foremost, over health, over the environment,
over other things, wins in the short run. So the healthcare system, well, not only that, but
I think something like 25% of our GDP is the healthcare system. So as people get sicker,
it's good for the economy in a bizarre sort of way. And then the other implication
that I'm getting from you is, you know, my work is about we're alive during the carbon pulse,
where humans are drawing down fossil hydrocarbons, which are energy 10 million times faster than
they were sequestered. And we've created this ginormous cultural metabolism. And we can't
process it. I mean, energy is healthy, but too much energy messes up our institutions and our
expectations and everything else. But you're saying that the fructose is doing the exact same
thing to us as individual humans. Indeed. I mean, so energy is healthy in the sense that it powers
things. But unfortunately, we haven't yet figured out a way to establish an energy source that
doesn't have a downside. Now, maybe fusion will maybe, you know, but that's 20 years off
minimum and possibly longer. But the fact matter is that burning of any energy on this planet
generates carbon dioxide and generates other toxic byproducts that are ultimately harming
the planet and actually interfering with our ability to actually burn that energy.
So you mentioned earlier that 200 years ago, our ancestors had one 25th of the sugar
or fructose in their diets. What was the rest of their diet? Five pounds a year.
Five pounds a year? It was about five pounds of sugar per year. And it was all from fruits and
vegetables and honey. Now, right now, we have 100 pounds per year. Yeah. The average United
States has... It was as high as 125. It's come down because of the obesity epidemic. So now it's
100 pounds. That's two pounds a week. Yeah. Per person. So is there any... Other than sugar
and other than processed foods, is there any evidence that our diets are substantially
different than those 200 years ago, as far as meat and protein and carbs and vegetables and
other things? I mean, it's got to be somewhat different, right? Yeah, sure. So trans fats,
you know, trans fats are the devil incarnate. So trans fats were first invented in 1902.
The first trans fat Crisco was patented in 1911. And trans fats started being added to baked goods
in around 1920. And, you know, it went up from there. And at one point, back in the 1960s,
70s, 80s, we were eating trans fats nonstop. In fact, we were told to eat trans fats because
trans fats were margarine and margarine didn't raise your LDL. Remember, we thought LDL was the
problem. And so margarine was trans fats and it lowered your LDL. Yeah, it caused heart disease
even worse. The reason... The reason we put trans fats in all the food was because the bacteria
could not digest the trans fats. The bacteria are what make food go rancid. Well, if the bacteria
can't digest the trans fats, the food won't go rancid vis-à-vis the 10 year old Twinkie. Well,
turns out those bacteria are mitochondria. Our mitochondria are refurbished bacteria. We made
a deal with the plant kingdom back in the Pleistocene period, you know, where we basically
agreed to house them. Animal cells agreed to house bacteria in exchange for the bacteria
generating the energy that we needed to power ourselves. So it's a symbiotic relationship.
Our mitochondria are refurbished bacteria. Bacteria can't digest trans fats. They don't
have the enzyme to break the trans double bond. Well, neither do we. So when we... Are you talking
about the mitochondria in the microbiome in our gut? Anywhere. Anywhere. Anywhere. There are no
mitochondria on the planet that can digest trans fats. Not in our gut, not in our skin,
not in our liver, not anywhere. What happens to the trans fats if they're not...
And so if you eat trans fats for five years and 10 years and 20 years, you... A larger percentage
of your weight is just trans fat that you've eaten in the past. Yeah. And also it will
precipitate in your liver and now you've got fatty liver disease. It will precipitate
in your arteries. Now you have atherosclerosis and you have metabolic syndrome. So we learned this
the first paper that reared the ugly head of trans fat was published in 1957
by a guy named Fred Kumero and he was completely laughed at and forgotten. And then in 1988,
people rediscovered the work and Kumero himself helped do this. And over the course of the next
25 years from 1988 to 2013, we learned more about trans fats and how they were the primary driver
of chronic metabolic disease to the point finally where the FDA in 2013 agreed that trans
fats were poison and that they banned them. So there's no trans fats in foods anymore?
Pretty much. It's pretty much gone except the trans fats you make in your own kitchen
because you can take olive oil and heat it past its smoking point and you will take the cis
double bond of the monounsaturated fat and you will flip it and now you have a trans
unsaturated fat. Oh man, I've done that. You have made a trans fat in your own skillet.
So if you're using olive oil and you lose paying attention or it's too hot and it starts to smoke,
that's not healthy. Throw it away. Throw it away. Olive oil is meant to be consumed at room temperature.
Yeah. You know, there's an odd thing happening here, Rob, which is I have a lot of guests on
talking about climate and ocean and dolphin and fish risks to our environment and it's tragic and
depressing. I'm going to have on Robert Lustig and just talk about health and metabolic system,
no big deal. This is hard hitting for me because I just, I mean, I have read your book but it's,
this is a big fricking deal. I mean, this is like we're all going through our life. We go to the
grocery stores and this is culturally accepted how we eat and it's affecting everything and it's
probably affecting our judgment and our decisions and our health to be able to be our best selves
and everything. No question. No question. And you know, to some extent, it's our own ignorance
and to some extent, it's actually corporate greed. You know, an example of that, PFAS,
polyfluoroalkylated substances, Teflon. Okay. We were told Teflon was the greatest thing since
sliced bread. Okay. And everyone used Teflon pans to, you know, prevent sticking for how long, for
how many decades? Well, turns out Teflon is one of the worst obesogens. It's one of the worst
mitochondrial toxins and it's a forever compound. It ain't going away. So Teflon's gone,
but PFAS are in our system right now doing damage. I had a Martin Scheringer did an episode with me
on PFAS in the water supply. You actually were recently at a conference in Racine, Wisconsin
on obesogens and you met some of my colleagues there. What is an obesogen and why are you
researching that and why is that so important? So an obesogen is a compound that generates
weight beyond its calories. That's an obesogen. So there are plenty of things in our food that
are calories, but they will generate a certain amount of weight based on those calories. If
they generate more than that. So there's some emergent property that has happened within the
body. Like if you consume 500 calories of obesogen and you put on 700 calories worth of weight,
something happened to make that happen. Exactly. Exactly right. So the reason is because of
mitochondrial dysfunction. Because you mitochondria are not working well. There was a paper that came
out about 10 years ago now, I think that tracked body temperature from the civil war to today.
And all of us, everyone at every age throughout the entire United States is burning. It has a
body temperature that is 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit lower than we used to. Now that cannot be explained.
By any change in our environment or air conditioning or physical activity or anything else,
why are all of us burning less energy to create less heat to have a lower body temperature?
It's because we have mitochondrial dysfunction. Okay. So again, I don't want to make this podcast
about me. We're going to take this offline, but I've come to know over the last decade that my
normal temperature is 96.7, like 2 degrees lower than 98.6. So if I have 98.6, I have a fever.
And I've never understood why that was. This is why. Holy crap. Okay. So
are there tests that are, okay, so there are various diets out there. One of them is called
Whole30, which the premise of that is don't eat any processed foods at all. You can eat carbs,
you can eat potatoes, you can eat Lara bars, just no processed stuff.
Well, Lara bars are processed. They are, but there's no other ingredients in there. There's
just like dates and peanuts or something. Yeah, no, I know, but it's a distilled process.
You can't, I mean, they had a macerated to get it into the Lara bar. So it's not none.
Okay. So there is a definitional thing between processed. When I think of process, I mean that
there's chemicals added in things. You actually mean that it was formed into a product. It's not
a whole food per se. Exactly right. So there is a classification system that was developed by my
colleague, Dr. Carlos Montero, who is a professor of public health at the University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil. And it is called the NOVA system, an OVA. It doesn't stand for anything, just the new system.
And the easiest way to explain it would be with an example. So there are four classes in NOVA.
Let's take an apple. So NOVA class one would be an apple picked off a tree.
Class two would be apple slices, de-stemmed, de-seeded, maybe de-skinned. Class three would be apple
sauce, like cooked macerated, possibly sugar added, and maybe some preservative. Class four
would be a McDonald's apple pie. Okay. Turns out when you look at the consumption
across the world of various foods, only that class four category contributes to metabolic
disease. But that's where the action is. And that happens to be 63% of all the food sold in America
and 67% of the sugar that we consume. What? 63% of the food sold is in that class four category.
How does that, what does that like globally in other countries, less?
So it's about 56% in the UK, it's about 60% in France, 63% here.
What about in Africa? I don't know. I don't know about Africa. That's a good question,
probably less. Yeah, probably less. They don't have enough money and importing issues and stuff.
So I don't know about Africa. In the Middle East, it's about 90%.
90% is that category four? Yeah. And that's why they have 18% diabetes and 80% obesity.
In the Middle East? I didn't know that. In Iraq, in Saudi Arabia? Yeah.
Well, there's some irony there with the carbon pulse as well. I didn't know that. So people that
do diets that are highly in the category one and category two or a whole food sort of diet,
I did a whole foods diet for a month. It was really hard for me, but I lost 25 pounds.
And then I gained it back, of course. Because you know why it's hard for you? Because the things
that you eat don't taste as good as the things that you gave up. Well,
indeed because they were implied with extra sugar. Well, they were implied with extra sugar.
So our taste buds have been desensitized. There's a neurophysiologist scientist,
neuroscientist at the University of Michigan, Monica Deuce, very, very smart lady, who has
basically demonstrated the molecular mechanisms of tongue desensitization. She showed it in
fruit flies. Point is, you can actually get that back, but you have to reduce the substrate.
So our food has been so sweetened on purpose that we have desensitized our taste buds. And so
food that is whole, as it were, natural, but came out of the ground, doesn't taste very good anymore.
Because we have desensitized those taste buds to not be able to appreciate it. If you go off
sugar for three weeks, a blueberry will taste like a balm in your mouth. I mean, it will just
explode with flavor. So sugar is a supernormal stimuli to our evolved brains the same way that
pornography or gambling or video games are. There are chemical addictions. There are behavioral
addictions. We have both. So anything that stimulates the nucleus accumbens, anything that
stimulates the reward center in the extreme is addictive. So we have chemical, it's like heroin,
cocaine, nicotine, alcohol, sugar. We also have behaviors. We have shopping, gambling,
internet gaming, social media, pornography. All of these stimulate the same reward center in the
brain. Every one of those has an aholic, after it, chocoholic, sexaholic, alcoholic, you pick it.
The point is we have a reward system and it is under fire every day by not just the food industry,
but by virtually any corporate entity. Because that's how they get you to buy.
I knew we were going to be like this on this call because I talked to you a couple of weeks ago
and we started to get going. I'm like, no, no, no, Rob, hold it off for the podcast because I have
so many questions. So is sugar then a possible contributing factor to polyaddiction in our
culture? Let's say no one is using cocaine or pornography or gambling or shopping,
but they become addicted to sugar because of processed foods in this category four you
said before. Is there a carryover effect that over time they will have a higher compulsion
for those other behaviors that I mentioned? Absolutely. In fact, sugar is a gateway drug.
I mean, that's the way to put it. And I'm not even the one who said that. You know who said that?
No. Eric Clapton. Wow. He was interviewed on 60 Minutes back in the late 70s.
Ed Bradley. I actually have the clip and I can send it to you. You can edit it in if you like.
And Ed Bradley said, so how did all this start to start with heroin? And Eric Clapton says,
no, it started with sugar when I was five, six years old, putting sugar on bread and butter,
pouring sugar down my throat. I consumed sugar because it changed the way I felt.
Wow. So there are certain things that don't directly have sugar, but they get processed in
the body into sugar like wine or something like that. Is that the same effect or not?
Well, so it turns out that fructose, the sweet molecule in sugar and alcohol,
are metabolized in the mitochondria the exact same way and do the exact same things
and generate that same liver fat. And this is why children today get the diseases of alcohol
without alcohol. Type II diabetes and fatty liver disease used to be the diseases of alcohol,
now the diseases of sugar for just the same reason, because our mitochondria handle them
virtually identically. And this was my big aha moment back in 2006. I was asked to give a talk
at the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences. They were celebrating their
100th anniversary. And so it was a two-day symposium, and the first day was going to be on
successes. So lead poisoning, pollution, and asthma. The second day was going to be on new
challenges. The morning was going to be on obesity, metabolic syndrome, and the afternoon was going
to be on ADD and autism. And so they asked me to come to this symposium and say what I thought was
the biggest environmental driver of obesity and metabolic syndrome. And they thought I was going
to talk about PFAS or BPA or phthalates or some chemical in the environment that would be easily
removable. And I said, you know, let me think about this. And I sat down and I said, all right,
look, children are always the canary in the coal mine. They're always the most vulnerable. I'm a
pediatrician. I'm a pediatrician and a chronologist. I'm taking care of these kids.
What are the two diseases that kids get today that they didn't get 40 years ago when I started
practicing type two diabetes and fatty liver disease? I said, yeah, well, I looked it up and
fatty those two diseases were the diseases of alcoholics. I said, hmm, kids are getting diseases
that alcoholics get. So I opened up my biochemistry text from 1974 from college.
And I turned to the alcohol page. And then I turned the page and there was fructose.
And I traced the pathways and I went, holy shit, these are the same. They do the same thing.
The mitochondria handle these the same way. And so I started pulling papers to try to figure out.
So I went to this meeting at NIH and said, I think that fructose is the primary driver.
And I gave my talk. And then was the bathroom break. And nobody came back.
They were all milling around outside. And I had to use the bathroom. So I went outside.
They tackled me in the frigging bathroom screaming at me. This is a bunch of toxicologists saying,
oh my God, oh my God. That's right. That's right. Fructose is a toxin. You have to tell the world.
I never saw a bunch of toxicologists get so worked up.
That's an amazing story. My initial reaction is how could all the smart doctors in the world
miss that until 2007? I truly don't understand it myself. I don't know.
So are you retired or do you currently see patients, children, you're a pediatrician?
I retired clinically in 2017. So I'm not doing any more patient care. I did my 40 years.
They made it very unpleasant between RVUs, relative value units, and basically counting every
minute you've spent then figuring out whether or not you were actually
justifying your salary. And then when the electronic medical records showed up,
that was like the death knell. I'm out of here. I can imagine. I'm doing a lot of stuff,
but it's not patient care. Yeah, I know you are. But the reason I ask is,
in the last few years of your practice, did you see, was there a demographic of children
that either because of personal physiology or because of their parents or because of their
school environment didn't have the typical cultural access to sugar? And did you notice
different things about them? So what I would say is I only saw the kids who had the problem,
not the kids who didn't have the problem, because I was the head of the obesity program. So,
you know, they conglomerated in my clinic. But having said that, what we learned was
that sugar was not the cause of obesity in all of them. It was the cause of the obesity in about
three quarters of them. The other quarter had other things going on. Could be hypotonia,
so that their mitochondria were not working right from scratch because of some neurologic problem.
Could be because their pancreas were overreleasing insulin in response to a glucose load,
what we called insulin hypersecretion, and that required a very different treatment paradigm.
It could be from, you know, genetics. There were genetic disorders called like
melanocortin-4 receptor deficiency in the most obese kids. So what we learned was that obesity
was a syndrome of multiple pathologies and that in order to fix any given kid,
you had to diagnose the proper pathology. Now, when we did that, kids got better.
But the overwhelming majority, it was because of their food. It was because of their ultra
processed food diet. So how can mitochondria get better for a kid and can the same healing occur
in an older adult, perhaps someone listening to this show? Absolutely. That's where it's all,
what it's all about. So the question is, how do you make new, fresher, better mitochondria?
So is it just like cells in your body that are constantly regenerating? We get new
mitochondria all the time? Well, yes. So you have to recycle your mitochondria. So there is a
recycling program in your cells and it is called autophagy, self-eating, autophagy.
All of your cells make junk. They make toxic byproducts and those toxic byproducts can affect
proteins. So you get protein aggregation and now those proteins don't work right. You can get
lipid peroxidation. So those lipids basically become inflammatory. These are all things that
have to be cleared. They have to be gotten rid of. So there is a recycling program. It's called
ubiquitin. Ubiquitin is a string of amino acids that get put on a protein or a lipid
and then gets sent to basically the recycling plant of each cell called the proteasome.
And it gets cut up into itty-bitty pieces and either get recycled into new proteins
or get excreted out of the cell entirely. So basically there is a constant replenishing
of the cellular machinery of each of your cells every single day and it is this process called
autophagy. You need autophagy. Autophagy is good. You want that.
And the autophagy of mitochondria that were dysfunctional because of sugar and all the
problems you've been talking about. When they're chopped up and regenerated, does the dysfunction
carry on into their new constituents or does it come out fresh?
No, it'll come out fresh. And so the new mitochondria will be good, will work well
until of course they go sour also. So in theory you just change what you eat and you could
change how your mitochondria function and reduce or completely eliminate metabolic syndrome?
I think completely eliminate. So there are a few things that we know will improve autophagy.
One is change your diet. Number two, exercise. Exercise, one of the primary ways it helps
is by contributing to autophagy. A third way that Volter Longo at USC showed is intermittent
fasting. And so intermittent fasting is a great promoter of autophagy. Number four is reduced
stress. Now, good luck with that one. We have a stress-filled world and it ain't getting any better.
A fifth one is a compound that we are studying called spermedine. And spermedine is a component
of food. It's also made in your cells and it helps contribute to autophagy. And we're studying a
supplement right now to see whether or not it will actually promote autophagy.
So autophagy happens on its own, right? Like we don't have to do anything. Autophagy is constantly
happening. It's constantly happening, but you can speed it up or slow it down.
Okay. And how does intermittent fasting help mitochondria, autophagy, and metabolic syndrome?
What are the mechanics there? So intermittent fasting means less food coming into the cell,
which means that your ATP is going to be broken up into its components,
AMP, which is, you know, and those phosphates that's liberating the energy to power the cell.
Well, when your AMP goes up, that means your ATP went down. And this enzyme I mentioned earlier
called AMP kinase senses the increase in AMP. It knows that that means that energy levels are low.
And so it then exhibits the, it then stimulates the program for increased mitochondrial synthesis.
So you make more mitochondria and they're now fresh.
And they're coexisting with unhealthy mitochondria, but the population
percentage has changed. Right. Yeah. So this seems to be,
at least in theory, a pretty fixable problem. Why have doctors not caught on to this and
taken it into practice? And how much nutrition education of what you're telling me today
do doctors receive? So the reason that doctors don't know about it is, number one,
there's no pill for that. Number two, there's no ICD-9 or 11 code for that.
What's that? So when doctors sit down with their patients and evaluate them,
they have to generate a billing slip in order to get paid.
Okay. And the way you do it is with codes for what was wrong with the patient,
those are called ICD-11 codes, and then codes for what you did, which are called CPT codes.
And it is the combination of the ICD-11 code and the CPT code that determines how much
Medicare or Medicaid or the insurance company will reimburse the doctor for his or her work.
And sugar is not a box that you can check. But there's no ICD-11 code. No. And autophagy is not
a box you can check. What if it were? What if it were? We would like that to be. Yes, what if it were?
Well, I mean, like I said earlier, healthcare is the biggest industry in the United States. So
is there a point that the refined food industry and maybe the medical industry will recognize
there's potentially more money in healthy living than sickly living or not?
So that's a really good question, Nate. And I'm going to tell you, I don't know the answer to
that. Let me tell you why I don't know the answer. In 1929, in Texas, Blue Cross was the first
insurance that developed. And they appropriately said nobody should go bankrupt dealing with
healthcare. And so they developed this thing called insurance. And then a lot of other companies came
into this space because they saw that there was money to be made. And what they did was they developed
the casino model. Pay to play, set the rates. The same way the casinos make money. They hand
money to you, okay, but they still make money because, you know, pay to play, set the rates.
And that is the model that the insurance industry has used right up to 2013.
And the reason that it changed is because of Obamacare. Now, you can think whatever you want
about Obamacare. And I don't care if you like it or you don't like it, irrelevant to me.
There's one thing Obamacare did do. It capped profit at 15%. No insurance company could make
more than 15% of its subscriptions, which meant that if they were charging more than that,
they had to give the money back to the patient. So now the only way for the insurance company
to make money is to keep you healthy. Before they wanted you sick because pay to play, set the rates.
The casino model. Well, now it's not the casino model. Now they've got a cap.
And so now they've got to figure out how to get, right, they got to figure out how to make people
healthy. They don't know how. But we've still gotten sicker since 2013, I would argue, as a nation.
Indeed. Indeed. And that's because the food hasn't changed.
So is one's sugar intake listening to this program? Is it an issue of personal responsibility?
As a lot of the diet industry has framed some of these health issues, or is it really a much
larger public health crisis impacted by the growth mentality dictated in all of our economy?
Okay. So I'm actually going to be giving us a talk at a workshop on exactly this
topic, personal responsibility or public health. That's the title of my talk. So I'm very up on
this as it were. I'm going to shoot personal responsibility in the foot with one concept.
We have an epidemic of obese newborns all over the world.
U.S., South Africa. So the mitochondria dysfunction
transfers from mother to baby in utero? It does.
Wow. So we have obese newborns. Now, did they diet and exercise?
Wow. No.
Okay. Can they be implicated for personal responsibility?
Well, that's your answer. So there is a paper that I love, and you should become familiar
and acquainted with this paper. It's from PNAS 2008. The author is Anthony Cashmore.
He's the head of biology at the University of Pennsylvania. And the title of the paper is called
the Lucretian Swerve. And it's about personal responsibility, free will, and the criminal
justice system. And the argument that this paper makes is that the only reason we had free will
is basically to publish transgressors. That is purely a function of the criminal justice system.
And the personal responsibility plays directly into this notion of free will. If you have free
will, then you can exercise personal responsibility, except it's not true. So when you actually look
at it, it's half your DNA, half your environment with some random stochastic eventualities. Well,
you can't fix your genetics. You can't fix those random stochastic eventualities. So all
there is is the environment. So our concept of personal responsibility is completely hinged
on the changes in our environment that have occurred. And I agree with that. So this is not
something that is choice. This is something that is response. Response to the environment. So how
do you fix it? You fix the environment. And this goes for carbon, the carbon pulse too.
Right, I was going to say it's another corollary with my story, which is we have become an energy
hungry super organism as a global culture, an individual behavior change isn't really going
to change that until we change the cultural aspirations, the economic rules and the incentives,
et cetera. So in your field, how do like subsidies and governance play into these issue,
especially for the corn industry, is big, big ag involved in this and would reducing
processed food consumption, kind of again dovetailing into my story necessarily require
us to move back to more locally produced foods due to the issue of shipping longevity and energy
costs and some of those things. It's exactly what the problem is. So in my opinion, and this
is opinion, in my opinion, food subsidies are the problem. Now food subsidies started
as early as 1790 because that is the sugar tariff was the second oldest piece of legislation
in the United States and it is still there. 1790. How does that function? I've never heard of that.
The sugar tariff, it was basically to keep sugar from other countries out so we could
develop our own sugar industry. But we didn't eat that much sugar. We only ate five pounds
of sugar back then. No. Right, exactly. Well, the point was to make more. And it was just
particularly important because where were we getting our sugar from, we were getting it from
the Caribbean. But now we just had the revolution and now we had this question about slaves and
what have you. And so we needed to help promote a sugar industry. And so 1790 sugar tariff.
Now the real problem in terms of subsidies came in 1933 with the original farm bill. Now the farm
bill, the first one, 1933, was in response to two things that we had no control over. One was the
depression and the other was the dust bowl. So we had a destitute population in the southwest part
of the United States that were dying of famine. And all the food was in the northeast and the
Midwest. And we had to get the food from the northeast Midwest to the southwest. But the
problem was if you just took whole food and put it on a railroad car, it would be rancid by the time
it got there. So we had to induce, we had to provide subsidies to the manufacturing industry
to process the carbohydrate, the grain, into flour, into 10 pound bags of flour and 10 pound
bags of sugar and put them on those railroad cars so that they wouldn't go rancid by the time they
got there. So they could then be baked up and we could feed a population in extremists. And that
made sense all the way through World War II. So processing itself wasn't just because it tasted
better or it made more money, but it was a necessity in the complexity of our growing
population and spread out everywhere and supply chains and all that. It was a requirement almost.
Exactly right. And the farm bill was the thing that allowed for that to happen.
And now fast forward almost 100 years, the subsidies. We don't need the farm bill.
Why not? We don't need those subsidies. Those subsidies are a problem. So we subsidize
things that can be stored. We subsidize food into commodities. Commodities are
storable food. That's the definition. And what are they? Corn wheat, soy sugar, all of which are bad
for us. But that's what we subsidize. And so we give- Is it just because of a momentum that we've
always subsidized them and then there's been power and lobbyists and everything and so it's like
there's a momentum there. It's hard to break. That's exactly right. And the more we try to break it,
the more they push back and exert political pressure on every administration since Eisenhower.
Do you know offhand the dollar amount of subsidies that goes to process foods and sugar and big
roughly? It's about, I think, well, in 2015, the last time I looked, it was $192 billion.
And so it's probably higher now. Let's just say that that was removed. How would the food
companies respond to that? They would have to change some of their practices.
That would be the assumption. So the Giannini Foundation at UC Berkeley
actually did this exercise, this modeling exercise back in 2007. They asked the question,
what would the price of food look like if we got rid of all food subsidies? You'd have to
get rid of all of them. And the reason is because if you subsidize one thing, that means you're
taxing everything else because you have to make book. I mean, subsidies distort the market.
That's what they do. So you want the market to work. I want the market to work. It's very
libertarian. Let the market work. Well, the market's not working because of the subsidies.
So let's get rid of the subsidies. So what would happen to the price of food?
Now, the betting man would say, well, the price of food would go up. It turns out,
the price of food would not go up. It would stay the same except for two items,
corn and sugar. Those would go up. And that's exactly what we want to go up
because that's what we have to reduce the effective availability of because they're
the biggest problem. So fresh fruit and fresh vegetables that are grown in California and
shipped to Wisconsin where I live, that wouldn't change then if the subsidies went away because
it's still going to be somewhat expensive to ship and whatever. That's already in the price.
But you're saying that the real bad foods for our mitochondria would go up in price,
which would be a good signal to people to consume less. Are you working on things like that? Are
there people working on this? Well, there are people who are modeling it. The question is,
is anyone working on it at a policy level? And the answer is, stay tuned.
So is there, in addition to the subsidies, would breaking up the monocultures in the
United States we're only talking about now and adopting regenerative agriculture,
which is more labor intensive, better for climate, better for the health of the people
involved in it, would that aid in the reduction of obesity and related diseases?
Absolutely. No question. No ifs ands or buts. It'll reduce obesity because it'll allow for
fruits, vegetables, and fiber-containing foods, which are necessary, to become
more plentiful and therefore less expensive. So people will be able to incorporate them
into their diets because they are less expensive and more available. And it will also reduce the
nitrous oxide and methane and carbon dioxide burden, which will have enormous effects on
cellular metabolism. So it's a win-win. What is the effect of nitrous oxide?
So, well, nitrous oxide is a heat trapping. All right. Okay. I thought you meant on the
individual. On a climate standpoint, it would reduce that.
Well, yeah. I mean, carbon dioxide is a problem too. And if you look at the...
People talk about all three greenhouse gases like they're equivalent. They're not. You know
this. No doubt. If you have three components to each greenhouse gas, that is, parts per million,
and then residence time, and then heat trapping capacity, you could develop a formula for how
bad each greenhouse gas was. Now, it turns out the one that gets all the attention, that gets all
the press is methane because they want to get rid of the cows. Okay. Here's the problem with that.
Methane is actually the lowest in terms of parts per million. And it's also the lowest
in terms of residence time. So it is 25 times the heat trapping capacity of carbon dioxide.
I don't argue that. It is definitely more heat trapping than carbon dioxide, but there's less
of it and it has a lower residence time of only nine years. The nitrous oxide that you have to spray,
that you have to spray nitrogen fertilizer on the crops because there's no cows on the farm
to carbon fix and provide nitrogen for the crops. So you have to spray the nitrogen
instead, which then forms nitrous oxide, which then goes into the air. It has the longest
residence time of 114 years, and it has a heat trapping capacity of 250 compared to
methane, which is only 25. It's 10 times more heat trapping. So us spraying nitrogen fertilizer
on crops because we took the cows off the farm is basically truly shooting ourselves in the foot.
It's like doing the absolute worst thing. And worse yet, we have the cows now in Kansas on these
CAFOs, concentrated animal feeding operations, where all the cattle are basically in pens
and can't move. And so they're all lying in their own excrement and they're eating corn,
which is not high in legumes, is not high in some of the compounds that are needed for
immunologic competency. So these cows get sick very easily. And so what happens?
The cattlemen have to give the cows shots of antibiotics. So virtually all of the CAFO treated
meat that we consume in this country is all antibiotic laden. So what are those antibiotics
doing? And does that carry over into our gut microbiome and disrupt it?
Absolutely. And it disrupts the cow's microbiome. So it kills off the good beneficial bacteria in
the cow's microbiome and allows the methanogens, the methane producing bacteria, to basically
take over. So each cow today is making six times the methane than they did in 1968.
But it wouldn't have to be that way just because it's a cow and people eat beef. It's because of
the way they fatten them up on the CAFOs with corn. Exactly right. So you have to unwind this
whole thing together. Well, you have to understand it first in order to unwind it. So thank you for
explaining it so clearly. Let me ask you this. This is just my own personal sense,
but you're an endocrinologist. So I get to ask you this. What is the impact of antibiotics writ
large on our microbiome and our metabolism? It seems to me in some ways, antibiotics are one of
the best inventions of human history. But it seems like we might have traded mortality for
morbidity. Like it's a great thing because we don't die because we take antibiotics when we
have a disease. But at the same time, the antibiotics are weakening our response as individuals
because it's killing all the beneficial bacteria as well as the bad ones. Do you have any thoughts
on that? I do. I have lots of thoughts on that. And you almost stated it correctly.
It's not just morbidity and mortality. I mean, ultimately, antibiotics kill, sorry,
bacteria kill quickly. Pneumonia kills quickly. Various infectious diseases. The reason that
our lifespan has gone from 47 years to 78 years are two changes in the 20th century,
antibiotics and actually three changes, antibiotics, vaccination and hygiene.
Okay, sanitation. Those three things, antibiotics, vaccination, sanitation. That's the reason we
went from 47 mean age to 78 years mean age. Okay, those three things. Antibiotics are good.
When you use them right, when you use them for the disease that you have in front of you.
But that's not what we've been doing. Every kid who gets a viral otitis,
you know, an ear infection, okay, it's viral. We won't let them back into school until they're
on an antibiotic. But antibiotics don't kill viruses. Exactly. Antibiotics don't kill viruses.
Those viruses would go away by themselves, but every kid gets an antibiotic for every ear
infection. And in fact, every patient who ends up in the hospital ends up on an antibiotic. And
the problem is the more you use the antibiotics, the more resistant the bacteria get. And so you
have to develop new antibiotics and new antibiotics. And now we have strains of bacteria that are not
even susceptible to antibiotics. So we've created a legion of superbugs. In addition,
we have sterilized our microbiome. And this is work from Marty Blazer at NYU,
who's basically showed that the earlier antibiotics get introduced into a newborn's gut,
the more likely that that gut microbiome will change and promote obesity going forward in the
future. Is there any evidence of people in communities that they're, rather than just someone
living in their house with just their wife and two kids or something, people living in communities
cooking together, sharing, working together, that they're sharing each other's microbiome because
of interaction and that's a healthy benefit? Or is that just kind of speculation?
I think it's speculation, but there is definitely something to microbial diversity.
The more kinds of bacteria you have in your intestine, the better off you are. That's clear.
Whether you get them from other people or not is not clear.
Do you take probiotic supplement type things yourself?
No. And I'll tell you why. Probiotics are live cultures. They are bacteria that are live.
Okay. You want to increase your bacterial diversity. So you take a probiotic.
Now, that probiotic goes into your intestine. It should take up space. It should grow. It should
take. It should proliferate. It should be able to do that. And it should be able to do it with
one dose. So how come you keep needing it? How come you have to take it every day?
Yeah, right. Why is that? The point is if the probiotic we're taking,
actually set up shop, you don't only have to take it once, but that's not true. And the reason is
because the reason the probiotic is not there in the first place, because the internal milieu
of your intestine is toxic. It's not conducive to the growth of those bacteria, which is why
they're not there in the first place. So what do you think adding a probiotic to a toxic environment
will do? Nothing. And that's what's happening. Nothing. What you have to do is you have to change
that internal milieu. And how do you do that? You have to allow fiber.
Fiber? Fiber is not a probiotic. Fiber is a prebiotic. So what are some things that
contain fiber that are readily available at grocery stores or restaurants?
How about all the produce? Okay.
That's what the produce is for. The produce is not for you. The produce is for your bacteria.
Wow. You have to feed your gut. What a profound statement. So
people that were living on the person in Sao Paulo's scale of the category four,
if they would switch from that category food to produce, right there, it would start changing
some reactions in their physiology, their gut, et cetera.
In two days. Really? Two days.
You would notice differences or a doctor would notice differences?
A doctor would notice differences in two days.
How can this not be more widely known, Rob? I mean, you do read it out there in places,
but not with this clarity. Because the food industry is very powerful,
and they have a very big mouthpiece.
Have you, I mean, you've been speaking about this issue for over a decade. Have you seen
positive trends in the right direction? And what will it really take to start
like significant change on this? Yeah. So really good question. So I actually have data.
And the food industry generated it for me. How about that?
There is a public relations arm of the food industry called IFIC, the International Food
Information Council. And they every year publish their annual report. And as part of the annual
report, they ask the public a question. And each year it's a different question.
In 2011, they asked the question, what nutrient or food stuff is the greatest contributor to weight
gain? And at that time, 11% said refined carbohydrate and sugar. And 48% said a calorie is a calorie,
I don't know. In 2018, they asked the exact same question the exact same way,
seven years later. And now 33% of the population answered refined carbohydrate and sugar.
And the same number of people went down in terms of a calorie is a calorie, I don't know.
In other words, those people had been educated as to what the real problem was.
So education does work, but education alone is no match for any substance of abuse.
Right. I know that.
You can't unaddict somebody with education.
Well, and I'm somewhat aware of these issues. And to me, the refined carbs have gotten the
bad name. And of course, sugar is a refined carb, but people try to low carb and all those.
But maybe that's not the real danger. You had matzo ball for breakfast, that's carbs,
but there's no sugar in that. So maybe carbs are okay as long as there's no sugar or processed
involved, yes? So this is, well, this is a question in the nutritional scientific
community right now. Is it carb restriction or is it sugar restriction? And I'll be very
honest with you, it depends on the patient. Some people that require carb restriction,
if they're beta cells in their pancreases are exploding insulin, they need carb restriction.
But if they have liver fat, they very well may just need sugar restriction.
So probably different modalities for different people.
So a few weeks ago, I was at a Homeland Security conference and I met a gentleman
there who knew you or knew of your work and we were talking. And I told him we would be
on this call and he told me to ask you, is obesity a national and Homeland Security issue?
Absolutely. If I named him, would you be able to tell me if it was him?
Sure. Dan O'Connor? Yeah, Dan.
Okay. I had a feeling. And he knows the answer to that. He's the one who said it to me.
Yes, of course it is. Too fast to fight. I mean, you know, that like, well,
if 93% of Americans have some form of metabolic dysfunction,
and if the food at the PX and at the cafeterias are, you know, ultra process, which they are,
okay, we are basically fattening up our own troops and we're contributing to their mitochondrial
dysfunction. Well, to me, that's not a fighting force that you want to field.
Well, it's troops and military aside, I think it's a Homeland Security issue for the
viability of our nation and our intelligence and creativity and health and discovery and
innovation and everything, right? It's kind of sapping a lot of our potential. 93% of Americans
have some metabolic dysfunction. Yep, according to Tufts. And what would you
speculate that the 7% of others, how did they luck out or how did they avert this?
I wish I knew the answer to that. I don't know. Okay. So if you had to speculate the next 20 or
30 years knowing which, well, let me ask you one more question. I have so many questions for you,
Rob, but we'll wrap this up soon. I have read in the climate... Let's do a part two.
Yeah, we'll have to do a part two. I've read in the climate literature that
warmer temperatures, good for plant growth, but they grow the plants, but not necessarily
the nutrition and that the micronutrients like zinc and things like that don't get assimilated.
So we might have a larger plant, but what humans actually eat from the plant is missing
critical inputs. Have you looked into that? Have you heard of that?
I have. I've not personally looked into it other than writing about it in
metabolical. It's not like I've done research in it myself, but there are two issues. One is
soil versus dirt, and the other is selective breeding. Two different issues. So soil versus
dirt, what's the difference between soil and dirt? Soil has microorganisms and healthy
mycorrhizal function, et cetera. Soil has a microbiome and dirt doesn't. Okay. That's the
difference. And dirt, if you're going to grow a plant in dirt, you need to add a whole bunch of
nitrous oxide and other things. Nitrogen, right. Nitrogen. And you have to carbon fix, right.
Exactly. That's exactly the point. So you can grow anything in soil, and the reason is because
the microorganisms in the soil, the viruses, the fungi, the bacteria are actually producing
things the plant needs to be nutritious. So the plant conglomerates those things,
but the plant doesn't necessarily make those things. Got it. So when you grow plants in soil,
they are more nutritious because of those microorganisms. When you grow plants in dirt,
yes, you have to throw nitrogen on them. You have to throw water on them. Yes, it'll grow,
but it won't have nearly the nutritional content that that same plant growing in soil will have.
And that's scientifically established. That's scientifically established.
Second problem, selective breeding. People like sweet. And so all the fruit and vegetable growers
said, okay, let's take our best hybrids and hybridize them together and make the sweetest
possible apple, the sweetest possible pear, the sweetest possible, you know, tomato, etc., etc.
Because then people will like them better and they will buy them. Well, turns out,
as you selectively hybridize, you actually reduce all of the things in the fruit and in the vegetable
that were nutritious because those things are bitter. They have a bitter taste. So the polyphenols,
the flavonoids, the carotenoids, all the things that actually contribute to the nutritional
quality of the plant have actually been selectively bred out so that the sweetness will show through
instead. So this is partly man-made by selective hybridization and it's partly plant-made because
of the soil dirt issue. But yes, there's no question that our fruits and vegetables today
are less nutritious than they were 25, 30 years ago. And then it's a positive feedback,
right? Because people buy those products, it has more fructose and less of the micronutrients,
and it gets our taste buds more tethered away from tiger piss and dog poop that
tastes bad but actually have nutrition in them from earlier in the podcast. Wow, I've learned
a ton here. So a few closing questions for people listening. What can people do right now in their
control to minimize the risks that you discuss about metabolic disorder and mitochondrial
dysfunction and create more healthy baselines for themselves in the future?
Three words. Eat real food. Okay. Eat real food. Now, that's hard to do. It shouldn't be hard to
do but it's hard to do. And the reason it's hard to do is because we have food deserts, you know,
through much of the country where you can't even get real food. And also, the cost of real food
is four times higher than ultra-processed food because the consumer price index.
So there's an inequity aspect to everything you're talking about because for people,
yeah. This is the basis of social determinants of health. Right here. This is what it's about.
Fix the food. Now, the question is how? How can you fix the food? Well, how about differential
subsidization? Okay, here's a concept. So number one, get rid of all the food subsidies. But if
you're not going to get rid of all the food subsidies, how about tax the ultra-processed food
and use the money from the tax to subsidize real food? Zero-sum game to the government. Not a money
grab. But what you're doing is you're improving effective availability for the people who need it
the most. Will they go for that though because the healthier food isn't going to taste as good?
Yeah. Well, number one, yes, they will. The public will go for it eventually because money is money
and price. Everyone's determined that price is the most important thing. That's been shown
50 ways from Sunday. The problem is will the food companies go for it? And the answer is they won't
be out anything because you still have to eat and you still have to drink.
I have so many questions for you. But the big thing that's like rolling in my mind,
it's almost four o'clock here is I'm wondering, what the hell should I have for dinner tonight
after talking to Dr. Lustig? So do you have? Yeah, I know. I have that effect on people.
Yeah. Well, it's a good effect. So do you have specific recommendations for young humans listening
to this that are aware of climate change, aware of how messed up our culture is? Maybe they've
learned some new things today from this discussion. What do you tell teenagers and 20-somethings who
are learning these things? Right. So the first thing is education works. Think of it this way.
All right. This is how I explain it to people. Okay. In the last 30 years in this country,
we have had four count them, four cultural tectonic shifts in this country. And here they are. Ready?
Number one, bicycle helmets and seatbelts. Number two, smoking in public places.
Number three, drunk driving. Number four, condoms and bathrooms. 30 years ago,
if a legislator stood up in a state house or Congress or parliament or the doom or anywhere
else around the world and proposed any one of those four items for legislation,
they'd have gotten left right out of town. And now this is so obvious. Nanny state, liberty
interest, get out of my kitchen, get out of my bathroom, get out of my car. Okay. Today,
they're all facts of life. No one's belly aching about any of those things. We're belly aching
about new stuff like vaccines. Right? Okay. But those things are settled. Okay. And if you don't
click your seatbelt before you pull out of your driveway, your kids will scream at you.
Now, how'd that happen? And why did it take 30 years? Answer, we taught the children.
The children grew up and they voted. And the naysayers are dead. That's why it's a generational
tectonic shift. Are you finding traction with educating young people with this message?
Absolutely. Yes, we are. And we are teaching kids about food in kindergarten through 12th grade,
Rainbow Chefs Academy, which I'm an advisor to, in the Mount Diablo Unified School District. We
have an entire food curriculum. We teach fourth graders how to cook in class in the cafeteria.
We use the cafeteria as an education center so that when a kid goes into the grocery store with
the mother and goes to the produce aisle and says, Hey, mom, there's an artichoke. Can we have that
for dinner? And the mom says, Well, I don't know how to make an artichoke. And the kid says, Yeah,
but I do. And the kid becomes the positive disruptive force in the household.
Teach the children. You can do this. This can be done. We are doing this. Now there is a problem.
It's called time. We have a clock. Okay, we have a drop dead clock. We have a 1.5 centigrade
temperature increase on climate beyond which there's the point of no return. And we have to
meet it. And that's the problem. We have to speed this education up. And we're going to have to
educate the naysayers too, because we got to fix this problem fast. And that's hard.
Yeah, yeah, for sure. And we're going to have to educate politicians as well. So I have three
final questions that I ask all my guests. I hope you don't mind. They're a little bit on the personal
side. What do you care most about in the world, Rob?
Fixing the problem. I can believe that. So if you there's nothing else,
if you don't fix the problem, if you don't fix the problem, what else is there?
Yeah. Yeah. The problem is we have multiple problems, but I am I am convinced that this one
is that we only have we only have one problem. Okay, the problem is the problem you have identified.
The problem is the problem of overconsumption.
Yeah. Couple centuries ago, they had people dying from overconsumption, which was a word for
tuberculosis. But now it actually is literally overconsumption as a culture and as individuals.
Yeah. So if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision,
what is one thing that you would do to improve human and planetary futures?
Get rid of the food subsidies. Okay. No, no ifs ands or buts. Get rid of the food subsidies.
There's no reason for them. Excellent. They distort the market. Let the market work.
And what is next for you? You recently wrote this book. I know you're speaking and talking
to people in DC to try to change their mind. You're dedicating your wisdom and connections
towards, you know, you're, what are you doing now? Another deep scholarly book or what?
So yeah, I'm going to, right now I've got a bunch of things on my plate, but I have an idea for a
book that I'm going to write with my best friend in science, Dr. Alyssa Eppel. She is a psycho
endocrinologist. She wrote, she co-wrote the book, The Telomere Effect with Liz Blackburn,
Nobel Prize winner about telomeres. She wrote the stress prescription just came out recently.
She and I are going to write a book about the amygdala, Ground Zero for Chronic Disease.
And why the amygdala is under assault 24-7, 365, and why that is the basic neurobiology
of our problem of overconsumption. I thought the amygdala is where we stored our emotional
memories and trauma and things like that. That's the fear center.
Fear center, yeah. Where we, the place we start stored memories is the hippocampus.
The campus actually feeds back on the amygdala. The prefrontal cortex is reason that also
modulates and temporizes the amygdala. When the amygdala is let to go hog wild,
that's when your brain goes from being a brain to being a lizard.
And is food related to that? You bet it is. All right. Well, you're going to come back for that one.
I really enjoyed this and I learned a lot and it's also given me the cognitive ability to
trump my emotional needs in the present for sugary tasting things and how to make some changes.
So thank you so much, Dr. Lustig, and to be continued.
My pleasure, Nate. Anytime, anytime.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
