What are the common misconceptions of these neurotransmitter slash hormones and what roles
do they actually play in shaping our behavior? Great, and you're absolutely right to say the
slash because it used to be testosterone only belonged to the endocrinologists,
but then it's due in something neurotransmitter-ish in the brain and dopamine used to only belong
to the neurocanus. So yeah, it's on a continuum, of course. Testosterone, everybody knows exactly
what testosterone is about, which is the hormone that makes you aggressive. It explains why males
the world over in species after species are such pains in the asses because testosterone causes
aggression. Testosterone does not cause aggression. What testosterone does mostly is it amplifies,
it increases the volume on the aggression that's already there, the aggression that's been socially
learned. And that's a very different story. A perfect example of it, you take five male monkeys,
they've formed a dominance hierarchy, number one, trashes two through five, two trashes three
through five, all of that. So you take number three in the hierarchy and shoot them up with
testosterone, shoot them up with like so much of it, like he's growing antlers or something.
And does he get in more fights? Absolutely. Whoa, testosterone causes aggression.
But what you might speculate at that point is as a result of that testosterone,
number three is suddenly like confronting numbers two and one and maybe toppling the,
nah, you never see that. He still has his chest as brown-nosing with them as he used to be.
All that happens is he's become a total nightmare to numbers four and five.
All the testosterone has done is amplify the social learning that was there already.
One and two, you have to pretend you like they're like haircuts. Four and five, you can do anything
you want to. So let's do it 10 times as much as normal. Testosterone doesn't cause aggression.
Testosterone amplifies what's already been socially learned. And testosterone even more so
is about defending challenges to your status. But then humans have come up all sorts of
circumstances where defending your status does not involve aggression. Just look at a bunch
of rich, half-drunk people at a charity auction and they're competing for status over who could
give away the most money conspicuously. That one doesn't make a whole lot of sense when
testosterone is all about aggression. And in studies where people get status by being more
generous, you give people testosterone and they become more generous. It's not about making you
aggressive. It's a making about amplifying whatever you've learned is good for holding on to status
in your little sliver of the universe. That's fascinating. I didn't know that. And how we get
status in our culture is probably going to have to change away from conspicuous consumption,
et cetera. So testosterone will play a role. Exactly. And I mean, what that tells us at the
end of the day with like human aggression, testosterone isn't the problem. The problem
is that we hand out so damn much social status for aggression. That's the thing that needs to be
solved. And as you know, that's immediately intertwined with who's got how many toys and how
conspicuously can you display it, et cetera, et cetera. We may not be economically rational,
but we are economically competitive and testosterone just feeds into that in ways no other
ape can make sense of. And what about dopamine? Dopamine, totally great, exciting neurotransmitter.
Another one where everybody knows what dopamine is about, which is dopamine is about reward.
It's about pleasure. Cocaine works on the dopamine system, various euphorians, you like give somebody
cocaine and they're releasing a thousand fold more dopamine than like some key parts of the
brain ever do. And whoa, it's amazing. Dopamine is about reward. It's about pleasure. And
superficially, it seems that way. You take a person or a monkey or a rat and you give them
a reward from completely out of nowhere and they have a rush of dopamine. Yeah, that's great.
Then you look more closely. And what you do is you take a paradigm and it works this way in a
human or a monkey or rat, you like train the individual that, okay, we put you in a room
and as soon as the little light comes on, it means every time you press this lever 10 times,
you're going to get a little reward. Signal work reward, signal work reward. So the organism
learns that the college freshman in site 101 or the lab or whatever, and they learn this. So
you put them in the situation, the light comes on, they do the work and they get the reward.
When did dopamine rise? And if dopamine is just about reward, it rises after you get the reward.
That's not what you see. It rises when the little light comes on. What's that about? That's you
sitting there saying, yeah, I'm all over this. I know about this lever pressing stuff. This is
going to be great. I'm like completely master the universe at this lever pressing. Dopamine
isn't about reward as much as it's about the anticipation of reward. And we sure know endless
ways in life in which the anticipation turned out to be better than the actual thing. And most
importantly, if you block dopamine from being released at that time, you don't get the lever
pressing. It's about the anticipation and it's about the motivation and the goal directed
behavior that's generated by that anticipation. Is that part of the core of our current
superorganism, energy, hungry dynamic of human society? Absolutely. And a weird human specific
feature of the dopamine system explains if you want to be grandiose, 99% of what's going
wrong with this, which is like you're a baboon. What are your sources of pleasure in life? You
get to hassle somebody lower ranking than you. You get to have sex. You're hungry and you eat
something good. That's about it. Like if you're human, all of those things feel good, but also
like solving Fermat's last theorem feels good. And reading about acts of random kindness and
seeing an arousing scene in a movie involving characters who aren't even real and listening
to a symphony and smelling a flower in early and spring and all of that. We've got a system
that has to incorporate responding to rewarding things that range from like remembering a line
of poetry to quadruple orgasms. And the only way you can get a dopamine system that could handle
that large of a range is it's got to reset quickly. What about oxytocin? Okay, oxytocin,
it's the grooviest hormone on earth. Oxytocin is about love and trust and social intelligence and
all of that. Oxytocin is this amazing hormone. Best evidence is it's about 100 million years old.
And what it first evolved for was like the most basic thing that mammals were getting around to
doing, which was making mothers get attached to their kids and kids attached to their mothers,
which is really essential if you're going to do that mammal dependent on mom stuff. So
that's been around for about 100 million years. Best evidence is about 30, 20 million years ago.
It then got, you know, refigured and started being used as well for pair bonding,
you know, monogamy. And it's just a tiny percentage of social mammals that are monogamous,
but they make heavy use of oxytocin. And whether we are one of those species is a really interesting
top again and of itself, because we're not, but we're kind of a little bit and we're very confused.
And then I don't know, maybe in the last five million years, oxytocin then got refigured again
for things like trust and social cooperation and generosity and game theory settings and all that.
Here's the naughtiest thing we've done with oxytocin, this 100 million year old hormone.
And in the last 20,000 years, we've reconfigured it again so that we secrete it and our dogs
secrete it when we're looking into each other's eyes. Like, whoa, we're now using oxytocin for
feeling attached to our ex wolves. Like 20,000 years, a blink of an eye and now we use it for that
and you give a dog oxytocin and it looks at its human longer. Okay, so everything about oxytocin
there is great. And if we could just dump oxytocin in the water supply, this would be a wonderful
planet. Oxytocin promotes prosociality. It doesn't. Oxytocin promotes prosociality with people who
you consider to be an us, people like me. And your pet dog who you spend more on for food each
year than your Sudanese gets in a decade counts as an us. What does oxytocin do when you're
encountering thems? It makes you crappier to them. It makes you more preemptively aggressive.
It makes you less trustworthy. Oxytocin doesn't make you nice. It makes you nice to people who
already count as a you and it makes you awful to them. It just takes this us them like fracture
line we have in our heads and it just pushes it apart further. And amazing studies showing you
give people oxytocin and they become more cooperative to their team members and they
become awful to the people on the other team. It is not this groovy hormone. It is this hormone
that makes parochial provinciality more dramatic and that's not often a good thing.
