The impacts from climate change on our temperatures, on wildfires, on ocean heat
currently around Florida are approaching 100 degrees, have been in the news.
This podcast is going to be about climate research and climate journalism.
And I'm aware that to those listeners who think humans are going extinct in the next two decades,
I'm not going to reach them ever with this sort of podcast. To those humans who think that climate
change is a socialist globalist hoax and that the climate has always warmed and it will warm again
and humans have a negligible role, I will never convince those people either.
But there are many people in between who know that climate change is happening.
It's largely caused by humans pulling up ancient carbon and emitting it 10 million times faster
than it was sequestered. So we want to understand what paths are still remain and which ones are
fantastical. My guest today is Roger Pilke, a professor of environmental science and policy
at the University of Colorado. Roger and I talk about the historical architecture of the
representative concentration pathway scenarios in the IPCC, the fact that many of these are
exogenously created. They had nothing to do with science. They measured a certain amount of GDP
in the year 2100. The bottom line is that the amount of fossil fuels that are affordable and
extractable probably is a fraction of what some of the early climate models show. On the flip side,
the biological feedback mechanisms that we're facing are probably higher than was originally
estimated. Roger and I also talk about what was the deal with two degrees Celsius. Why was that
chosen as a threshold? Roger researches and writes on subjects from understanding the politicization
of science to decision-making under uncertainty to policy education for scientists. He just recently
gave a presentation to Congress. His most recent book, The Rightful Place of Science,
Disasters and Climate Change, takes a deeper look at the IPCC and climate science and how it is being
interpreted in the media. I hope you learned from this episode and please welcome Professor Roger Pilke.
Roger, greetings. Hi, Nate. How are you doing? I am good. It is a Friday afternoon.
It's 82 degrees here in April and tomorrow night. It's supposed to snow, so it's the strange spring
that we've had. Where are you in Denver or Boulder? I'm in Boulder, Colorado, and it's
snowing behind me right at this moment. Okay. That's headed this way. I have long been aware
of you and your work. We have some mutual friends. I literally have like 100 questions to ask you,
so if you're game, we're going to try to break biology and Tim Ferriss eight-hour podcast record.
No, I got my coffee ready. Let's go. Yeah. Okay. All right. So climate, huge, huge topic in our
world relative to our future. You are prominently writing about what's going on with climate,
climate history, the models, the politics, the science. Here's how I'd like to start.
I'd like to get into the RCP, the representative concentration pathway scenarios and their
implications. But first, before we do that, how did the climate models and the assumptions that go
into them come about? Because I don't think a lot of people think about that or know about it.
Could you give us a little story of how that ended up happening? Yeah. Yeah. So,
no, well, first, thanks for having me. It's great to be here and I'm looking forward to our conversation.
So to run a physical science climate model, it needs some inputs. And if you want to know what
the climate's going to do in coming decades and centuries, you need to make some assumptions
about how much we're going to admit. And if you want to know how much we're going to admit,
not just carbon dioxide, but methane, nitrous oxide and so on, you have to know something about,
well, how many people are going to be on the planet? What kind of energy are these people
going to use? How are they going to produce that energy? What's the economy going to look like?
Where are people going to live? How are we going to get our food? Go on and on and on.
So it turns out that the physical sciences of climate change are themselves built on the back
of a lot of work that's done in what's come to be known as integrated assessment modeling.
But that's built on the back of things like futures and demography and economics and
even political science and so on. And so in order to run a climate model, you need to have these
assumptions. And going back to the very first IPCC intergovernmental panel on climate change
reports in the late 1980s, you start out with what are called scenarios. And those first reports,
the very first report had four scenarios. And the most recent sixth assessment report, AR6,
had thousands of scenarios in its database. So the scenario world has expanded. And the RCPs,
which we can talk about in more depth, are the main scenarios that the climate research community
focused on really from 2005. And it's still fairly prominent in the literature,
even though there's another generation of scenarios out there.
Okay. So what was the origin of those RCP scenarios? There were four of them.
And then particularly, I want to talk about RCP 8.5, which you've written a little bit about.
Yeah. So it was probably about the third formal generation of scenarios under the IPCC.
A process was started in 2005 to identify a small number of scenarios and a small number of scenarios.
You can't use a thousand scenarios because computer models are computationally intensive.
They take time and money to run. So the community needed to winnow down thousands of scenarios to
just a few. And they decided to focus on four scenarios. And it really wasn't anything more
complicated than, well, we need one that's pretty high. We need one that's pretty low.
And at the time, they said, well, we need two in the middle, because if we pick just one,
everybody's going to focus on that as the central tendency. And so they went to the existing
literature on scenarios that was out there and had a process with integrated assessment
modeler experts, climate modeling experts, where they selected four of these scenarios,
which were intended to be, quote unquote, representative of the family of scenarios
that they come from. And RCP 8.5 was selected at the time as the only what's called a baseline
scenario. So this is a world without climate policy. The RCP and the 8.5 stands for 8.5
watts per square meter under that scenario of climate forcing, right? Right. That's that's
refers to the energy balance at the top of the atmosphere. So the higher the number in the RCP
scenario world, the greater the change to the climate in in the energy system.
So I think there was an assumption, because I originally had this assumption, I don't know,
10 or 15 years ago, that these scenarios that were distilled down into four categories from
a thousand or whatever you said, were this is what we expect could happen to the climate based
on our science. And our science suggests that in the year 2100, the there will be 8.5 watts
of forcing per square meter. But you just said that let's pick a low, let's pick a high. And then
did the RCP 8.5 scenario, was it based on climate science and then built out,
or was it based on let's see what sort of forcing would be really high and then
backcast from that? It's very much the latter. I mean, people people will be and probably should
be shocked that the scenarios that are at the center of climate research, really for the last
two decades, were never evaluated for their plausibility or their probability, their likelihood.
The the you know, what we know now is that RCP 8.5 was never a realistic projection of where the
world was heading, either in terms of the emissions to generate the forcing or the forcing itself,
because the scenarios that exist today can't generally produce that level of forcing now.
There's some scientists who say, well, if we added some things or we, you know, uncertainties break a
certain way, that's fine. But those aren't in the scenarios we have today. So it's, it's a little bit
more, a little bit less precise than you might think it is. It's, you know, let's have a high one,
8.5, that's pretty high. Let's have a low one, 2.6, that's really low, and a couple in the middle.
And it was really nothing more sophisticated than that. And one of the things I and my co-authors
have done is to try to increase the focus on plausibility, because we want to focus on scenarios
that are plausible futures. So they're more meaningful in policy and public discussions.
So I think I remember, and here's another problem with all these things, is I've done a lot of
looking into climate over the last 15 years, and I care deeply about the natural world and the
environment and the oceans. But a single person can't possibly stay on top of all this stuff,
even within the climate field. And I'm looking at finance and human behavior and plastics and
politics and, you know, you just, you just can't stay on top of it. So what I heard, and this may be
a faulty memory, is that some people in the IPCC brought in some economists and said, come up with
a reasonably plausible economic scenario that would lead to 8.5 watts of forcing in the year
2100, and then put in the amount of coal oil, natural gas, et cetera, and economic growth that
would get us to that point, because we want to see if the world warms like that, what would be
the impact on all, you know, heat and precipitation and everything else. So it was kind of an economic
overlay, and then it was fed into all the climate models. Is that, is that what happened?
Yeah, that's, that's, I mean, that's pretty much correct. I mean, it's interesting because if you
go back far enough in time, so the 80s and 90s, the way the IPCC did its scenario work leading
into the physical science, climate models, or system models, is you had to do the socioeconomics
first. We had to come up with projections for population, projections for energy consumption,
projections for the economy, and put those into a scenario. And then once the scenarios are developed,
then you run them through the climate models. Well, in 2005, the climate modeling community
said, hey, we can, we can simplify this, we can make this a lot easier. We're going to pick the
radiative forcing levels for 2100. And then we'll send those trajectories of radiative
forcing to the climate modelers, which is what they need to run the earth system models. And
then we'll also send them at the exact same time to the integrated assessment models and
the social scientists. And then they can tell us what futures will arrive at those levels.
So, so there was this, this, this split where the, the, the radiative forcing was selected
quite independently of the socioeconomics that produced that forcing. This was a problem because
when they sent the 8.5 Watts per meter squared radiative forcing scenario back to the
integrated assessment models, almost all of them were unable to create a future with that level
of forcing. It required heroic assumptions about the burning of coal in particular. So, so that
was, I think, a fundamental error that, you know, it's, it's, you know, it's, it's an emergent property,
but it's something that came out of the community trying to do good work, but not realizing that
once you cut that link between the socioeconomics of the real world and the needs of climate
modelers, don't be surprised if you find yourself in a place where your assumptions actually are
implausible. So I'm going to, I'm going to come back to this, but can you give us an update on,
I seem to have recall reading a month or two ago that the Biden administration
officially discarded the RCP 8.5 model and it is starting to be discredited as, as plausible.
Can you, can you give an update on what's going on there?
Yeah, I mean, I, I mean, I think there's a general recognition in the community that, that
it's an implausible scenario. Whether or not the world can reach radiative forcing levels of,
you know, 8.5 Watts per meter squared or even higher is certainly the subject of continuing
research and discussion and debate. Nobody, nobody in the energy space or even the climate
space thinks it's plausible that the world is going to turn all of its energy consumption
into coal-based sources. You know, we're not going to get rid of wind and solar and nuclear
and hydro, replace it with coal. We're not going to get rid of petroleum and natural gas, replace
it with coal. It's just not going to happen. So I think there's a general acceptance of that.
The Biden administration in its update to what's called the social cost of carbon,
they engage with a group called Resources for the Future to produce a set of scenarios of the
future. And RCP 8.5 was way beyond even the top of the envelope of those scenarios.
The Biden administration didn't put out a press release saying we junked RCP 8.5,
but in practice, it's nowhere to be seen. Except that many, and this isn't a recent thing,
but over the last 10 years, I know a lot of IPCC climate scientists who are specialists on the
Arctic or specialists on water vapor or whatever. They're not like macro analysts, but they all
say that them and all their friends just assumed that business as usual would result in RCP 8.5.
And there were many famous books like The Uninhabitable Earth by David Wallace Welles
and others that set this cultural overton window that that was the base case. So my question to you
is, you know, you, Roger, have written extensively on apocalyptic climate scenarios, but even outside
of the RCP 8.5 scenario, catastrophic scenarios have been present for a long time environmental
research. Have these, and in particular, RCP 8.5 hurt the cause for reducing the human impact on
the environment because it created a chicken little, a skies falling cultural dynamic where,
oh, this is the base case. Well, not really. What are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, I mean, I have a couple of thoughts on that. I mean, the first one is, you know, I don't think
the efficacy of a bit of research for advancing a particular cause, no matter how worthy it is,
that's not the criteria that we should be using to evaluate the quality or importance of the science
that we do. There are some futures that are more or less plausible. And the minute we start thinking,
well, how instrumental is that scenario for affecting the change that we want? You know,
I wrote a chapter in my book, The Honest Broker, about the decision to go to war in Iraq and the
narrative around weapons of mass destruction. And you can say, I mean, and I think it's true,
that the Bush administration, Tony Blair, you know, banging the drum on weapons of mass destruction,
that was effective in getting people focused and maybe supporting intervention.
At the same time, we can also say that the intelligence communities in the US and the UK
in particular suffered a big hit to their credibility because people were using intelligence
in this instrumental fashion. There's a debate in the environmental community, whether scare stories
or extreme scenarios motivate people or not. I'm a political scientist. I focus on public policy.
In the toolbox of tools that I teach and understand scaring people into action,
it works in some contexts, you know, when there's a fire in a crowded theater, it's pretty effective.
But, you know, when the ambulance picks you up and you have a heart attack,
but in democratic systems where you need public consensus, and particularly on an issue like
climate change where you need public support for decades, better part of a century,
there's very little empirical evidence that keeping people in a state of fear
for decades is actually an effective strategy. So, my first, you know, appeal to the scientific
community is let's call things straight. Regardless of whether you think it helps or hurts your
cause, let's call it straight. And then, you know, we can figure out what policies are consistent
with calling things straight. That's my philosophy as well, Roger. But so let me simplify that a
little bit. I don't know the exact numbers, but let's just say that the research and then the media
that responded to the research said, we're going to headed for a four degree Celsius world.
And people got up in arms about that. And then the energy reality of oil limits and
we don't have that much fossil fuels. No, the more plausible scenario is two and a half degrees
Celsius. Well, two and a half degrees Celsius is going to be hella bad enough on its own. But the way
the human brain works, you know, with the high watermark, it's like, oh, two and a half doesn't
sound so dangerous anymore relative to four. And so people have a tendency on both sides of the
discussion to attach their identity to a story. And so how does climate science try to stick to
the science with this as a backdrop? Yeah, I mean, I can tell you a little story. I was on a disaster
survey team in Grand Forks, North Dakota, when I was a young researcher in the late 1990s, 1997.
And one of the things we learned there, it was an ice melt flood. So it happened, you know,
sun shining, but the Red River, the north flows from the south to the north. The ice and snow
melts in the south sooner than the north and the water flows to the north and it piles up because
the snow and ice to the north hasn't melted yet. Anyway, this was a flood that could be seen coming
months in advance because of the high snowpack. And the National Weather Service decided to tell
people in Grand Forks, you're going to see a flood of 49 feet. And after the flood, which, you know,
people were evacuating in the middle of the night, people were surprised it was a flood,
even though it was well predicted. We interviewed the hydrologists at the National Weather Service
and they said, well, we picked 49 feet. We didn't know exactly what it was going to be. We knew
it would be a record flood, but the flood of record was 48.8 feet. And so we thought that would
scare the bejesus out of people and they would take the right action when we interviewed citizens
in the community and said, well, what did you hear when they said 49 feet? They said, oh, well,
that was only a couple inches higher than the last big flood. That wasn't so bad. And so the
message people received was the opposite of the message that was sending through a quantitative
number. So for me, the idea that we can use global average temperature targets as a policy
target, much less as a political motivator, exactly as you said, some people are going to
hear these numbers, they're going to hear how they change, and they're not going to respond
how the people putting the numbers out think they're going to respond.
So I'm not at all a fan of global temperature targets. I mean, it helps us to focus the mind
and it's good for integrated assessment modelers. But if I'm going to Thanksgiving dinner with my
family, it's the last thing I'm going to talk about is global temperature targets.
What are you a fan of in that domain? Yeah, so I mean, the things that I find that motivate
normal people out there in the world are the economics of energy, maybe the public health
effects of energy, security. There are a subset of people who risk about the global environment
are a very motivating factor. But in order to get a coalition of action in support of decarbonizing
the economy, which I think is an important, I've been working on this for almost 30 years,
we need a broad base of policy justifications. And it turns out that scientific justifications,
they're important, and they underlie a lot of what we know. But if you really want to get people
off their butts and moving, it's jobs, it's the economy, it's energy security,
it's looking out their window and seeing air pollution. So I'm very much a fan of meeting
people where they are. And if I have to sit down and explain RCP 8.5 to somebody, I've already lost
the policy discussion. So if somebody can find a Ford F-150 Lightning that's reasonably priced
and performs better than their old gasoline or diesel version, then they're going to buy it.
And I don't have to convince them of anything. But I think it's beyond just an academic discussion,
the fact that the entire climate movement was emotionally supercharged by this RCP 8.5 scenario,
and that changed the whole polarization of the debate and other things. So it's really a mismatch
in two ways with the human brain. The human mind evolved in a vastly different situation,
and climate change itself is almost the perfect storm for humans to ignore or deny because it's
abstract, we don't see it, it's in the future, there's no easy answers. But then on top of that,
there's the science and then the communication of the science. And a lot of the communication of it
didn't understand what you said earlier about RCP 8.5 was not a climate bottom-up model. It was,
let's see what a big forcing is and then back-ass from there.
But what has ended up, let me ask you if you'll change your verdict on the RCP 8.5 in the face
of the recent phenomenon of climate anxiety, especially among young people, and you're a
college teacher, what do you think about that? Yeah, I do think there are consequences
of overhyping or exaggerating the state of the science or even misrepresenting it.
I teach the example, as a lead-in to some of my environmental policy classes,
I teach the example of how the world responded to global so-called population crisis of the 1950s,
60s, and 70s. And there's good empirical evidence that that was a crisis that never was.
And yet the policies in response, particularly the one-child policy or forced
sterilizations of people in developing countries around the world, the responses to that
non-crisis were probably worse than the crisis itself. And so it is absolutely essential that
we diagnose and understand problems accurately. I mean, the problem with RCP 8.5 is there's
a whole set of reinforcing incentives. So if I'm publishing a study, if I use RCP 8.5,
I'm going to get big climate change effect. It's more likely I'm going to get that study
into science or nature. If science or nature decides to publish that study, it's more likely
that the press release they put out is going to get picked up by the Washington Post or
the New York Times. If I'm a reporter for the New York Times, I'm more likely to get a byline on
the front page. If I say climate change is going to be apocalyptic rather than not, then you get to
the- So it's not only social media that's forcing extreme views on things. It's the scientific
and PR process itself that is advocating for more extreme views because they get more views and clicks
and PR, etc. Absolutely. I mean, I don't even think- I mean, there's a little bit of an element
of climate politics in there where people like extreme scenarios to promote. But I don't even
think that's the biggest factor. I think it's more about the culture of modern science,
the incentives we've created in universities and research institutes. But then if you're David Wallace
Wells or you're Greta Thunberg or you're a young person in one of my classes, and all you do is
you get your media from Facebook or TikTok or Twitter or even, you know, people getting it from
CNN or the Washington Post, you're just getting someone skimming the most extreme of the extreme
from the entire literature. I mean, climate science is wonderful. There's a great literature
out there. And I wish people could see it and understand it because the diet that most people
get fed of climate science is not representative of the science that's actually out there and the
good work that people are doing around the world. How can we do that, though? Whose role is it to be
that honest broker of condensing the aggregate of the climate science? Because it's too big for a human
individual brain to assimilate. Absolutely. Right. Right. I mean, there's nobody, as you said, there's
nobody who's an expert in everything climate, not even close. But I mean, so there's good news and
bad news. The good news is we created an institution in the 1980s, the IPCC, to assess the science.
And I often say, and I believe this, that if the IPCC didn't exist, we'd have to invent it to do
exactly what you say. So take tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of studies and come up with
some coherent summary. One of the problems with the IPCC is that it has deviated from that original
mission. It is, and I was very critical of the synthesis report which recently came out. It reads
a lot more like skimming the most extreme of the extreme off the top and presenting a case for
advocacy of getting people motivated to win the news cycle, in this case for part of a day, which
was about it. The IPCC needs to be an arbiter of the science, the good, the bad. Now, I spent a lot
of time with the IPCC report in areas where I have expertise. And if you get into the meat of the
report, there's a lot of really good stuff. The problem is you have to be an expert to separate
out the good stuff from the stuff that's not so good. And that kind of limits the value of the
IPCC to the general policymaker or the public. So let's move on from RCP 8.5 to another IPCC
benchmark, which is the two degrees threshold. So how did climate policy and the IPCC settle
on two degrees as the goal for safely limiting human-influenced climate change?
Is it based on physical science around feedbacks and tipping points, or how did that number get
chosen? Yeah, I mean, it got chosen in the same way that policy targets pretty much get picked in
any area. You use some science, you get in the ballpark, then you pick something qualitatively
and politically that seems to make sense. I mean, formally, the two-degree target came from a
advisory group to the German government, which came up with a methodology in the 1980s, 1990s,
which is no longer current. It's based on outdated science. Actually, science that wasn't really
peer-reviewed. But two degrees is a nice number. It's round. It's curiously round. And it got picked
up and promoted similar with the 1.5-degree temperature target, which is also curiously a
nice round number. And again, for me, it gives the illusion of precision and science-iness.
But I mean, the reality is the policy message is we should be decarbonizing our economy as fast as
we can and get to net zero as fast as we can. And nobody knows where that is. But this gives us an
anchor or something to hook onto. So, I mean, I understand it's qualitative political background,
and I'm not particularly opposed to it. I'm not going to say 2.1 is better or 1.6. But I think
people have to realize that it's not the sort of precise number that, well, the world gets to 2.01.
All hell's going to break loose. But if we get it to 1.99, we're going to be okay. It's not like
that at all. I just this morning released a video, one of my franklies, on probability
and reality and perception. And I included some real IPCC probability distributions of temperature
out to 2,100, as well as my own perceived that I think in some ways it's far less likely to reach
those because we don't have the fossil fuels available. But then again, it's likely that will
exceed them because no climate model, integrated assessment model looks at denuding forest for
fuel in the future if an end to growth scenario, and they don't include a nuclear war as a possibility,
et cetera. So, I want to ask you some questions about this. But let me first lead with this.
If you, Roger Pilke, had to right now, knowing all the things you know, had to create a probability
distribution in your own mind of temperature relative to pre-industrial average in the year 2,100,
what would be that range and how much confidence would you have in the midpoint and the range of
that? Or is that even a fair question to ask you? It's a fair question. Here's my answer. My answer is
that I can come up with a number of different methods to produce such a number,
but I will tell you that any number that I would produce, I would assign zero confidence to.
I mean, if you look at the, all you have to do is look at the history of long-term predictions of
the evolution of society, including technology, energy consumption, population, wars, economic
growth, we suck. We are really bad at that. And so, if those are the inputs, and let's just
postulate that the Earth system models, the physical science models are perfect,
even if we postulate that, we still can't do it. So, and for me, it's far more important to figure
out how do we start this long-term journey rather than how do we finish it? And there's so much
attention being paid to how do we get the last ton of CO2 out of our economy? What would I
want to know is how do we get emissions to peak and then decline by 2030? Let's just start at the
beginning. Once we do that, then ask me, well, how do we accelerate it? Policy is incremental.
It's a little bit like asking someone an expert in 1920 and say, you know what, give me your best
estimate of a probability distribution for the global average lifespan in 2023. Can people do
it? Sure, they can do it. Would it have meant anything? Well, it's before they invented things
like penicillin and MRIs, and you know, it's just kind of a ridiculous effort.
Okay, two responses to that first, especially the high-status, silverback, male hominids in our
world. Everyone likes to have an opinion. I think it's going to be three degrees Celsius. What? No,
you forgot about the positive feedbacks in methane. It's going to be four degrees. Everyone
seems to have an opinion, and they like to debate about it like the Buffalo Bills will win the
Super Bowl next year. You know what I mean? There's something about, well, the real answer
should be an answer like you just said. I have zero confidence. Well, with the exception,
is there is a pipeline of prior emissions. I mean, we can be confident of certain things.
What do you think about all that? So, we did a study recently with me and Matt Burgess
at Colorado and Justin Ritchie at UBC, and we took the big family of IPCC scenarios, and we just
asked two simple questions. What subset of those scenarios are most consistent with history? So,
history is like 2005 to 2020, because they were mostly initialized. You mean the history of actual
climate measurements? Actual emissions and what are called the Kaia identity factors. Basically,
GDP, population, energy consumption, energy production. Our focus was on carbon dioxide
emissions, and then we asked which ones are most consistent with the near-term projections of the
International Energy Agency, and we went from something like a couple thousand scenarios to a
couple hundred, and that subset projects as a whole 2.2 degrees in 2100. Do I believe that?
No, not for a second. And people who criticize our paper said, yeah, but these scenarios are just
a subset of possible futures. Yeah, absolutely. They're just a subset of possible futures,
but those are the ones that we're using to guide the IPCC, International Climate Policy. So, if
that's the fact, we ought to know where we stand with respect to them. But again, I'm much more
confident in a prediction of what our emissions going to be next year, which is hard enough,
or 2030. I mean, 2100, we might as well debate who's going to win the Super Bowl in 2100,
and it's not going to be the Buffalo Bills, but it'll be somebody.
So, here's another theme that is kind of prevalent, and I think I remember seeing you
write about this in the past. Is the actual real observed temperature and climate situation now,
in 2022 or 2023, how does that relate to what the RCP scenarios projected in 2005 or in the past?
Because I think there is a sense that things are much worse than the models even had projected.
Yeah, I mean, this gets to your choice of indicators, and more indicators of the climate
system than we could ever hope to discuss or count. Is it sea level rise? Is it global
concentration of carbon dioxide? Is it radiator forcing? Is it the number of hurricanes? Is it
flooding? Is it the economic damage? Is it people dying? So, I mean, is it agricultural productivity?
And all of these factors that we care about, so the number of species, the health of the oceans,
coral reefs, and so on, all of these factors are confounded by the fact that there's much more
that impacts them than just climate by itself. So, for example, if you look at deaths related to
extreme weather events, that's dropped by two or three magnitudes over a hundred years.
And so, if there is a climate signal, it's really hard to see that there because we're smart, we're
inventive, we invented weather satellites, evacuation, planning, and so on. So, are things worse than
we're projected? In reality, pretty much everywhere around the world, if you look at
indicators of human well-being, things are better, independent of whatever the climate's doing than
they have been in the past. Yeah, with a big old asterisk in that a lot of these risks are back
loaded, and with the particularly climate, you can't look at the last 10 years and say, well,
look how good things are because we know what's in the pipeline, and the next 20 or 30 years
that's a different question. So, your question is, your first question was, looking to today,
are things worse than we're predicted? So, just stop the clock today. And the answer is, no,
things are not worse. And then the question is, well, what do we think is going to happen in
the future? And again, that's a different question. And yes, I agree with you that the climate risks
are back loaded. And this is something that I see a lot in the media, is people will report, well,
here's what's predicted for 2100, you know, more tornadoes. I'm just making that up. And then they
say, oh, we had a tornado yesterday. So, that's consistent with what the predictions are. And
it just doesn't work that way. So, not only are we facing climate change, which to me is not the
problem, it's a symptom of a much larger dysfunction of a aggressive, creative species
finding a huge amount of buried sunlight and throwing a party for two centuries. But not only
is there the climate change aspect of this, but it just seems, and this is a hitting home with you
speaking today, it's like humans encountered this complexity bomb. Like this is all so
unbelievable that even the experts can't agree on some of these things. How do we even manage this?
It's a rhetorical question. Yeah, I mean, I mean, I'm very optimistic about our ability to
transform the global energy system over the next, you know, 50, 70, 80, 100 years, because we've
done this sort of thing before. If you look at, you know, agricultural productivity. If I asked
you, you're a world's leading agriculturalist in the 1930s. How are we going to feed 8 billion people
in, you know, in the 21st century? Your answer would be, you know, hell, if I know, I mean,
that's a tough problem. If I were to say, how are we going to deal with diseases and, you know,
the fact that there's people, you know, lifespan in some countries was like 35 years a century ago?
Again, the answer would be, you know, I have no idea how we're going to do that.
I, and people don't, I mean, people still don't agree about the global population crisis. You
know, earlier I said, you know, it was a non problem. Some people will go to the mat and say,
it was, it was, you know, thank goodness for the green revolution that saved us.
So I expect even if we successfully decarbonize the global economy, 80 years from now,
experts are still going to be arguing over what it all meant and how we did it. And, you know,
was it the fact that we had scarce scenarios that forced us to do it? But I mean, I have a lot of
faith in the technological ingenuity of human beings. And if we decide as a species that we
want to decarbonize the economy to a very low level by the end of this century, and there's no
reason why we can't do it. So, so it's, in your right, it's absolutely, you know, a consequence
of us discovering fossil fuels and they had a lot of benefits. Yeah, but, you know, that party
went on too long and too much of a good thing. It's not a good thing. But at the same time,
you know, I think we're going to get on top of this one also and it'll be a lot like the
population crisis. One day, you know, we'll be better off and then we'll be arguing why that
is and we won't agree. I don't really agree with that. I don't think we're going to optimize for
carbon. I think we're going to try to optimize for economic growth and we're going to kick every
can possible to keep growing until we can't. And then there is a shrinkage. I call it a
simplification on the horizon and so we will have less emissions and then figure stuff out and
hopefully have low carbon energy sources as part of the mix. But, but let me, let me dovetail that
back to your expertise and your writings. As far as I know, Roger, zero of the integrated assessment
models have global economic growth stopping in the next 50 years and most of them don't stop
through the year 2100. How important is this to accurate climate assessments? And is it because
it's too politically difficult to forecast an end of growth and therefore it can't be spoken
due to oil production declining, etc.? Yeah, so let me, let me start with saying like I agree with
you that the world's going to optimize for economic growth going forward. It's not going to optimize
for carbon, but I don't see optimizing for economic growth and decarbonization is at all
inconsistent and we could unpack that also. I think a lot of times people talk about economic growth
and it's accelerating or slowing down or even stopping or de-growing without having a real
good understanding of what economic growth is. I mean, one part of economic growth is a growing
population, all else equal. And so, I mean, the world's not going to, unless there's an asteroid,
a nuclear war, or, you know, to heaven forbid, a worse pandemic than COVID, the world is not
going to intentionally at least depopulate, you know, before 2050. Maybe, you know, that's the
inflection point somewhere around there. Well, most countries in the world are below replacement
right now. Right. We are going to, I mean, the central estimates of everyone from
IHME to the UN is, you know, a peak and then decline this century. So that in itself is going
to slow down and retard economic growth. But another big part of economic growth is our gains
in efficiency. So, I mean, if you're talking about energy efficiency or the efficiency with
which we employ business processes, hey, guess what? You're a fan of economic growth because
you can't help it. It's a consequence of becoming much more efficient in how we do business. So,
I wrote a piece, you know, a few years ago on, you know, let's just take apart economic growth and,
you know, do you want less people? Do you want less efficiency? Do you want to stop getting more,
you know, more from less? And it turns out it would be hard to stop economic growth,
even if we said we wanted to. Now, what I think people who talk about degrowth actually mean,
and if you look at the literature, they'll actually come out and say it. They don't mean
stopping economic growth. It means changing what economic growth means and the significance of
what it is that we're pursuing and getting more from less from. So, you know, I find it, it's not
a particularly useful debate because economic growth in many contexts is just an emergent
property of humans doing the human thing. And, you know, we don't...
On the backs of 100 billion barrels of coal, oil, natural gas, equivalent every year.
There are a lot of places that are very unique. I lived in Norway last year.
Norway seems to do pretty well with economic growth, maybe too well for professors who are
visiting without any, you know, heavy reliance on fossil fuels for their energy production.
So, I mean, I think it's possible to see societies, parts of the world that have economic growth and
have very low carbon footprints. So, I don't see those as being inconsistent in the slides.
I'm more... My question was more about there doesn't seem to be anyone in the IPCC in their
public charts and projections that acknowledges the peak oil and the consequences of that. Not
like we're running out of oil, but that oil underpinning our vast financial
Rube Goldberg machine has an expiration date. That's just not in the models. So,
how accurate are the climate projections if we're going to have the energy credit nexus
kind of snap back at some point before 2050? Right. No, I mean, I think that's a fair criticism.
And, you know, my response is you have a lot of fellow travelers for people who say, well,
the IPCC integrated assessment models don't build an equity around the world. A lot of the work of
decarbonization is on the back of people in Southeast Asia and Africa, for example.
The IPCC models rely on, and I'm happy to use this kind of disparaging terminology,
but magical technologies of carbon sequestration. There's an enormous number of factors that are
not... I mean, a simple thing, you can't find an IPCC model that goes all nuclear.
So, I mean, in many respects, the assumptions that go into the model are a reflection of the
politics we see as acceptable to talk about today, not some vision of the future that is plausible
or even possible. And so, that's why I say take these projections with a grain of salt because
the future is going to be a different place. I mean, what do the IPCC integrated assessment
models say about the effect of AI on future decarbonization? You make your point. There's
so many aspects to this. So, that segues to this question I have for you. You are a political
science professor at University of Colorado, and on this podcast, I usually interview ocean marine
biologists, climate scientists. Why is a political science background relevant for studying and
answering these important questions about climate change? Yeah, and technically, I'm a professor
of environmental studies. I don't think... I think the political scientists had enough of me about
1994. Okay. Well, your background is in... Your bio says you're a political scientist. Yeah, I have
a PhD in political science. You know, my area of emphasis, since I did my PhD, my PhD was on
how do we use climate science to make better climate policy, which would seem to be somewhat
relevant to this topic. But I mean, the answer is there is a field of study out there. It goes by
the name of policy, which is about how we make decisions in the public and private realms.
And I happen to focus on a subset of that area called science and technology policy,
which is how we make decisions about science and technology, but also how we use science and
technology in making decisions. For me, the training that I've had, the experience I've had,
you know, I think... I tell my students, if you want to participate in big, messy, wicked debates,
then knowing something about policy and how it's made is really important. Now, that said,
that by itself doesn't get you very far. You need to have subject matter expertise. You know,
I'm lucky, you know, I grew up in a household with a PhD, atmospheric scientist. I was a computer
programmer at the National Center for Atmospheric Research. I worked there for eight years. I was
in a big climate science institute at the University of Colorado, Boulder. So I have a lot of substantive
knowledge about climate. I mean, it's just... I'm probably one of the few people with a PhD in political
science who publishes regulating the climate science literature. So all that is to say,
don't judge anybody by their PhD. Take a look at their work and give it a good hard scrubbing,
because that's how we figure out who knows what and who doesn't.
Well, speaking of who knows what, one of your co-authors recently told me that of all the
scientists that he's ever co-written papers with, Roger Pilke has the highest scientific integrity.
I think that's... when someone says that, I pay attention. However, your work has raised controversy
in climate policy debates. What has this conflict been like as a faculty member teaching at a
university? And how do you see the role that universities play in fostering free thinking
that's necessary, but can sometimes run into these roadblocks and be contentious?
Yeah. Well, first, I mean, wow, that's a wonderful thing for a colleague to say.
I don't want to embarrass her. You could probably guess who it is, but anyways.
Yeah, yeah. No, it could be anybody. No. So for me, I mean, so again, I'm going to go back.
If you are in the space where you're discussing writing about advocating policy
in highly politicized contexts, you should be so lucky that your work generates criticism,
and quote, unquote, controversy. My goodness. That means people are taking your ideas seriously.
You tell me one topic, one policy proposal that you can put forward in the United States today
that somebody's not going to criticize from one side or the other. I mean, welcome to policy debates.
Now, I will say as a person, as a human being, sometimes it's really hard. It has been difficult.
I'm better at it now. I'm 54 and I've gone through congressional investigation and done all that,
but having the privilege to be able to participate in high-level debates,
to me, that's why I do what I do, because that means people are taking your ideas seriously.
Academia, I mean, it's a difficult time in academia. I often say I have academic tenure and I use it,
and that means I can't get fired for my ideas, and I'm sure there are some people who would
want to fire me for my ideas, but it's harder. I think it's harder than when I started,
and universities are tough places nowadays, and there are attacks from politicians,
but there's also attacks from our peers in academia. Will tenure exist as it does today
in 10 years? I don't know. There are some people who might like to fire you for your ideas. Your
ideas generally being that climate might not be as catastrophic as some of the public conversations
about it are. Yeah, I mean, well, I think that's objectively true. So, I mean, if we go back to
our discussion of RCP 8.5 and we recognize that the vast majority of studies cited in
recent IPCC reports rely on RCP 8.5, either you believe RCP 8.5 is either implausible or kind
of at the fringe, or you want to make a case that it's where we're headed, and not many people are
making that case now. So, I think objectively, I mean, I think that's what pisses some people off
also, is that, you know, I got a lot of criticism in 2007 to 2015, but I'm still here, and I think
a lot of these ideas and issues, I've been around long enough that they've survived not everything,
but, and so that, you know, that's, there's a lot of history that goes along with personalities and
so on. The way that the world works, or at least the modern world, is that I'm now going to get
criticism because I'm having you on my show by the transitive property. And just the fact, even
if people don't listen to your, to this conversation, the fact that Roger Pilke is on the great
simplification, what is Nate thinking? Doesn't he understand that climate is existential and a
huge risk? Yes, I do, but I want to understand what the thinking and the modeling and the
conversation that led to our current public debate and understanding of it are. So, I'm also a free
thinker, but I'm speculating that that'll be the case. We'll see. Yeah, we'll see. I mean, this is
I have a lot of, I have a lot of climate followers in my stream. No, and I mean, number one, good for
you. But number two, I mean, I mean, I know my idea is pretty well, they're not all that radical.
I mean, I'm a big support, I'm a big supporter of the IPCC. I've been advocating for, you know,
accelerated decarbonization of our economy before, you know, a lot of the people who are
talking about these issues were even born. So, I mean, I think my track record is pretty good.
There are radical voices out there and I just find to hear from them also. But I mean, I think it's
just a sign of the nature of our public debates that, you know, heterodox thinking is not often
welcome. So, you know, number one, I appreciate having the chance to articulate some of these
ideas. But number two, you know, I don't see myself in any way as like a firebrand radical,
you know, on the left or the right. It's, you know, and maybe that's part of the problem.
I don't see you that way either. Otherwise, I wouldn't have invited you here. But relative to,
for example, the near-term human extinction movement, you would seem radical or not radical enough.
Yeah. Well, I mean, yes. I mean, there's a lot of groups in society you can compare me to that
I'm not as radical as. But, you know, that's, I mean, that's one of the wonderful things about
politics is that we have this great diversity of views. And in order to get stuff done, we got to
come together. And, you know, my favorite, one of my favorite, it's not a quote, it's a paraphrase
of Walter Lippmann from 100 years ago, said that, you know, the goal of politics is not to get everybody
to think alike, it's to get people who think differently to act alike. And so for me, disagreement
is healthy, it's normal, it's part of our political ecosystem. The challenge is how do we get enough
people to get on board with action so that we collectively make progress? That's the political
challenge. So from a political lens, looking at climate, how do you see the climate policy
and the climate debate evolving in the future? And what would be kind of a best case outcome?
And what would be a worst case outcome? Yeah, so I've been on sabbatical for the last year,
I spend most of it overseas, the first half in Europe, much of this spring in Southeast Asia.
And I guess that I mean, the first thing people should understand is that our long-term climate
future as changed by humans is not going to be dictated by what happens in North America or in
Europe. You've got billions of people in Asia and Southeast Asia and Africa who are going to be
consuming vastly more energy. And it'll be fossil fuels if it has to be, because if your choices,
energy services or no energy services, all of us would make the same decision.
So the long-term climate future I view very much is not going to be determined in large part by
what we do here in our political battles. It's going to be determined in the rest of the world.
Now, we can collectively in the US and Europe decide to help those processes along through
technological advancement by helping countries to gain access to energy services while they grow
their economies, or we can stand in the way. So I do think we're at a big inflection point,
but a big part of me thinks that a lot of the debates I see on Twitter,
New York Times, in the US Congress, in Europe are a little parochial when it comes to
what's actually happening around the world and where future emissions are going to come from.
Two comments there. I recall reading a paper, I think it was 2014, that showed if the United
States did everything that the Paris Accord stated perfectly for the rest of the century,
but the rest of the world didn't, the temperature in the year 2100 would be identical to
the scenario. In other words, if it was just the United States, it wouldn't matter.
Second response is how are the climate debates in Southeast Asia, and you said you were in
Norway or Europe, is it different than the United States? Why is the US so polarized along political
lines and its views on climate change relative to some of these other places?
Yeah, I mean, the short answer is because politicization of climate favors the Democrats
and the Republicans. So everybody's familiar with Al Gore's conversion to a climate warrior.
It was very convenient for Republicans then to take climate and say, look at that lefty project.
It's a part of a broader trend in the United States of scientific issues becoming politicized.
We see this with COVID and so on. It takes two to tango, and I know people on the left are going
to say, well, it's all the Republicans fault and people on the right say, well, it's all the people,
you know, the lefty environmentalists. The reality is that for something to become so deeply
politicized, it has to benefit pretty much everyone across the board. So there is not a lot
of interest in depoliticizing the climate issue in the US because it does confer
intensity advantages, particularly in primaries, particularly for progressives in the far right
to demonize the other side. So, you know, did it have to become politicized? No, it didn't.
We see some of this, you know, a little bit in Australia, a little bit in the UK,
but there's a little bit more political angst over climate in much of continental Europe.
I find much less, you know, I talk to people in Asia and Southeast Asia, there's much less,
I mean, economic growth and development is kind of a primary goal that everyone accepts,
and hey, let's do it in a way that's clean. And so, you know, a lot of parts of the world,
I see much more focus on, you know, there's a general political consensus, we should do something
about this whole climate thing, so let's do it. And where you can have criticisms is, you know,
how fast things are going, whether there's, you know, greenwashing, like with the, you know,
German car industry and things like that. But the unique high level electoral polarization in the
US is pretty extreme compared to other countries. It almost seems to me this gets back to human
behavior, but let's forget about the details of climate for the moment. But if you were to
present three scenarios, one is this climate change thing, it's a socialist hoax created by
those lefty liberals that want to control your life, or climate is changing, it's due to humans,
it's not going to be as bad as some people say, but it's going to be pretty bad. It's also inflicting
the oceans and there's some other nuances, we're probably not going to do a lot about it. We're
dependent on economic growth, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Or the third category, climate is
a disaster and the wet bulb temperatures are going up, we're going to have premature dying of
billions of people and we're headed towards a hot house earth. Of those three scenarios,
I think a lot of humans gravitate towards the first and the third scenario. The second scenario
isn't as interesting or compelling and it's also complex and nuanced. I've just made this all up,
do you think there's anything to that? Yeah, I mean, this resonates really well. I mean,
I had a mentor friend, the late Steve Rainer, who often said that we have to accept as we move
through the world, that people have different worldviews and each of the three scenarios that
you described are reality to some segment of society. And so arguing over whose vision of
reality is the correct or right one for me is probably not a route to policy or political
action. What I'd like to do is say, all right, given that there are, let's take these three
buckets and there's probably seven or 12 or whatever, but where is the place where we can
come up with policy alternatives that are acceptable to a sufficient number of each
people in those three different buckets that we increase the chances for action to occur.
But on this particular problem, that intersection is pretty damn small, don't you think?
Well, I think it's too small because we've made it so. I mean, here's part of the problem.
A lot of action that we could take that would accelerate the decarbonization of the economy,
which is a technical term, changing the technologies of energy production and consumption,
are probably best sold to people not by putting climate first. And if you're a climate warrior,
that's, what do you mean you're not going to put climate first? I mean, I was,
I participated in the great light bulb war of 2011, where people were arguing over incandescent
light bulbs and in this wiggly compact fluorescence and members of Congress saying,
you'll take my incandescent out of my cold, dead hands. It went away. The partisan angst didn't,
but we got LED light bulbs now that are plenty cheap and they last a long time,
and that damn technology took the politics right out of that issue. So I'm optimistic that, and
again, this is something I think is really important, we need to expand the scope of available
choice. That might be technological choices. Maybe it's advanced nuclear, maybe it's
reprocessing of nuclear waste. Maybe it's improving solar panel efficiencies, even beyond where it's
at, having better transmission, more effective use of geothermal, whatever it happens to be,
expanding our technological options tends to be something that can take the hot politics out of
issues. That's the story of chlorofluorocarbons and spray cans. So I think there's a lot that
can be done. And the other is, if we focus on things like energy security, economics,
in many places around the world, energy access, you will find a lot of people get on board who
might not otherwise say, oh, I care about carbon dioxide. So I would love to see more of these
options tried. The problem, as I see it, when you expand policy options, it can disrupt
existing political camps. Oh my gosh, what happens if in the United States a group of
Republicans and a group of Democrats agree? Oh my gosh, that's a mess. I mean, that's how
people think these days. We have so many straight line partisan votes in Congress because the idea
of bipartisanship is kind of a no-no in our current politics. If you want climate policy to
survive for 50 years, you're going to need Democrats and you're going to need Republicans,
and that's just the way that's going to work. So I'm very much a supporter in taking people where
they are, and then we're smart. If we can come up with integrated assessment models, we can come
up with policy options that we haven't thought of yet for accelerating decarbonization. I think
the battle has just begun, and we're either going to decide to be pragmatic on climate
or we're going to decide we love the political battle so much that we'd rather have the political
battle than decarbonization. And that's the big fight, I think, in the climate space.
Well, when you say we love the political battle, what you really mean is we love the tribal nature
of our current situation in this ring. Absolutely. And the social benefits that it confers on us to
be with our tribe and what they say. Absolutely. Awesome. Well, this was a great overview.
If you have a few more minutes, I'd love to ask you some personal closing questions that I ask
all my guests. Sure, absolutely. So we've talked about climate. I'm just curious,
what thing, what risk in the world are you most worried about, Roger, in the next decade or so?
Yeah, so I gave a big talk in Oxford, while it was on sabbatical last fall, called Catastrophes of
the 21st Century. And I basically put things into three bins. So one of the things that we know of
and we kind of have some ability to expect, a big earthquake in Tokyo or San Francisco,
even a pandemic. We don't know the details, but we know about pandemics.
The next category is emergent phenomena. So we learned in 2011, there was a big flood in Bangkok,
but it turned out that it disrupted supply chains for the global automobile industry
everywhere from Bangkok to Japan and had all these knock-on effects. Or look at the global
financial crisis of 2008 with the destabilizing role that risk models played. So we had these
emergent catastrophes. And then there's the stuff that comes completely out of the blue.
Things we're not even talking about right now. So the examples I used are, what happens if we
discover extraterrestrial intelligent life tomorrow? What does that do to our social
fabric and so on? Is that going to be a catastrophe? Things we can't even imagine that aren't on the
radar screen. And so what I did is I said, let's take a look at where we focus our attention.
And guess what? Almost all of our attention is focused on the stuff we know about.
Earthquakes, hurricanes, even pandemics didn't get enough attention, but we focus a lot on public
health. Emergent phenomena we tend to look at after it happened. Sure, there's somebody who
warned about the global financial crisis and other emergent phenomena, but we usually don't
spend enough time. And then we're not paying any attention to what experts will call existential
risks that are just off our radar screen. So what I would like to see is us in the expert
community recognize, climate is really important, but there's no shortage of experts focused on
climate. Maybe some fraction of those folks could be talking about things we're not talking about.
So the biggest thing I worry about is that we're going to get hit by something
that we haven't really thought about enough, but we should have.
Okay, good answer. I know a lot of people working on X-risk space, and it's additive,
right? Because I'm an expert on these things, and they're an expert on these things. And when
we talk, we're like, oh, shit, I didn't know about that. But you're saying there's things that
no one knows that we're going to have to respond to. But let me just say, how you prepare for
something you can't imagine is something that we can do. In addition to uncertainty, there's areas
of fundamental ignorance. But just because we're ignorant about something doesn't mean we can't
build up resilience. So that's a whole other podcast. Okay, I'll take you up on that.
So given your lifetime of thinking about and working on these issues, do you have any
personal advice to the listeners and watchers of this show at this time of kind of global upheaval
and systemic risk, whether it's climate or economy or environment, et cetera?
Yeah, I mean, that's a great question. It's hard to know what's what, I think,
in the modern era, even if you are an expert, because you get so many different channels,
so much different information. What I tell my students is, the first thing is to do what
John Dewey said, American pragmatist, was that the first step in learning how to think well
is being comfortable with not knowing, existing in a prolonged state of uncertainty or recognizing
that you have ignorance. What should we do about AI? My first answer is, I don't know.
It's not something I've studied, but it's the sort of thing that, well, if I ran a graduate
seminar on it, we read a bunch of stuff, we have the ability to come up with clear thinking about
the nature of problems, the potential interventions we might make, but it takes time and it takes
effort. For anybody who's out there who says, I want to better understand the world,
the good news is you can do that. It takes some work and some effort.
The worst thing you can do is pick your favorite politician and say, I'm going to follow what they
tell me. They'll be right occasionally on things, but they'll be wrong a lot of times.
I am pretty optimistic about our ability collectively to sort through information.
It's just a hard challenge day-to-day for all of us.
What other advice do you give to your college students, especially as an environmental science
teacher? I've taught 17 to 21-year-olds on all these things. It's tough because they are ready
or kind of shell-shocked with our political or financial situation. What other advice do you
give your students at the end of the semester, if any?
Yeah. In my class, I tell my students, the first thing I tell them is, math is your friend.
Understanding numbers, the scale of things like the global energy system or agriculture.
I've often, in courses, use Hans Rosling's book, Factfulness. Simply getting a baseline
understanding of the magnitude of things that we deal with in policy. Most people don't know
the size of the U.S. federal budget or the global economy or how much energy they personally
consume every day and how that compares to someone in Rwanda or Bulgaria. Grounding yourself
is a great way to get an understanding of where we sit in the world. The other thing, I try to
convey to my students, and then this is just a values thing, but people are awesome. You can
look at the news and get pretty depressed, but you go around and you talk to people and you meet
them. In my classroom, I see this too, the students are awesome. People, overall, around the world,
they want the best things for their family. They care about the world. People are good.
I'm pretty optimistic about our collective ability to do things, even though there's bad
actors out there and there's crime and all that also. I wouldn't be in the field of policy if I
wasn't optimistic that policy makes a difference. I try to convey to my students that it's great.
Welcome to the fight. Buckle up. It's a long slog, but if you're ready to get up every day
and do the hard work of learning and participating, you're going to leave the world a better place.
So this is the very first time we've ever spoken, so I don't know much about you other than what
our mutual friend told me, but what do you care most about in the world, Roger?
I care. Like I just said, I spent the last year really eye-opening. I think I went to 17
countries. I care about the people and life on the planet, our ability to sustain it and to make
things better. We are an inventive, clever, smart species. In the last few months, I don't remember
exactly when it was, but the U.N. said we passed 8 billion people. I got to read it and everybody,
you read it, everybody read it. Some people said, oh, my gosh, it's awful. We'll look at the strain
on the planet. These are 8 billion people who get to live their lives, including me,
including you, including all my students. And thank goodness, good for all of us that we get
to experience life. So I'm pretty optimistic about the human condition, even with all the
shit that goes on out there. That's the positive I see. If you're a member of the species Homo
sapiens, there's around an 8 to 10% chance that you are alive right now.
Right. 8 billion out of 100 billion have ever lived. So it's quite something that there's,
yeah. So if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your
action, what is one thing, one policy or one dictum that you would do to improve human and
planetary futures? That's a great, I mean, as policy analysts, I teach and we're taught to
be pragmatic and you don't have magic wands. If I did, I would invent a tolerance pill
that people could take and just make people chill out about being accepting that there are people
who have different views than them out in society so that we can do better in the work we need to
do collectively. So I don't think there's a policy or a program or a technology that's
going to make things better. I do think there's a lot that we can do in the social fabric and if
I could somehow smooth out magically with my magic wand, our ability to live together,
then we'd make a lot more progress a lot more quickly.
Some people might say that ayahuasca is a tolerance pill, but I'm not sure. So what's
next for you? What are you dedicating your experience, wisdom and connections towards?
What's like a lie for you right now in your research and exploration?
Yeah, so I mean, for me, I'm at this position where I'm not at the end of my academic career,
but mid-50s and for me, having the ability to have a global platform where I get to share ideas,
encourage discussions and try to build this tolerance pill through public engagement
is what I'm focused on. So I run a sub-stack, has a lot of readers. I challenge people,
I say things that are quote unquote controversial. I call out bad practices when I see them,
like when the IPCC gets politicized. I also call out positive things. I think the inflation
reduction act is an interesting and positive experiment in climate policy and I try to create
a place where people can, the phrase is achieve disagreement. They can come, they can exchange
views, they don't go to war with each other, don't call each other names and they don't go
their separate ways. So I'm actually trying out this whole public intellectual thing for real,
probably for the first time in my career. I'll continue to publish books and write in
the peer-reviewed literature, but taking advantage of my good fortune and being able to have access
to a lot of people around the world is where my attention's at right now.
Well, good luck on that. That's a really important path and I wish you success and thank you so
much for your time today. Nate, it was great fun. Thanks for having me.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification, please subscribe
to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com for more information
on future releases.
