We are a class of organisms that has trumped trophic cascades, so trophic cascades are defined by
predation, generally, and the organism at the top of the trophic cascade, generally speaking,
plays a harmonizing role within the ecology relative to the flows of all the other relationships in
that ecology. So starting from that insight is a useful place to ask what are humans for.
If we have trumped trophic cascades, what then are we for?
Today I'm joined by my friend Samantha Sweetwater, a leader and storyteller caring for people in the
earth at the intersection of spirituality, psychedelics, and systems change. Samantha is
the founder and director of One Life Circle, a plant medicine ministry dedicated to truth,
love, and the continuity of life. Her first book, True Human, Reimagining Ourselves at
the End of Our World, will be available later in 2024. In this conversation, Samantha and I
discussed what it means to be spiritual, and more broadly what it means to be human while living in
our turbulent, modern, metacrisis sort of world. It's my belief that any impactful change in a
system will need to include the individual humans that comprise such a system, which is why Samantha's
work is quite important. It's my hope that more individuals find ways to center and stabilize
themselves, the more that these type of people can act as stabilizers for the broader system.
With that backdrop, please welcome Samantha Sweetwater.
Samantha Sweetwater, welcome to the program.
Thank you, Nate. It's good to be here.
It's such a powerful name. I kind of wish that my parents had called me
Jonathan Greenfield or something that is emotive and beautiful. Nope, it was Nathan Hagans.
So you and I have met at a few conferences. We have some mutual friends,
and we had an instant synergy and awareness of each other's presence and work in these times.
And you have told me that you are working on a book broadly about the metacrisis and
what is sacred. Could you maybe introduce what your book is about and what you're working on
to start us off? Sure, happy to. So the book I'm working on right now is called True Human,
Reimagining Ourselves at the End of Our World. And it braids together a conversation about
the foundational ontological worldview factors that have created the metacrisis that we're in
right now that continue to replicate human misalignment with nature, human misalignment with
other humans. And it braids science, systems theory, and deep spiritual narrative and experience,
also grounded in plant medicine work, into an exploration of who we might be and become
in a world that works for life. And one of the frames at the end of our world is that the world
that we were born into, that any of us were born into, is a world that may, on its own terms,
be coming to an end. That the underlying assumptions that are the architecture of how we see, think
what we assume to be right action are shifting, could be coming to an end. And a new beginning.
A previous podcast guest pointed out that the end of the world, as we know it, is not the end of the
world. Exactly. Yeah, exactly. So how do you link science and spirituality, which are not often linked?
It's interesting. In my intersectionality, they are often linked. So it's an interesting,
it speaks to my reality tunnel in a way, that question itself. I mean, one way that
science and spirituality are deeply linked is in the inquiry into what is consciousness,
what is reality, what is choice. You could say those are scientific questions. They are also
the fundamental questions of all lineages of spirituality. The question, what is reality,
is not a very different question than what is God. You could consider those to be actually
two sides of the exact same question, one of which is framed secularly and one of which is framed
spiritually or religiously, but they are essentially the same question.
What is the proposiveness of reality, of biology, of evolution? Is there proposiveness to it?
What is the nature of agency? Do we have agency? Do organisms have agency?
If there is agency, what does that mean in terms of the meaning, value, and purpose of any given
thing or of any interaction between things? In a way, I was trained as a scientist at a very
young age. I was in a gifted and talented program and trained very, very early in the scientific
method. I was dissecting worms at five. There's not a large difference between mysticism and science
as approaches to reality. The difference is that mysticism takes subjective experience seriously.
Real mysticism is extremely rigorous and actually seeks external,
overtime, data-driven verification of anything that is also internally experienced.
What is mysticism? It's a great question. I think mysticism is extremely misunderstood,
that there are a lot of what I think of as cultural shadows, cultural
taboos, and also shame structures that have been wrapped around subjective experience,
wrapped around spirituality, wrapped around mysticism. There's good reason for that. There's
rage at religious fundamentalism. Battles have been fought over various spiritual narratives that
aren't verifiable relative to objective fact. There's legitimate reason to put our
ability to subjectively verify things in the shadows. But at the same time, rigorous mysticism,
I mean, one of the alchemical victims is as above, so below, as below, so above, and you would then
extend that to as within, so without, as without, so within. You could say real mysticism is an
inquiry into the synthesis and constant dance between what is objectively verifiable,
what is subjectively verifiable, and then also what is intersubjectively occurring.
If I have a story that cats are cool and I love them and I'm attuned to them,
I am more likely to actually be attuned to cats than someone who has a narrative that cats are
dirty and not to be loved. There's always an intersubjective dance going on. So part of
what mysticism is is being in that inquiry over time in a way that takes in all those different
lenses. So does mysticism, could you say it another way that you use wider boundaries of
perception and analysis? Yes. Oh, and I'm mystic too, because I use wide boundaries in how I perceive
situations. Right, which is, that's a very cool meeting. And I'm very attuned to cats as well.
And dogs. And dogs, yes, animals maybe. Yes, and I mean, you could say that attunement is one of the
quadrants of skill that the mystic must have. Well, I know nothing about this, but a colleague,
I don't know if you've ever heard of this guy, John Michael Greer, he's in the arch druid
whatever order. And I used to make fun of him because he believed in magic. And I was like,
magic, that's ridiculous. But then he told me that you could frame your words in a certain way
that could change what another person believed or thought. And isn't that magic?
And I thought, oh, that was kind of interesting. So we can do these things that can't just be
parsed down into their material sub components. So, you know, I think part of this is language. And
when you say things like subjective and inner subjective, those are not terms that I use every
day. So it sounds fancier than it probably is. But your cat example, I that I understood.
Got it. What is subjective and what is inner subjective?
Simply subjective is the boundary within the self.
So you could say, you know, I'm having body affects about how I feel about being on this
podcast with you. If I could give them name or not, I could say, are they pleasant or unpleasant?
That's the most base touching into affect. I could say, oh, there's a little anxiety. There's a
little excitement. There's a certain texture of calm. There's some curiosity. I'm sensing all of
those things subjectively, internal to myself. You could also have subjective perceptions,
internal to yourself perceptions about what's going on for me.
They would not be objective. Those would be your subjective perceptions about what's going on over
here. Objectively, it's interesting. Playing with virtual worlds gets really interesting
into what is objective. Like you are looking at a screen. I am looking at a screen. We are
both looking at an image that is probably adding up as the same image for both of us from different
sides of that screen. It's objectively true that you're seeing a vision of me that people also see.
Many observers will see the same thing. Objectivity. This is a forest landry way of
describing this from the imminent metaphysics. Forest is a really good friend and teacher of mine.
The way he talks about objectivity, objectivity is based in the verifiability by many observers.
That then gets really interesting when you realize that every observer is still a different angle
of perception. Objectivity would be a majority rules of scientific measurement of a phenomenon.
Or measurement of any phenomena or verifiable by many observers.
How does the interrelationship between subjective and objective and then
the relationship between my subjective, your subjective, and the intersubjective where the
two of us are in a dialogue, how are those relevant to the metacrisis and what we face in
people's perception and opinion and reactions of what's going on? There's so many layers to that
question. One could say that the assumption of objectivity is an imposition.
We could say that to impose the assumption of objectivity about anything has a dimension
of colonizing reality. We could say the same thing in reverse. We could say if subjectivity rules,
then anybody can decide what's true based on their own personal experience. That also is a
colonizing of shared reality. We could then hold that there is value in being able to objectively
verify things. There is also value in subjective experience. That deep sense making that includes
many people over time has to find new ways to include those things.
I was doing research yesterday for my book with the Center for Greater Good. The Berkeley Center
for Greater Good has since 2014 been gathering scientists who are looking at what are the
things that cause societies and or multiple groupings of nations to be peaceful over time.
It turns out that one of the many things that is included in that list, both in terms of
personal skills and in terms of cultural narrative, is the recognition of the value of different
perspectives and that the cultures that are contiguously peaceful have mechanisms of holding
unity and diversity that are more highly developed than cultures that are consistently at war.
Over modern or throughout history? Throughout history in modern contexts,
like the Swiss canton is an example, the Iroquois Confederacy is an example that's historic.
There are examples of indigenous tribes in various places where there's currently,
where there's long-standing peace between multiple groups. Those studies don't link to the ecological
conditions that generate that, which is also a thing.
For example, in California, before it was California, there was long-standing peace
in one of the arguments for that anthropologically as it was so abundant that no one needed to fight
over anything. The arguments in the current science look at all these different lines and
levels of development, both of the individual and of the society as a whole. One of the
major characteristics of that is this ability to hold multiplicity. You could also call it
post-conventional moral development as a society. There's many different dimensions of post-conventional
moral development, but one of them is the ability to hold another's perspective.
Is this related to
spiral dynamics and or metamodern perspective that you suppress your own identity or objective
belief and empathize and can listen to others? Interestingly, the research does not point
at all to that being a necessity. It's actually quite interesting if you look at,
I mean, metamodernism is one narrative that is Eurocentric,
but there's instances that are in indigenous contexts contemporaneous with our own,
that where there's been a binding of multipolar traps consistently over time based in
cultural mechanisms that wouldn't fit into the rubric of spiral dynamics or metamodernism.
Is there a mapping between objective and subjective ways of thinking and masculine
and feminine perspectives and ways of looking at the world?
Definitely. Though I'm hesitant to reify maps there, but I would say definitely.
Here's why I ask, Samantha. You and I were at a conference last year. It was the first time I
met you in person, and I've been to several conferences in the last year and a half that
is this way, roughly 50-50 men and women. But then after a couple days, the demographics at the
conference, a couple hundred people kind of self-assemble into subgroups working on something,
aspect of the metacrisis or whatever, and invariably a lot of the women self-assemble and the men
self-assemble and are working on different topics. I mean, I come from the peak oil movement where
it had to be 90% men. I don't know why that is. Still to this day, in financial observation or
climate change less so, but energy depletion and collapse space, it's mostly men and not all,
but the majority. This channel on YouTube is 80% of the followers of this channel are men.
20% of 80,000 or whatever is still a lot of women, but it's four out of five are men.
What do you think is going on here? Because I know you well enough. I trust that you can
opine on this. I think this is related to the subjective and objective deeply.
I would look at it as a bias towards parts, to use the Anne McGillchrist's words,
more of a bias towards abstraction, recursion, specificity, mathematics, and parts awareness,
to more of a bias towards relationship. What often happens in my experience is there's a point at
which the female-bodied or the feminine-oriented people in the room realize that the thing that
they really want or need to work on is the absence of relational intelligence or the need
to cultivate relational intelligence. When I say relational, I don't just mean between humans.
I mean relational in terms of the qualities of interactions that we have with anything,
with water, for example. That was actually something that happened at Emerge. There were
ceremonies that happened in relationship to the water of Austin. We brought in indigenous elders,
and there's a sense-making that you could say is feminine that sees a connection, a deep connection,
between how we engage with and talk to and care for and pray with and weave drops from places all
over the world of water as a prayer for continued water for all beings that is foundational to their
being life. It is foundational to any world that we don't break life in, any world where humans
continue, that that's more of a feminine texture of sense-making and doing the act of building
that relationship as a meaningful act that doesn't have a measurable outcome.
That might make sense to more of the women potentially in the room than to the men in
the room because the men might be more focused on, well, I don't know what that's doing. I can't
measure it. I can't see the evidence of it. I can't give it a finite definition. I'll go focus on
the thing that I can do there. That happens repeatedly over time. Occasionally, those things
braid and some other, and I would use the word magic, can happen sometimes because very skillful
means can come together with great beauty. When those things come together, they can empower each
other, but they often also frustrate each other. I never read the book, but men are from Mars,
women are from Venus. Is this along those lines? It's certainly, it's along those lines. I think
it's useful to think of it. There's many different ways you can think of it. Yes, you could think of
it as Venus Mars. You could think of it as right brain, left brain. You could think of it as mental
versus embodied. You could think of it, you could even divide it as secular versus sacred.
I find that division actually quite interesting, especially when you added up with all those
other views, that then you're starting to get a fuller picture of the different textures of
where we could be more integrated if we chose to be, potentially, and where we default divide.
Certainly, the Venus Mars narrative is useful and it is well proven that women tend to attend to
different things than men do, and that there's strengths in that and that there's some deep
challenges in it. Well, it's not just masculine, feminine divide. There's all sorts of divides
in the cultural conversations around the Metacrisis and maybe I was naive. I don't think it was just
me, but I think there's this unspoken assumption that if we have enough of the facts and we get
enough pro-social people at the table that everyone will see the situation roughly the same and work
towards, if not solutions, viable responses, and everyone will be part of the conversation.
It ends up not being that way. There are just fractal conversations because of different
temperaments, different value systems, different understandings, and it's frustrating.
I know that masculine, feminine is one of them. There's also the economic ecological. A lot of
people don't really think about ecosystems and life as sacred. They're focused on the economy
and what that means for poverty and things like that. I mean, you seem to me of the people that
I've met that you have a little bit of a foot in all of these different demographics. What do you
think about all this? The neuroscientist Lisa Feldman Barrett says every human being is a unique
ontology. I think that's just such a potent place to begin that in a very real way each one of us
has constructed reality uniquely from the internal subjective sense of having a construction about
what is true, having a construction about what people are, what nature is, what the future is,
what love is, what is worth doing, worth attending to.
In a way, I think that's where we have to start. The approach I have taken to group process
over the years is then the other side of that is that any given space has to start with some
assumptions that orient towards can we agree on very simple things. In my work, I always put
life at the center of that set of agreements. That's part of what the book is about is this
one little shift, is the way I frame it, of putting life at the center and orienting towards
the care for and continuity or the beauty abundance and continued biodiversity of the
process of life. I talk about it as a song, which is an invitation to attune and care for
and be aesthetically attuned to what is at stake, what is actually calling us forward for the
future of the children and the future of the trees and the future of the watersheds.
That mirrors what in Indigenous narratives are called original instructions.
There's also many ways that those principles are named in different Indigenous traditions,
and I think you've interviewed Tyson, and I know you've interviewed a couple Indigenous women.
One framing is that there are original instructions to human organisms,
to the human beings, who sit in a particular place in the ecology of things,
and those instructions are to tend the beauty abundance and continuity of life.
The elders from the heart of the world who are from
the Kogi and Arhuaco and two other tribes, they finish every process by saying,
let us continue to continue. The orientation is always larger than the self.
It's always towards the continuity of generations, and it is not just the human
generations. It's oriented towards the deep knowing that the continuity of human generations
inter-depends with and is made meaningful by the continuity of all beings.
Except the original instructions on how to live did not foresee a planet with 8 billion of that
species. No, they did not. They did not foresee peak oil. They did not foresee 8 billion. They did
not foresee AI. They did not foresee a technosphere and an economy that is root level out of alignment
with the continuity of life. But doing that thought experiment of, is there a way to reverse engineer
or lift original instructions, the concept of original instructions, which essentially is
human alignment with the biosphere, which then by extension is alignment of our economy and our
technology and our governance? Were our original instructions really human
alignment with the biosphere, or was it just human alignment with our local ecosystem,
and we were never big enough to have any impact on the biosphere?
It's actually quite hard to know historically what was true. When you start to dig into the actual
numbers of how many indigenous people were here on this continent, the numbers stretch from
hundreds of thousands to 26 million. These are very, very different things to look at in terms
of ecological impacts. There's a strong argument to make, and I find this to be a really interesting
hypothesis. The fossil record shows us that everywhere that humans emigrated out of Africa,
there followed a major extinction of the megafauna of that place. That is a predictable pattern in
the fossil record. It is not 100% proven. I've just done a fair bit of research into this,
but one hypothesis that is probable, currently the most probable one, is that wherever we went,
that we hadn't co-evolved with the ecology, we just went and created an environmental catastrophe.
You can hypothesize from that that in original instructions were the first response culturally.
If we look at this in terms of Marvin Harris's cultural materialism, that they were a
superstructure response to human hubris relative to the environment designed to create continuity
at that level of technological scale, which then invites us to ask the question,
what stories can guide, bind, and direct our next stage of civilizational development?
Do I have those original instructions somewhere within my body or my brain?
Not in some magical sense, no. But in the sense of, there's a number of ways I like to think about
this. One is, if you're here, and this was a teaching from Cheap Chavez from the Lenka tribe,
who's a tribe from Honduras who has living oral memory of when they moved during the Ice Age,
and living oral memory of making it through the conquistadors and slavery and all these layers
of colonization and genocide. Pass down and pass down and pass down.
In oral lineage. The moment I met this man, he's such an exquisite man, and he works in ex-risk
now, by the way. The first thing he said to a group of almost mostly white people
was, if you're here, you are carrying the same memories as I am. It's just that my people remember
them. So in that sense, yes. In that sense, yes. But in the sense that
I think of original instructions not as an externally imposed set of principles,
but as an always co-emergent co-regulation with ecology and culture that orients towards
continuity. So original instructions from a Western integral perspective, we could cultivate them
externally, objectively, scientifically. Let's look at all the qualities of interaction
that nourish, regenerate, detoxify, protect, perpetuate, vital ecological flourishing
for humans and all beings. We could look at that on the external, its quadrant in Ken Wilber's map.
And then in the I, we, in the personal subjective and the collective subjective, we can look at
what do we need to do, what kind of embodiment and embodiment practices
supports us to be attuned to the well-being of ourselves, other people, and the environment.
What kind of collective practices are needed to nurture a deep sense of that being fundamentally
important? Harvest ceremonies, for example, like if you look at pagan traditions, they were oriented
toward culturally towards that continuity. Whether you believe that it matters or not that you pray
for the harvest, like actually taking time as a culture to care for it
and mark it and give gratitude for it, is it binds us in on an embodied level to a sense of being
connected to the continuity of life. And yet we have Super Bowl and Halloween and big fireworks
on 4th of July. And yeah, but there are people that pay attention to the solstices and the harvest
moon and things like that. So what does this all imply for the meta crisis? Are you suggesting that
people, could there be a movement where people become more aware of this and collectively
grow that movement or is it we need to heal from the ground up and any top-down stuff doesn't have
a chance at working until we get enough humans that are working in these multiple perspectives
and more healed? I would say and and, absolutely definitely and and.
I think there will be many movements that emerge in the next arc of time, providing we don't have a
massive, massive catastrophic event that inhibits communication and connection,
that there will be multiple movements that will not be memetically the same, but they will be
memetically related. In other words, there may be a movement of women's empowerment that's connected
to environment. There may be a movement, the work that I'm doing is oriented towards what I call
enlightenment, which is a next stitch on enlightenment, which is oriented towards
transcendence to actually ground that transcendence kind of Auroboros style or infinity loop style
back into, well, what do you do with this consciousness once you have it? You use it,
you work with it to be fluid and available to 10 life, to put life at the center of the process.
I see a movement arising around that.
And I would say I see many sub movements happening, like the work that Thomas
Hubel is doing around healing collective trauma would be a good example that is impacting many,
many individuals, many communities and finding ways to adapt the work locally in different contexts
that are not always local, different contexts, they may be different racially, they may be different,
you mentioned class, and then they also may be different locally relative to
what's going on in a given place. But that's quite a growing movement that is having powerful
impacts that work with what the individual needs to do and also work with the community level.
The bioregional regeneration movement is an increasingly large movement that has both urban
and rural dimensions to it and an aspect of best practice and scalability and an aspect
of locality and the uniqueness of a given place and a given group of people. So,
I think of it ecologically, you could say, that there will be an ecology of processes at different
scales. Do you know Nora Bateson? I do, yeah. I don't know her well, but we have a lot in common
in terms of the way we think. I talked to Nora, yeah, you do have a lot in common. I talked to Nora
last week, she's a good friend of mine, and I told her, and I know her well enough that I knew
she wouldn't take offense to this, that when she talks, it seems circular at times, and I don't know
what she's saying. And yet, my body feels that what she's saying is important. And I kind of get
that same feeling with you. I'm not understanding everything that you're saying, but my body
feels like, okay, she said something there that was important. So, maybe that's just my
masculine knuckleheadness or something, but there's a little ember that is being awoken by
your word combinations. I don't know. I would guess that that is the case. And it may be partly
that I certainly speak in a fairly, not entirely right brain way, but I certainly ground what I'm
speaking to in a right brain quadrant. It's more poetic, it's more aesthetic, it's more embodied,
it's more relational. And so, that may be a piece of the sense of like, I don't understand all of it
because I'm not speaking dominant left brain language.
That was a question, I don't know if you listened to my podcast with Ian McGilchrist,
but it was on my list to ask him is the left brain, right brain schism that
is happening in our world, is there a gender aspect to that? And I never got to ask him.
Right. I don't think there has to be. I think if we don't want that kind of schism,
then we make sure everyone does art and or music and or physical practice. There's educational
dimensions to nurturing that wholeness that you see from very young with kids, like boys
are got their trucks and they're building things and destroying them and girls are like making
pretty things. And that's not always true with all humans in different kinds of bodies, but
there are definitely tendencies there. And yet, aesthetic education is something we can all
respond to. So, I have a similar situation with Ian as I do with you. I've got like 17 questions here
and I've only gotten through two so far. So, one thing I wanted to ask you is in our previous
conversations offline, we've talked about spirituality and that's something that is
central to your work. Maybe you could tell us a bit about your own spiritual journey
and what is the word spiritual? What does being spiritual mean to you?
I think I as a, so I was born during the Cold War era. I was born into a little family and
community that was very ecologically conscious. And I cannot remember a time that I wasn't aware
that of the metacrisis you could say. Certainly, I didn't have that language for it, but I don't
remember a time when I wasn't aware that human beings humanity could extinct itself and all
complex life on this planet during my lifetime. And then that was textured by art and science.
But I was very into both of those things as a kid. And my perception of how spirituality developed
for me was at this intersection of having an extremely voracious mind asking tons of questions
and getting to more unanswerables than answerables very quickly as a young person.
And I think those unanswerables drove me to explore in a different quadrant that was like,
you could say, was the mystery and was, well, if I can't answer it, maybe I can feel it.
Or if I can't answer it, maybe I can make a dance about it.
And to me, spirituality tends to live more in the quadrant of let me feel my place in the universe.
And then it becomes mysticism when you also ask, let me add in the scientific dimension.
That's how I think that's a very quirky definition of mysticism. It is not the conventional one.
But when you put those two things together... So spiritualism plus science equals mysticism?
Not exactly, but not exactly. But a tension to, rigorous attention to both the subjective
and the objective over time, including what you can repeatedly verify within yourself
and what you can repeatedly verify out in the world and others could repeatedly verify as well
adds up to mysticism. So part of that is awareness and maturity almost,
because some people are just looking externally at what's going on and other people are
have a little Nate or a little Samantha on their shoulders observing
Samantha's reactions to what's going on. And when you get older, you talk to little Samantha or
little Nate and have conversations. And is that what you mean about merging the objective and
the subjective in a way? No, self-witness is awareness aware of awareness. You could also
be aware of different parts of yourself. All of that is happening internally to you. So it's all
in the subjective dimension. But it's interesting. So self-witness can have many different qualities.
It could be kind of a base level of self-witness like, oh, you didn't make your bed this morning.
That's you witnessing yourself. It could be much more kind of non-dual and objective.
An example like a more mature example would be watching oneself in a cycle of unwinding a trigger
or responding to someone else's trigger and noticing that you're doing that in a calm way
that honors you and honors them. That would be a higher level of self-witness.
And then meditation is not witnessing any of those things. Meditation is witnessing
awareness itself. Is that witness observes awareness?
What is all this called? This is definitely a spiritual conversation. This is all in the
quadrant of spirituality. I find it very difficult to answer the question, what is spirituality?
For a variety of reasons, including that I like to respect everybody's unique answer
to that question. So I could share my answer, but I love that many people have different
definitions of it. But all of this is in the quadrant, you could say, of consciousness,
self-study, spirituality, and also personal and emotional development.
Well, you and I have been blessed to have traveled around the world and observed other
cultures and other people. And I think, and I don't mean this in a pejorative sense,
just an observational sense, that in the United States where we both live,
I would say people are pretty disconnected from any sort of spiritual practice
and awareness of what you're just described. When and how do you think this became
so common? And is it related to our isolation from other people and the land, which also relates to
the carbon pulse and all of our fossil armies that are helping us with all the goodies being
delivered to our houses? And we don't have to have that connection. What are your thoughts on all that?
There's been a historical progression in the United States. There was a
poll done this year in September. I think it's a Pew poll, I will have to look it up again,
that the percentage of religious people has gone down to approximately 44% and the
percentage of people who identify as spiritual has gone up to 33% in America.
There is a, America is a country that has been largely defined by Judeo-Christianity,
which orients towards a divinity outside of the world, not a divinity in the world. And
what's interesting about the one a person identifying as spiritual is there's often a
sense of inner divinity. It could even just be inner awareness, but there's an awareness of
awareness. And when you actually touch awareness of awareness, you realize that it's sort of special.
So we're in an interesting moment culturally, historically, in terms of
kind of a vast foment in where we ground in psychospiritual, psycho-emotional relatedness.
You could say that that entire Judeo-Christian history, the entire history of axial gods of the
Abrahamic religions is part of a foundational cause of the Metacrisis, that there was a rupture
of divinity in the world, that historically was, happened not all in the same place at the same time.
But once you've taken God out of the world, you can do whatever you want to the world.
So I have a couple of coaches right now, and one of them is talking about four quadrants, the
psych, the emotional, the physical, the spiritual, and the mental. Of course, I spend a lot of my time
in the mental quadrant. And I say, I don't have much of a spiritual presence. And she's like,
yes, you do. I'm like, no, I really don't. She's like, you're with your ducks, you go and meditate
in nature, you go and hug trees, you work in the soil, your affiliation with nature is your
spirituality. I'm like, ah, well, yeah, there's that. So how connected do you think spirituality is
humans being in connection with nature? And is this the fall from grace that you just suggested
has led to the Metacrisis? Simple answer, yes. Okay.
A more complex answer.
As long as there's a separation between spirit and matter, between the sacred and the world.
And I think that between the sacred and profane is a different conversation. But
as long as we are incapable of recognizing that the world is beautiful and valuing the love and
awe and wonder and the smells and the tastes and the textures and the beauty and the miracle of it,
as long as we are incapable of feeling that we will never solve the Metacrisis.
I don't think you need to call it spirituality though. Like I'm hesitant to answer your question
by like one of the things I find interesting is that you have all of that without identifying as
spiritual and that's okay. Like that's also beautiful. Yeah, it's just a word. I'm more
curious about your role and your perspective and what's really at the core of it than the
actual word of spirituality. Because a lot of people, when they hear the word spirituality,
they think, ah, he goes to church and he believes in this, that or the other. To me, spirituality
just means there is something larger than yourself that you find profound and important and gives
meaning to your life. Yes. Yeah, to me, spirituality means that I meet the world, life, my own experience
as miracle, as miraculous. Here's a difficult question. You just suggested that unless we
recognize the earth and the species and the ecosystems and that we truly love and value
the beauty that exists, there's no hope of solving the Metacrisis. Agree with that, except the scout
team of empathic people that deeply care about the wounds that the earth is undergoing now
and the demise of other species that share this planet with us. Those people are more emotionally
and therefore physically and other ways fragile relative to the people that are
in the consensus technology trance of the technological technosphere superorganism of
consumption, however you want to call it. Those exact people that could be champions on behalf
of earth's future are also at the front lines and taking arrows at least emotionally. I find
that. What do you think? Absolutely. I think one aspect of being spiritual that's very strongly
in the Tibetan Buddhist tradition is the warriorship that comes with that, like to choose the
warriorship that comes with the open heart, which is not easy work at all. It certainly
requires a sublimation of emotion to be able to show up with extreme clarity and strategic efficacy
and coherent analysis of the nature of power as it is on the planet right now.
It requires a great deal of sobriety and stamina and integration in all the ways we've been talking
about, of the masculine and feminine, of the emotional and the intellectual.
The game theoretics of it don't look good. The game theoretics look terrible. It is far easier
to be a sociopath and keep going and feel nothing than it is to be an empath or simply a feeling being
and persist. I struggle with that to be frank. There's truisms that
are interesting to sit with like Martin Luther King Jr. speaking to the moral arc of the
universe bending towards justice. But still, if I'm rigorously honest, that too is just a story.
And if I look at statistical dynamics and game theoretics, it does not look good.
And yet, life does not like to lose life. Life really likes to keep going.
And it turns out that at the end of the day, we are biological organisms whose lives are at stake.
And I get very curious and I think of where we are right now as a crucible that is a crucible
for our own evolution. And you could say it's a crucible for the evolution of consciousness,
but it's also a crucible for the evolution of systems because either the system breaks itself
and fails to survive and we break ourselves and we fail to thrive. Or we find this, I think of it
as a biospiritual urge to nurture the continuity of life. And one of the increase I've been exploring
is could it be that we're right at that point in punctuated equilibrium where there may be
sufficient chaos to actually create the lift and gift to create the jump to the next
order of coherence of the system? We won't know. But we could do the work of being
that which attracts the right solution, things out of solution. That's part of the work of
being the storyteller, being the healer, being the systems creator to create towards
the better possibility, the better story in a way that nurtures the continuity of life.
I've long said, I don't know that you've heard me say this, but we've arrived at a species-level
conversation where we're the first generation of our species to be able to understand where we
came from, how we got here, what we need, what we're doing, what sort of technologies we have,
what future pathways are available to us. And sometimes I think that we almost had to navigate
the carbon pulse and dig up this ancient carbon bonanza and do what we're doing to wake up and
see what our role is on this planet. So in a recent email exchange, you and I had you
brought up the question, what are humans for? And I will ask you that on camera. What are humans for,
Samantha? Are they for anything? I look at evolution itself and ecology as
propulsive. So I look at this question from an ecological frame that I also think of as a
spiritual frame, but I think of it first as an ecological frame, that no organism lacks purpose
relative to the ecology it occupies. All organisms have purpose relative to the ecology they occupy.
That's a basic truth of ecology and the nature of evolutionary processes, is that everything
co-evolves with everything else. And when something gets too far out of alignment, it goes extinct,
or you have the lemmings jumping off the cliffs, et cetera, et cetera. And
from that perspective, we are a very unique class of organisms.
We are a class of organisms that has trumped trophic cascades. So trophic cascades are defined
by predation generally. And the organism at the top of the trophic cascade, generally speaking,
plays a harmonizing role within the ecology relative to the flows of all the other relationships in
that ecology. So starting from that insight is a useful place to ask what are humans for.
If we have trumped trophic cascades, what then are we for?
And looking at that question, there's one angle that says, well, on some level,
we are then responsible for managing trophic cascades, but there's more.
And that more is where we are right now in our collective story. Could it be?
I mean, you could say our purpose is to create technology and transcend the Earth,
which probably won't go very well. But relative to the biosphere, relative to the intelligence of
Gaia, we can name things, we can create things, we can design things, we can engineer things,
we can observe things, we can analyze things. So relative to the ecology, if we ask, if we
really focus on that question, we can ask, well, what could we do with all these competencies
that causes the perpetuation and continued flourishing and evolution of the biosphere
as a whole? It goes back to exactly what you just said, where the first generation
that has actually had a planet-wide conversation about what to do with us
relative to the biosphere. And the keys lie in that focal point. And I believe very strongly,
by the way, that this is a question that must be asked from all the angles. It must be asked from
the angle of how we manage energy. It must be asked from the angle of how we raise our children.
It must be asked from the angle of what is most fundamental about being human.
What do you hope is going to happen and what would you like to see the impact of your book
coming out in 2024 be? What are some of the possible benign pathways ahead of us?
I would like to see a planetary conversation about us being for the celebration, evolution,
beauty abundance, biodiversity of life. I would like to see a global conversation
about that asked from every angle. I would like to see us take very seriously the ways in which
we, even most humane AI models, for example, put humans above biosphere. I don't think that will
ever work. I would like to see the conversation orient humans towards reconfigure. What we're
talking about here is the continuity of the biosphere relative to humans and technology
nurturing both of those things. I'd like to see that reordered in a very non-arbitrary way.
That simply gets the depth of misalignment. I don't need to repeat all the conversations
you've already had about that, but people could just listen to the podcast with Daniel on AI,
and it's all there. I would love to see a synthesis between what we think we are biologically
and what we know we are spiritually as this exquisite species. I talk about us as creators,
preservers, destroyers, like the Hindu Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, the creator, the preserver,
the destroyer. What we've gotten wrong about that is the majority of what we see as creative
is currently destructive relative to the biological substrate that we depend upon.
But if we oriented towards creativity that is actually generative for the biosphere
and got nuanced in cycles of death and decay and destruction, that's a very deep
exploration of what could circularity really be.
Could you give a couple examples of how we could be more creative in a regenerative way?
Certainly. There's silly examples. I work on a project in the packaging supply chain working on
generating a circular packaging economy, but in nature, there's all waste is resource.
How do we create materials that then become waste that is resource for the biosphere and
how do we work with existing materials that fit into that category already, like cardboard,
in a way that is circular with our agricultural soils, for example.
Those are material examples. Human shit, excuse my French, but our poop could be an
incredible resource. One strand of designing medicine better would be to design for more
circular loops that are biologically coherent at every level of scale that may actually be
a good reverse engineering of what is healthy for us to take pharmacologically.
I think it's interesting to ask these questions in both directions. I've done a lot of work in
the food system. A question that I don't think anyone has really asked is if we actually nourished
all the human bodies on the planet in an optimal way. We might be able to reverse engineer a food
system that has less meat in it, but still has meat in it, that orient towards diets,
that also orient towards our genetics in a way that is an ecological global food system.
I think we have to ask questions from different angles. I tend to
hold a question, a constant question, like might it already be more harmonious than we think
in ways that we're not thinking through from different dimensions,
directions, because we're thinking in linear chains all the time.
Might there actually be harmonies that are seeking to arise? Then there's some obvious
things around reuse and reduce that you talk about a lot of things like
darning socks and taking care of the garden. Those things absolutely apply to a more ecological
civilization. That's what I'd like to see. I would also like to see all children welcomed at birth
and parents and children better resourced. I think that is actually one of the root causes
of our continuous challenges.
Some of the various episodes you've done on different deterministic understandings of our
development are very relevant to that thing that I'd like to see parents and children resourced.
I would like to ask you some personal questions. I assume you watch my podcast so you know what
I'm about to ask you. This conversation we should treat as just the beginning because
there are so many questions I didn't have time to get to. My mind is spinning with some of the
things that you've said. You're quite articulate, but this is a realm that I'm not an expert in this.
So thank you. What advice do you have for the average listener who may not have been living
with the metacrisis knowledge his or her life like you have but who's become aware of how all
these things fit together? As you were just speaking, I agree with what you're suggesting,
but what you're really saying is we have to change our value systems as individuals
and then ask better questions that influence our technology and our industry and our governance.
But all this biomimicry and learning from nature and different things will require
a smaller scale of, if not the global, certainly the United States material throughput. So if that's
true, we have to navigate from here to there, which is the thing that's like the root canal
appointment on your calendar that emotionally takes up your brain. I'm rambling with this
question, Samantha, but what advice do you have to the people that think the way that you do and
agree with what you've said? Simply make relationships very important.
And when I say that, I mean your relationship to yourself, to your own body, to your own mind,
your relationship to your closest ones, your family, your relationships to different communities
and communities are very broad top thing, communities of affinity, communities of place,
and then your relationship to nature in various dimensions. So
one of the principles of Indigenous consciousness is that is place consciousness
and like you spoke to earlier, there's been a rupture of our relationship with place.
But restoring relationship with place is, and animals, organisms, the tree outside your window,
the soil in your backyard, whether you know how to plant a seed, that's a relationship.
Like thinking of all of these things as relationships, the relationship between
where you get your food from in your own body, the relationship between where your food comes from
and the farm workers, like attending to relationship is the primary competency
of the next stage of civilization. And then also you can start to feel whether those
relationships are, whether they make sense in terms of being expressions of your own values.
And I think that that is one of the ways that when I watch people transition from more of a
default job that is part of the extraction machine to something more meaningful, more
contributory, it always comes through care for relationships.
That all made complete sense to me. But when we hang up, I'm going to think I need to tend to my
relationships. Like what would that mean physically for a masculine person like me, like this week?
Like pay attention to the salience and be fully present in my conversation with other
people or with nature or with the animals in my life or what would be the tangible advice to
improve and tend to my relationships? Such a good question. Just asking people how they are.
Emphasizing eye contact. These studies on peaceful societies was very inspiring to me.
It's like the distinctions in relationship are so tiny. The increase or decrease of the amount
of peace in a society is based on algorithmically on how many reciprocal relationships occur
between people in that society. And that's going to be unique with anyone you cross paths with.
It might be the person at the store who's always kind of checked out who you just habitually
check out with because they're checked out or because you're on your phone or
where you're like, I'm taking this thing off. I'm taking my earbuds off. I'm just going to
say hi. I don't need anything from this person. I'm just going to say relax in my body,
which is an active co-regulation and say hello. With your girlfriend, it could be making sure you
say I love you or taking her out to dinner in a way you didn't before, making something a little
more special than it was before or a little more intentional. We haven't reviewed our shared values
lately. Let's do that because we're here. We're choosing this together and I want you to know
that that's meaningful to me. Just stating that something is meaningful, you don't always have
to fill in the blank with the meaning, increases the sense of meaning. With the food you're eating,
I listened to you frankly on your coach and the quadrants of self-care were brilliant. It's a
brilliant map. Even looking at how you're sourcing your water or your grapes or the meat they
eat, those are relational increases as well. I could paraphrase it by your recommending that we
be more active in our relationships as opposed to passive and just on an autopilot. That is
dovetails with my biggest recommendation to people is building social capital
ahead of the great simplification is the biggest no regret strategy that we have because we've
lost. I haven't used the words that you have just now so eloquently, but we've lost this relational
way of being in our lives. I think it's because of, not only because of, but in large part because
of this massive amount of physical material surplus on the backs of hydrocarbons.
I think yes, I think you're right about that. Yeah, combined with the digital architectures
that define our attention. Right. In addition to mostly male listeners to this show,
they're mostly older people, but there are some in their teens and 20s listening to this program.
What advice do you, how would you change your advice to young humans who become aware of our
ecological lack of relational culture that we find ourselves in?
Yeah, I would say three things. Use your body. Be sure that you are doing things with your body,
doing sports, dance, art, love making. Use your hands. It will make you smarter. It will also
make you more resilient relative to wherever this ship of civilization is going. What I see a lot
with young people is that there's a fork of either hope or hopelessness, and it only makes sense to
choose the fork of hope. It does not make sense at this time in our existence to throw the towel in
and take the nihilistic path. It only makes sense, and the reason why is because it's meaningful,
and meaning is a basic human need. That then, it's like, well, what are your creative gifts?
What are the things you care about? What are the things that keep you up at night?
These are basic purpose questions. Ask yourself these questions and follow those threads.
We're certainly, you know, barring massive catastrophic events. We're certainly heading
into a massive retooling of the job market, and younger people are the best equipped to be
available to fill in all the needs. I like saying, just assume there's going to be a regenerative
movement at civilizational scale and get curious about what part of that song you would like to
tend, what relationships you would like to tend. The horizon for an emergent civilization, if
there is one, is relationship. It's a relationship at every order of scale.
You have, as you said, a science background, but now merging into other perspectives and
spirituality, etc. I think I've started asking this question at the end of these interviews.
There's over 200 million college students now, and there's a lot of postdocs and graduate students
who are working on papers or theses or projects, but I think they're kind of embedded in this techno
super-organism sort of framing of the world. Do you have any categories of suggestions that
people like postdocs should be asking that are really important questions that we need
more people working on? There's a couple that are really poignantly awake alive. One is,
how is biology, ecology, bodies different than machines? There's an increasingly dominant
it's increasingly dominant that people will say, very smart people, tech-oriented people will say,
the human body is a machine. An organism is a machine. An organism is not a machine. An organism
is an organism. The distinctions between those things are an area where we should
put a great deal of attention right now, not on collapsing organisms into the category of
machine because we understand machine because we're hacking things at a very, very minute
mathematical and computational level. That's bad thinking because it's an incorrect metaphor
that imposes a reductionist view on biology. We should reverse that in all dimensions and get
very curious about how biology and ecology are distinct and emergent categories
from physics. It is incorrect to collapse all of that into physics and that they are not the
same thing as machines. To understand that as those distinctions is where our possible flourishing
lies. If someone is in computational work or working in AI, one of the questions I'd like
to see people ask is, how does biology structure, how does ecology structure goals?
AI works according to goal logic. Any goal taken to its umpteenth, a single goal taken to its
furthest conclusion, we end up with a paper maximizer, paperclip maximizer kind of problem.
But ecology does function in terms of this incredibly variegated, time-bound, place-bound,
context-rich set of goals and contingencies and boundary conditions. To put our most tender
and rigorous attention on that at this time is what I think people should be attending to.
And then people who are more in policy and in the direction of working with human systems
should be working on circularity, closing loops, increasing new materials innovations.
We need to solve composting at scale. If we are going to actually innovate a materials economy,
we have to solve composting. We have to solve recycling as well, but composting is put forward
as a solution and it's actually much more ecologically toxic than plastics right now,
because we don't have composting. We have to look at all these circular loops in many different
ways and we have to tell the stories that are compelling about them. We have to shift the
Overton window around what we can and can't talk about. I'd love to see and I think we're getting
close to being able to kind of shift the Overton window towards like does this create more biodiversity?
Does this create sustaining soils? Those are places where we're getting
close to there being a collective awareness. And carbon is too small of a conversation,
but it's always a metric that people understand. So those are things that I think people should
work on. If you could wave a magic wand and there was no recourse to you personally,
what is one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures?
I would awaken awe in every single human for a few moments, absolute awe in the allness,
not in the oneness, in the allness, in the awe in the uniqueness of the moss and the water
droplet and the spider web and the textures of the wind, awe in the everything and the all things,
not in the one thing, in the everything and the all things.
Thank you for that. I actually do experience awe on a weekly basis. It's almost always from
finding some really cool and unexpected thing on my wildlife camera or a sunrise or a sunset or
something happening in the field with the animals or something. And I just pause and it's just like,
how freaking amazing was that? Samantha Sweetwater, to be continued, my friend. Thank you.
Thank you, Nate. It's so good to be here.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagins, edited by No
Troublemakers Media and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
