There is no one out there that doesn't feel a little bit bad about what we've
done with plastic. And so if you want a gateway in order to start to drive
systemic change that is going to be better, you know, less energy, all the
rest of it, then plastic's a really great place to start.
In addition to climate change and biodiversity loss, more and more people
are understanding that plastic is one of the most important threats to our
natural ecosystems and to human health. Today's guest, Sean Sutherland, is a
leading industry activist in charge of a plastic planet where they were using a
pro-business, pro-solutions approach with an ultimate goal of helping the world
turn off the plastic tap. A plastic planet uses a three-pronged framework of
reduce, refill, and replace as a call to action for business, media, and global
policymakers to pull the plug on plastic production. Sean and I take a deeper dive
on what's going on with the growing awareness and response to our plastics
crisis. I'm pleased to introduce Sean Sutherland.
Sean Sutherland, welcome to the program. Thank you so much. It's a real pleasure to be here.
Thank you, Nate. We have mutual friends working in the plastics endocrine
disrupting space, but this is the first time we've ever spoken. I am told you have
a long and diverse list of careers in your life before your current invocation. Can
you just introduce yourself by giving a bit of background of who you are and
what you've done? Yes, thank you. I'll try and keep it brief because I'm pretty old,
so it's actually quite a long history now. Sean Sutherland, co-founder of a
plastic planet and plastic-free. What you would probably call a serial entrepreneur.
My very first career was in advertising, but I left advertising quite young, 25, set up my
first business. For some crazy reason, I decided I was going to open a restaurant in Soho in
London. Zero experience, never lifted a plate before in my life, but it was very fortunate,
and that's a pattern really that happens through my careers, of pulling together a very good team
that did know what they were doing and then leading them. We won a Michelin star on our
first year, which is amazing and terrible in the same breath, because then as soon as you get one
star, you have to keep it or get a second star, and everything you've ever seen about kitchen
nightmares is absolutely true. I lived that way, but it was also a wonderful experience that I
learned a huge amount about business. Then I married my restaurant manager, left that business
when I was 30, went back to my marketing roots, set up a design agency, which slightly bizarrely
now I look back and think, specializing in packaging, and now if you know what I do now,
you can see the irony of that. We focused myself, my creative co-founder, focus on the two areas
that we loved, because we wanted to work in a small boutique way on stuff that interested us,
and it wasn't really cat food. It was things in the beauty world and things in the alcohol drink
world, so we did a lot of work in those two areas. We also went through our baby-making years,
and through those years, we realized that there was this massive niche in a very, very saturated
market called skincare, where you fall pregnant and there is nothing there for you. In fact,
it's the opposite of that. Everybody is fearful of the fact that you're pregnant, so we develop
products for ourselves in the most truly selfish way, and then years later, recognize this niche
was still there, big enough to drive a bus through, even though it's a relatively small market,
everyone's got a mother. What does she use when she's putting that 30-inch stretch on her tummy
in 40 weeks and hopefully losing it again? We launched our own brand, and we launched that in
the US. That was our biggest market, and I ran that brand for the next 11 years. I mentioned that,
Nate, because you can imagine no plastic saints sitting here. How many millions of plastic bottles,
jars, are my personally responsible running that company for pumping out into the environment?
Shocking to say this now was not on my list to think about what happened to them next,
but, of course, 10 years is a long time in the life of plastic awareness. Then it was at the end
of running that skincare brand that I had my personal epiphany, because I was asked to advise
the Hong Kong board of the documentary filmmakers who were working on a feature documentary about
plastic in the ocean. That was a very, very fast learning curve for me, working with the
marine biologists and the health scientists. It was at a time when nobody was interested
in the topic of plastic in the ocean. Nobody knew it was pre-the infamous Blue Planet 2 screening
where the world really woke up. It was at a screening that we were hosting of a plastic ocean.
That was the name of the documentary. Luckily, we had David Attenborough coming. A few people
coming just because he's such a legend. It was then that we realized we're about to show a
documentary that's going to make people feel scared, angry, and guilty. Yet, tomorrow,
they're going to push their trolleys through the supermarket. They're going to fill them up with
plastic because we have zero choice. That was the moment that myself, my co-founder, Frederica
Magnussen, crazy Danish woman, decided that we could perhaps create a different kind of business
model, not a charity, not an NGO, but an organization that could go forward working with
governments and industry with this very, very simple goal to ignite and inspire the world
to turn off the plastic tap. You said it was kind of uncommon, given that you were a plastic
sinner with your beauty products and some of the other things. Maybe it takes someone that's so
deep in an industry to recognize and have that epiphany because I worked on Wall Street in finance,
and so I saw the belly of the beast, per se. Maybe it's almost a necessity for people to
really be swinging for the fences on the issues of our day to have those people come from the
deep experience of the industry that they're now trying to shift.
I think it does give you a different kind of credibility when you're dealing with business.
When we work with other beauty brands or consumer goods companies like Unilever,
and I can say to them, I co-founded and ran a skincare brand in their market. I know how
hard it is to change. I also now know the imperative to change, but I do recognize it's difficult.
So I think you're right. There's very different kinds of activism, and in some ways, I think of
us as, you need the Greenpeace kind of activist. You need the people who are going to board the boat
and hold people to accounts in a very aggressive way. You need those kind of extremists,
and in some ways, they are a huge benefit to us because we are the safe option.
So people will sit at the table with us because we understand and we welcome the fact that
business is the tool of change. So you're the externality diplomat.
In some ways, yeah, that's a great way of putting it. Or as somebody from Unilever said to me,
in some ways, you're a critical friend, and they didn't mean that I was essential,
but I understood what they meant, that I understand how difficult it is for them,
but I'm really going to hold their toes to the fire now.
This has been on my mind a lot lately because more and more people are paying attention to
the meta crisis and how everything fits together, but they're very tribal and single issue. And if
we have a huge amount of humans that deeply care about the environment and plastics and
biodiversity and climate change, but then a huge amount of business leaders that are trying to
develop and sell products demanded by humans around the world, they're often not really
talking to each other. They're very firm in their objectives and their plans and their values,
but there isn't a whole lot of overlap, which is a problem.
A serious problem. And it's extraordinary to me just in the world of plastic. It's now
five and a half years since Blue Planet was screened. The world woke up to the problem
of plastic in the ocean. Every consumer goods company came out with some kind of plastic
commitment and pledge. Most of them had a 2025 deadline for that. Not a single one of them
is succeeding. And there is so little real collaboration between industry. And every
industry will say to me, we can't fix this alone. And I'll say, great, but are you actually talking
to your competition? You're right. Because we have to change the entire system, not just the
material here. Plastic is an extraordinary gateway to systems change. And yet people are
still not ready to shift away from their competitive mindset. And that's what's really got to change.
So we're going to get into that in this conversation. But first, I have had several guests on
Martin Scheringer, Shauna Swan, and others who have talked specifically about the impacts from
plastic pollution on humans and on wild creatures and ecosystems. Can you give like a whirlwind,
a brief recap for those might not be familiar with the serious damage that plastic and the
plastic ecosystem can cause on our economy and on our planet?
It's very easy for us to think of plastic as something that is a material in itself,
like aluminium or copper or cobalt. Plastic is not on the periodic table. Plastic is a
mixture of chemicals. Many of them are toxic, known toxic. And yet when we look at, when we
talk about plastic, we always treat it like it's a material in itself, rather than what does it
actually comprise of. And you look at the amount of chemicals that are used within plastic, 13,000
chemicals are used to make plastic, to give it its extraordinary qualities of being rigid and shiny
or being stretchy like Saran wrap cling film. So in order to, you know, or to use it in your
yoga pants. So to give plastic all these extraordinary qualities, we add a huge amount
of chemicals to them. Half of those 13,000 chemicals have never been tested on the impact
for human health. So this is where the problem lies. And we are in total denial of the impact on
human health. And I know many of the scientists that you just referred to and people like Professor
Pete Myers and obviously Professor Terry Collins from Carnegie Mellon, who are part of our plastic
health council, where we are trying to give them a more global stage, you know, more mic share
to really get this message out. Because their message is very clear. It is five past midnight,
we cannot ring the bell any louder than we are. All you will ever hear is we need more research.
Yeah, I wonder if plastic, I wonder if this credit card size was a plastic that we're consuming
every week. I wonder if it has an impact on us. I wonder if the fact that there is plastic in
placenta now. I wonder if the fact that there is microplastics twice as much in a baby poop
as there is in an adult poop. There's plastic in blood. We know that plastic is a mixture of
chemicals. So all of these, these, the merchants of doubt that you will hear, largely the fossil
fuel industry, who will continue to purport this rumor that we need more research, we will always
need more research, but we have so much research already. We're just not listening to it. So these
scientists, these health scientists who have been doing this very deep research for many, many years
and who are very concerned about the impact on cognitive disorders, autoimmune disease,
things like autism, Aschbergers, all of those conditions that we've seen a massive rise,
the huge impact on fertility, on heart disease, cancer, all of these things are caused through
some of the chemicals that we use within plastic. And a lot of those chemicals you know already are
called endocrine disrupting chemicals. Our endocrine system is vital to how our entire body
operates. And when we disrupt it, we disrupt many, many health systems. And we are doing this now
knowingly. And this is the problem. So one of the, when we look at a plastic planet and we look,
what are the levers of change? What are those tipping points where we can actually persuade
industry that this is not a nice two because of the bit of pollution or a turtle with a straw
up its nose, but this is an imperative, a have to that we can take to our shareholders, our
stakeholders that we have to move away from plastic. One of those tipping points for us is the impact
on human health and this mounting body of science. And we need to give it a lot more air time.
So the person that introduced us, mutual friend has told me over a beer that he could make a
strong argument while why plastics, endocrine disrupting chemicals are a greater threat to
our future than climate change, which was quite, quite a strong statement.
I think there's a multiple, we've got multiple threats right now. We talk about this, the multiple
crises that we all face. And we talk about artificial intelligence and what that might mean.
Obviously, the climate crisis, the endocrine disrupting chemicals, the amount of chemicals
that we're using in everything, the destruction to our soil, the, the, the, the fundament that we,
that we grow our food in. We know the damage that we cause in the ocean, the biodiversity of the ocean
and chemicals are really need to take a fair share of the blame here. I find that I was talking
to a scientist the other day and he said, what's amazing is he used to work at Dow Chemical
and he's now a professor of green chemistry. And he said, I just suddenly dawned on me one day
that we work in these labs and we're incredibly good at hazmat gear and we can protect ourselves
and we work on all these really powerful chemicals. And then we release them onto the market. We
release them into the environment. What are we thinking that we should do this? When nature,
as we know, you know, when, when you give something back to nature, there is no waste in nature.
Nature is the most, of course, the perfect circle. Everything is the nutrient for the next stage of
growth. But nature is binary. And what we give back to nature is either a food, a nutrient,
or it's a toxin, a poison. And we think there's this gray area where it's maybe a little less bad,
maybe bioplastics, a little less bad. But actually nature is very simple. It's either a toxin
or it's a nutrient. And a lot of the chemicals that we are pumping out daily, I think I've read
somewhere, we make a new chemical every 10 minutes. So we're pumping out all of these chemicals with
no regard for the impact on nature, as if nature can just handle it. And clearly, she can't.
So I have lots of questions for you, Sean. But, but let me just ask, how do you, how do you even
frame this problem in your mind? Is it that we need to reduce the scale of human consumption?
Or we need to reduce the scale of things containing plastics? Or we need to find alternatives
that are not toxins, but either inert or nutrients to the system? Or how do we even
create a framework to think about what we face with respect to plastics and the human economy?
The reason that I am so obsessed by plastic is I think it's the perfect gateway to the
climate crisis, to the biodiversity crisis, to many of the things that we are facing right now.
And it is that because the invention of plastic broke the system. And it's such a recent problem.
It's our generation. It's my generation that has caused this mess. This is not something that has
evolved over hundreds of years. And if you think of the way that we used to consume,
and the, and the amount of waste that we used to individually, it's not just about a growing
population. You know, I remember I grew up in a family of six, we had one metal bin, we dragged
it out into the street every week. It was really full. My boys have left home now. I live in an
apartment with my husband. We fill a bin every two days with packaging materials, with all of this
stuff that we just use momentarily and then throw away. So for me, the invention of plastic broke
that system of repair, refill, renew, rent, share, all of those things that used to be just standard
practice for us. And it broke the system so simply that we could actually, it's amazingly cheap
for us to make these things now that we can use them once and we can chuck them in a bin for some
mythical magical recycling ferry to supposedly recycle. And in the world of plastic, that is
simply not happening. So I think when you look at the climate crisis, and you look at what has
allowed us to get to these giddy levels of hyperconsumption, obviously, in the rich west,
and what that has caused with the climate crisis, why are those coal-fired factories in China,
why over the recent decades have they been pumping out more and more stuff to export to us for us
to use once to throw into a bin? Plastic is the material that we can lay a huge amount of blame
because it broke the system. And on the same note, by divesting from plastic, by weaning
ourselves from plastic, which we are so addicted to now, the new systems that we are going to have
to invent, not just systems, but the new materials that we will adopt, I think give us a very exciting
glimpse into a different future. So that's why I think of it as a gateway. And it's also,
there are no plastic deniers out there. It's not like carbon, I don't know, I can't see it,
I can't feel it, I can't touch it. How can me, how can I impact the carbon crisis? Plastic,
I feel bad about it every single day. I'm complicit in the problem every time I buy something,
and I don't want it anymore. But what we need is to push governments to create laws that then
create this level playing field for industry to be able to wean themselves or fossil fuel plastic
and change the system. We use more material, more natural resource in the last six years
than we did in the entire 20th century. And part of this is because we've got this culture of
single use, and that's what plastic gave us. And the amount of plastic that exists today is
greater than the weight of all the animals on the earth. And it's never going away. Every piece
of plastic ever made and less burnt, which is simply burning a fossil fuel, and we know where
that's got us today. Every piece of plastic still exists on the planet. And I read like a
plastic milk jug will degrade only after 800 years, but when it degrades, it'll degrade into
microplastics. Is that correct? Correct. So it doesn't, you know, it doesn't actually degrade
down to nothing. You know, plastic simply breaks up into smaller and smaller pieces. And microplastics,
as you say, but then also nanoplastics. So because plastic is so omnipresent in our lives,
and it isn't just about packaging, it isn't about the plastic products, it's paint on the wall,
it's all of our furniture. So we're inhaling it as well.
So I'm going to have to amend one of my taglines that our modern economic system is turning
billions of barrels of ancient sunlight into microliters of dopamine plus CO2 and microplastics.
Yes. Yeah. So go ahead.
No, I was going to say I love the dopamine expression because for me it is, you know, our
hyperconsumption, it just, if you step back, I don't know, did you ever, Nate, did you ever
watch that film Minimalism? No. It was a documentary on Netflix maybe 10 years ago now.
And I remember watching it with one of my sons. And it showed this whole rise in hyperconsumption
and how it really kicked off in the late 70s, early 80s. And for him, it was shocking thinking,
wow, I thought it had always been this way. I've only ever lived in the world where we buy like
we do now. But it's a fantastic documentary about these two, maybe people that you even
knew, Wall Street guys who decided, you know, having all this stuff was really weighing them down.
So they're divested, they got rid of all this stuff and they traveled around America with
very, very few things. And they interviewed many people and they wrote this book called Minimalism.
And there was a quote in there that I'll never forget, which was that whole thing about the
dopamine hit of the buy now, buy now and what, you know, I just need more stuff because this
makes me feel safe and successful and secure and it'll make me happy. And this line was,
we will never have enough of something we don't actually need. And that is so true, isn't it?
And again, it comes back to fast fashion, for example, the amount of clothes that we wear,
we have enough clothing on the planet to close six future generations already.
And yet still, the stores are full of the latest, best things that we should be buying
for that dopamine hit. So, so fashion and clothes is a microcosm of our over consumption,
because there's dopamine and unexpected reward there. I like this shirt, it's one of my favorite
shirts, but I've been wearing it for five years now. Maybe I need something different,
even though this one is fully functional. That is a driver of many of our consumption decisions.
Yes. Totally. And the fact that fashion, you know, it makes me very sad. I love clothes,
I love fashion. And, and yet fashion has gone from something which was about beauty and craft
and enhancement and I don't know, maybe self-esteem. It's gone from that to being one of the most
depletive, pollutive, exploitative industries on the planet. And that's happened in a very
short space of time. Fast fashion couldn't exist without fossil fuels.
So, is there a lot of plastics or chemicals involved in clothes and fashion? I'm not aware.
Yeah. And most people don't. If you go to your wardrobe today, maybe yours is different to most,
but anybody's wardrobe, 70% of that wardrobe is plastic bags just hanging there, because 70% of
all our textiles globally are now made out of fossil fuel plastic, polyester, anything beginning
with a poly is definitely going to be plastic. Every bit of thread, even if you're wearing,
if your shirt is made out of cotton there, I guarantee it's held together with polyester.
So the, that entire fashion industry, it's very, very difficult now to make things that are entirely
plastic free. And the other interesting thing that's happened in, in the world of, of clothing
is that we think performance, technical garments, the North faces, the Patagonias of the world,
you know, the Lulu lemons of the world, we think that we can only get performance by using synthetics.
And actually, if you look at how do you get true breathability, true flexibility, true comfort,
nothing feels as good as a natural fiber. So we've gone this slightly strange direction
thinking technical equals plastic, that's the only way. And one of the brands that we work with
is very interesting, because they are trying to fight that system in a very David and Goliath way
of saying, we're going to be the very first brand to uncompromisingly bring out a range of
outdoor wear of sportswear that is going to be entirely plastic free. And having worked with
them, I recognize, wow, it is so hard to do. It isn't just the threads, it's the coatings,
it's the dyes, it's everything is based on plastic.
So is it the same way as fossil fuels have subsidized and built a metabolic global, just in
time delivery system for, for products, because it's now cheaper to do that than have your local
hardware store be an expert on things you have Amazon and Walmart. Because of the fossil transportation
subsidy, is clothing the same way? Like if you were to make natural fiber clothing, it might be
better for the breathability and, and the other things you mentioned, but it would it be significantly
more expensive? It depends what you're buying, because it is the same, the same really with
anything that's made out of synthetics, I mean, how much is a Patagonia jacket, it's, it's not cheap.
And a lot of it is going to be made out of plastic. So it really depends what you're buying,
but fundamentally, what we've got a question is how much do we need? So would you rather buy
things that fall apart in a year's time? Or would you rather buy things that you genuinely love,
that you repair and you have for generations? And it's funny how somebody like King Charles
is now known for the fact that he still wears the same shoes he's been wearing for 30 years,
they've just been incredibly well looked after. And the same suits and all of those things. And
he's gone from being somebody that we all thought was a little bit of a funny daddy
tree hugger to somebody who is actually the epitome of living a sustainable life.
I think to answer your question, I would prefer to buy something that would last a long, long time,
even if it was more costly, and it was available. But that's the thing. I don't think people have
the options. Our stores are filled with the, you know, planned obsolescence sort of gadgets,
and things that are cheap and easy. So I think a lot of people would answer your question in the
affirmative, they would want things that would last a lot longer, but they're not available.
It's also, it's they're not available in abundance. And that's what we need. And it's also,
it's not the norm anymore. What is considered normal now is to pop into a prime mark or a target
and pick something up that's cheap. And actually look at that, if I buy one, I get another one
half price. So we are bred, you know, we're bred to consume. And that is the problem now is everything
is about more. And we have to recognize that actually, how much lighter we would feel.
You know, that's why, you know, the Maricondo whole thing of tidiness and holding things into
they spark you with joy, that's why it had such a massive impact, I think, on many people, because
they recognize they're just weighed down by all of this stuff. And I was better to have a few things
that you really, really love, that create the core of your wardrobe or your, you know, your home
furnishings and all of those things, that you can then just accentuate every now and then.
You know what the key is to getting to that place? I don't know that it that people have the
fortitude or the mental shortcuts to do that by themselves. But if you surround yourself with three
or four or five people who are more minimalist, and they care about simple things and valuing
these five things, that cultural evolution can happen really fast, like I want to live like they
do. Yeah, I agree. We were talking today actually about that saying that you are the
some part of the five people that you spend most time with. And, you know, so choose those people
wisely. Don't make them the hyperconsumptive people who are just on Instagram the whole time,
bye, bye, bye, getting that little dopamine here. That's not good for you. It's why I'm one fifth duck
and one fifth dog. So you mentioned earlier, Sean, that recycling has culturally gotten the
name for being a popular option to reuse plastic and therefore keep it from polluting yet you
and your colleagues from what I understand at Plastic Planet argue that it's not a solution at all
and that actually it may exacerbate the problem. Can you unpack this and explain why you think that?
I think recycling is the fig leaf of consumerism. It appeases our guilt. It makes us feel that perhaps
it's going in to have a useful second life. And with many materials, that is true with metals,
particularly aluminium, you know, 71% of every can you pick up is recycled aluminium. It is
infinitely recyclable. It doesn't down degrade, you know, downgrade every time you do it. Glass,
very good. We're not very good at recycling it, but it is recyclable in the right way. Paper,
pulp, all of those things. Those are the materials that fit into a recycling stream. Plastic does not.
And the reason for that is you only ever downcycle plastic. It was never invented to be a material
that would ever be recycled. So you downgrade it every single time. You can never recycle it more
than once, maybe twice if you're lucky. And so, but it's a little placebo pill that we have been
swallowing for decades. Because when the plastics industry say, we don't have a plastic pollution
problem, we've got a recycling problem, we need to really invest in recycling. And when you get
the likes of forgive me for mentioning a name, but when we get the likes of Coca Cola, saying,
if only we could persuade this lazy consumer to put the bottle in the right bin, then suddenly
it's our problem. And we feel like we're the, we're the reason the recycling system isn't
quite working. We're not, we're not using the bins right. Everybody's suddenly obsessed
about being a good recycler. And the reality is most of that, that plastic that you put in the
recycling bin, 91% of it has never and will never get recycled globally, because only 9% of any
plastics being recycled. The US, particularly less than 5% last year was recycled in the US.
And in the UK, what happens to the other 95%? It is landfill or it's exported. So the US are
the biggest per capita producers of plastic waste. The UK are number two in that sorry league.
And we are both massive exporters of our plastic waste to other countries, offshoring our dirt.
That's why I talk about waste imperialism of thinking other people can deal with our trash.
So we have to stop pretending that recycling is the answer, because all it's allowed the
plastics industry, the fossil fuel industry to do is continue to pump it out at the tap
and have our eye on the wrong end of the pipe thinking we need to recycle more. It's a complete
myth. So I heard on one of your prior talks in, in researching this, you mentioned waste
imperialism. So I'm obviously familiar with resource imperialism, where the global north
finds energy and rare earth materials in countries in the global south and, you know,
takes advantage, etc. But what is waste imperialism? Could you unpack that a bit?
The sheer fact that we do not deal with our own dirt in our own country. And one of the things
that we really push governments for is that we need to ban the export of plastic waste.
And until very recently, export of plastic, and if you've seen some of the containers and what
they're filled with, used nappies, coat hangers, we're not talking about clean PUT bottles here,
that are shipped to countries like historically to Malaysia to Myanmar to Mozambique to countries
that have no infrastructure for handling their waste. That's why it's an imperialist attitude.
I've seen some pictures of Malaysia and Indonesia of the lakes and the rivers and the oceans are
just, it looks like there's more plastic and dirty nappies or whatever than water in some cases.
And maybe those are unique photos that were placed that way. But it's, you know,
when I see those photos, I think they use a lot of plastic in Malaysia, but you're suggesting that
some of that is imported from the UK and the US.
Definitely. You know, we export, I think, I was just looking at a report earlier today,
31% of our exports from the UK go to Turkey. So that's us in a very developed, rich country
like the UK sending it to Turkey, where many reports have proven it is being burnt on the
road sides of Turkish villages. So that's the plastic waste. That's the rubbish that we put
in our bin. The other side of waste imperialism, sorry, do you want to say something?
No, I just wanted to grimace, keep going.
The other side of it is when we talk about textiles and clothing. And I don't know,
if you have seen some of those images of the pristine, beautiful Atacama Desert.
And that Atacama Desert, now, there, it is like a graveyard of fast fashion.
And you can see, as far as the eye can see, mountains and mountains of discarded clothing.
What? Wait, what country is this?
In Chile.
In Chile.
Yeah. And if you look at, there is one town in Ghana, in North Africa,
that receives 15 million items of discarded clothing every single week. 40% of them are
considered waste immediately and burnt. You can imagine how much plastic that is.
So all of these loopholes of us thinking that we're giving stuff away or we're popping things
into a recycling stream that exists, we have to wake up. We are creating billions of tons
of waste. So this is where we have to go back to. Can plastic and the problem of plastic be that
catalyst for us to rethink how we use resources in every way?
I thought I knew kind of what you were going to talk about, but this is that deja vu feeling
that when I get, when I have a guest that I've never spoken to before, that I have this little
pit in my stomach that I'm learning something new that's horrible about the world that I didn't
know an hour ago. But moving on to your work that's addressing the problem.
Okay. So how do you think about, as your organization, a plastic planet, how do you
begin to think about a response to this issue that incorporates multiple aspects of society?
Because it's not only the individuals and it's not only the governments and it's not only the
corporations, right? I mean, how do you even begin to structure the problem before you and your
organization and aligned organizations tackle it? As you can imagine, I, as an entrepreneur,
I believe in the power of business and business is the tool of change. And much as we should have
much stronger leadership from our governments, it's not happening and we can't wait for it to
happen. And ultimately, governments do what industry wants. So we need to look at industry
as being that tool of change. And I almost think of it as like a burger. You know, when we talk
about where's the burden of responsibility here? I flip it into a burger. And at the bottom of
the burger, you've got the consumer. You've got you and me, the shopper. This is not our problem.
And I think for too long, the onus of guilt has been put upon us to feel bad about the
plastic crisis, the all of these problems. Ultimately, we buy what we are sold. It's
industry's job to sell us something different. And it's government's job to mandate the industry
do that faster. So the top of that CDB is, of course, governments who need to create
stronger legislation, better fiscal policy, create a framework that give business certainty,
because the juicy burger, maybe it's vegan, whatever, in the middle, that juicy bit is industry.
And this is where we get really excited, because this is where we can make change happen.
But we need governments to give industry certainty so that they know which path should
they tread. Because right now, globally, it's very difficult for industry to know,
I don't know, is there going to be a more onerous plastic tax? Will extended producer
responsibility mean that plastic is no longer the cheaper option? Is this UN Global Plastics Treaty
actually going to force me to change? And governments aren't helping industry in any way.
So kind of understandably, if you run an organization like Mondays or Unilever or P&G,
a lot of people are trading water, kind of doggy paddle, you know, in the shallows waiting
to either have certainty or for something to happen that means that they have to not. It's a nice
And a lot of the work that we do is how can we create the threat of legislation,
the liability of the impact on human health. So all of these things will motivate business
to change faster. And that's say, 30% of our work, and then the 70% is, and then how do we
help them with solutions? Because I don't think it's good enough as an entrepreneur
to call for a ban as we have in Europe on the little packets, sachets, a trillion of those
pumped out every single year. They go something like 11 times to the moon and back. Every single
one still exists on the planet. It is the way that big brands penetrate developing markets,
because it's an affordability issue. Anyone who's been to Indonesia or Thailand will see
the amount of those little sachets that are sold by Western brands. So to call for a ban on those,
because that's a pernicious use of plastic and we have to stop, we will also in this twin track
approach work with some of the biggest users of sachets, and that is Unilever and Kraft Heinz,
you know, the little ketchup sachets. How can we work with them and help them solve the problem
quicker? So here's a hypothetical situation that I often think about that would work except
socially it wouldn't. But mechanically it would work that if we told industry and consumers,
but specifically business, that oil would be $500 a barrel in 2033. So, you know,
eight to 10 times more expensive for energy, for non-renewable energy. You have 10 years to prepare
for that. But when that happens, oil is going to be 10 times more expensive than it is today,
that that would create innovation and people would use non-renewable inputs to come up with
products. And I think business would adapt to that if they really believed it would happen.
I wonder if the same sort of thing could happen. Of course, we understand the social and political
hurdles to what I just said. But in the plastics industry, if there would be some massive
tax or penalty by using plastics 10 years from now, could industry design ways around that,
even if it ended up costing the consumer more, there would be more options and there would be more
non-fossil chemical inputs into products. Any comments on that?
I'm going to vote for you and try and get you into power so that you can make that happen.
If I was in power, what would happen is about nine years from now, I would no longer be in power
and whoever replaced me would repeal my idea. But go on.
Yeah, you're right. That's the story state of the political system that we have globally.
I think you're absolutely right. Imagine, if you think man invented a material that lasts forever,
how extraordinary is that? Who knew that we could do that? Did we put it on a pedestal?
Do we price it like gold? Do we use it for things that we need to last forever?
Do we respect it? No, we treat it like rubbish. Literally throw it in the bin, throw it in the
street. Use it for things that we need for moments, even though we know it lasts forever.
So that's the madness of how we use plastic. Imagine if we did. Yeah, it's so bonkers,
isn't it? When you step back and then we will look back, generations will look back and they'll
think, they'll think a couple of many things. One of them will be, why did we have a market
which is about selling water in plastic bottles in countries that have a tap and could filter
their water very easily? We will just think that was mad. Plastic itself, the misuse of plastic,
we will definitely rue the day. Future generations will not thank us for what we've done with plastic.
But imagine if we did price it like gold, exactly as you said, because what's happened
is because it's so cheap, so incredible, it is a miracle material, albeit toxic and indestructible,
we haven't bothered to invent any other materials. So for the last 50 years, imagine if technology
had not even bothered. Hey, we've got a telephone, it's connected to the wall, it's amazing. I mean,
why would we even need anything that's better than that? And so in many ways, I look at technology
has served us incredibly, but also it's failed us because it's just given me a massive amount of
power that makes me buy more and more stuff and 147 carriages in that little handheld device.
But what technology hasn't done is take us to a better future. It hasn't taken us to a world of
materials that can fit into nature's true circularity of growth and nutrients, growth and nutrients.
And that's where we need the investment now is in that new world of materials. The new world of
let's reuse things more. And one of the projects we're working on here that I'm so excited about
is creating the first standardized packaging that will be used by competitive brands and
businesses that go into a circular system. So if you're buying a three ounce bottle of shampoo,
then that three ounce bottle of shampoo is the same bottle that will be called Dove one day
and be called, I don't know, Trezame the next day, trying to think of you as brands, the next day,
because it's the same bottle. And you and I are not buying the bottle, we're buying the stuff
inside the bottle. And as soon as we can change that thinking and create this true circular
system where packaging is a service, not the thing that you buy and then throw in the bin,
making us complicit in the problem, then that's a true system change that I think
if we could make that happen fast and normalize it, that's the Nirvana less natural resource,
less energy needed, no waste. So in that scenario, I use the three ounce shampoo bottle and I'm done
with the shampoo, which is what I wanted. What do I do with the bottle if this all bands out?
So that bottle, because what we'll never wean ourselves off is convenience, because we have
been, you know, we've got very addicted to convenience and there is no time is money.
And I don't want to take loads of bottles back to the supermarket and refill them and take time
at a machine to refill them. And God bless the lovely little refill stores, but there is not
a viable, a financially successful scalable refill model on the planet.
They're all, when big brands do them, they're all marketing. What we have to have instead
is systems that are massive scale with thousands of drop off points, where your three ounce bottle
of shampoo, sorry, three ounces is probably a bit little for the US, but let's call it the three
ounce bottle of shampoo. You then can drop back at a Starbucks and you are rewarded for dropping it
because it's all about a reward system. So if you take, you can take it back to Starbucks or
in time in your kitchen, you will have a reusable bin because why is your bin simply about waste?
It's the same people come into collect your domestic waste or a commercial waste that could
just collect the reusables, put them into a centralized system of washing and redistribution,
Bob's your uncle. So those little bottles, you're right, I don't have anything that's three ounce,
probably 10 ounce, but those little bottles then they're not melted and reformed. They're actually
hygienically washed and then maybe even a new label on it. It might be a different company or
something. Yeah, exactly. That makes total sense. So are you finding success? Is this
something exciting that's happening? The good news is that a lot of the big brands that I've
mentioned already, all of them have signed up to say, we know that this has to be the future. We
don't know quite how to get there. We know that somebody has to build the system. So we are working
with the organization that's building the system, which is the cooperative that is responsible for
that logistics of collection, washing, redistribution. And then the brands simply lease their packaging.
They don't even need to own it anymore. They lease the packaging from the centralized system.
And then as a as a shopper, all I get is reward. I get an enhanced elevated experience. I've now
got a beautiful aluminium or a stainless steel bottle that I know I'm not having to put into
a waste bin and be part of the problem anymore. So I've got something that feels better, more
substantial. So I've got the products that I love. So nothing, no compromise for me. It was
pre-filled. I didn't have to go and fill it anywhere. All I need to do is drop it off at a number of
many, many places. And for doing that, I get rewarded. So we have to make it a win-win.
And I could see how global education and environmental consciousness of what is happening
with the natural world and plastic pollution would help. But it's not essential for this model to
work because even people that don't necessarily hold the environment prominent in their values
would get the reward and get some economic benefit from a new cultural model of using
containers for the things that they use. Yeah. And we have to do it at scale. And it has to be
with the mass brands, not just the niche expensive brands, because we have to make it the new normal.
So that has to happen super fast. In France, for example, they are mandating that 20% of
supermarkets over a certain size, 20% of those supermarket floor space has to be given over
to refill because they know that if they don't make that happen, it won't become normal. It'll be
niche and that won't work. So I understand the consumer's role here and the role of industry.
What does government have to do with plans such as this? Why are they essential as well?
Because they need to create the framework of fiscal policy and legislation that mandate that
these things happen. And we vote governments in to protect us, to run our countries, to keep us
safe. I think that they are failing in this. They are failing in this because the generally,
the climate pledges, I'm not saying any governments hitting the climate pledges.
We all know that that one and a half degree threshold, we're already at 1.4 degrees.
Now we talk, we don't talk about stopping this, we now talk about resilience, the language has
changed. So I think governments are absolutely failing us because they haven't created the
framework for industry to have to change. And that's what our governments need to do now.
And again, I come back to plastic because it's popular. There is no one out there that doesn't
feel a little bit bad about what we've done with plastic. And so if you want a gateway in order
to start to drive systemic change that is going to be better, less energy, all the rest of it,
then plastic's a really great place to start. I'm down with that. I can't wait to bring my
bottles to Starbucks and get rewarded because I do feel bad and I see the things, but I don't
have an alternative. So what else is going on at a plastic planet? Do you have any other
signs of progress on this massive issue that a lot of people don't know details, but they're
clearly aware that we do have a plastic problem? One of the things that we've been working on for
the last couple of years been a very big project for us. We recognize in all this work with industry
and we work a lot with creative agencies that there is this massive gap, a knowledge gap between
the creative industry. And if you think about it now, everything is designed. Everything in our
life, our street, what we're wearing, the cup I'm drinking out of now, the computer that we're talking
to, everything, everything is designed, even if it's a bad design. And there is 160 million
creatives globally and there's this knowledge gap because they have not been trained for the job of
the future, understandably. So the plastic free materials makers, the system changes, the proof
points, the case studies, what questions should they even be asking? How can they push back against
that brief that says just use a recycled plastic? How can we inspire, empower, educate, ignite
that community of 160 million global creatives so that we can redesign a different future?
Because I feel very passionately about the role of the creative here. Go back in history, tell me
one moment where a banker or an economist changed the course of history. It's always been the Mavericks,
those engineers, the architects, the radicals of the world who can envisage something completely
different to how we live today. And we need the creative industry more than ever to do that right
now. So what we've been working on for the last couple of years is we developed a platform which
is hosted on plasticfree.com, which is that solutions platform, which is an education platform for the
160 million global creatives to help them feel ignited, inspired and educated and all of those
things so that they can push back, change the brief and redesign everything. Because if we change
it at the beginning, we will have no waste at the end. I hadn't heard of this creatives demographic,
160 million. Are these marketing advertising people or is it beyond that? What do you mean by
160 million creatives? So for me, I would actually envisage it's much, much more than 160 million
because I think entrepreneurs are the most creative people on the planet and they're probably not even
included in that number. If you create a business out of nothing, you know how creative you have
to be for that. But it's everything. It's the architects, it's the designers, it's the people
who work in clothing, in packaging, in product. There's a lot of people out there who have the
ability to envisage a different way to make stuff of how we're going to live.
Even podcast hosts, perhaps. Even podcast sites. I mean, media, massively influential and highly
creative. Yeah. So this is such a huge, huge topic and there's so many aspects of our live. I mean,
I just look around my office. I have so many things made from plastic. So what areas of life
do you think, where we currently use plastic exclusively, do you anticipate are going to be
the most difficult to change? Are there some areas that we will always need plastic?
We need to start with the innovation first. So a lot of people said to me, yeah, but Sean,
if you were ill and you went to hospital, you'd be so glad that the plasma bag is made out of
plastic and the amount of plastic that is used in healthcare is phenomenal. We've got many
professors in the NHS here and in the American health system who are saying we need to take
plastic out of healthcare. It is not good for us and it is everywhere. So I'm not sure that even
healthcare is where we will end up still having plastic, but what we need is the innovation.
And if we start with the easy bits, so what is the most ridiculous use of plastic?
As we've discussed already, packaging. 40% of all plastic is used for packaging alone,
used for minutes, chucked in a bin. We don't even want it. We didn't buy it. It wasn't part of the
product. So that would be a very great place to start because if we can crack packaging and then
obviously we should move on to textiles because I think the removal of plastic out of textiles,
35% of all ocean microfibers are from us simply washing our clothes. So that's an imperative.
We have to take it out of clothing and the shift in that as well because of course fast fashion
cannot exist without plastic. So therefore we will have to rethink the entire fashion industry
in a much healthier, fairer, less depletive, less pollutive way. And then the final one
for us will be the built environment because we live in plastic tinder boxes. Every time
we paint a building, we plasticize a building. All right, I have a bunch of questions. So
what did you say about microplastics that the microplastics in the ocean come from us doing
our laundry? Yep. Every time you wash your clothes, then your polyester clothing, you know,
your gap fleece. Because they're not natural fiber. There's a lot of poly something in my clothing.
Yes. Everything sheds. Even natural fibers will shed, but they are not harmful in the same way.
And those of course just go straight into the drain. We do not have filters on washing machines,
kind of bonkers. Why is that not mandated to start with? They flood into the water system,
flood out into the rivers. No filter will ever capture them. They are invisible to the human eye
and then they flood out into the ocean. So it's the equivalent of a family of four every single
week going to the beach and throwing in a plastic bag. That's the amount of microfiber pollution
that we're talking about with washing your clothes. The oceans are really the bottom of the barrel of
our waste dump of this economic system, aren't they? In so many ways, they're invisible and just
the solution to pollution is dilution, but the oceans are not unlimited in size and health
and clarity, you know? I mean, there are really a lot of stuff going into the oceans.
Yeah, it's really terrible. And again, we come back to chemicals. The amount of chemicals that we
pour into the oceans that we think the oceans can handle, it's really shocking.
So let me get back to the other question I had from what you said. So if we change the packaging,
that's, there's two aspects to that. One reason we need so much packaging is because
things get shipped all over the world and there needs to be a packaging. So part of it is maybe
localizing and shortening supply chains. So not as a high percentage of the things that we use
come from around the world and need to be packaged, like maybe more local things and they wouldn't
need all that packaging. And then the second component is what is that packaging made from
and we would like it to be less chemical in origin. Is that correct?
Totally correct. So that's when I say if we fix the plastic crisis, we would directly and indirectly
fix so much else because you're right. Why are we shipping stuff around the world in the way that
we are? We know how carbon intensive the shipping industry is. So is this really necessary? I know
there's a big push at the moment in the US for invented here, manufactured here. We need more
of that. So there are many activists and I know quite a few of them, especially in the environmental
movement who are fundamentally anti corporations, especially large corporations with respect to
the chemical pollution and plastics situation. What are your thoughts on that stance?
We're never going to get away from big business and small brands, little indie brands,
well meaning as they are and many of them are doing the right thing from the get go,
they will not move the dial. We need the big brands to create a different normal for all of us.
But I'm realistic that there are going to be casualties and I think things are starting to
accelerate and the pace of change from industry is not keeping up and there are many that will
step over that line of change and they will reimagine and reinvent themselves in a positive way
and they will become less commoditized, less wasteful, less resource intensive.
They will think of themselves as service industries rather than consumer goods industries.
All of those things are really positive and then there'll be some that don't
and everybody's got a Kodak story and I think we're going to see a lot of casualties going
forward and it's going to happen much, much faster than we ever thought.
What do you, I mean you had a successful career, multiple careers and now you're an advocate for
an important part of our environmental and human health. So in many ways you are an industry person
turned activist. What do you think makes for good activism, meaning activism and behavior that
actually leads to real and lasting change? And do you think the majority of what we
consider activism today is aligned with this? It's a saying that if you're not an activist
today you're part of the problem and I think that is increasingly true and I really love to see
this next generation rise up and the anger that they have, the understandable anger of the cluster
that we are leaving them after how we have raped the planet and done everything that we've done
and given it back a whole load of nothing but rubbish and very toxic chemicals.
So activism I think can take a number of different forms. I'm not, for me personally,
as an entrepreneur you have to be a born optimist and I'm very optimistic about where we are right
now and the ability of mankind to innovate our way out of this and to wake up in time
because otherwise you just couldn't get up in the morning. We have to focus on solutions,
we have to stop talking about the problem, we have to stop carbon counting as if that's actually
going to make any kind of impact but key to it all for me is we've got to stop with guilt and
blame because those are not, they do not help us move forward and if you are working in a big
industry right now you are still a human being and you may not feel great about turning up every
day and then going home and saying to your kids guess what I pumped out another billion bottles
today that are going to exist forever. I'm sure people are stuck in these roles because we're
all in that hamster wheel of consumerism and believing we have to earn a certain amount in
order to buy a certain amount we're all in that terrible wheel of having to earn enough right
now and so people are worried about jobs and so they do a lot of things I think they don't feel
good about so a lot of what we want to do is how do we tap into the human within industry and by
doing that we have to help them not blame them not vilify them in any way you know there is no such
thing as industry it's a construct that it's like money we just invented it it's a body of human
beings so we need to treat people like human beings and we need to really help them to get
onto a better path hold them to account yes but champion them when they do the right thing.
So what thoughts do you have for the viewers and listeners of this program who care about
plastics chemical pollution the environment from your perspective what can people do in
their own lives on on this particular issue? I don't think your power really is for you as a
consumer we don't have time to wait for this ethical consumer to rise up in sufficient volumes
that industry would take note your power as an individual is what you do every day at work
and this is why I love talking to people within the world of business because often they'll say
yeah what can I do Sean you know I've got usually reusable coffee cups and well that's really great
you know and definitely take a take a bag to the store don't take a plastic bag you know all of
those things are important and we have a certain level of personal responsibility and you have to
vote with your wallet and support those who are doing the right thing but ultimately my message to
them is if you care be a squeaky wheel at work go into work because there is not an industry on the
planet that is not dependent on fossil fuels and plastic so go in and see how can you become involved
as as a pro activist within your organization that is not about guilt and blame but is saying
let's get some good people in and let's see what we can achieve because I don't understand how we
have allowed this model to grow where industry at the behest of everything in the name of profit
to the destruction of the environment inequality all the things that we know in the name of profit
can do whatever they need to do and then we have this other thing called charity where industry
out of the goodness of their hearts hive a little bit of profit off to give the charity something
to undo the harm that they've done why is that model why does it exist I don't agree with it
industry business has to be the tool of good charity in my sorry controversial statement
why does charity exist because business has to do the good I think the the reason that it came about
it was because fossil energy and its byproducts which you're working on were so unbelievably
cheap and the world was still not ecologically full that it was just the the path of least resistance
to create this stuff for monetary profits and the externalities are not big enough to matter
and now 2023 ish holy crap the externalities are mattering in a big way and the stuff's not
becoming as cheap and we need to change the model and fast but I think I think the origins are in
this unbelievable cheap subsidy and bounty from the past that we treated as interest but it's really
principle with a big old pollution asterisk tied to it
totally agree we are taking the resources from our children's future we use two planets worth
every single year we sell them today and we call it GDP how can this be right
so obviously you have thought about these issues quite deeply as a as a mother as a human being
as a runner of an NGO not on plastic and pollution per se but what what broader personal advice can
you give to listeners of this program at this time of upheaval anxiety shame guilt worry about the
future we have to have hope we have to have optimism but we have to remember that hope is a
verb hope is an action word it's not a theory and we have to move to action now so whatever you're
doing stop talking about it and start doing something about it that's the whole thing of
being that squeaky wheel but have faith as well that we we live on the most incredible planet
in the universe and I think it's only now when we can see I don't know if you've seen any of the
James Webb telescope images where you see you know the pillars of Hercules and the origins of
stars and it blows my mind when I see some of those images but then equally you look back
and you see this little blue and green marble suspended in space and it makes me value what
we have even more that's what we've got to look after it does amaze me that the the wonder and
the majesty of everything is being recognized at the same time of the tragedy and the horror of what
we're doing and it's this like juxtaposition of both of them at the same time that can be a big
motivator to change and that's that's what I'm trying to do here with with this portal to get
more people to see that and and change how they think and how they act so would you change what
you just said what what additional recommendations would you have for a young human 16 to 25
listening to this show what being at the you know in the first quarter of their life what
what recommendations would you give to a young person do not fall into the trap of consumption
do not yeah I well it'll be pretty simple if I'm really honest thinking off the top of my head
come off social media because we all know that social media is bad for us protect your mental
health above all else get out into nature whenever you can we live in these concrete boxes and it
it's how much more science proof do we need that when we're out in nature then we feel better our
mental health is restored so you've got to get out into nature and just enjoy the world for whatever
time we have whatever time we have let's just relish it and embrace it and appreciate it like we
never have before I have a large diversity of guests in their professional background and what
they're working on but what everything you just said is a very common a common answer so that
gives me kind of a positive feeling that it's robust like that must be true those things get
off of social media get out in nature stop being a mindless consumer I mean I think those things
hold water what do you care most about in the world Sean well it's got to be my family I'm
absolutely blessed with three wonderful brothers a husband we just just celebrated 32 years of
marriage and my two sons who I pinch myself every day that you know can't believe how
what wonderful human beings they are and how how gorgeous they are to us so my family is
really really important to me my friends super important to me and then if I'm really honest
I am a massive advocate of the mini break I think when when we all work as hard as we do
and you Americans are not good at this you need to take more time out even if you're still connected
for me that whole thing of of getting out into nature you know I've just come back from working
from Greece and that's my fourth August now where I thought you know post-COVID I can work anywhere
and so I base myself on a little Greek island with good wi-fi as you know with with pretty good wi-fi
I could do everything I needed to do but for me the joy of being able to just jump into a sparkling
warm sea every morning it's those simple pleasures I think that that's all I don't need fancy jewelry
I don't need any of that stuff I don't need more things in my life I need less things but I definitely
need more wonderful experiences with friends and family that's that's what fuels me if you could
wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decisions what is one thing
you would do to improve human and planetary futures I would probably do exactly what you
said which is make fossil fuels completely unattainable unaffordable because I think they
the catalyst that would happen from that would be really extraordinary because fossil fuels really
are the our road to destruction we have lost our way but you would have to give a deferral on that
because if you did it overnight it would absolutely crash the global system so there would have to be
like a a build-in phase in phase right yeah totally totally but that's that whole thing if you give
industry certainty they will move because they have to move and the stakeholders will allow them to
move and at the moment nobody has certainty so this this is where we just need to say this is
how it's going to happen here's the date it's going to happen exactly as you said and then we have to
come true on that and then I think it will be unbelievable the world that we can create I think
we have no idea that the future if we wanted it the future that we could reimagine for ourselves
into a true reality could be could be better brighter more exciting more optimistic happier
better mental health all of those things living in harmony with nature we just need to want to
get there and right now the majority don't seem to want it I would agree with that this has been
great it's been eye-opening again I've learned some things do you have any closing thoughts on
the topic of plastics chemical pollution and your organization a plastic planet
I'd encourage anybody who's interested to learn more to to join plasticfree.com
pretty easy to find I think talking about the impact of chemicals you know what's amazing to
me Nate is you go to any any dinner table with friends gathering tonight they'll talk about
schools they'll talk about the price of property very very few people will talk about what's
actually happening to the world very few people dare talk about the climate crisis the plastic
crisis a bit of a downer they don't want to be seen to be an eco-activist so I really encourage
people let's start to have the conversations that matter those honest conversations don't feel like
you're some kind of the eco weirdo we've got to start talking about things and we're really not
we're a little bit in Lollaland maybe we need a a sequel to the movie The Graduate which was out
in the 70s and Dustin Hoffman had some advice from his girlfriend's dad say hey I got one word
for you plastics and now in the sequel it's the impact from plastics and we need to change it
an odd comment to end the interview on but I think the conversation but I love it I know how
how many people went into plastics because of that I'm sure they will rue the day just
Dustin Hoffman listening to that thinking I never should have got into plastics
so thank you so much for your time and for your work on this important issue I have these things
every month called reality roundtables where I have former guests three or four of them convened
together to discuss a topic I would love to have you and Shauna Swan and maybe Pete Myers
and Martin Scheringer or others to to convene and have a deeper interdisciplinary conversation
on this if you'd be willing I would love that Nate and thank you so much for just giving this
some airtime because this is this is the dinner table isn't it these are the conversations that
we should all be having so so giving it the airtime we really appreciate because it's much
much needed we got to take it out of the closet and talk about the problem and then we can fix it
thank you Sean to be continued thank you Nate if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of
The Great Simplification please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit
TheGreatSimplification.com for more information on future releases
