Today, I'm happy to welcome back to the podcast Simon Michaud Simon works for the government of Finland
Has been on this podcast a couple times is a good friend of mine and a good human being
Simon returns to unpack the road to Arcadia
Which was one of the four types of people working on a pro social future. What sort of technology? What sort of?
Frameworks to get us from here to there
We send her the conversation around a recent paper by Simon called a resource balanced economy
Which is in contrast to the popular?
circular economy
We talk about supply chains new technology
data collection artificial intelligence and what it's really going to take to get from here to there
For those of you that have followed Simon and my conversations or elsewhere
You know, he is a colorful personality. He has a passion for exploring ideas
And he's become a good friend of mine who I trust and I love to just watch his brain work in real time
And this was a fun conversation. I hope you enjoy
Simon Michaud
Good day, mate. Good day, mate. Who've a who've a mentor and good day, mate. You've a humanta
The only two Finnish words, I know
Well, I know three and I the third one's a nonni
Nani noni
It's a general
You can apply to many different applications
You are wearing a skull and crossbones shirt instead of a Superman shirt today
I hope that is not a ominous for voting for our podcast topic change of warning
What's happening is I'm reading this book that Manda Scott sent me and I'm finding it to be very very very entertaining
So
In in contrast to our usual podcast
You know, my my diurnal cycle has changed
Last year I would have coffee in the morning and then I would wind down in the evening with a glass or two of wine
My new schedule is I have a podcast in the morning and then I have a podcast in the evening
So I'm on a completely different schedule. So this is very early in the morning here to
Get you to talk with me on on Finland time. So
Thank you again for being here
You know, since I stayed with you last summer
I've come to realize
You know, I don't use the word lightly, but you are a polymath and you're kind of a goofy guy
But you're so smart and you have so many
You know aspects of this in in your brain and what really impressed me
And maybe we'll have time to show a little excerpt of this
Is all your little notebooks on the wall that when you are
Waking up in the morning or you're waiting in an airport
You draw these sketches of future things that are in your mind and you boy
You just have a wide breath of that stuff Simon. It's it's impressive. Yeah, so so what's happening there is when I was doing my phd
I was trying to
Trying to connect to my subconscious mind to my conscious mind to do some problem solving
But when you walk down the street and a car drives past you and later that night you have a dream and
That car is in your dream that car will have the same number number plate in your dream
Your mind is a supercomputer and it collects an enormous amount of information
And so if years I've been trying to train myself as I go to sleep
I'll make a point of thinking about something and you wake up in the middle of the night
And you often when you have like fragments of a dream or when you wake up first thing in the morning
First thing you do write it down because these things evaporate very quickly
And they usually like some kind of weird abstract drawing that you then got to explain to yourself later
Yes, so what ends up happening is all my really interesting ideas happen when I'm asleep
Dude is the same with me. I
Tell my students to not have their phone next to them when they go to sleep for
You know addiction and dopamine reasons and I used to do that
But now sometimes when I wake up, I have something called cocoon on my phone and I leave myself
I'm like, oh, of course. I'm gonna remember this good idea in the morning
But then I never do so now I'm I just record in the middle of the night when my eyes are still closed
It's called a hypnagogic state
Which is this time between sleep and wake and I'm the same way
I get my best ideas for franklies or or papers or videos when I'm either
Exercising or half asleep
So
With with that preamble, this is your third appearance on this podcast
in the first one we discussed why
Energy would be a limit to a business as usual future and that minerals and materials
Would be a limit to the proposed
Green renewable future that many people are advocating in the second episode
You outlined four social groups
That are present when talking about and thinking about our future and global
Predicament the old school
Which is just people that want to see a continuation of the existing system
Which is the majority people the Vikings who are those people who would take advantage of a failing system
The realist who are those are people who are getting practical kind of the prepper community
Personal short-term survival needs but not focused on the larger societal health
And then the focus was the fourth category the Arcadians who had the longest time goals and want to build a new society
based on creating better relationships
With communities the environment and ourselves to create personal responsibility
The you also outlined seven categories for interventions when thinking about the needs of such a future society
transport water food
sewage and sanitation
heating
minerals and
Manufacture and the uniting theme of all those seemed that
They would need to be more localized than we currently have and perhaps
designed
uniquely to each
region or or community
So that's we won't spend more time on that summary than that
I recommend people go back and watch those episodes
But do you have anything to add to that or highlight before we dive in to this this episode?
Yeah
The first thing would be the energy source. Where does that energy come from and in what form?
And the only thing so that's the first thing to look at the other thing I would add is things are moving really fast
We've now got multiple black swans around us some are visible and but some are not here, but are highly probable
It's no longer a drill. It's not a theory that can be ignored like our daily lives are being impacted like
So when we talk about the four groups of how we're going to respond those groups are forming now
Those the wheels are falling off now
Yeah
Yeah
No, I I see that and I feel that and I hear that
From people reaching out etc
Okay, so let's first touch on this idea that that many viewers of this podcast are probably familiar with
complex adaptive systems
What is this and why is it important to understand as we move into thinking about
The breakdown of the current arrangements of of a global system
So this is just a
Mathematics that's a re jargon heavy now
We have to get we have to be careful not to get tied up on things that don't necessarily mean
uh, like
We get tied up in the methodology and the methodology becomes the reality
Complex adaptive systems
Simply a way to act to get our arms around the idea that we've got a very complex system
That everything is connected to everything else and a relatively small change can have big impacts
In a ripple context
Right, so it's a concept to help understand about how our society is made up. It's many parts and it's constantly changing
So a world is complex
Right, um, so so how do we understand what changes and why?
And so I I'm using this idea in in conjunction with other things
Right, so so we need many many tools to connect together and this is just one of them
And so you have a new paper out or
Proposal out called a resource-based economy, which we're going to discuss
Uh today. Do you want to um, give any background background or backdrop to that first?
So it's actually I call it the resource balanced economy
It's an evolution of the original venus project idea that the zeitgeist movement made very famous back in 2008
What I've done is I've put a series of energy terms
Um into the basic architectural energies at the very center of everything
So where this came from the work that I've been describing in the last two of our podcasts has been presented now
to a few times uh to you know people across the world and
They all said essentially the same things
um
First they they couldn't they were very shocked
They were shocked by what I presented to them
Uh, but they couldn't refuse it
Uh, the the the logic behind
Each of us are including the size of the buffer uh for the for power generation. They couldn't refute it there and then
Every single group asked me to come up with a counter plan fix it
What do we do now in europe what we talk about extensively is what we call the circular economy
It's like an alternative to the steady state economy
same basic principle, but uh
the circular economy, um
In its current form is thermodynamically imbalanced. It's not going to work
And so that was one of the things I used to to talk about
Anyway, so they've actually asked me to evolve the circular economy in context of my work
And so the paper that's come out
Uh, and there's there is now a link for it. We can put the link in the comments below below. I suppose
uh
Is a is a 50 page document which is a description of how society might do its best to meet these challenges
Where we've got to change our relationship with energy with the environment with technology with energy and each other
Do any of the fix it paths that um, you've described
Result in more
Um energy and material consumption per capita
No, it's all less everything shrinks
Everything shrinks there's going to be an across the board less quantity of all things
But the things that we do do will have to be much higher quality
less quantity more quality
And and how do you find the uh politicians and think tanks and institutional response to that type of statement?
Uh in person they said this is a very interesting holistic approach
Um
Publicly they haven't said anything at all like it doesn't exist
And so they're still attached to the same they've got the same problems as before they're they're attached to the same paradigms
And uh, I I understand that but they're reading it and they're passing it around
Which is which is a better result than what it could have been
So
Let's dive in a little bit deeper to the resource balanced
Economy can you explain what that looks like and how it's different from the currently touted circular economy?
right, so the circular economy
is the basic idea that um
We don't dig up materials from the ground called mining
Uh and process them and throw them away and put turn them into landfill
The circular economy is the idea that we get all their resource needs from recycling around rubbish
So that's thermodynamically imbalanced and it doesn't consider energy terms or
uh
thermal entropy terms
so
I instead of trying to actually fix the circular economy. I completely came up with completely different idea
and so
this entirely new concept, uh
It's it's going to be based on four basic challenges. We haven't any
The energy systems required to be developed will be fundamentally different
See the form the energy takes whether it's oil gas or coal at the moment has dictated what
What industry and what activities has actually evolved around that and what form it takes?
Well, if we go to a new energy system that will change
So as a direct consequence the nature of industrial activity will also change
And will evolve to something completely not seen before
So that's the first challenge. The second challenge is a um, you know, let me just
Turn that off. I'm getting a flashing light
So sorry about that. So the second challenge is a new relationship with the environment reflecting ecological reality
Uh, you know people like bill reeds can actually talk talk at length about that sort of thing
The third challenge is how raw materials are sourced. It has to be very different to what it is now
And whatever it becomes it will have to reflect the quality of what resources are available
The technological capability to extract those resources
And the quantities we're going to extract them
In terms of physical reality limited by physical reality. So we have to be central
And so the fourth challenge is the restructuring of society into an entirely new social contract
And how we perceive the environment and and and energy and resources in each other
We'll have to go to something else and that sounds complicated, but it's actually one relationship
Not many and so we just have to develop
um
How to do it right so we're going to have to meet some challenges. So these are the boundary conditions
So the first boundary conditions is possible
peak crude oil production now that's being supplanted by the gas industry as art burman has shown
Right, but but when we do hit peak oil production, it will have implications
across our society
And so we're probably looking at peak energy consumption per capita
So we've got to decide the human society is part of the environment as opposed to separate to it
A long-term survival is linked to the long-term stability of the biodiversity of life systems. That's not rocket science, but here we are
The planetary environment is in a state of deterioration
And industrial pollution in several forms is overloading the uh planet
There's there's two
Sectors where things have gone wrong. One is our industrialization. The other is food production
So whatever we do next has to fix those two sectors in some form
We're looking at the end of growth-based economics. So that now has to you know phase out something has to take its place
Uh, we're probably looking at the collapse of the ic transport network
Now that's nice. I see internal combustion engine
now at the moment we are actually
um
A lot of our transport systems, whether they be planes trains trucks automobiles
aircraft, it's all it's all petroleum based somehow
I can see a situation where we are going to um
Whether it's not a question running out of resources. It's a question of not being available in the market
Things will just stop appearing in the market and be non-linear
right so that so
We can we can probably power things with non-fossil fuel systems that are in place already
There's there's quite a lot of systems in place, but but the transport network is going to suffer
So the next thing is manufacture goods. There's going to be shortages of all times all kinds
and
Metal shortages are really mineral shortages. So when we're talking about shortages of
available metal for manufacture, it's actually a mining problem
Uh, so there's going to be a shortfall of regional industrial capability
and
So so
These are the sorts of challenges that we have to sort of face
We're also probably looking at things like we've got a phase out petrochemical fertilizers
How are we going to do that?
Plastics are going to have to be phased out and so we're like, hmm
But there are solutions too
For example, anything that can be made out of plastic can also be made out of hemp
Can can we explore that like how do we do that? And so and so
Probably not anything well a lot of things most things most things
um, yeah
This is I mean, I I want to focus on your resource balanced economy paper, which is not the political economy
but when you say
Peak oil will lead to peak energy will lead to peak growth. I agree with those things
and I think um
Peak oil is not about running out of oil or energy. It's an inflection point when
That which powered our incredibly growing economy the last century is no longer available at the scale and price
That would require continued growth
but one of the the casualties of that may also be
the current globalization
and the international trust and the geopolitical
situation so
I I just question in your resource balanced economy how local and regional would that be because
resources particularly energy and minerals and materials are not evenly distributed around the earth
So how much thought have you put into?
supply chains
and regional blocks of
Supply chains to strengthen them making them more resilient
I think you mentioned in your your new paper about something called an industrial
Cluster architecture. Can can you explain how this conceptually would work without getting overly dragged down in the geopolitical constraints?
okay, so
The way I see this happening is is how we would meet a natural emergency
Natural disaster emergency like a hurricane hits to your town now what everyone in that town would actually stop what they were doing
normally
They'd put aside their normal business activities and they would then actually sort of take steps to make sure that their community was actually looked after
So that's the mentality behind this
So as systems that we've actually dependent upon in the past
for one reason or another become unreliable
and they shut down or they
Just stop completely right or they become
Inconsistent they're available every couple of months
Alternatives will be brought to bear and every region is different every
Every region has its own set of challenges and opportunities
And the conversation is going to be something like if we we need x and we used to get x from over there
We've now got a source x some other way
That's either
finding a different kind of technology
Like to substitute the technology itself for example cars are replaced by bicycles
It could be
Finding a different way to manufacture the technology will make cars ourselves out of a different kind of set of materials
Or we come to terms with the idea that we don't need the technology at all to survive
We'll just get by without it
And so we'll have to socially change and maneuver around these things
And that's that's not a very pleasant conversation, but that's that's I think how we're going to go for that
so so the industrial cluster idea
was
This might sound a little strange it was originally thought about is is is how
An organic self-sufficient farm operates applied to industrialization
Now on a farm you've got you you've got horses and cattle that produce poo the poo can be turned into compost the compost goes onto crops
The crops grow
Food some of the crops are fed back to the horses and the cattle
Some of the chickens every output goes to another input
And very little is wasted if anything at all
And you have a lot of dynamically self-feeding systems on the same property
So our industrialization at the moment operates on the function that it is so easy to transport things
That we can transport a manufactured good to the other side of the planet
That's not even finished yet and then bring it back
You know we and and that's quite okay, but this transport is so quick and easy and cheap
What if it wasn't
the the what if what if the act of transporting physical goods all of a sudden has become
more expensive
Okay, how do we how do we fix that?
So what if we had everything?
Let's say we're going to make a washing machine
We're going to have a a site that makes washing machines
So instead of having factories dispersal over the world and one factory in china makes
The electric motor and another factory in china might make the shell and another
Factory in south america might make the bowl that everything sits in and it's all made separately
And it's all brought together and put together
What if we had 10 or 12 different
Process plants that when they were normally spread far apart put very close together
And they're all optimized together to produce a finished product
So raw materials and components go in one end and a washing machine comes out the other
And so it's a cluster
Six or seven or however many industrial process plants that are optimized together
I actually saw this in action. So yeah, yeah
Finish your example and then I have a couple of questions
What on our um professional tour into love vickshaven in germany, I saw the b asf process plant
It's the largest chemical refinery in the world. It had 200 process plants integrated together
Into one big gigantic enormous site
But everything fed everything else. It was the most amazing thing i've ever seen
B asf doesn't make the products they make the products better. Yeah
So that was their advertisement
They're a chemical refining company
Um, and they make a whole series of products
But they had two there was more than 200 separate process plants
Where outputs and inputs were optimized together
That was this site had over get this 100 train stations to move staff and products around
And then and then they're resulting product whatever it is those get exported around the world
That's correct
raw materials go in products come out
so here's um
It is quite early in the morning and i'm still having my coffee. So so bear with me. Um
When I taught my class I did the uh an economic game of showing comparative advantage where
different countries
Were different experts on oranges or chocolates
Um, and you know the guns and banana example that if a country is best at producing
Both guns and bananas
The country that's least bad at one of them should specialize in that thing
And produce all bananas and trade in the international market
And when we we mapped this out the physical oranges and chocolates
By specializing the world had more oranges and chocolates than every country
Doing it on their own. So this is the theory of of the last 30 or 40 years
Where we pursued these policies of import substitution
Where um every country produced what they were specialized in but what I did is then I changed the cost of transportation
Uh, and so I kept I which was the chocolates and I pulled away the chocolates because it was getting more expensive
And then those countries that were in autarky, which had never been trading at all and were poorer
Uh
materially for a while
Then had advantages because they were more resilient
To the period when chocolate in this case oil was more more expensive
So my my question to you is
We have uh based an entire global infrastructure on oil
As the hemoglobin that transports goods around a global transportation structure
Uh remaining cheap and plentiful
And when that starts to get more expensive all all of our focus on profits and efficiency
We have optimized efficiency at a cost of resiliency
So what you're talking about is
In the future having a focus more on resiliency instead of efficiency or said differently
Being efficient with a new much higher cost of transportation
so um, that's a little backdrop to this next question, which is
It sounds like what you're proposing
Is very similar to what i'm working on with u.s government people on something called advance policy
Which is those things that we're going to need to do in the future that are socially and politically unacceptable right now
But we need to have blueprints and break glass plans and constituency and awareness
because by the time
Society really gets the signal that the hurricane is here and we need to everyone
You know drop what they're doing and focus on this
It's going to be too late for many places to to build in this stuff that's got a time lag
So are you recommending with the resource balanced economy?
to have pilots and and a political constituency and awareness
To get this scaled ahead of time or or what are you what are you proposing exactly? So okay
um, I
I'm proposing a few things. So first of all it
I came to conclusion it is futile to predict the future and it's futile to control the world
Even if you could predict the future
and so this is um
I'm using some ideas out of biomimicry
Or i'm trying to look at the natural world
How does the natural world solve problems?
And how do they meet a complex problem? And so
For example, let's take a forest or a jungle
And let's say the amazon jungle and the amazon jungle is made up of a number of species
Amazing amazing array of species that some are more dominant than the others
But there are still rare examples of unusual species. There's a genetic library
so when
when that
Jungle has an environmental change like say a drought a big drought hits the area
The species that were dominant to the old conditions start to die off
And but some are in the jungle in the genetic code. There's another species that that can thrive in the new conditions
They then take over
So so at the end of the process the jungle now has a different set of species that are dominant
You still have the biodiversity, but they're in different proportions
Right, but the jungle is still intact and it's stable because the life that's in it keeps it stable
So what i'm proposing to transfer that to human society and our industrialization. This is the biodiversity of ideas
Or the diversity of ideas
Sorry, where what i'm proposing is
First to understand the nature of what's happening to us then try and get out the idea that that
Where can we put our efforts where they will be rewarded or where that's where something will actually progress
and
If we try and sort of flog ourselves to try and keep the existing system going
It'll work for a bit, but we'll exhaust ourselves and we'll waste our time and we'll you know, we'll fail in in many respects
And so then it's to understand
Well, what could we do that might help?
You know work on the things that will work
Don't worry so much about the things that won't work and understand that
You know some some of these systems are going to fragment apart
So at some level yet you were saying yeah
Well, this this builds on on something i intended on asking you that a lot of people
um
In social media and analysis are attempting to build out an entirely new system
But we're part of a dynamic system that has a metabolism and a momentum
So given the constantly changing
Biodiversity of our economic jungle as you put it
and the unpredictable nature of global climate and
geopolitics and energy and human behavior, perhaps it's better to think about
toolkits and systems that are highly adaptable to
these constantly
Changing conditions. What are your thoughts on that and how would someone listening to this?
In a position of authority to impact these things start to approach this
so
I talked to a few people now who are in positions of authority and I find
All of them have been trapped by a paradigm. They have a set of ideas a set toolkit
And all they've got is a hammer. So every problem's got to look like a nail from their perspective
What
Is happening to them is their normal methods of operation the hammer and the nail for that matter
Are changing into something else they don't recognize
They all think that it's a temporary thing
It'll get back to normal what they don't realize this is this is the new normal and we're about to evolve into something else
What i'm trying to show here is is develop a series of tools a series of
mechanisms that we could work with
that might work in this environment
where
People in positions of responsibility when they realize they're they're they're they're really sort of rolling the rock uphill
And they're just not getting anywhere
That well if they were to try some different things, what would those different things be?
And so i'm getting that out to as many people as possible
Where I've got some ideas
They are a starting point and those ideas are to be developed by everyone else. They're a starting point
They're not the solution
And so when we get the when we hit like a roadblock can we get around that roadblock somehow?
can we actually realize
What is our situation awareness really telling us?
Well the roadblock is is gdp and profits as our cultural goal and the political economy organized around that and
So if you propose something that's counter to that
It may make sense to the analysts and engineers that you're talking to but there's a glass ceiling
In in the political implementation of it. Yes, so yes, that's correct
But I'd have a parallel suggestion to what they're normally doing
How do you maintain continuity of governance to make sure the needs of society are met?
So we're not trying to be the most economic or the most efficient or effective
We're not trying to outperform the free market
Right as an emergency safety net
A series of thinking and ideas like blueprints break class
our blueprints
But not just for people in position and responsibility, but for society at large
At the moment we do things this way
And when things get difficult, well there are alternatives. We don't have to lose hope
So so you're starting
This is on the fringes of the conversation of triage
prioritization and rationing
But where you're coming from is
Not only is the way we organize our industrial production infrastructure important
But what we are producing is just as important if not more so very much
And so right now we we produce things for user preference and user optimization often short-term single use
Pretty much never with recyclability and integrated
Chains in mind. So how would
Someone in government listening to this program
Begin to balance design principles with what we consume. Will it mean that some products?
Currently on the shelves that we currently use and expect just won't be made anymore
That is correct. Um the way I have been able to do this is
The students in the university that I'm working next to I gave them a challenge. This is a mobile phone
This this mobile phone
It's got lots of toys in it and lots of exotic metals in it that frankly. I don't need or use
right
So if I challenge them to make a communication network
Where the metrics were I had to be able to make a phone call
And send an sms text from one end of the finland to the other
Right and and all the infrastructure between but
They had to build and manufacture everything
locally
And all resources had to be sourced within a radius of 1000 kilometers
How are they actually what are the steps they would go through that and what they came out with is they'd use 3d printing
To to make the phone the phone will be made out of much simpler materials and it looks like the old-fashioned Nokia
A very very simplified version of what we have now
Like for example
Much simpler materials like like what can you share at the moment? We have say these very complex alloys that that take a lot of
energy and
you know
thermodynamic
Very very complex systems
Highly pure materials that take a lot to mine and refine and they're blended together in these exotic alloys that they're really hard to recycle once they're done
Yeah, and and when they just not needed
Like we've we've you know, we've just really built
And I understand this because of the logic of the superorganism. We've just really built this giant
Waste producing rhub goldberg machine as a global economy that gives us dopamine spurts every day
It is totally
Nonsensical from a resource energy environmental standpoint. Yeah, absolutely. Oh for example back to the phone
We we need gallium a metal called gallium. Why do we need gallium? Oh, it makes the
Screen on the mobile phone. That's one of the things they want to recycle. They want to rip the screen off and recycle it gallium
Hang on
Do you need
A screen on the mobile phone?
No
No, you don't so if you don't need that. Do you need the gallium?
Oh, right
Why don't you need a screen?
you could have a
liquid crystal screen like the old calculators that we used to have when we were in school and all you need to do is a text
Right, you don't need three or four cameras and a high resolution color screen
And all the things with that we'd like to say we do but actually we don't
Right, we tell ourselves
Some some amazing. Yeah, the little white lies we tell ourselves and some of them are whoppers
Right
Yeah, right and so so if we were to actually make something simpler if you were to refine copper and maybe brass, you know, you
simple alloys that that
The way metallurgy was say back in the 1920s
There were some alloys they weren't that complicated
And as such they can be extracted apart
Much more easily so if we were to design something that when we are finished with it
It can be broken apart and recycled into something new
It's okay
But that has no recycling solution. That's easy and most of the time it just gets thrown into the furnace
And all these rare earth elements are just kisked by
Why it looks cool
The dopamine hit. Wow. Look at the expression on my face. Yeah, that is
How our economics is driven at the moment. It's not driven by need
Our assist economic systems have get to the point where what we do
What we need and what we want are all the same thing
And at the moment they're really not
And and how did those
students professor michaud
respond to these tasks and and and you know designing a new phone that can text within
Finland
So the way I do it is you get them into a room with big whiteboard
And you say all right everyone send off your phones. You're now looking at me. You're not looking at your phone
And you create a situation where we have a discussion. Everyone's got a whiteboard marker
And you have like an idea
brainstorming session
And you say here is your task you write it up on the board
How would you do it? They have like a like what are the what are the bits that we need?
And they have a discussion back and forth
They are doing it in terms of
They've been given a job to do
It hasn't occurred to them that
This is an emergency thing that they have to fix
They think it's just like an assignment or a prac and they think it's all a bit cool and
And and and everything and and they tend to go for it
The the the people who are the most useful who I talk to are the postgraduate students
The masters and phds
Everyone else is either in the rat race and set to a paradigm to to work to
Or they're trying to get to the rat race
So in addition to energy and minerals
Young people are also a critical resource for this Arcadian transition. Yes, that's true
But they're like electricity. It can it can be used effectively and it can be used poorly
They have to be challenged and guided
And and they have to understand what's really happening
I like talking to post grads because they're the ones that in 10 years time
Who will be in charge of things?
And it's their choices that which will make get this get get us through this or not
Yeah, I love that so younger than that there's it's still important to understand the world and how all this fits together
But you find postgraduate age are when they're able to apply this
In a in a new direction and and develop new things. Yeah, they also tend to be less tolerant of political expediency
You know, the things that we put up with as adults that we put our world. That's just necessary
They run right over the top of that and they won't tolerate it
and so that's that they tend to be very green and very raw and
often not attached to the way the world works in reality
But they don't they're not that interested in bullshit compromise
So I find them to be useful
So since our last podcast
there's been a
lot of news and new releases
On the concept of artificial intelligence chat gpt4 is out chat gpt5 is being trained up
Um, some global organizations have suggested that expanding AI and data collection
To closely monitor our resource use even at the individual level
Um, using, you know, smart monitoring, etc. What are your thoughts on this and is this sort of
smart consumption
part of the future that you envision or or is that uh, dangerous
Uh, there are several answers to that
First of all
The people who are developing this technology at the moment
Seem to be developing it to the benefit of a very small number of people
Where the rest of us get hung out to dry
Now what I mean by that is when we're actually sort of mapping resource. Yes, we want to manage resource
We want to understand what we're doing and yes, this would be if it was used effectively
AI and machine learning would be the best technology to do that
But but can it be trusted and can the people who are developed being trusted?
And the reason I go to that is I hear a lot about for example, uh, the fourth industrial revolution
And where they actually want to merge
Uh us biologically with surveillance state
They want at the end of a button
What each individual person is doing inside their home
They want like they're smart tv to to surveil they want the refrigerator to monitor what's in the refrigerator. That's not necessary
If we're after about resources
All you need to do is actually work out what gets consumed at the local shopping mall
You don't need to surveil the individual and you don't need to surveil the individual in the home
and you don't need to have a merging of humanity is merging with technology and
Surveillance at a biological level and what's really needed is a society level. We've got to merge with the environment
So what i'm getting at here is the system that's been put in place over the last couple of years
I think is guided to the purpose of how does a small number of people keep a large number of people in place to consume less
And we're we're heading towards
Uh, I like to say that the movie a lesium
Where the rich people are off somewhere else and they've got all the technology and wealth in the world
Everyone else is starving and scratching around for resources
If we were to get control of the technosphere if we were to control it, that's you know
Society at large not like a small number us
And technology genuinely became a tool
Then yes, it would be very useful in mapping the resources
So we've got to evolve as a society to the point where we learn to control the technosphere
not the other way around
And we've got to socially evolve where
We the people are genuinely a democracy as opposed to being herded into one corner by a small number of people
I know that's not your area of expertise though
You may have your morning drawings when you wake up on that
But do you have any speculation on how we might democratize the technosphere and move towards that direction rather than a lesium state?
Yeah, I don't know the answers to a lot of these questions
Um, I I can sort of feel it. It is sort of coming
I think if we actually sort of treat it like all the other sustainability problems where we map the actual problem out
and see where the nodes and bottlenecks are
And then go to those nodes and bottlenecks and we either control those but not bottlenecks. We shut them down
Right, so
I think the invention of AI
Uh, is I can't see it getting to the point where it can mimic human behavior in terms of
lateral thinking of moral judgments
I don't think it's going to be able to do that
But the other things it can do and especially if it becomes a legal enforcement tool
Um, we are we are going to create a very serious problem for ourselves
And I think the solution here is more people need to understand it
Understand what they're looking and they need to do it quickly
Uh, how that is or what is it's not my expertise
I
Might either
I'm hella worried about it because I think it's going to
Accentuate a lot of the other risks
that that we face
But I do like the art. Uh, that's so beautiful. So, um, you foresee then simon that overall
a new system
Is almost for sure going to require a smaller material footprint. Yeah
So even if lots of
policy people government leaders agreed with you
We are still as I mentioned earlier enthralled to a market system which requires growth to maintain
How can a country or even a county or a city
start
Right now after watching this podcast
On what you are proposing
In the face of an uber focus and a cultural consensus trance
on growth and markets
So first it starts out with the energy system. What energy systems do you have to work with?
If you're going to knock out oil gas and coal
What systems are left?
And what's this? Well, first of all, are you really talking about knocking out oil gas and coal or just dealing with less?
So we will need oil gas and coal
Because we haven't actually done any work at all or we've done very little of the work needed
And so we'll need those fossil fuels to actually construct the next industrial era or whatever that is
Uh, but when we do we have to be very aware that when we're using that energy it has to be for a strategic purpose
Whereas at the moment there is no thoughts given to how we use energy or why or where
And so now the focus is the long-term focus is what new non fossil fuel systems are being dropped in place?
And that is the starting seed for everything industrial
And so it starts with the energy then it goes to the industrial and then it goes to the human population
We'll have to rearrange around that and then food production will have to go to the population
But as you and I know energy is the master resource and it's not evenly distributed
So if if people in countries or counties are listening to this
Unless there's some sort of global government
Energy underpins everything else. So that if if you don't like I live in wisconsin
There's no coal oil or gas
In our state. So we import it from other states
The inference then is decentralized energy which gets back to renewables
And on your previous your first podcast with me
You said we don't have the the minerals and materials for the batteries and the backup and everything else
So if energy is the the precursor
How do we think about that or how do people listening to this think about it?
So all existing systems are not good enough that they won't be good enough to actually
Keep the system going as it is. So first of all, we have to understand that we're moving into a low energy future
That's actually going to be quite a bit lower than what we thought
Second we need a breakthrough on one of the energy systems in front of us at the moment has to give us a breakthrough
Uh, if we're to get out of this
What are the energy systems? Like what are the options there? Okay, so
If we can actually scale back what we do and how much we do like much of what we do in terms of manufacturers just not necessary
Like the gallium on the screens for example and also the quantity so if we can scale back
Uh, what we need when we're not so wasteful and we're not but I'm so materialistic
That changes the rules on how much we need which means we can go to a smaller system
Then if we also start thinking instead of having like a massive power plant in the center
Uh, like like a big wind turbine that's 800 meters tall
Right, we're not going to be able to manufacture a lot of those
But what if we manufactured lots of small ones?
Out of you know bits that you'd find in your average car
I pull the alternator out of a car and attach it to a couple of blades and you you
Uh, and you can innovate your way out to actually make a small system and then have our energy needs come off a small system
So this is the kind of problem solving so so how much is that practical that that's another conversation
You've also got to be very clear about what we're harvesting from the environment to do that
One of the things i'm looking at is an evolution of the nuclear fuel cycle the existing nuclear fuel cycle
Uh, cannot help us. It cannot expand fast enough. It's too complex and it's too dependent on fossil fuels
so
Then you've got the alternative fuel thorium
Now thorium conventionally
um, it's very promising because it
Burnt that the fuel that comes out the other and there's much less off
Right, so so conventional uranium for example the the fuel rods that come out are still you know
95 percent of the mass that you put in is still there. It's very radioactive
Whereas thorium only you know three or four or four or five percent of the mass
Of what you put in is left and unburnt
And and you only have to keep it for 300 years or so not 10 000 or whatever it is
For the conventional nuclear fuel cycle the problem with thorium
is it's very impractical at the front end
You've got to put the fuel into the reactor convert the thorium to uranium 233
You think that i take it out of the reactor to actually extract some of the
Uh, uh things that are not helpful like you know, there are certain elements that went in with the fuel rod
So you've got to clean it and then you put the clean fuel back into the reactor for a second go
Then you can generate electricity. It's very complicated. It's a pain in the ass people so we prefer
Uranium
I'm now looking at an evolution of the thorium
fuel cycle called thorium molten salts
Now the molten salts
Can be fuel can be made at a like a mineral processing plant on a mine site
And it is mildly radioactive, but as it some basic steps can contain it
You put the molten salt in the reactor
You don't have to take it out
And you and you consume it up and then material is about like four or five percent
Is left over at the end that is unburned fuel and that can be then removed
If that was possible
Right, then we now have a a system that is actually useful to us
How much thorium is there
About four or five times what there is in terms of uranium
The other problem is how do you get that thorium?
Usually it's in monazite sand
And it's a monazite
It's a like a mineral sand that comes out of a granite pigmentite granite. So uh, and you've got a problem with um
Usually when you're getting like rare earths
Thorium is a waste product and it's it's very hard to
get hold chemically
I'm working with a group that's actually doing that
With a um, we're using a form of plasma to actually adjust the texture
Of the monazite, which means it can be extracted hydrometallurgy much easier
Which means we can get rare earths, but also the thorium as well without sending the stuff to china
The whole value chain gets rearranged. So if we can actually make
thorium fuel at any
You know monazite deposit
But there's this one and there's there's quite a few in america
Uh, and it's worthless at the moment
But if we can actually make thorium fuel
And a mine site in america and and then you can actually say a thorium reactor only needs
A very small amount of material for it to run because it uses almost all of that material
And the waste product that comes out the other side is much easier to deal with
That is a technology that could change the architecture of everything else
Well, here's the problem I have with that
Is if that is true and it works out the way that you said it
It's not going to be used in this
Smaller arcadian economy. It will be used to power the super organism and gdp and everything else
So the other evolution that might be possible
Is if it was possible to make what's called a small modular reactor
They could fit which are in the news and very like um
The us do e is is very positive on on the smr's right now
Right. So so if that's possible then we can actually make small units of it and we can break the value chain up
What the problem I see with all this is we need this to be operating now
We can't wait five to ten years to get our act together on that because there's
Things are going to sort of fall apart in the meantime
So it's not going to save us from for meeting these problems, but it's more a long term goal to try and
establish
So so conceptually um
In our first podcast one of your critiques on
conventional nuclear power is
It's expensive and it takes a long time to build
And we need a lot of
Plants to to replace
But what about what about thorium? Could it be done much quicker in theory?
If you could if the small modular reactor is possible then you could make them quicker
Uh, there's less power that comes out of thorium than what comes out of uranium
You know as a system. So it won't be as effective
So what you've got is much less electricity being generated
But we've got some electricity being generated
And so if you have a system that contracts in size
And it contracts around what energy plants that we have and you have a much much smaller
industrial system coming out
Um, then it comes down to what do we use that power for?
So in the arcade in blueprint
idea if we could have
Excuse me power systems that are
small and targeted to a specific outcome
Right where instead of having ubiquitous technology everywhere like we have at the moment
We have a combination of
High-tech examples are around a very small the quality outcome and the rest of the time
We are more attached to the
The practical elements where human beings do more of their own work
And we just go without we go less like more of us to be involved in our own food production
More of us will be constructing our own furniture and we'll be doing it instead of going down the shop to buy new materials
We'll try and reuse materials
That's that sort of thing. So it's a combination of
Everything put together and you've got a hybrid society that the so far doesn't exist
Well building on that you're a big proponent. We're going to need a new social contract or a different social contract that unites people
What do you see being held in such a social contract and
Just speculate on how we might get from here to there
So at the moment, we are completely isolated
from
We we are we are completely isolated
Uh, uh from the consequences of our actions
so
How much sense says this we're isolated from the consequences of our actions in our choices
Like when we go down the shop to buy something we buy it. We don't care where it's come from
We use it without a second thought and the only thing the only metric to use it was what it cost us
And then we throw it away and when it goes in the bin we have no idea where it actually
goes
Right. So how we see
Both energy and materials and and and the environment all of that has to go
So we're both the bottleneck and the solution
well, a lot of people are trying to um
Have apps on their phone that shows how many calories they eat
And others are showing how much carbon
Is in this product and now we're getting ones that show us how much energy is in this product
So what you're saying is we need to be a lot more connected with the information of
How and what we consume as a first step as a first step, but then we've got to show up
We've got to put our face in the fight
Yeah, you can't just have this nice app on the phone. Oh, yeah, that's nice and and pretend you're doing something about it
You have to actually change your behavior in after you change how you see things
We've got to collectively understand in a situation awareness. What's happening to us and the fact that the actions of the individual
In cooperation with everyone else is actually the path through this
And and that's where we're going to need
Arcadians as opposed to vikings and and old school, right? That's right
And and and if the Arcadians couldn't be bothered coming to work
Right, then we then we stick with the prepper community and that's as far as we go
Which would still be better than vikings and old school, but Arcadians is the
Is the high bar there is a map out of this
I became very interested in the venus project
When I saw you know a couple of years ago
Jack fresco. Yeah, jack fresco
It would have been an amazing man to work with
It presented as a you know
pure cornucopia
Like high-tech solutions and it wasn't really tethered to reality
But the genius of the venus project is not really discussed that discussed and presented
It's the basic premise
If we were to truly understand what human society actually needed to attend to the needs of all the members of that society
And we were to science the shit out of this. What would that look like?
Right, so if we were to actually bring everything that we had to bear in terms of our science understanding
I used to live in a city called lige in europe. It was 1500 years old
It had layer upon layer. He had roman ruins. He had medieval new cathedrals
And everything sort of worked, but it was it was awkward as hell to get around
And then you get to go to Helsinki and everything just works
And the difference is Helsinki in 1990 when they got their independence
The Finnish government got together a whole lot of town planners and academics together to have a discussion
Of how they could develop their cities
And they developed a plan and then they went and did it
and that so and the outcome
Is Helsinki is actually a city that's actually very well planned and everything seems to work quite well
So this is the basic premise behind the venus project
My thinking now is what would happen is if the venus project met the prepper community
Now the prepper community is working on the assumption that they will get no help
from others
There will be in a small community and the only thing that happened in that community is what they themselves make
Right, so but what would happen if there was a network of communities and science and technology
Was able to help if we change that science and technology to meet the limitations of low energy
Very short supply chains and you have to work with what you've got
If we were to science the shit out of that and then look at the needs of society
What would that look like?
That's what my thinking is at the moment
There's ever a movie uh based on you and your work. I would like matt daemon to
act as salmon michel
So um
Do you have uh any further
Clarifications or comments on your new uh paper called a resource balanced economy that that you're sharing or is this
A good enough teaser for for what you're proposing. There's always more always
What I would say is that document has been written to to talk to people in the existing system
There are certain trojan horses in that document. They're they're hidden in the text call them easter eggs if you like
That imply some of the very serious problems that we are facing
But we are not able to talk about out loud yet
And for example when I talk about food we have to produce our own food. We have to phase out petrochemical fertilizers
So we have to do it differently and if we can't transport things very far
Then a population center with whatever work it has to do has to be local
But our food production has to be local as well
So now we're talking about the carrying capacity
of the local environment
And how do we manage that with regard to the number of people that are there now
So what you're saying what i'm saying is this document is the polite
starting uh or durv
To the conversation which could get quite serious. I am highly confident you will again be a repeat guest on this podcast
Do you have any ideas of a topic that you are passionate about and would like to take a deep dive on another future conversation?
So one of the things I keep coming across is we're very tribal
and especially in the
In this this space
We're either the world is full of swings and roundabouts and roses and rainbows and everything's going to be fine
That's one tribe another tribe is we are doomed
As and we're done. We're finished. That's it. We slash your wrist now
Right and the you're not allowed to be in between
What and you're either in a group that's actually looking at technology that's useful
Or you're in a group that says none of that can exist anymore
What if we were to actually navigate and problem solve our way through this by looking at unorthodox ideas?
And how they might change the architecture of the system we're looking at which would change put us possible
I
Love it. Yeah, and so there's a whole series a list of technologies
Yeah, and there's there's simple things like hemp and bamboo could change things
And if we've got 3d printing going where you're actually making the feedstock for the 3d printer locally
That changes things
So i'm having a podcast next month with a woman from lebanon lebanon has 50 unemployment and a thousand percent
population
And she's looking at creating packaging for local
Transportation of goods and stuff using local ingredients like potatoes and algae and and
This is the sort of of of thinking so have you have you actually briefly
Looked into bamboo and and and such as an hemp very briefly. So like hemp's a fiber
Talking about industrial hemp not the stuff you smoke
Um, so you can make hemp crete has building material like a geopolymer. You can make it as a fiber
like for textiles and
You can make plastics out of
I'm just spitballing here, but if we did use industrial hemp
We grew it and it grows a lot in one year because we have ditch weed
Around where I live and it grows, you know 10 feet tall
And then you chop it down and turn it into concrete. I would imagine uh, or hemp crete
I would imagine that's a much better co2
Full cycle because you're
You're drawing in you're drawing down co2 as the hemp plant grows and then you're putting it into something in a building
It changes it changes the rules for all sorts of things
Um, also if you have a value chain that stretches over a large portion of the country
You know good Portland cement and you've got gravel and you've got the this and you've got the that and
If you were able to make everything with a relatively simple technology package
That is all local
Right and and you're actually talking about something that is
by biomass to start with
And to turn it from biomass into something useful is relatively low key. Yes, it changes the architecture
that there's a whole lot of these things that we could do
and you know
When we're faced with a difficult situation where if we don't come up with something, we're all dead
Don't you think we're actually going to consider the unorthodox ideas when the orthodox ideas fall over
Well, I mean that's what these podcasts are for is to act as an overton window for some of the people listening to apply
these ideas and have their own
Hypnagogic states when they're sleeping and drop an idea that they take to their office and and their manager or their
President or whatever
I get people talking to me about this and when I try and propose solutions
The amount of whinging that I hear about this sort of stuff is that they want the usual
Uh, the the usual track where everything, um
This won't work or that won't work or or we should talk about something else and and my message to those people has become as follows
You either come along with me with my ideas and try them
Or you lead and come up with your own ideas or get out of my flight path
Because these people will waste my time and there are people I can be working with instead
Yeah, I I
I hear you on that and it applies to my my job as well. Um, that's well stated. So, um
Lastly my friend, um, not to put you on the spot, but earlier this week
You woke up and did a drawing and you shared it with me and said Nate
This is what I do when I wake up in the morning
I have it on my screen in front of me and I could share it with the audience
Can you just describe if you remember what it was it was something about ocean salinization and solar?
Can you give a one minute summary of what you were thinking when you woke up that day?
So the problem is as follows. I'm helping a colleague of mine
Develop an area on the coastline of Peru
This coastline is desert it they only get rainfall like five six days a year. It's very very dry
There are no living things there. It is bare earth
And he wants to start a settlement there and he said look there's already drinking water shortages
problems and this food shortages coming
And there's a big drought coming as well
In progress
What do I do right? So I came up with this idea where
first
When at gtk the geologic survey I work with one of the jobs we do is to go into areas that have been sterilized
by industrial agriculture
And arable land has been sterilized to dirt and cannot support life anymore
How do we fix that?
right, so first you fix the mineral balance then you've got to add your
Your organic content to it
But before all that happens we need water
And so after understanding the watershed of the area, you know the the hydrological watershed so you can sort of work out
where this might work
I had this idea where
If they've got sun so much at the time
Can we use that?
So I came up with the idea we pump water from the sea uphill. It's like a gently sloping land
That's average height is 80 meters above sea level
Put it into a dam at the top of the hill
And evaporate the water off that when I was a scout as a boy
When in Australia when we are actually short of water
What they said was dig a hole in the hole you put in like some tree leaves
And and plants you put a plastic cover over the top of that and a rock in the center and under the rock you put a cup
Water is evaporates out of the leaves condensates on the plastic rolls down and then drops into the cup
You know with like about a quarter of a cup of water. It's not much but you can drink it
same principle you have a big reservoir of
Seawater and you have glass panes in an inverted v-shape
The water evaporates off that condensers on the on the glass
Runs down to the center into a trough the trough then collects into a water tank of potable water
To get to that point all we are doing is pumping water up the hill
Which is essentially a pool pump a domestic pool pump
Put a couple of solar panels over that and a very small battery
And they can run indefinitely like for a couple of hours a day
collect that water
And then you can irrigate it out to parts that we're going to convert into arable land
And so to do that because you've got evaporations a problem
There's lots of desert reclamation technologies the israelis have developed and I think the chinese are doing it too as well now
Where you then have that water drain with gravity in pipes under the ground so it's not going to evaporate
Into the area where we want it and then you perforate that pipe
And then you have you know in the pipe you have gravel so it doesn't silt up
And you are drip feeding continuously
water potable water into specific areas before it can evaporate
You evaporate the water during the day and you irrigate during the night. Okay, so now we have water where we need it
Then you go into the area and you do a series of soil tests to work at what minerals need to be
Present at what minerals that you be taken away
Balance that minerals for that area
There is also you can then add I need to add organic content
and so there was a
A nice case study. I like to use where
A couple of I think was anthropologists went out to a desert part of the amazon jungle that had been forested out
and was completely barren and they did some tests and they worked out what they needed to do and they got several hundred tons
of
Rined from oranges from a fruit juice factory and they just dumped it on the ground and they just left it
They walked away and I think it's five or six years. They came back
And the whole area had reforested
Right so the organic stuff has to break down and the soil food web has to reestablish itself
And so we're talking about, you know, what pH do we need and what organic matter do we need?
So they're the building blocks
We then with permission of the Peruvian government go into the amazon jungle and get some of the soil
From the amazon jungle in a small amount and we put it into one of these areas
And the bacteria in that soil will start the food web again
And so now the food web's established. It's been irrigated regularly
We've got a source of water the building blocks building blocks of soil food. We were in place
And then in a subsistence way where you're below the carrying capacity of that soil food web
You can start to grow certain crops that are suitable for the region
I had two thoughts while you were saying that
three one
that's awesome
two
Picturing you as a boy scout when you were young I can picture the boy scout hat with a superman shirt
It went in eight-year-old simon
and and thirdly
I I don't think either of us could manage this
But there would be worse things to do than for me to do 10 minute podcasts with you every morning
Based on whatever you drew that morning when you woke up. Yeah, some looks a little strange
Some of you might be a little worried about
But sure
Thank you so much my friend to be continued. Um, you are a
A global treasure and I really hope that
There are more
Arcadians to be that are influenced by by your work and your conversation and your your human spirit
So as are you
You might not know this but you've also got a following to be continued my friend
Thanks Simon
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
Please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform
And visit the great simplification.com for more information on future releases
