We need to understand the principles of an ecological civilization, giving as much attention to the
well-being of our ecosystems as we give to our own well-being.
Joining me today is Sir David King, who is an emeritus professor of chemistry
at the University of Cambridge in England. He's also the chair of the Climate Crisis Advisory
Group and the founder of the Center for Climate Repair at Cambridge. Previously, Sir David King
was the chief science advisor to the British government, as well as the foreign secretary's
special representative on climate change. On this channel, we're trying to integrate and explain how
all the parts and processes fit together of the human predicament we had in the past month alone.
Sean Sutherland talking about plastics, Robert Sapolsky talking about brain and behavior,
Luke Gromen talking about interest rates, peak-cheap oil currencies and financial risks,
and last week Chuck Watson talking about geopolitics and the risk for nuclear war.
A lot of people are hyper-focused right now on the warming earth and the impact of global heating
on the oceans and the biosphere. A lot of people still are not, and we are becoming increasingly
compartmentalized and tribal in the things that we care about. It all fits together. This was a
deep dive with a physical scientist who's been working on climate his entire life
and is deeply ensconced in political circles around the world and knows what's going on.
What a wonderful man, Sir David King, is articulate, warm, and he deeply cares about
our biosphere in the future. I hope you enjoy this conversation with Sir David King.
Good afternoon, Sir, and in this case I really mean it. Welcome to the program.
Good afternoon, and it's very good to be on the program.
So you can see in the globe behind me I have both South Africa and the UK on screen in your honor.
We have a lot to discuss, but let me start with this. You are a chemist, a scientist,
and working on the important issue of climate change with your organization and in your career.
Let me ask you this. When did you personally first learn about the climate system dynamics,
and when did you first get personally really concerned about the human aggregate impact
on the biosphere from the metabolism of our CO2 burning?
That's a relatively easy one because I'm a physical chemist, so between chemistry and physics,
and I got the chair of physical chemistry in Cambridge in 1988, and that was when I was exposed
to the atmospheric scientists here who were world leading, particularly on the destruction
of the ozone layer by CFCs. And that then led me into discussions with this wonderful group here
about climate change and the realities of the science underlying what we understood about
climate change. So I would say 1988 is the date when I began, and I would say about the same time
I began to get very worried about it, and had discussions, for example, with somebody who's
now Lord John Brown, and John was the CEO of BP, and he had a house here in Cambridge,
and we used to have many, many discussions. And at first John said to me, David, I'm not convinced,
the jury's still out, and then I would say about the year 2000, John was saying to me,
I get it, climate change is real. And that's when BP changed its logo from meaning British
petroleum to meaning beyond petroleum. And so 1988 was 35 years ago. So if you were concerned then
personally, psychologically, then this is a bit like watching an unfolding tragedy,
then knowing what you know. It's very much like watching an unfolding tragedy, because at first
when we were discussing this issue, it seemed to all of us that we had time to manage the problem.
We had that 1992 meeting in Rio, which was very strongly supported by the American government,
by governments around the world. And I said the American government, because frankly,
if the American president had led the way from that point on, on climate change, we wouldn't
be where we are today. And I have said 10 years ago, I said we've got 10 years to get everything
in place, to see that we can still manage the challenge. Five years ago, I said there's five
left. Well, you can see where we are now. Time isn't on our side, and we are having to adapt
our strategy to meet the very real challenge that we have. So I know you're working on
adaptations and technological strategies, and we're going to get to that. But let me first take
a step back. I don't know how much you know about this podcast and my work, but I'm trying to paint
a systems picture of how everything fits together. And climate is, in my opinion, a symptom of a
larger dysfunction of a social species that found a huge amount of fossil sunlight and is throwing
a party for the last 150 years. But that involves economics, money, debt, geopolitics, human
behavior, all these things. And those of you who are scientists deep in the climate space,
obviously know and feel the urgency of the situation. But many other people are focused on
poverty, or debt overshoot, or many, many other issues. And I'm trying to convene people at the
same table. So a lot of my listeners listen to this because of energy depletion and finance and such.
So for now, David, could you assume that I have no background at all in this field, but I'm just a
pro-social civic-minded human alive today at this amazing and perilous time. Can you give me an
elevator pitch on why climate change is happening and what it implies?
Yes, but first of all, Nick, can I just say I know what you're doing and I very strongly support
your whole program. So we're on the same page, I think. So then in answer to your question,
the science of climate change was really developed after Fourier, the great French mathematician,
back in 1824, published a paper in which he said, we know how much energy is coming to the earth from
the sun. And we now know that a hot body radiates heat outwards at a rate which is equivalent to the
fourth power of the temperature of that body. So as the body heats up, the radiation increases
enormously at fourth power. That's a very high power. And so he said, therefore, we should be able
to calculate the temperature that serves the earth very accurately. And he said about calculating.
And interestingly, first of all, he found a number which was way out minus 30 degrees centigrade.
I'm going to talk in centigrade minus 30 degrees centigrade. And what that meant was that he realized
he had not included the function of the atmosphere in capturing radiated heat from the hot surface of
the earth. So in other words, his model was to take a cold earth, radiate it with sunlight,
and then as it heats up, it radiates heat out equal to the amount of sunlight coming
in to heat up the earth. So he then includes what we would call a Fourier coefficient. We might even
call it a fudge factor to get the right number, plus 15 degrees centigrade average for the planet.
So he does that, putting that coefficient in, but honestly stating, I had to develop this because I
don't know how to calculate how much heat is captured by the atmosphere. Then we come to
a very important scientific development, which is the understanding. And let me say how this was
measured. The understanding is to how the atmosphere captures heat. So we have this great Irish scientist
Tyndall. And Tyndall takes a glass tube, puts heat in at one end, and measures how much comes out the
other end. A very simple experiment, except that, very fortunately at first he cleaned the air that
he was putting into the tube. Cleaning the air, something a careful scientist might do, meant
that he removed literally all of what we call greenhouse gases. So he removed carbon dioxide,
methane, water vapor from the sample, and he found a coefficient of zero. So it looked as if Fourier
had got it wrong. And then he just tried it again with air as it comes, with all its impurities,
and bingo, he got Fourier's coefficient very accurately. Now this is a very neat piece of
science because that confirms that we understand how the atmosphere captures radiation. Now we
understand radiation from a hot body at a relatively low temperature, like the temperature of the earth,
is in the infrared region. And infrared radiation can be captured by molecules that don't have the
same atoms at each end. And oxygen and nitrogen, oxygen has oxygen atoms at each end, nitrogen
has nitrogen atoms at each end, can't capture radiated heat. It has to be a molecule like
carbon dioxide, methane, etc. to capture the heat. So we now understand all this, and we can
calculate these numbers theoretically because the understanding from quantum mechanics of the
behavior of molecules is pretty damn good today. So then we come to 1897 when a great Swedish
scientist by the name of Svanta Arrhenius said, okay, I can take Arrhenius's equations with the
coefficient fully established by Tindall, and I can calculate what the temperature rise
average for the whole planet would be if we continue burning fossil fuels. He said this
in 1897. If we continue burning fossil fuels and eventually put as much as, as much in the
atmosphere as we've got already, double the amount there, and he calculated the temperature rise would
be five degrees centigrade. The biggest computer in the world today, which is busy working on these
equations, but with much more sophistication introduced, demonstrates that by the year 1900,
we really had most of the physics well established. There's some key things left out,
but most of the physics is established. And if I say to you, the number is actually three plus or
minus two degrees centigrade today, it's not very different from what we knew in 1897.
So I think that's the basis of our understanding. And if I can explain it in very simple,
non scientific terms, you get into bed at night and it's winter and it's cold and you've only
got a sheet over you, you put a blanket or a duvet over you. Your radiated body heat is captured
by the blanket keeps you warmer. If then somebody kind came along and put a duvet over you,
you would say it's too damn hot, right? So you'd simply exceed the temperature you would need.
That's what we're doing today. We're adding another duvet onto the bed and the result is
global temperatures rising. Thank you. I've got some some follow ups to that,
based on things that I frequently get asked, or people in the news have little sound bites.
So you've described what CO2 and methane and other things do. They act as blankets or duvet
covers. But an oft repeated claim in the news is that CO2 originally was only three parts per
million and now is just over four parts per million, maybe headed towards five parts per million.
How can such a small amount of three or four or five parts per million actually change the
heat flux and the temperature on earth? Right. So let me just put a slight correction on that.
Today, we're at four hundred and twenty parts per million, four hundred and twenty parts per
million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. And if you add methane to that, we're now at well over
five hundred parts per million expressed as CO2 equivalent. Now, if I go back to the pre-industrial
period, it was two hundred and seventy five parts per million. So the first thing to say is
greenhouse gases have got a very bad press at the moment. We need them. We should never bring
greenhouse gas levels down below two hundred and seventy five parts per million because we'd all
start getting extremely cold. The temperature at the surface of the earth is almost precisely what
Fourier first calculated, sorry, at the surface of the moon. It's about minus thirty degrees centigrade.
It has no atmosphere. So I would just say look at the moon, guys. That has no atmosphere, same
distance from the sun that's getting the same amount of radiated heat. Why are we warmer?
It's because of greenhouse gases and thank you, the human species wouldn't have come into being
without those greenhouse gases making it nice and warm for us. But when we increase the amount,
then it's bound to get warmer and it's almost as simple as that.
And yet, how many people really understand that of the eight billion humans?
A few million? I don't know.
You're quite right to ask the question. Needless to say, I've been talking about this for a long
time and I've traveled the world many, many countries of the world making these speeches.
The climate crisis advisory group that I chair, which is a global group, 16 members from 11 countries,
CCAG, do visit our website. You will find we've produced 18 reports in three years and those
reports will tell you why we're having extreme weather events. We can explain these in some
detail now because of our understanding. So I think we need to really get the idea
that this is a very sophisticated field. So for example, Nate, what was the temperature
at the surface of the earth over the last million years? And how do we find out?
Now, it's very, very clever because if you go to a region of the world where
snow has been falling year upon year and very little melting has happened,
the snow that fell a million years ago is down at the bottom of the heap and at the top is last
year's snowfall. And so if I drill down and take a core of ice, which is exactly what is done,
here we have in Cambridge, the British Antarctic Survey, they've got all these freezers full of
these cores. And in the core, you can analyze what the snowfall looked like 600,000 years ago,
800,000, et cetera. You can analyze it because captured in the cores is the amount of carbon
dioxide that was in the atmosphere at that time because they're bubbles of air captured in the
snow, in the ice that's compacted as further snow falls. Now, it doesn't go all the way back that way
because the sheer weight of the ice does actually force the bottom layer to slip away into the sea.
All right, so you can go back about a million years that way, but then you can do ocean cores
and you get again information going far further back, millions of years ago,
that is actually very, very detailed. And the information is obtained from many different
parts of the world so we can compare how these different experiments are conducted and how they
agree with each other. So right now we're at 420-something parts per million. How does that
compare to the past few million years? And what about our temperature during that same time scale?
Right, so we've had a series of ice ages and warm periods over that time,
about seven of these ice ages, warm periods. The ice ages are relatively long,
and the warm period, and we're in a warm period now, is relatively short. And so we might have
expected to come out of the warm period because carbon dioxide take-up would increase and that
means the amount left in the atmosphere would be reduced and so it would get colder. So if we go back
in time, the cold periods lasting maybe 50,000, 70,000 years and then the warm periods much shorter,
10 to 20,000 years. So we know about all these cycles of warm and cold and we can also see
how much carbon dioxide there was in the atmosphere, how much methane was in the atmosphere in the
past. And so we can also see whether there's a correlation between the level of greenhouse gases
and the temperature into the past. And the correlation is pretty good. I'm not going to
say it's exact because there are other things that cause these big, big changes.
And how do we know that these connected temperature patterns and CO2 that are highly correlated,
that CO2 is what led the temperature increase and not vice versa?
Such a good question because correlation doesn't mean that it was actually delivered by that force.
It could be a complete feedback that is driving that. And of course there is feedback involved.
It's not a direct correlation and there are times when it looks as if it goes out of kilter.
The situation is rather more complex than I'm able to explain here and now. But certainly
if we look at the past periods, there is a point in the world's past when we had
what an author by the name of Gabriel Walker called Snowball S, the title of her book. It's
brilliant. And this is all the evidence showing that at one point the ice at the two poles became
so prevalent that it almost met at the equator. Now the almost is quite important because that
water left in the sunlight around that region meant that there was still life in the oceans
and we are derived from that life. And then finally it recedes. Now this big positive feedback,
causing that snowball is not described by what I've just been saying. So at the moment,
and this is really important, we know that in the North Pole region ice has been melting
more rapidly than the climate scientists were predicting based on what I was describing to you.
And here's the feedback effect. First of all, when there's a fire on land, we've just had an
enormous, the biggest fire in Europe on record in northeastern Greece with a big natural forest
destroyed and all of the habitat in that forest. If the wind is blowing towards the arctic,
taking all of that black soot stuff over there and it settles onto the snow,
the black snow absorbs sunlight whereas of course the white snow reflects it back into space.
So what we call this the albedo effect, as the albedo is changed, we see that the ice
melts much more rapidly because of this big absorption of sunlight that wasn't occurring
before, not included in the calculations because it's so difficult to know how much black ice
would form. And then underneath the arctic ice, as distinct from the Antarctic, is a blue sea.
It's the Arctic Sea around the North Pole. And as that blue sea becomes exposed, even small regions
of blue sea exposed to sunlight, of course that blue sea soaks up sunlight even more rapidly.
It's a great sink of heat and the air above the blue sea gets warmer and that's really why
we are now seeing the Arctic Circle region as a whole, which is a large region,
is heating up at 4.3 times the rate of the rest of the planet. So and this has been happening
for the past 15 years because of these feedback effects. And can you explain why we often hear
the word tipping points in climate science and why they're so important and unpredictable?
And that really is a good moment to explain this because what we're seeing in the Arctic Circle
region is a tipping point in which we're losing ice more rapidly because of these feedback effects.
But then there are follow-up tipping points. So for example, Greenland sitting in the Arctic
Sea is now exposed to the warm air during the three polar summer months and is losing ice
quite rapidly. Now when I say quite rapidly, it's speeding up year on year as more and more of the
blue sea is exposed to sunlight year on year. And the result of that is if all of the ice
melts and it looks as if it's melting, beginning to melt irreversibly, if all of that melts,
sea levels globally will rise by seven and a half meters by 24 feet. That's a global
average sea level rise. That's an enormous feedback. The second big feedback there are three
is what happens over the land mass. So around the Arctic Sea is land, whether we're looking at
northern Scandinavia, northern Canada, Alaska, all of that land is covered in ice and it's
virtually permanently covered in ice and we call that permafrost. And that permafrost contains a
vast amount of methane and methane per molecule is about 120 times more effective as a greenhouse
gas than carbon dioxide. Now the methane is now beginning to evolve explosively. Now again,
not predicted by the scientific community that would happen in that way. So in northern Siberia,
we now have photographic visual evidence and evidence from satellites of these enormous
explosions yielding very large deep holes in the ice. Maybe, I talk in meters, maybe 50 meters
diameter and 60, 70 meters deep. That's methane being explosively released with water vapor,
with a bit of earth, but not much earth. It's mainly water vapor and methane. Now it's not
happening enough now to make a big difference. Most of the methane is emitted from leakage,
from gas oil and coal recovery. Most of it is emitted also from farming, whether you're growing
rice or whether you've got livestock, especially beef. A vast amount of methane comes from that.
And so I think those are two big feedback effects that are real tipping points. And then there's a
third one, and we're all experiencing it right now. Around the North Pole region, there's a
circular wind. It goes anti-clockwise around the North Pole, the jet stream. And that jet stream
is essentially pretty circular. It waves up and down, but it's essentially in the past pretty
circular. But because of what I've just been describing, the warm air above the North Pole,
during those polar summer months, that warm air circulates around here,
but there was cold air there before. So that warm air displaces the cold air down. Now the jet stream
was our means of keeping cold air in the North Pole region and warm air from the tropics down
below. It's a real separator of cold and warm. And what's happening now is that we get such big
distortions in the jet stream. So for example, I'm across advisory group did an analysis of the
very hot summer down the West Coast of America in 2021. It's been repeated, but in 2021,
what we show very, very clearly is that the jet stream got locked in down the West Coast of America
so that warm air from the equator was coming right up to Canada. So it was coming right up
because of this distortion of the jet stream and then the center of America, cold air going right
down. In that year, Texas, Dallas, Texas experienced a temperature of minus 16 degrees centigrade.
So what you're looking at is extreme weather events occurring literally around the planet
driven by what I've just been describing. It's so refreshing to have a real climate
scientist on the program. I could spend a whole two hours just asking you these sort of questions,
but I really want to get into the heart of your work. But I'm just personally curious about the
mechanics of all this stuff. First, let me conclude this introductory section by asking you
how much uncertainty is there currently really in the field of climate science?
And where does this uncertainty apply to? Because there was a consortium of scientists,
like 2000 scientists came out of a couple months ago saying the science of climate is not settled
and CO2 is not a big deal and that sows confusion with people that are unsure about what's really
going on. So where is the current state of climate science? I mean, the current state of
climate science is very well represented by the intergovernmental panel on climate change.
Thousands of scientists literally from every country in the world are represented by that
international panel set up right back in the beginnings, 1988, the beginnings of the United
Nations Framework Convention. And what we do fully understand is what I've been explaining to you,
and I don't think you will see a report that questions the overall understanding. Now, of course,
the origin of the phrase the butterfly effect refers to the idea that a butterfly flapping its
wings in China could lead to storms in America. How could you possibly predict that one butterfly
could do that? And weather is a very difficult thing to predict accurately. It really is very
difficult. And climate scientists are fully aware of this and have to be very careful about
specifying the range over which they're making predictions. It's not going to be possible to
say next year the weather will be this in this part of the world, etc. However, predictions
are proving to be good as long as these feedback effects that I've just described are taken into
account. And prediction, so for example, we've got in Western Europe a very, very detailed prediction
made for the weather out to the end of the century, and it was made back in 2002 when here in the
British Meteorological Office, we managed to get access to the world's biggest computer in Japan
and do these calculations as accurately as the science was able to make it. And predicted
what the weather would look like in Central Europe and even focused down on the three summer months
of Central Europe, what the weather would look like out to the end of the century. Now, the summer
temperatures in Central Europe are about twice as high as the global average. And the reason is
big masses of land tend to heat up more than oceans. There's more energy exchange with oceans.
And so this is happening. And we were able to say that the most extreme summer that we'd ever
had on record in Central Europe in 2003 was predicted by this model a year ahead. But it
wasn't predicted precisely that it would be 2003. It might have been 2004 or five, but we could see
from the bouncing predictions that these extreme summers would reach the sort of level that was
reached in 2003. When it's estimated that in Central Europe, something like 70,000 people
died of heat stress. Now, I'm talking about an advanced part of the world where heat stress is
not that common. Today, we've had extreme hot weather around Europe over the past summer and
it's just receding now, actually. And again, if you look at the predictions from that model 2002,
it's there within the error margins of the prediction. And that prediction was saying
Central Europe will see temperature rises up to five, six degrees centigrade above the
pre-industrial level by the end of the century if we continue emitting greenhouse gases at the rate
we're emitting them at now. So that's a very, very clear message because where we are today
at just over two degrees centigrade in Central Europe summer temperatures above the norm,
it's already very, very severe. We've had another very severe year for deaths from heat stress.
Not to mention the Indian subcontinent and Australia and other places. Okay, I have
so many questions, Sir David. How about giving us a summary of the current state of climate
and ocean impact? Thank you for the introduction, bringing us to this point.
What impacts are largely built in? And can you paint a science-informed picture of a distribution
of the midpoint, not the best case, not the worst case? What that looks like on our current
trajectory the next 20, 30, 40 years? Like what are the impacts we're looking at that are largely
built in and what we face? Those extreme weather events I've just been referring to
can only get more extreme as we go forward in time. So I think that we're simply
living in a new phase where the weather systems of the world are in transition
and I've already indicated driven largely by what's happened in the Arctic Circle region. Now
I'm saying this because the Arctic Circle region has had such a big impact and so we can make
these predictions. But greenhouse gas levels at this level today, the impact, for example,
in India, I don't believe that we're going to avoid a catastrophe with over a million people
dying in that country at some point when there's an extreme hot weather. Now I know that people in
India are used to much higher temperatures than most of us and they have accustomized themselves
to that just as the Inuit and Sami people on the permafrost have accustomized themselves to living
at much lower temperatures minus 10 minus 15. But there's no way that a human being can survive
with a temperature of 45 degrees centigrade for a couple of weeks if they have no access to
air conditioning. And air conditioning is a solution but it doesn't help farming. So there's
real real problems there and of course for many many people in that part of the world there's
no air conditioning for them. So I think these enormous disasters are very much around the corner
and I mean 2030. It could well get bad. Now we've also, I mentioned sea level rise and Britain is
an island nation. The reason why I was able to get all-party agreement in Britain back in 2008
on climate change when we literally tied every future government into actions on climate change
at that point was because we're an island country and I was able to talk about rising
sea levels and what the impact would be. Yes we've got a Thames barrier to protect London.
We can divert water into floodplains around that part of the country but that only operates up to
a certain level of sea level rise. I'm talking to you from Cambridge which will be effectively
underwater by the end of the century if we just look at where we're going now. Let me take you
to Vietnam. Vietnam is a very flat country and the reason is that this enormous river coming down
from China, from the eastern part of the world, coming down to the sea has created a great big
delta and that great big delta is Vietnam. So it's all silt that's been brought down by the river
and in that delta you've got the world's biggest rice paddy fields. Third biggest rice producer
in the world. Now we all depend on Vietnam, Indonesia, China for rice. All of those rice
paddy fields, Southeast China, Indonesia are very close to sea level but Vietnam prediction is that
by mid-century that 90% of the landmass of Vietnam will be under seawater at least once a year.
Now once it's under seawater, rice production is going to be very very difficult to continue.
And it's worse than that right because even before that happens the salt water will wick
underground and salinate the soil. No you're quite right. The problem with salination
is very well known and the Philippines has a rice research institute which has been working very
very hard to produce rice species that are able to withstand salinated water. That's quite difficult
to actually get the rice as productive as the food stuff as the rice that we have now.
Right now we are seeing, right now second half of the year 2023 we're seeing extreme weather events.
How much of this is due to this El Nino in coming months and will what we see this summer and winter
go back and mean revert to the prior trend or is it possible that we are in some sort of a
phase shift or is there a lot of uncertainty about that question?
So I mean just a very quick explanation. The Pacific Ocean soaks up a very large amount of heat
and particularly during a La Nina period and it soaks up enough heat that we get a cooling
of the whole planet and then the heat is re-emitted into the atmosphere and that's the El Nino.
So we go from a La Nina to an El Nino and it's come about already and much more quickly than
we anticipated. You might know that for example Antarctica has lost a vast amount of sea ice
just in this year and in the previous years very little sea ice was lost, previous 10 years so
suddenly it's lost a lot. There is I believe more of an El Nino effect than the effects I've been
describing but the El Nino effect sits on top of this overall temperature rise due to greenhouse
gases so the El Nino effect always makes it much more extreme so it is very likely that I would say
it's almost a certainty that in the coming year as the El Nino takes over we're going to see
a temperature rise in excess of 1.5 degrees centigrade for the whole planet on average
and that was the number that we agreed in Paris that we should try to avoid exceeding.
So I think your question is such a good one. Yes there's already an influence of El Nino coming
through now and yet we have not seen the full spread of that and we won't see it until next year.
But then will there be mean reversion after that? Almost certainly there'll be a reversion.
Here's a question that I don't know the answer to which is why it's a question.
What about a future El Grande Nino when the ocean can't absorb any more CO2 and out gases in a major
heating event? Is that possible? Is that in the models? Is there historical analog for that?
It is possible but let me take you back a much longer period of time to 20 million years ago
when most of our atmosphere was carbon dioxide and we wouldn't have species living on oxygen
as we do if that was the case today and the carbon dioxide levels have been pulled down
by creating insoluble carbonates which dropped to the floor of the ocean. Now at the same time
as this happened the amount of carbonates built up the floor of the ocean in many parts of the
world and there's where our continents emerge so the continents sitting on these carbonate formations.
In Italy there's hills called the Dolomite Hills and those Dolomite Hills have the same
species, the same amount of magnesium, calcium, lithium as in the ocean and we're pretty confident
that they were formed as the crust of the ocean came above the ocean itself. So the ocean has
an enormous capacity for storing carbon dioxide as these insoluble carbonates. Now that is over a
long period of time we're now talking about much shorter periods of time so I'm just feeding in
the oceans have enormous capacity and while we may not have a comfortable future for humanity
nevertheless the planet will continue in a form that won't be very different far into the future
but there's going to be a very uncomfortable transition. Now I don't know if I've answered
your question because I think it remains a very good one. There is a limit as to how much
carbon dioxide can be taken up into the ocean. It's converted to carbonic acid in the ocean by
action with water and then that carbonic acid reacts with the salts whether they are calcium
salts or whatever some of them soluble some of them not soluble and I think this is this is
critically important for the biomass of the oceans. I think we maybe need to have a discussion
about that because I'm as concerned about climate change as I am about biodiversity and our oceans
are now literally many of the deep oceans are literally deserts compared with where they were
400 years ago and we can discuss why that is. I had a recent reality roundtable discussion with
three ocean scientists on that and they are all very very concerned I'll send you the link it was
thank you yeah there's climate change but then there's also the biodiversity and and other impacts
so before I get into your work one one last question this is more of a psychology political
question you've been aware of this and working on it since 1988 you said and James Hansen and
others since then we see all of the convening of parties and the co2 marches uh unimpeded
is it it seems to me that society kind of builds antibodies to new
um predictions and uh awareness of the deleterious effects of climate here we are in 2023 we're
spiking in temperatures we're seeing these fires and floods and other things and yet the the
it's it's not like 90 percent of us are on board with this there's half of society is still
disagreeing that this is reality maybe if if uh they agreed with the prescriptions more of them
would would agree but is this going to continue like like naturally as a scientist I would think
that as more evidence comes out that things are this way more people would agree oh my gosh we
have a problem but it seems the opposite is happening as more evidence comes out people
dig in their heels and disagree that this is the situation what what are your thoughts on that
so Nate I think we need to understand the power of the fossil fuel lobby particularly in the
United States the lobby system in the United States we all know about from guns where the
population at large is all for better legislation on control of what kind of guns individuals can
can purchase and how they purchase them and so on but that that doesn't make any difference
because the lobby is so powerful the lobby on cigarettes has been extremely powerful and once
again we now see Philip Morris coming out saying we've got to deal with these people who are against
vapes and vapes have become a major problem in many parts of the world because young people
are pulling in nicotine into their lungs from vapes very young people thinking it's a safe way
to to operate and yet they become hooked and this is the way the cigarette manufacturing
industry works with climate change I don't know how many senators and congressmen have received funds
from the fossil fuel lobby but the money that though that lobby puts into the anti-climate
science brigade is enormous I mean I'm talking about billions of dollars over the years so
there is no equivalent organization with that sort of money spreading what is actually happening in
the world rather than people defending what they consider to be their vested interest and not caring
about what happens to the world so do you in your international experience all over the world
with different conferences is the United States propaganda machine especially egregious and and
other countries are more on board with the climate reality we face yes I mean there was an interesting
poll done by by Pew in the United States but an international poll in which they they asked
everyone I do take climate change seriously as a serious threat and the answer yes came from every
non-english speaking language country in the world English speaking language countries the answer
was more like the 50 50 you've been describing it's not 50 50 in Britain I can assure you it's
much more like 80 20 people believing in climate change but nevertheless the the power of that
fossil fuel lobby can be demonstrated because people quote what's happening in America in their
newspapers well it's it's also a little bit of cognitive dissonance right because the United
States has burned more fossil hydrocarbons and carbon than any other country in history and so
it it might be it might stand to reason that 50 percent of our population don't want to admit that
that is a problem and that we're in the driver's seat of of creating that problem so I think that's
right I mean I we could go on discussing this for some time but I think the main point is let me
say it this way if in 1992 at Rio the American presidents subsequent presidents had decided
to put their shoulder behind action on climate change we would not be where we are today
in other words the United States the great hegemon of the world led the world for example on the
Montreal protocol and could easily have done the same on climate change why not because of the
great vested interest we've just been discussing but the vested interests sir are beyond the
fossil fuel companies the vested interest is economic growth which is dependent on extraction
not only of fossil carbon but copper and minerals and neodymium and all kinds of things
so the underpinning this discussion is climate is the most egregious and worrisome symptom
of ecological overshoot and that is a discussion that I mean you were the chief science advisor
to the UK I doubt you were sitting around a table talking about overshoot because it's so complex
and I don't think we have the political ability to deal with such a thing what what are your thoughts
on that no life I fully agree with you and let me just take this broader picture that you're
raising now I do believe that we have been operating an economic system the free market system
which has penetrated the whole planet and as a result a very large number of people have been
taken out of poverty the large number of people are getting education a large number of people are
living healthier better lives and I don't want to again say that but I do not think that this
system is fit for purpose in the next part of this century meaning that system gives no value to our
ecosystems whatsoever we can destroy the ecosystems because they're there they're free we can pollute
the atmosphere we can do whatever we want we unless legislation is introduced so governments can
cope with some of this by legislation but there's a another big issue and we we talk about vested
interests and these are very real problems if a very tiny proportion of our population
can acquire so much wealth and this is a fairly new phenomenon post 1980 can acquire so much wealth
that they can control a few people control the news media of the world what a very small number
of people have the wealth to buy up the major news outlets etc that is not democratic what what we
end up with is a system where true democracy is very difficult to maintain so my view is
we need a complete transition away from this economic model to a model which does deal with
diversity we need diversity but we also need equality we need to see the people around the world
are able to live decently are able to live well and we have enough wealth in the world to do that
but we don't have the capability of delivering so how do we integrate equality and well-being
for those humans alive today around the world eight billion and future generations while also
um paying attention to the natural resource limitations of the sink capacity of our oceans
our biosphere etc can those things be optimized at the same time or what are your thoughts on that
so what what we have to accept I believe is that super consumerism which is what the free
market system produces in other words you might be perfectly happy with the way you lived 20 30
years ago but as everyone acquires what it seems to be deemed better and better things you acquire
more and more super consumerism is the way GDP grows the curse it's everyone consuming more and
more and more otherwise GDP growth would stop we don't need super consumerism I I often visit
the Greek islands and one of these islands the name of it is Ikaria I don't want everyone to
travel there it's a small island but has the longest living people in the world on average
right so well over 90 and many many of them over a hundred uh age at you know they live on and on
and it's it's not a sophisticated lifestyle but it's a community that helps each other
it's a community of a kind that frankly in our world I think has disappeared now I'm not suggesting
that we can repeat what's happening in Ikaria around the world we we have very very big cities
and we've got to manage life in those cities and that is an immediate problem but as we move into
the the more distant future tens of years ahead we need to make sure that we move away from a
consumer driven society to a society in which human well-being and ecosystem well-being
are treated with equal importance we somehow need to take the lesson from what is happening today
that our ecosystems provide us with our ability to live and survive and yet we seem to have
ignored that for the past many hundreds of years we've developed a system that put no value on
ecosystems here here um let me uh I'm I'm gonna get I keep promising I'm gonna get to your work
but well one one last question so you uh I think from 2000 to 2007 thereabouts were the chief
science advisor to the UK government so that was 20 years ago do you think that what's happening in
the world now and the emotive visible effects from climate if those would have happened uh
when you were in that position would would things have been easier for you like do we need to see
the smoking gun before we can actually do things so I'm just gonna say a little bit about that time
when I was chief scientific advisor working with Tony Blair over the period eight years from 2000
to 2007 and the last period was with Gordon Brown two prime ministers and in that time all party
agreement on climate change all party agreement on climate change I think we had six votes against
in the 630 member house of commons my every single one of all parties and as chief scientific advisor
I am regarded as a civil servant and so I wasn't party pre I was seen to be available to every
head of whatever party we had and I did brief all of them and then I gave a talk on their
invitation to both houses of parliament which was extremely well attended in which I said
frankly I don't see how Britain can survive beyond 2017 2018 if we don't manage this climate
crisis and set out why what we needed to do now Britain under Blair frankly took a global
lead on this he thought he had a very good relationship with George Bush jr but George
Bush jr's team and for example we were in the chair of a g8 meeting held in Carnegie in Scotland
and the American team said the other seven nations get your agreed statement for the end
of the meeting together and then we'll look at it and they redlined every sentence that
meant action on climate change that came from the United States president so what I'm saying is
that the the only country where we were getting opposition to what we were proposing was the
United States but we couldn't act without the United States and I would say today if I translate
what I was trying to do then and by the way I became the representative of our foreign secretary
on climate change negotiations so I also worked with two other prime ministers both of them
conservatives and I carried that through in four years in the run up to Paris
I had 165 climate attachés in our embassies around the world every ambassador knew that
Britain treated this as the most important issue on our table and prime minister Cameron
made available to us for negotiations a sum of unbelievable 9.2 billion pounds to help those
negotiations now what I'm saying there is the British government understood at that time the
nature of this global challenge and was prepared to back it with money all of these climate attachés
embassies people well trained in climate change it was astonishing and I have to say I was a bit
amazed that we had so much support now I think we have gone backwards if you ask me which country
is in the lead on climate change now is certainly not Britain since 1990 Britain has reduced its
emissions domestic emissions by 48 percent that's not a small amount we have reduced our so that was
all through that period I've just been discussing because we had to have to improve our negotiations
a domestic policy that made other countries believe that the problem was really tough and
that's why we were putting this amount of money in so people could see that we were taking it very
seriously we were only emitting 2 percent of the world's carbon dioxide and one option would be
frankly what I think our current prime minister might believe that that's a small sum so why don't
we just keep emitting and let the others deal with it let the United States and China deal with it
that's a nonsense position what we have to do is all pull together this is a global problem
we have a massive enemy and we all have to stand and work on it together and my bottom line now
is that I'm working hard on trying to achieve this United States and China have to provide the
leadership if the United States and China actually came up with a plan to manage the situation as
it is today I do believe the rest of the world would fall into place now that's not exactly
good to be saying at a time when people in the United States and Britain are throwing
whatever they got got their hands on at the Chinese right we we need to find common ground
and work on this together I agree thank you for all that I didn't know that uh about Tony Blair
and George Bush I mean this is a global problem and I don't know how our species can coordinate at
that at that level um but let me get to your the heart of your work um uh sir David you have uh
I've read up on on what you're doing you've outlined your strategy for a climate response
with what you call the three Rs reduce emissions remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere
and repair the damage can can you give us a brief outline of of these three
absolutely I'm delighted to have that question I think the the point I want to make is that we the
climate crisis advisory group have tried to put forward a comprehensive strategy for managing
the problem from where we are today not from where we were back in 1992 but from where we are today
and by the way we're now talking about four hours we've had a fourth hour which is resilience
climate change is with us and we need to learn to be resilient so let me take you through
four hours and this might take a more than a single breath
the first hour is reduce emissions deeply and rapidly today we're emitting 50 billion tons a year
of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere 40 billion of that is carbon dioxide and the rest is methane
and NOx but all expressed as carbon dioxide equivalent I've already said methane per molecule
is much more effective 120 times more effective than carbon dioxide so if we if we look at 50
billion tons a year and we continue doing that let alone increasing it which is what we are doing
year on year still I think there are signs that it's going to decrease at least peak and decrease
and fairly soon I can say a few words about that but the the main point is unless we can reduce our
emissions whatever else we try and do we are cooked I don't I don't think there's a possibility
for us to continue if we're going to keep adding greenhouse gases into the atmosphere
now the second hour is to remove excess greenhouse gases that are already there
now what what I'm saying is today at over 500 parts per million of carbon dioxide plus methane
we are already seeing the Arctic Circle region melting we're already seeing Antarctica losing
its sea ice we're already seeing extreme weather events rising sea levels etc so in other words
the current level of greenhouse gases is such that this will continue for quite a few decades into
the future of course if we hit net zero tomorrow the rate of reduction in greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere will slowly bring it down but the rate of reduction is very slow particularly for carbon
dioxide methane has a shorter lifetime so we have to learn how to remove greenhouse gases
what's the objective for a safe world and here I fully agree with Jim Hansen the American
NASA scientist who's now at Columbia Jim has been working on this for a very long time and he's
been saying for a long time 350 parts per million is the maximum we should have if we want a safe
future for humanity and we're at now 500 now I believe he's right so we need to learn how to
take billions of tons of greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere at low cost and at no damage to
the planet as we move forward two big challenges and you're going to say how the hell will you
do that well first I was going to ask I didn't know that the 350 also included the methane and
NOx and and CO2 equivalents so on just the CO2 it would have to be less than than 350 maybe
yes and I've had that discussion with Jim and Jim is saying no no don't talk about it like that
it's CO2 yeah I don't believe that's right he's scheduled to come on the show but he's waiting
for his paper to make it through peer review right his paper is is depressing is does not even begin
to describe the adjectives please carry on all right so we are I set up a Center for Climate
Repair at Cambridge University and it's it's it's not doing all the work that I need thing needs to
be done we're acting as a hub to stimulate the work to be done around the world and the Center
for Climate Repair at Cambridge is looking at each of these four Rs and seeing what what in
detail needs to be done we're not interested in looking at a project for removal of greenhouse
gases if when it's all scaled up it can remove less than a billion tons of greenhouse gases a year
we must be looking towards three four five ten billion tons per year for each of them
and what are the things that can do that potential right so that you now I'm just going to give you
my favorite project which is we call it molecular biomass regeneration sorry marine
biomass regeneration and marine biomass regeneration which which I initiated from Cambridge
but we have four other institutions working with us University of Southern California the
University in Honolulu the Hawaii University of Cape Town and the Marine Studies Institute of
Goa and each of them has a research vessel at least one research vessel some of them have more
than one and so this consortium is working on the business of greenhouse gas removal at scale
but as well at at restocking the marine system of the world the deep oceans with fish marine
animals as well mammals and also crustaceans and so what what we have with this project
is an understanding based on the work of a German scientist Metacek and and he published papers
from 10 years ago this is a recent discovery but I love it he found if you film a pot of
blue whales coming up to the surface of the ocean the film suddenly gets cloudy as the whales
approach the surface now we're aware of watching them from the air that they're taking in a vast
amount of air but what's this cloudiness they're relieving themselves any mammal that is 300 to
500 meters below the surface of the sea has their orifice is jam shut by the high pressure
so when they come up it's not only for air it's also to relieve themselves now what that means is
all this fertile material is put into the surface of the ocean which receives sunlight and the result
of that is that within a week you might have an enormous area thousands of square kilometers of sea
covered with green material just from the blue whales defecating yes okay and and that green
material is is drawing in co2 from the atmosphere as it grows drawing in co2 but perhaps more
importantly it's it's essentially phytoplankton there's zooplankton as well and the zooplankton
includes krill which is the food of the whales they the krill goes down 300 to 500 meters down
which is why the whales are down there all right so it becomes a bio system at the surface of the
ocean equivalent to an ocean a land-based forest and the the result of this is if you have a large
enough area you might get a quarter of a billion fish there why because fish eggs the sea is full
of fish eggs even though it's almost devoid of fish but an average fish lays 100,000 to 200,000
eggs a year so what you have is a lot of eggs and when the larvae hatch they die unless there's
phytoplankton every kind of fish needs phytoplankton bingo they all live in that phytoplankton area
so this is a way of restocking the oceans but i i i believe a little more than that
well hold on isn't the answer we need orders of magnitude more blue whales then
yes exactly and you've come to my point how does that happen that happens because this is a process
by which you increase the krill population as well and at the moment there's a very good krill
population around the southern ocean around the Antarctic and also around the arctic
but not not many other parts of the world the arabian sea has a fair bit not many other parts
of the world have enough krill to sustain a large population the blue whales
are done to probably less than one percent of the population they were at 400 years ago
that was our first oil discovery our humanity's first oil discovery was that these whales that
live down below the surface of the sea where it's very cold have a large amount of blubber to
sustain themselves and that was our first oil and so we stripped the seas of whales and the
result is that we were taking out this circular process that the whales were essentially responsible
so whales were our historic a big part of our carbon sink as it were they were that's another
point so yes they were a big part of the carbon sink but i'm also saying they were part of creating
this food stuff for the fish larvae to create this great population if we if we look at the
stories of sailors from 400 years ago they knew they wherever they were traveling in the ocean
they would catch fish well i said it's not it's not quite like that today so i think the point
i'm making is this is an amazing potential for restoring biomass to the oceans but at the same
time taking up vast amounts of carbon i do believe but the figures are very difficult to put big
numbers on i mean to put proper numbers on because it's such a difficult calculation we need to be
doing the work at sea which is what we are doing how much carbon dioxide do i think we could capture
if we were to put this artificial whale poo if i can use that phrase on the surface of the oceans
we and let's suppose we did it to two to three percent of the deep ocean surface how much
carbon dioxide are we likely to fully sequester probably minimally three billion tons a year
maybe maximally 12 billion 13 billion tons a year so it's it's there's no other way of capturing that
amount of carbon dioxide and sequestering it so i do believe that we might have to continue doing
this for 40 50 years at which point we've got the whale population back up and as you were saying
we leave the whales to do it but we need to increase the baleen whales or the ones with
this blubber we need to increase their population dramatically and how do we do that
by exactly what i'm saying can i just tell you another little story about whales
the the southern ocean is is cold water at whatever depths you're at it's not exactly my
favorite place to swim in and when the female blue whales are pregnant they know that they can't
have their babies down there because the babies don't have blubber when they're born and they would
die so they've learned to go up to the east coast of africa i'm from south africa and i
have been down to a place called the wilderness to watch these wonderful blue whales coming up
i didn't know they were coming up there to have their babies in warm water
but there's not much krill there and so the the mothers have to time their return so that
they've still got enough blood blubber themselves to withstand the cold water in the southern ocean
but their youngsters have to have built up blubber as well so it's it's quite an interesting little
story we just don't know how everything is connected do we and at the last moment when
things are disappearing uh we're finally figuring out the importance of the other species as part
of earth's ecosystem just at the last moment and it's yes it's both beautiful and horribly tragic
at the same time um is there is there no other way in your um in your research that we could
uh remove large amounts of carbon i've i've heard that using regenerative agricultural methods
might be able to increase the soil soil carbon content from one percent to two or three percent
things like that is there anything promising in that area yes i've asked a vast number of
different things that are emerging and really there are a large number of people doing research
into these areas so for example um i was just in uh new york for climate week a couple of weeks ago
and met up with a wonderful group from danmark and what they told me about was what was happening
in greenland greenland has this vast amount of ice greenland is about the size of mexico
it's uh you know it's a vast island and it's got nearly two miles of ice all over it
it's been percolating from the ocean as snow over many many hundreds of thousands of years
and the result of the mass of the ice is that blocks of it will shift away towards the ocean
so it slides down towards the ocean and where a big block of ice slides down towards the ocean
the the larval material the uh the geological system underneath the ice is crushed to a very fine
powder oh this is really important because this is a very very important source of the nutrients
required not only in our land masses for farming but the nutrients required in the ocean i'm very
interested in this so we can use this as our artificial well poo right so the the real question
is whether we can transform farming practices to use this material how much material do they have
there and it's it's all in fine powder form it's just ready to be used so it's not going to cost
a great amount of energy to grind it down uh the answer is not billions of tons but trillions
of tons they've got a vast amount and we could possibly transform the farming system of the world
using this resource and how how do you get your artificial whale uh poo from where it's generated
to where it would be in the oceans and how much energy and co2 would that uh create in in the
process i mean big questions but you're you're aiming at a huge solution yes and so this is why
we've got these uh research vessels out in the ocean doing these experiments um and you know we
we need to raise more money because that is the only slow factor we've got but the the main point
is that the the work is proceeding well along the following mechanism in goa there's a very large
rice factory one of the biggest rice factories in the world and what do they have as a throwaway
product from producing rice they have rice husks and our team in goa decided to try and use the
rice husks as floats right so each of these tiny little husks floats on the surface of the ocean
now you they have to bake it it's not a high temperature just bake it a little bit and you
now have something that floats on the surface of the ocean using a biological glue lignin
they can put the lignin on one side of the rice husks and then add our material our fertilizer
material onto that that means the rice husks are keeping the material in the surface of the ocean
for longer and that's in the sunlight and it becomes extremely efficient actually it turns
out the rice husks also dissolve slowly into the ocean and add further nutrients so we're
winning all the way around so how would we do this over two to three percent of the world's
ocean surface that's a vast area now we've got easy maps of the shipping in the world if you go to
google you can see where every ship is in the ocean right now how they're moving if we had a
fraction of that large number of ships depositing these rice husks loaded with fertilizer into the
surface of the ocean i believe we can do it but there's another way to manage this wouldn't
when we first start work we plan to be working around small island states particularly in the
pacific but in the indian ocean as well and possibly the atlantic tristan tecuna
where the fish stock around the island has become diminished and yet for example if we take tonga
the gdp of tonga depends on selling tuna to the rest of the world mainly to the united states
that's their gdp and it's falling and has been falling for the last 20 30 years year on year
so we will get permission from the heads of these governments i know this to work in their
extended economic zone into the ocean that's about a radius of 1000 kilometer from their
beach front into the ocean that's ideal because these pacific island islands are formed by volcanic
action from the floor of the ocean so it's deep water all around and we will only do this work
in deep water so it gives us a means of a stepping stone into working at full scale i have so many
questions for you um this is just so fascinating it's not where i expected the conversation to go
let me ask you a non scientific question but a political and economic one if we humanity recognize
our place in history and what is happening to this blue green earth due to our uh economic
metabolism if we're able to somehow um bridge that governance and cooperation with the uh the
minds and and people around the planet we are going to need to allocate some of our existing surplus
to regenerating and healing the natural world in other words someone's gonna have to pay for this
it's not going to generate gdp in the way that we have come to think of it but governments and
business and philanthropy right now are following this business as usual gdp model and somehow to
regenerate our biosphere into a healthy state there's going to have to be like a tax or a
re-giving back to the earth do you agree with that and do you think that's possible essentially i do
agree with it but let me just put in this little caveat um in in britain how did we reduce our emissions
by 48 percent to today um it it didn't happen easily uh so basically what we said was we've
got all these utilities producing electricity and every utility was told they had to use a certain
percentage of renewable energy for their energy they sold to their customers and that percentage
would increase every two years and they were told in advance how this would be and they would there
was a system of penalizing them if they didn't manage to achieve that now what this meant was
the renewable energy systems that we were using solar and wind were much more expensive than
fossil fuel energy but it was starting off at a few percent it didn't add much to how much the
customers were paying for their electricity i don't think anyone even noticed but the result of that
was and we pushed it we were then in the european union and you know why i'm saying that uh and the
result of this was as other countries in europe picked up on this germany france italy it went up
up scandinavia they all began to do the same thing one way or another subsidizing renewable
energy which was more expensive and the market kept expanding and here's the beautiful thing
about the market as it expands the price collapses and the price for any one of these forms of energy
light emitting dimers are now popular right around the world because they are cheap much cheaper in
producing light for us at night than the old hot filament bulbs and so what what we have is seen
something no economists predicted which is interesting in itself that the the cost of
photovoltaics has come down the factor of a hundred the the cost of wind turbine energy has
come that come down massively uh so here in the uk we have wind turbines offshore and a vast amount
of our electricity is coming from offshore wind north sea the wind blows most of the time there's
only a couple of days in the winter and it doesn't blow but otherwise it's blowing you ask any sailor
they will tell you that and the result is we can get the world's most efficient wind turbines into
the north sea because we deliver them by the same shipping that was used for north sea oil and gas
recovery right we can deliver extremely long wind turbine blades 110 meters long very difficult
over land to do that so that itself is a huge discussion but wrapping that into our prior one
the uk is two percent of global emissions so the climate doesn't care about the uk the climate
doesn't care about anything actually it just responds to biogeochemical forcings and globally
even with the expansion of solar and wind growing very rapidly and their costs coming down rapidly
we're hitting all-time highs of coal extraction this year because of india and china and and
elsewhere so getting cheap energy is really not reducing our co2 it's adding to the entire
energy hungry superorganism which is humanity not quite that way that's so let me let me the
international energy agency which is based in paris but it's truly international produced a detailed
analysis of the uptake of renewable energy systems around the world what percentage would you say
around the world is now from renewable energy you'd never guess 32 percent of electricity produced in
the world i can take you to texas where more than 50 percent of electricity in texas is produced by
wind turbines but electricity is only around 20 percent of global energy use correct that is correct
right so i'm just making the point about electricity but it also applies to every other form of new
technology that's emerging it starts off expensive but as the volume in the marketplace goes up
the price goes shooting down and then you start beating it is now cheaper in the u k to produce
electricity even with storage problems to produce electricity from renewable sources then from any
form of fossil fuel let's skip ahead to three or four side points here and let me ask you a
core question if humans had abundant low-cost renewable energy or energy of any type would that
solve our climate and overshoot and biodiversity and plastics and endocrine disrupting and ocean
issues or would it have to be accompanied by a change in objective a change in consciousness
and a change in governance absolutely we need to understand the principles of an ecological
civilization giving as much attention to the well-being of our ecosystems as we give to our own
well-being i don't think there's any other way now you may be interested because you mentioned
china's consumption of coal india's consumption of coal can i say a few words about china because
i've been there many many times china is producing more photovoltaics more wind turbines more nuclear
power and also more hydropower than the rest of the world put together but they have a large population
and what i've only recently understood and this is a report that the climate crisis advisory group
produced just a few months ago is that in china since the year 2000 about 800 to 850 million people
have been taken out of poverty and are now living the life of middle-class citizens that's one heck
of an achievement so the the chinese government since 2012 really committed themselves to the whole
business of reducing dependence on fossil fuels you will know that their electric vehicle
on the road level is now higher than the rest of the world by a mile right so most cars being
sold in china are now electric what what they didn't understand initially was that as that middle
class emerges they're going to use more and more energy and they could not meet that energy demand
with the new renewable sector even though they were investing so heavily in it and that's really
why their dependence on coal has has gone up it hasn't come down now i do believe it's going to come
down as you may know their economy is no longer expanding and frankly i don't know whether that's
deliberate but it may be in keeping with what you and i've been saying here's a um here's a question
that i worry about and you're a particularly well uh place to speculate on it i think as the climate
continues on the trend that we've seen that in the coming decades it will be undeniable to the
leaders of the countries around the world that we have a major planet scale problem and so geo
engineering uh of the volitional type and we're doing geoengineering now by by transferring the
buried carbon into the atmosphere and getting dopamine in the in the middle but i think geoengineering
will will become prevalent and maybe uh not every country but some places will do it and i worry that
as a can keeking uh creative problem solving species that in some cases the the the cure may
be worse than the disease that we do manage to reduce co2 by a few parts per million but in doing
that create some other damage that we haven't considered what what are your thoughts on all that
yeah i think i think this is a very very important part of the whole question so the first thing is
please don't shut down on experiments we need more experiments to see that whatever is rolled out to
scale as it becomes necessary we roll it out to scale on the basis of as much information as we can
gather and let me now say i i'm working on with my colleagues here on marine cloud brightening
that is creating white cloud cover we possibly have a mechanism for putting white cloud cover
over the arctic sea region during the three polar summer months and that would reflect sunlight
away and keep the ice that's formed during the winter over the arctic sea and we'd have to do
that every year for the next 50 years perhaps but that that in itself needs a lot of experimentation
to make sure that there's no negative consequences but here's the alternative and this has been
talked about quite frequently which is putting aerosols into the stratosphere and the the use
of aerosols sulfates for example into the stratosphere we know will work because when there's
a volcanic eruption it does do just that it puts these sulfates and little particles up into the
stratosphere and it cools the planet because it keeps the sunshine away from the planet's surface
however if we put sulfates into the stratosphere we just got to remember it's not too many years
ago 1980 that we agreed the montreal protocol not to destroy the stratosphere by removing ozone
and creating this great big ozone depletion layer the ozone hole which people in new zealand on
australia were more aware of than anywhere else because it was largely settled around the Antarctic
and so what we need to understand is that any country that has the ability to put sulfates into
the stratosphere and many many countries have rockets now and they could do it would be able
to do this unilaterally now i would be all in favor of a moratorium on rolling any of these things
out until there has been enough experimental verification and agreement amongst nations that
this is what was the only way forward i would i'm against putting sulfates into the stratosphere
because i fear that once again we'll all get cancer from the loss of the the
ozone in the stratosphere keeps the ultraviolet the high energy part sunlight away from our skin
and protects us from cancer so i think uh there are sound reasons why you're asking such a good
question the scientific community has to proceed with caution oh my gosh i i'm you're one of the
few guests that i can ask any of these complex scientific questions and you have uh knowledge
on it i i don't want to spend our time asking about the effect of global dimming uh the fact
that if we did manage to stop all carbon burning that there would be a a phase where the the masking
effect of our current particulate emissions would make climate worse well i will ask you that but
what do you think about that briefly so we we we have been burning a lot of coal that contained
a large amount of sulfur and the sulfur dioxide has been a major factor in keeping the planet cooler
for just the reasons we've been discussing um now we have cleaned up our act on that we we know that
sulfur dioxide in the lower atmosphere is pretty bad for us and so we we keep the sulfur out of
the coal and we we're still burning coal but we claim that it's clean coal i say claim because
it still produces carbon dioxide but the point is that if if we completely eliminate sulfur
dioxide in that way getting into the atmosphere we are going to see even more warming than we're
currently experiencing and we already that is a factor in the rate of warming now
here's my ultimate worry about geoengineering is is i think we need more people asking what if
neoclassical economics is wrong and the continuity of large long-term projects is subject to energetic
receding horizons and political discontinuities and as soon as we stop this geoengineering when we
run out of money or cooperation then there's an abrupt spike or termination shock because species
can't adapt and uh i don't think you have an answer to that i'm just throwing that out there as
something i worry about i think i think these are the things we all worry about it's it's um
it's not an irrational worry uh the the the state of the world is such that we know our
civilization has never had to face up to a challenge of this kind before and i'm talking
about the thousands of years of our civilization one of the interesting things about the way
discussions take place in the united nations framework convention on climate change meetings
nobody discusses what happens beyond 2100 right the world stopped existing in 2100 and we don't
care what happens after that and yet i've said i love going to greece and one reason is because we
can see ruins that go back thousands of years uh in greece from human civilization and some of them
the most beautiful statues etc that you could possibly imagine so we can go back in our history
many thousands of years why would we on earth be happy with another 70 years only yeah we don't
think about it much but world uh i mean 2100 is closer to today than world war two is and we
have movies about world war two all the time and things like that yeah so so how do we how do we
begin to create a coordinated global effort especially at times when there's israel palestine
ukraine russia nato and financial and economic geopolitical issues shout louder to ours and
our politicians mental structures i mean i know you're a scientist but you've worked with politicians
in your career how do we even begin to coordinate this globally other than more education and
activism etc so i'm i'm just going to interpose yes i'm a scientist but over the last 20 years i've
i've been working in diplomacy as well the negotiation uh process and i i'm very proud of
the fact that the american association for the advancement of science gave me an award last year
it's probably the award i'm most proud of for science diplomacy and so i i have got used to
talking to politicians literally around the world in the two years run up to cop 21 in
paris in 2015 i visited 96 countries officially that was one-on-one negotiations effectively
britain with that country i had deep pockets so often minister of finance was there and they
listened they listened because britain was really doing what he could to manage his domestic
emissions but they also listened because we were offering money so it was really quite an eye opener
that getting an agreement in paris i didn't even have to go to paris i knew there was going to be
an agreement from all the countries that i'd got uh agreement from as long as obama was there to sign
in and then the chinese would sign they said we will only sign if the united states signs
that we knew everyone else was going to fall into place now that's why i'm saying the key
answer to your question in the current political structure is the importance of china and the
united states playing the global leadership role yes bring in the european union and by the way
that's not going to be difficult at all european union as a whole is also right on top of managing
climate change you know so i think let's say those three power groups but don't leave out
the rest of the world but that all would happen if the great hegemons of the world actually lead
the way now i'm using the current structure political structure in my answer to your question
but you asked a much much deeper question which is and how do we change our economic system now for
me i've just brought on to the actually i'm not sure i can say the climate crisis advisory group
uh an economist who is somebody i admire enormously and uh she works in london and i've
been looking for a male female balance and this helps but she is amazing and she is an economist
who is trying to answer the very question you're asking how do we switch from the current economic
system of the world even china is operating the same system how do we switch from that
to the system that is fit for purpose in the world that we're talking about in terms of
biosecurity as well as in terms of climate change and the future of civilization
sounds a lot like k rayworth um so i this has been so fantastic and i want to be sensitive
to your time um i kind of in in uh lew of asking chat gpt questions about the world i wish we had
a chat serve david king because you have opinions and and deep scholarship on these things um i'm
going to have to have you back on on a deeper dive on some of these things but let me ask you sir
uh some closing questions that i ask all my guests you've thought about in our obviously a
engaged citizen and macro observer on the human problematic as a career choice do you have any
personal advice to viewers of this program at this time of global ecological disruption and
civil upheaval and and anxiety because it does seem to be a lot and we i think many people
watching this program agree with almost everything you've said but what do we do as individuals what
what advice do you have to the listeners now of course every individual has got a different
personal history and a different position in society and if if i was talking to a group of
global heads of governments i would say something very different um so it does depend on on what
your background is but all of us can spend a bit of time to think about the state of the world and
the direction of travel that will suit ourselves but also our children and our grandchildren i'm
of an age where i have four grandchildren so i really care about that longer distance future
but also think about different people in the world and the group of people that i think we need to
focus on much more radically are the indigenous people of the world and i i become friends with
some people who are members of the saami people who live on the uh permafrost in northern europe
and represent also the inuit people on the other side and these people live basically with reindeer
and the reindeer provide them with so much of their ability to live whether it's leather hides or
whatever and they have actually a sophisticated lifestyle but quite simple you need fish you
break a hole in the ice and you fish there you know it's it and that lifestyle is now being
dramatically altered i spoke to one of my colleagues who lives in northern ciberia
name of terror muston and he's a climate scientist on the permafrost
spoke to him in april 2021 what's the temperature there we're just chatting he said it's cold it's
minus 30 degrees centigrade i said oh he said no it would normally be minus 10 minus 15 this is
extraordinary cold but we know how to manage it i spoke to him the same year at the end of july
when this hot period had arrived he said you better be sitting down the temperature here is now plus
32 you imagine the lifestyle of those people who depend on their historical knowledge of living on
the permafrost and the permafrost exploding around them so that i mean i was brought up in
south africa the people of the calahari are probably one of the longest living indigenous people of the
world they live on a near desert it does rain there every five years or so but they live there
and they know how to live there if any one of us was dropped into the calahari i doubt that we
would stay alive for very long at all but they know how to do it so indigenous people live
relatively simple lives but are extremely smart at managing their own affairs we need much more
respect for those people i've been to the calahari and okabango and it was probably the most memorable
trip of my life all right um so um what about the young people you say you have four grandchildren
what about the young people listening to this and and coming to terms with the climate and the economy
and and uh the cultural change uh what what advice do you have for young humans so each one of us
when we're growing up are developing ideas of what we are going to contribute to our own lives
and to the world as we move forward in time that's a normal human operation as we learn to live in
this this world of ours and i would just say open your eyes to the direction of travel just not
the next few months but the next few years decades you're going to probably be alive at the end of
this century you need to look at what that will look like and what is the right lifestyle to live
in a world that is endangered in the way it is i do think for everyone it's a question of
understanding the challenges and then working out from where i'm sitting how can i best operate
to not only manage the challenges for humanity but for myself and my family
if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision what is
one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures well you've now asked me the
most difficult question of all because you asked me for one thing and am i allowed to say
that the four rs are all accepted as a way forward for humanity and our eco civilization
sir david king this has been a very interesting and wide-ranging conversation to be honest
or to be blunt i think we just scratched the surface of your artificial whale poop
re-growing whale populations and marine cloud brightening i think this was a fantastic introduction
but i would love to have you back in a few months to take a deep dive on those initiatives from a
scientific perspective if you'd be willing because i think we're we're headed in that
direction and we need to have broader awareness of those things
Ned can i just say thank you very much for spending this amount of time with me because
i appreciate that you reach a significant number of people and if we can get these
messages out we're doing exactly the right thing so i'm congratulating you on what you're doing
this is the conversation of our time and the human history as we converge on the world's
largest problems and this is it to be continued thank you for your lifetime of work on these
important issues thank you if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification
dot com for more information on future releases
