Greetings, friends, and fellow humans alive at the same time I am on this blue-green Earth.
In lieu of a frankly this week, I have an announcement and a favor to ask the viewers
of this program, which, by the way, since I started with a hundred followers and went
to a thousand and then 10,000 and over 50,000 on YouTube and another 40,000 or so on the
podcast platforms, I told my staff that when we reached a hundred thousand viewers, we would
create a Discord channel because at these times it's important to be able to converse on these
topics in a much deeper way than we can cover on a cursory podcast. So we have done that.
We have created a Discord channel for the community to connect with one another. It's a
place to share knowledge, discuss ideas related to the great simplification and the complex
and delicate systems of our current society and our current world, basically for like-minded people
to join the conversation here online and potentially in person. If you'd like to join that, you can
click on the Discord link in the description of this episode and we'll see how that goes.
Also, I would like to ask a favor of you, the viewers, the listeners of this show.
We have appreciated the feedback we've gotten on emails and comments on YouTube,
but we want to better understand the issues that are important to you and basically how to make
the channel better. So we've put together a short survey, also linked in the description,
that should only take about five minutes. It took me two and a half minutes, but I wrote it.
And there's some open-ended questions at the end. We will be reading all the answers. So if you
ever wanted us to feature a certain guest or spend more time on this or that topic, this is the time
to write down your ideas. We'd love to hear from you. You know, this whole podcast thing as an
emergent part of my own work was surprising to me. Two years ago, I didn't plan to be here,
but the world is converging on this story. And I think as many of you do, the next couple years
are going to be vitally important. If you follow this channel, you know by now that my philosophy
is that I want to put forth content that is credible, is interesting, is relevant to your
lives and our futures. That's non-political and that somehow pertains to the foundational
aspects of our situation, which is energy, ecology, and human behavior. I don't know what's
going to happen in the future. I don't know what to do. And I don't have prescriptions. But what
we're trying to do is pass the baton to more humans to play a role in our collective future.
And in doing so, change the initial conditions of what's coming.
I'm still learning. And because of that, I realized how little I knew two and a half years ago.
I learned from my guests. I learned from the comments. I learned from these processes.
I hope you're all learning along with me and we'd really love your feedback.
Many, frankly, and much more content coming soon. The next 25 episodes are either recorded or
scheduled. Lots of great ones in the hopper. Gaya speed to you all. And thank you for joining
Discord and filling out the survey. There will be, frankly, next week.
