Hello, I was going to do a frankly this week on nuclear that'll have to wait till next week some new news on nuclear fusion
I'm going to give a
outlined
debunking on
The opportunities and constraints of nuclear since that was kind of involved. I
Instead called my friend Nora Bateson
Who is in Sweden where electricity prices are 30 to 40 times higher than they've been in the recent past and
Asked her what's going on. What is she doing in response? What are people in the country saying?
What is the government saying? It's kind of a big deal and maybe a dress rehearsal for what's coming to some other places
Here's a short conversation with my friend Nora Bateson
Hello Nora, great to see you. Hello Nate great to see you, too
Welcome to my frankly episode. I do have Frank Frank's on the ground below me taking a sleep
Because it is snowy and cold here. Is it snowy and cold there snowy and cold. Yes
It is snowy. I just looked I just looked on the the map and Sweden is way further north than Wisconsin
Then I imagine it's like as far north as the Yukon territories in Canada. You're really up there
It's it's the refrigerator. It's Scandinavia. It's winter. This is what it is
And it's also dark darker than in summer by far
It gets dark now by 2 30
in the afternoon
So
The reason that I'm inviting you to have this conversation
First of all, I haven't talked to you in a while great to see you always, but I saw your Facebook post. I saw your Facebook post
yesterday or the day before
How extreme the energy prices are now in Sweden and
What people are doing what you're doing in response and I just think it's so
Topical it's like a dress rehearsal
For things that you and I have been working on discussing for a long time. So maybe just tell me what's going on
Well, the price of heat has
Skyrocketed the price of electric has skyrocketed and therefore the price of heat primarily
Houses in Sweden are heated with electric heat
Most of the time that heat is that electric is produced by either nuclear or hydro
plants
so
We don't really have those big oil tanks in the back of the house or or natural gas
That makes heat here. That's not really
part of the program
So when the electric price goes up so extremely
people are in trouble and so to give you an example in in
You know, not very long ago in early November late October the price for
For electric per kilowatt hour
Was about 42 a day now 42 a day is about four cents
And that's really cheap
Okay, it was it's probably too cheap
But right now it's upwards of 800
So this is an extreme jump now some people have are locked into three four-year plans that they made
last year lucky them
And they are okay
For now, but a lot of people had to get a new plan this year or they were on a
flexible program and
so they are caught and
For those people who are on the the
the fixed plan
there's been some promise on behalf of the government to do some reimbursement, but
Looking closely at that reimbursement if if you you know, you might get a
Couple hundred dollars back
Whereas the the energy bills are upwards of for a normal little house upwards of a thousand dollars a month right now or more
so
So things are changing quickly and you can imagine what this means for businesses
You can imagine what it what a grocery store is paying or a hair salon or just you know anywhere you go
So of course systemically, it's it's drifting everywhere. This price increase is
Moving into all parts of life where it can't actually be solved back with the electric
price and
What's interesting to me is how we are adjusting
Because this is a fast adjustment. Okay, no one was really
Prepared for this, you know, except for maybe the real preppers and well you you said even in October or November
It was one twentieth of what it is now or something like that. Yeah
so that's extreme and
and so you learn quickly how to live your life differently and
We learn, you know, you don't run the dryer
Just don't run the dryer if you want to dry your clothes you hang them
But you better hang them in front of the fire because you there's it's a house is freezing
We're keeping our house at 14 15 degrees centigrade
Just enough to keep the pipes from freezing and we're not alone. There's lots of families who are doing this and
You don't turn on the tea kettle. You don't use the electric oven. You don't use the hairdryer
You turn off the floor heat in the bathroom. You I mean you take really short showers
So so let me ask you this I have tons of questions
You haven't actually gotten a bill yet though, right?
So when people are anticipating because they know what the price is the bill's gonna come later this month or in January
so when you look at a hairdryer or an electric oven and
You're about to get the human brain services that we get from cheap energy
Do you then in your mind translate that to to dollars or the Swedish money?
Yeah, like oh, I don't want to turn that on because next month. I'm gonna have to pay a lot for that
Is that what's going in your mind? It's it's past that point. I
Mean we have this app. Okay, so this app shows me they'll put it where let's see where we are right now
So this is where we are right this second where it's
731 year day and this shows the time of day and the ups and the downs so we follow these ups and downs and we try to
Run the washing machine accordingly or turn the heat on
So so it's not it's not grid-based management. It's your own individual management to the prices, right?
So so tomorrow
Let's see so this is this week
All right yesterday it actually went up to
918
But look at this three years ago
It hardly ever even went up as far as 500
Two years ago
Yeah, right. So Wow, so
Yeah, so I feel like my house is populated with all these
Machines that are just sitting there and
You don't turn them on like you just don't do that
So I don't know about Sweden
But in the United States there was a recent essay that showed the average American household had 60 things
That were plugged in all the time and that that was like a 10 or 12 percent drain of the total energy use
It's just being used by things that are plugged in sitting. They're not being used
But this is all fascinating to me because
You know, my work is about we really live in a biophysical economy that energy and materials
power things and we use money and technology to you know
Grease the skids and to have as our proximate story
But now what a massive shift. So are you talking to your neighbors and people?
What are people how are people reacting in Sweden in Stockholm and in the countryside? Well, it's cold
It's really cold because also outside today. It's minus five and
So, you know, we we bundle up in the household and we are
Not
This is a culture that's much more individual based
So if this is a place that is kind of geared around self-reliance
Which is a deterrent to the type of collaborative and cooperative
Possibilities so by contrast I have a friend in
I believe she's in Ireland and their prices are also skyrocketing
But what they're doing is they are they have a group of friends and they're going to each house
For dinner. So they're rotating
So that it's, you know, one eighth of the price because there's eight people in the group
Do you see what I'm saying? So that I do of collaboration is is is where it's at
But it's we are not there yet. However, I I can only say that this culture of
everybody having their own machines and being self-reliant is
Is it's not really going to be an option people cannot afford to live alone?
They won't be able to we're going to have to to start sharing these costs
Well, I just
extrapolate that to you know driving across the state where I live you see areas that have these huge six or seven thousand
scorefoot houses and if
Electricity was as high as it is in Sweden. Could you imagine the bills?
That's going to be to heat those places and I think I mean you're right
We're going to have to have more people living per structure if energy price is really
Increase in the future
So do people in Sweden think this is a short-term thing and next year it's going to be back to the good old days
Or is there some sense that this or something like it could last?
That is a really interesting question and I think it varies
I think there's some people who have been watching other systemic processes and are thinking well
This may be more than just a fix it
you know
you're you're talking into causation here when you ask that question and
The causation is all too easy to place on
Okay
Well, this is because of the war and because the pipeline got burst and because Angela Merkel made a deal
With Russia to get the natural gas and they don't have it
So now Sweden's selling power to the rest of the EU and then we have to buy it back
And it looks like it lives there and therefore if the war ended and the pipeline were fixed and the da-da-da-da
Then maybe the prices would go down, but is it
Is that really where it lives or is this more of a of a continued?
Consequence of big everything being a problem big energy big ag big education big pharma big
Big tech
And the fact that the politicians and the people on the ground can't seem to stop it because the the electric companies right now are making
Unmitigated profits, so it's not like there's a lack of electricity
So so what is going on it is yeah
Isn't one of the nuclear plants shut down there for maintenance unexpectedly or something like that that is part of it also
But that's not all of it and and so yeah, you know the it starts a long time ago
It's and and so where does it end so so where does it start and where does it end and these things place?
This situation and a linearity that's not quite so easy
So it could be that the electric bill goes down
But the food bill that you know all the other things have have been moving around it supply chains, etc
So it's whenever you see this type of a whip lash in in a very
Interdependent system you're going to be seeing consequences that are in multiple contexts not just the electric bill
But but actually very seriously in the culture
So I have to drop this pun in here. Maybe you should keep track of all this and call it keeping warm data
Staying warm data. Yeah staying warm data. So
Is there a sense and I don't understand the intricacies of the EU rules, but as part of the you know the the European
Collection of nations there are some energy laws that
You have to export a certain amount to the greater European grid
Is there any nationalistic sense that Sweden is relatively energy-independent because you have so much nuclear and hydro
And biomass and other things that there's a we don't want to have to be forced to export our energy
Are our conversations like that bubbling up or not so much?
Absolutely, they're bubbling up and they're bubbling up in in exactly that description that you just made as well as a
general degradation of
trust in the state
Which to you and I who didn't grow up in countries where there was trust in the state
Is is is very serious
Because part of the way that the whole Scandinavian program
Has worked is with the social welfare and the idea that the government is actually benevolent now this may seem
ridiculous to you
Being in the states and it certainly does to most most other places in the world, but this is the foundation
Upon which the state has its stability
So what we're seeing here is is that's why I was saying it very seriously. There's changes in the culture happening
so we are seeing a
loss there of
Of trust in the state to be able to respond and to take care of people. Okay, that's the deal
I pay big taxes you take care of me and
The take care of me isn't happening
What what sort of messaging is coming from regional or national governments on how to manage
Are there are there public service announcements on turning down the thermostat or things like that or or what and
TV shows radio shows. It's the buzz everywhere
on how to keep your heat down and
if you talk to any Swede today and you see them in a zoom call, they're gonna be wearing their puffer jacket in the house and
Which is not a disaster by the way. No, I mean I often do that
And when it's really cold here, I sleep in one of those thermal sleeping bags
If the fire doesn't reach where I'm sleeping
so I mean this is I
think the disaster here is
We have a long edge of expectations
Not so much a shortage of energy and now we're at the inflection point of that conversation and we can live
significantly differently, but
ripping the band-aid off is gonna hurt and be cold
metaphorically
But I just you know
energy prices are
Not that expensive in the United States yet, but what you're experiencing
I expect will come to all of us in in coming decades and it may be on the permanent side
So I just wanted to get your you know boots on the ground
perspective on this
are you
seeing any application to your work and
working on culture change and and this is an opportunity or
What are your thoughts there? I mean, I'm with you. This is not a disaster for me
Right and that's that's important. There are a lot of people for whom it is a disaster
and
And I think that the changes that we are discovering are needed and that
That there's no need to go back. You know, we actually should be watching
How much energy we're consuming and it was like we were on a runaway spending spree of just using the juice
out of every plug in every room and
So this is this is a good wake-up call to the realities of that and
And I'm with you. I don't think it's gonna end anytime soon and I also think it's gonna take different shapes
so and
because of that it's very
You know, the the politics of this are that you can respond to a crisis here or a crisis there
But it's not staying in the box
So this becomes a food crisis. This becomes a health care or a
You know, all sorts of different issues can come out of this most of all the the the lack of
the
The pixelating of the state is is really the issue but
My work
in warm data is
really about
nurturing a kind of flexibility to be able to respond to all sorts of stuff and
So the sentence I usually use here is it's about nurturing the flexibility that we don't yet know we're gonna need
So it's not about getting a perfect crystal ball
You know forecast of what the future is so we can align the perfect preparations. It's about how to be in relationship
with each other with your body with your land with your neighbors with your with your parents with your
You know with your children who may live a long way away and and that those
relationships then produce a kind of possibility for response that
That is in in stark contrast to the individualistic go out and buy yourself a kit for survival type of behavior
I totally agree with that. So instead of preparing
for an energy economic
Change prepare yourself behaviorally. So you're flexible to any of these changes and
Not only yourself, but yourself in relationship to to everyone in your life. I I totally agree with that
Just out of curiosity. How are our families and schools?
Handling the impact of their kids on this. I would suspect that kids would be
Less affected by this because they're tougher and more resilient, but maybe not
I don't think we've seen it yet
You know, the thing is is that when I first moved to Sweden my
Husband said don't worry. It gets cold here, but Swedes don't like to be cold
You won't be cold. No one keeps their house cold. It's not like England
He said where you'll freeze to death in someone's house and he was right
I mean really up until this year. I never set foot in a house that was cold here
so there has been a a just generosity of
Usage of
Heating and my guess is that the schools are still warm
I think there's some folks who are in for a bad surprise and I think there are a lot of people who
Actually aren't
Registering yet that even if they have a long-term plan that the companies are probably going to claim force majeure and
raise the rates on them
and that if there's bankruptcy again force majeure and
So there's there's a lot of loopholes for no one to be responsible and for the the bills and the consequences to land on the individuals
but I can see
Once the December bills start showing up in people's mailboxes that there's going to be a huge social
Reaction to this unless the government helps out somehow
With the bills and right now they've kicked the can so the promise of support is there
But if you do the math, it's so minimal that it's actually insulting
And well not only that but when you're going around your house and looking at what you could turn off and you're thinking oh
The government might help me with this, but they might not so I think I better turn to hoff just in case that sort of thing, right?
Yeah, and that I think you're right. I think the December bills are gonna be us a harsh reality
And of course, it's still it's you know, it's the holidays. It's
It's not this is not an easy time coming up for folks here and it's it's like you said it's because of
large expectations
and a kind of comfort that is being removed and
You know, have you ever been at the airport when
Somebody who got an upgrade?
When they didn't actually buy the first-class ticket
They just got an upgrade and then that upgrade gets taken away. Have you ever seen that person get angry?
It's a special kind of angry
Yeah, it's loss aversion, but that's a microcosm for our whole culture on a century timescale
Is we've become accustomed to the first-class seating and now we're gonna go back to coach and coach is gonna be fine
But it's the drop that's gonna cause us to go a little haywire
so, you know, I'm
Privileged of course with all these lights on and a globe and a dutch and on my lap talking to you on a zoom call
but I
can see this as
A positive dress rehearsal if things kind of go back to normal
Because people will have emotionally experienced this reality not only in Sweden
Across Europe and then we're so tied to the United States that we learn from what's going on
So I'm hopeful this is an opportunity to really think about how we restructure things in coming decades
and the only thing I can add to that because I am in
Absolute agreement with you is that what's great is the unexpected stuff
You know, like I had an old whistling teapot
That that I was like, why am I keeping this? We always use the kettle
But but I kept it because I had a sentimental attachment to it
and now we can put it on the wood stove and make tea without turning on the electric stove without plotting in the in
The teak in the tea kettle and you know, just the things that you figure out to do
So I live with my 93 year old mother is living in our house. So
Everybody also has very different needs. Okay, I'm cool to sleep in my room at when it's 10 degrees. That's fine
I can bundle up and and I'm but she can't do that
So we are definitely tapering everything in in one side of the house so that we can put more into her room and
Then you know, we might take our breakfast or our tea or our computer and go hang out in her room
So there's a whole new relationship coming out of everybody going to Nana's room to hang out because it's warm in there
including the cats and dogs
so
So there's so it sounds festive in a way
well, I think that it's it's the things you don't
Imagine you can't the complexity of how you're going to respond is so in the detail and
I think when we think about the possibilities of future and future with upheavals
it's important to always remember that there is a huge quotient of weird and
the the weird details that come up in the possibilities you find together are
absolutely
Unpredictable unscriptable and and that's wonderful
Which gets back to your
focus on the
importance of being flexible
Against many different futures
Thank you so much Nora. Do you have any closing thoughts? I really appreciate you taking the time
With 24 hours notice to talk to me. I
I
Love doing this and anything with you Nate. My only closing thought is just that it's
It's really important that the story get told in
the complexity
That it exists in because like I said, it's all too easy to create a very linear causality of this
But it starts, you know, it starts in the Thatcher years
It starts when when the the real social welfare
Was sold to private enterprise and when that happened then the maintenance bills didn't get paid
Right and it began to degrade and and so this this is is this is part of
the the
the flow of immigration that happened when Syria
Got their grain cut off from Russia in 2009 or something like that 10 and
There's a lot of story in here that is way beyond those, you know numbers on that graph and
And it's just too easy to point to the bill or point to the politician in charge or point to
Putin or point to Merkel or whatever you want to point to it's it's a whole
World that has been working toward this for quite a while
And I think the listeners on your program are aware of that. So that's just something to always reiterate
Yeah, I don't know that you know this because we haven't spoken in a month or two
But a few weeks ago. I spoke to hundreds of members of the Swedish government their entire energy agency
I gave a presentation
Which five years ago wouldn't have happened right because of what's going on
All of a sudden everyone is interested in how the pieces fit together and the complexity of our energy material growth
money sort of system
So it went well. I I hope we use this as an opportunity to maybe
Shift the path of our culture. Thank you so much. Stay warm and
keep
Thinking and working on warm data stuff. Thank you Nate. Nice to be here
