When you look at the amount of energy you and I consume, it's enormous compared to what a
Roman slave would consume. But the amount of our energy we actually put into manufacturing is
trivial. Whereas, of course, back in the Roman slaves, they virtually all the energy they got in
was the output that have to provide to the slave owner. So that's about 100 watts per person.
But machinery has gone up radically. And that, of course, is where our productivity has come
from, increased amount of energy being, you know, harnessed per machine over time. But of course,
that means waste. So all these things, if we had that framework, we would never allow the level
of energy consumption to reach the level is because we had the level of waste production.
We'd also be acknowledging that they have a non physical view of the economy that it's all stuff
you can write on a whiteboard with no terms labor and capitalism, but energy is not one of the
terms they even look at. And this is, it's a mindset that I trace right back to Adam Smith,
in fact, because if you go before Smith, you'll find you had the physiocrats. And the physiocrats
who can a candle on, there's quite a few others, they argue that all wealth comes from the soil.
But what they fundamentally meant was all wealth comes from the sun. And if you imagine you're
like in the agricultural society of France, which was the main location that develops the
physiocratic theory, you plant one corn, one seed corn, you get 1000 pieces of corn back,
and you simply sit there and watch it, it'll happen over time. But if you barely do anything
with the soil. So this became obvious to them that what what was causing the wealth in human
society is what they literally call the free gift of nature. Now, in that sense, the free gift of
nature, that predates the understanding we have with the laws of the conservation of energy.
And they're aware of it. The same was simply exploiting energy we find in the universe,
turning it into useful work. Then along come a Smith and says, Oh, no, we'd be living in Scotland,
industrial, but you know, hardly agricultural Scotland, he couldn't accept that labor land
was the source of value, he said, Labor is the source of value. So you then had the classical
school of thought coming along. Now, Marx then took them and said labor is the only source of
value. Therefore, labor should get the entire rate of profit. And the neoclassicals come along and
say no, both labor and capital could contribute to output. So there's a labor gets its marginal
product and capital gets its marginal product. And that's all just with wasted 250 years arguing
about the wrong stuff, the physics rights were right. We only have an advanced economy because
we exploit free energy. And all we're paying is the cost of extraction. And therefore, those
enormous differentials you mentioned earlier come about, largely because this is said that it became
part of the ideology of the contest between workers and capitalists over the distribution of income.
When Marx turned the classical school, the labor theory of value against capitalism,
then in the 1870s, that was when neoclassical economics, which came out, which said, No,
it's the marginal productivity that determines the income. Both factors of production, labor and
capital get what they deserve. So the whole thing was seeing what productivity is coming out of
three elements, labor, capital and technology. Now, when they tried to then quantify that,
and this is probably in the 1950s and 60s with Robert Solo, they have what they call the solo
residual, that when they looked at how change in GED comes about, it had very little relationship
to change in labor or change in capital or came of change in technology. And so this A term,
which was undifferentiated, became the magic source that enabled growth to occur over time.
And that was, if you asked economists about it, let's have a team in ingenuity. Now,
they didn't see that, yes, there is ingenuity there, but if it wasn't fossil fuels to harness,
we wouldn't be producing this volume of output.
