So most of what we've seen is a growth in our wealth, our growth in the consumption levels we
have, has come from that increase in energy. And now we're cooking with gas in that sense
because we're finally acknowledging the role of energy in production. But that's not what
neoclassicals are doing, of course. I'd like to welcome Professor Steve Keen back to the podcast.
Steve is author of Debunking Economics and the New Economics of Manifesto.
Steve is, among many other things, a research fellow at the Institute for Strategy, Resilience,
and Security at University College in London. He is writing a new book, and today we discuss
one of the chapters in his book, which is an economic sleuth story on the origins of energy
blindness. We go back all the way to Adam Smith and look at a series of wrong turns in the road
that neoclassical economists made on the treatment of land, energy, and things that are not
capital and labor. This is a difficult podcast. Steve is an economist, talks in a lot of
economist language. I barely understood what he was saying, but I did understand the critical
importance of his main message is that our main shaman of our culture today, those that we look
to for answers and explanations of what's happening and what will happen in the future,
are truly divorced from our biophysical and ecological reality in their formulas.
This ultimately is a really big deal. There's a chapter in Steve's upcoming book on that,
but this is a one and a half hour treatment of energy blindness and its origins. Please welcome
back to the show Steve Keane. Steve Keane, good to see you. Welcome to the good of you back again,
my good talk. This is a monumental podcast for three reasons. One, it's my last podcast of 2023
recording. Two, it's my first podcast on prep for a colonoscopy, so hopefully we won't have to
interrupt it too many times. And third, I think you have just finished a detective story about a
concept that I often talk about, energy blindness. I know the result of why our culture, why our
institutions are energy blind, but you have just written a book and a chapter on the energy
production function and you've gone back to the original papers from the classical neoclassical
economists and figured out why humanity has over time completely neglected the role of energy
in our descriptions of wealth and productivity. So we could talk about climate change, you know a
lot about that, we could talk about money and you know a lot about that and we probably should,
but today I want to just unpack your story of what you've been working on the last couple months
with respect to energy blindness. Okay, let's roll. First question. All right, so take me to the
beginning. We had classical economists back in the day, right? Yeah, and virtually every economist,
if you ask them who's the father of economics, going to answer Adam Smith. And in a sense, I was
inclined that way, except that I've read previous economists to Smith as well,
including the physiocrats. And my attitude was that the physiocrats were more advanced on important
issues, both macroeconomics and the role of energy in production than who were the physiocrats.
They were a bunch of 19th and 18th century French, mainly French, but also some Irish
economists who worked in French. And this is in France. And this is before we actually had
the term of economist in many ways. So there are people who are trying to analyze how the production
system works. And the they're called physiocrats because the leading personality, the leading
intellect in the group was Francois Connais. And Connais was the physician to the king of France.
And he was working at the time when we were having the very first autopsies to find out,
you know, what was inside a body, because for a long time in the West, there were religious
laws, rules against carving open a dead body. And then we started to do it. And Connais was
involved in this. He found all these tubes running all over the body and had this vision of a system
of circulation for the body. And then when it came to looking at the economy, they had the same
idea. There's a system of circulation, goods go from one spot to another money goes in the
opposite direction. And there was this sense of saying, we can see the economy is a dynamic
system in the same way we're now realizing the body is because all these tubes flow down and
flow back up again, the arteries go through the body, they become veins come back up again,
there's circulation of blood, there's mixing of blood with oxygen, all these sorts of things were
the vision and in that sense, the basic paradigm they started from wasn't mechanics as neoclassical
economists have ended up doing, it was biology. And that was a far more sensible starting place.
And so instead of calling them bureaucrats, they were physicians that were advising the king. So
they call them physiocrats. Well, the most dominant personality was Cannae. And there's
two combinations. He was a physician for the king, literally the king's physician. Now,
that did two things, gave him enormous prominence. It also gave him plenty of spare time because
he only got one person to occasionally have to do something medical with. So for the rest of the
time he was working in trying to work, and the interest was in how the economy functions as a
sort of monetary and physical goods version of a body circulation system. This was in the 18th
century in Europe? 1700s, yeah. So as people like William Petty was trying to work out how the economy
functioned in England at similar times, Sip Smith afterwards, of course. But the curious thing about
being based in France is that France at the time compared to Scotland, it's we're not comparing
France to England, but France to Scotland because of Smith. France was still overwhelmingly
agricultural, okay? Agriculture dominated production in France. You had, you know, some
level of manufacturing with nothing like what was developing in Scotland at the time. Sip Smith's
book came out, I think the same year as the very first James Watt steam engine was sold. And but
of course we had the previous models before which are much less efficient was still steam engines.
And you had steam power and water power and wind power being used in all the factories in Scotland.
But from the point of view of the physiocrats, they said, well, what they were looking at was,
you know, rural France. And what they saw was a farmer would plant one seed and a thousand seeds
would come out of it. And so their orientation was that wealth comes from the land. And it isn't
the labor that goes into making something that gives it the value. They didn't even talk about
that. Well, they did, but we're as a secondary factor. So they said the source of wealth is the
land. And the husbandman as they call the farmer is the one who exploits what they call the free gift
of nature. And their perspective was first of all to say that the land is the source of all value.
That was the opening four or five words of Richard Cantillon's an essay on economic theory,
which was published in French 21 years before Smith wrote the Wealth of Nations.
First of all, for the French, not only did Smith read French, he was in France taking a young
nobleman around for education and met Cannae. So he was quite aware of the literature in French
before he wrote the Wealth of Nations. And we'll never know whether Smith derived his ideas partially
from the physiocrats and interactions with them, because he insisted that all his notes were burnt
upon his death. So we don't have any long term record of influences on Smith. But this school
of thought was very strong and had a definitive foundation for explaining where wealth came
from. And it wasn't from labor, it was from land. And then there was steam engines. And we were off
to the races. And our stories changed influenced by Adam Smith.
Well, that's much right in the wrong direction. Because what the physiocrats also said was,
because with land, they said, well, the land receives the free gift of nature. And that
had many potential meanings. But fundamentally, from our perspective, looking back, it was energy.
Because the sun's energy lands on the soil, plants absorb the energy, the plants grow,
the husbandman's actual labor is far less important than the productivity of the soil
and the exposures of natural elements, the climate, the sunshine coming in. And that was the source
of wealth. And they said the husbandman is the only source of wealth. And if you look at the
writings that people like Turgo and Candle on and can they had, and you look at it from the
point of view that you and I have of the role of energy and production, they are fundamentally
saying the free gift of energy is what enables us to produce anything. And what we often would
be called a surplus by other schools of thought is the gap between the energy put in by the husbandman
and the energy retrieved. And there's a wonderful sentence from Turgo, where he says the husband
receives the free gift of nature, which he did not pay for and which he sells. Okay.
Well, that's a microcosm of our entire economic system today.
Exactly. So in that sense, the physiocrats had it right. The one mistake they made,
and this is the thing where the whole thing fell over. And Smith played a role on this,
is that they could not see the same thing in manufacturing. So what they saw for manufacturing
is that manufacturing receives the output of the agricultural sector and transforms it to
some different form, but does not add value. Now, what we know, of course, is that manufacturing
also receives the free gift of nature in the sense that we're exploiting fossil fuel energy,
which has been there for millions of years, but it's basically stored solar power.
And without that input in manufacturing, there'd be no production for manufacturing either.
And at the same point, the manufacturing transformed the free gift of nature, which
is raw energy, into useful energy. So the sensible perspective would have been
to go from the physiocrats' vision of the role of agriculture to then say,
well, it's also in manufacturing. And Smith could have done that, because Smith could have thought,
well, we don't have much farming in Scotland comparatively compared to France,
but we do have manufacturing. And in manufacturing, we're using the free gift of
nature as well. We're putting coal into the early steam engines. We've got water power,
which is another gift of nature, wind power to some extent. But predominantly,
it was steam power and charcoal power, and coal. Coal is becoming very important,
becoming dominant actually, before Smith published The Wealth of Nations. So he could have said,
well, that's also the free gift of nature. But he didn't. What he said instead was,
labour is the source of value. What you have out of that is a switch from seeing
the external, the existing universe, being the source of us transforming the inputs we
form, find there, into something useful for us, which is consistent with the laws of
the laws of thermodynamics, into labour being the source of wealth and division of labour
being the source of growth of wealth. And this is all effectively inside the economy.
There's no reference to outside the economy. So I see Smith, by simply changing one word,
you have Richard Cantillon saying that land is the source of wealth,
to Smith saying labour is the source of wealth. And that completely pushed economics off the rails.
We can only speculate why that happened, but possibly because Scotland was
further along on industrialization. And all of a sudden, we had this wealth and
higher goods and services than a few decades earlier. And there was maybe a human exceptionalism
dynamic. Look at how clever we are and how industrious our citizens of Scotland are.
We're creating these machines and we're creating this productivity. And so that statement, that
shift from the focus of free gifts from nature to the husbandman, the farmer or the labourer,
that was the origin of our current energy blindness, you're saying?
I think so. I can't criticise Smith for this. I'm a great pity,
but I can't criticise him because he had no idea of the consequences. He didn't know
the laws of thermodynamics. He can't criticising for breaching something which wasn't developed
for a century after he actually spoke. But when you look at the... I'm not going to look at some of
the... And even the word energy was invented after he wrote Wealth of Nations, I think.
Did you know either 802 or 809, I think. So the word itself was taken from Greek,
but it was made up in the early 18th century by an English... 19th century.
Early 19th century. It's easy to make that mistake.
No, no, no. I always get that confused too. Sorry, I interrupted you. You were saying...
It's quite an 802. So we can't blame them for not using post-language and we can't
blame Smith for not knowing that there's a law of conservation of energy.
The story continues, though. It wasn't just Smith. The heirs compounded. So what's next?
Well, the next stage is once he said... Smith said that labour is a source of all value
and division of labour is the increase in value and wealth.
You then... Initially, that was used by Smith and Ricardo to attack feudalism and argue in favour
of capitalism. When you look at the role of the classical theory of economics played,
it was to promote trade, it was to promote freedom of movement and freedom of enterprise
against all the restrictions of the feudal system. So in that sense, it was pro-capitalist and that
was the way in which it was used by Smith and Ricardo. Nobody regarded... Smith and Ricardo
was calling for the other side of capitalism, but along comes Marx. Now, Marx... Not only Marx
were plenty of what they call Ricardian socialists before Marx turned up, who took the same idea
that if labour is a source of value, why does... Is the wage not equal to the entire product?
Why does profit exist? That was the twist that was then taken of the interpreting...
Interpreting the classical argument that labour is the source of wealth. Say, well,
it were the source of wealth, why don't we get it? And you have to go back and think about the state
of industry in the... In the 18th and early 19th centuries, kind of fall over that 21st century
thing in the 1900s, all the damn time. But if you think about the state of Scotland at the time,
if I have any analogy to what it was like, it was Calcutta in the 1950s. It was
stench everywhere from pigs being disemboweled, chemicals pumping out, smoke out of the chimney
stacks, et cetera, et cetera. And I've forgotten who coined the phrase of the dark satanic mills,
but that was what Scotland looked like at the time. And you had people who used to work in an
agricultural environment with quite a few rights that the peasants had back in that time,
who pushed through the enclosures movement, became landless labourers fundamentally, had to work
in the industrial systems, then found themselves working 14-hour days, normally six days a week,
thank God, for the Sabbath. But six days a week, often sleeping inside the factories,
it wasn't exactly going to conducive to making you think what a great system capitalism is.
On the other hand, of course, the capitalists themselves were benefiting from all this,
and bleeding the industrialisation and so on. And the technological change, they thought it was
great. So what you had was for the working class and for the urban poor, Ricardian and
Smithian economics became a ground for arguing for revolution and for a fairer share of what's
being produced. And that political shift was brought to a head by Marx in starting in 1857,
where he was prominent well before then, but 1857 with his work on what's called the Grangerisa.
And arguments for developing Marx's particular version of the classical theory. And Marx was
far more eloquent than saying capitalist exploit labour. He actually said capitalist pay workers
precisely what they deserve to be paid in the commodity production system. They get their
means of subsistence. That's the cost of reproducing the worker. It's again for the buyer of labour
power that there's a gap between labour and labour power, but by no means an injustice to the seller.
That's a quote from Marx. But anyway, what you got was Marx being used as the means for saying
let's have a revolution. And now in that setting, the classical school from being regarded as positive
by the capitalist class and the ruling class. The classical school being Adam Smith in the lake.
Adam Smith, Ricardo, and through to ultimately to Marx. But all the time there was a subgroup,
which was called, it had no particular name, but they were what I'd call proto-neoclassical
economists. And the most prominent would be Augustine Corner, who gave us the mathematics that
did what's called corner oligopoly theory and so on, comes from Augustine Corner back in the 1820s.
And Jean Baptiste, who was a complete believer in a utility maximizing view of human behavior
and equal utility maximizing view of capitalism as a system. And he was vehemently pro-capitalism,
which I'm not criticizing here at the moment at all, but I'm saying he had a subjective theory
of value, whereas the classical school was objective. So Ricardo, for example, at one stage said
the price of co-products are set by the cost of production and not, as has often been said,
by supply and demand. So Ricardo was anti-supply and demand. Most people, including the classical
economists, don't realize that. But when Marx became the bastion of the classical school,
this is in the 1860s and 1870s. At that stage, there was a very rapid turnover in economic
teaching at the universities where the subjective theory of value became dominant.
And it's passing on from, say, in Corner to Marshall and Jevons and Wal-Rah.
Can you briefly state what subjective versus objective theory of value would be?
The objective value theory says that the price of something is set by cost of production.
So they ultimately, the cost of production determines the price something sells for.
Whereas the subjective theory says it's a combination of the utility maximizing
desires of the buyer and the profit maximizing desires of the seller. The two together set
the price. And as Marshall ultimately says, it is as ridiculous to ask whether supply and demand
sets price as to ask which blade of a pair of scissors cuts the paper. So they saw both having
to play a role. But they also came down to saying that it isn't just labor that is a source of value.
Capital is also a source of value. Now, Marx, when you read Marx properly, and I think there are three
people have done that on one of them. Rostovsky is another. But most Marxists don't realize that
Marx actually had an explanation for how capital can add value or be a source of surplus value in
his terms. I won't get into that here, but that's saying the Marxists don't read Marx properly.
Let me ask you a clarifying question because where we're headed, we're going to talk a lot
about labor and value. Labor is pretty clear. It's the husbandman. It's the worker. Now,
how do you define capital back then? And is it the same today?
That's two of the most difficult questions in economics. Capital is fundamentally machinery.
Capital is a word for machinery, which we also use almost identically as a word for
money, a cumulative value of money. There is no simple mapping from the physical machines
to the monetary value of machines. And we'll talk a bit about how an energy approach makes
it easy to understand the role of machinery later in our conversation.
So with the old equations, if you substitute the word machinery for capital, and then you
say labor and machinery in these 19th century formulas, that would be correct. That would be
the same inference. That makes sense. So the Marx art, the physical machine adds no value to
production. This poses a distortion of his own philosophy, which is a yet another issue for
another day. But if you have the labor theory of value interpretation of Marx, a machine adds
nothing. It simply contributes to the output, what it cost to make it in the first place. And
there's a famous phrase in volume one of Capital, which says, no matter how productive the machine
is, if it costs 150 pounds to make or three weeks of labor, then it adds to the product 150
pounds or three weeks of labor. So it simply transfers its value, whereas the increase in
value comes from labor. That was Marx's labor theory of value argument. Now that
contributes to the whole political battle between workers and capitalists over who should get
profit, should the capitalists deserve a profit, etc, etc. And that was where the classical school
suddenly became on the nose for most capitalists. So the subjective arguments of Sey and Corno
and then ultimately, Vorar, Jevons and Menga became much preferred. And I really don't know the
politics of the switch in the 1870s. But in 1850s and mid 1860s, the classical school was still
dominant at universities and dominant in public discourse. By the 1870s, it was the neoclassical
school, which was completely dominant. And classicals were effectively marginalized, pardon
the pun. So the marginal school takes over. And the argument is both labor and capital
contribute to production and contribute to output. So Marx actually directly or indirectly
influenced the birth of what we refer to as neoclassical takeover of economics?
Yeah. Now, when that happened, of course, the real thing I'm interested in is not Marx in
particular. It's a piece of particular. He's an actor in causing this, but he's not the main
stage. What started with the physiocrats had the proto version of energy as the source of value.
And that's correct. We know from the point of theory of thermodynamics, we know that
there is a set amount of energy in the universe. And what humanity does in its manufacturing
process is take significant concentrations of energy and use those to either to convert energy
something more useful or to do motive force with that energy. And that is work. And that is what
enables us to produce goods and services. But we cannot create energy. We take energy in one form.
We put it transferred into another. We actually degraded according to the second law of thermodynamics.
So there's no surplus in that sense. What there is is a gap between the energy input needed to
harness this free energy and the energy in the free that the energy contained by that free
source as well, the coal mine or etc, etc. And that is what we're we're taking advantage of.
So we should have an energy theory of production. And if we'd had the physiocrats, we would have
got there because once the physicists in that sense caught up with the economists and developed the
laws of thermodynamics, economists said, ah, that's what we've been talking about.
And we can simply integrate perfectly with that. Instead, we got the wars between labor and capital,
workers and capitalists over who's the who's the source of value. And that completely ignored the
role of energy. And so the neoclassical economists starting in the 1870s continued to build on this
separation from a biophysical physiocrat explanation of our wealth and productivity,
kind of at the same time that coal started to expand, we had just found oil and we started
the Industrial Revolution in earnest. Then what happened in the field of economics and the description
of our productivity and bring us gradually up to the present moment?
Well, you had Kanae having a theory of production, which is fundamentally a
multiplier version of investment and being multiplied by transfer between different sectors
and so on. The first mathematical models came out with both Marx and the classical school
and the neoclassical school. But there was still no, as we're used to today, no models,
no series of production, which is the mathematical equation saying, here are your inputs, there's
your GDP as output. So until that point, it was just stories and rhetoric. And all of a sudden,
then at the late 19th century, we started to put math to it and equations.
Marshall and Volra and Jevons being the main three that did that, Marshall writing into the 1920s.
But the first attempt to have an actual, it's called aggregate production function.
So trying to relate the aggregate level of output to the aggregate level of inputs at the level of
a macro economy, the first attempt to do that in the neoclassical school was the Cobb Douglas
production function. And in both Marshall's work and in Jevons' work, you can find this idea of
inputs having marginal productivity. So you put a certain amount of labor in and you get a certain
level of output, you add more labor, you get not as much increase in output as the previous level,
but still some positive returns. So this idea of marginal productivity of labor
and marginal productivity of machinery, which turned up in the neoclassical theory.
And I think in the 1890s, J.B. Clarke developed the marginal productivity theory of income
distribution, which said that workers receive the marginal product and capital,
capitalists receive their marginal product. And so that concept became built into neoclassical
theory. So the wage is supposed to reflect the contribution to output of the last worker
hired and the rate of profit is supposed to reflect the contribution to output of the last
meat machine turned on. But how did they know what percentage of the value of the
product that was created was from the worker and from the machine?
Well, they didn't actually know in that sense, and they're wrong with the answers they gave.
But the basic concept with the marginal productivity theory of income distribution
was that the marginal products would be based upon the share of income going to different
what economists call factors of production. So if labor gets 75% of GDP, and that was roughly
the term that applied in the 1920s, and capitalists get 25%, then the marginal product of labor
is 0.75 and the marginal product of capital is 0.25. So that was the general expectation,
but nobody put a mathematical number on it until Cob and Douglas, one being a mathematician,
the other being an economist. Douglas being the economist.
And this was 1920s, 1930s?
1928, I think it was. Cob and Douglas?
Yeah. So they had painstakingly assembled a set of index numbers. Again, this is why
it's important to know your history because as well as knowing how things happen, you also know
the context in which they happen. And today we're used to getting GDP figures off the
bureau of economic analysis every three months. And then we get a breakdown of the
distributions from different sectors, and there's huge tables and statisticians,
groups of statisticians that are involved in making this all look consistent. Back then,
there were no numbers. There was one person maintaining an index series for GDP,
but there were no numbers on the amount of labor and no numbers on the amount of machinery.
So Douglas made up fairly carefully, but put together a number of different series that
he could find to produce an index of labor, an index of capital, and had this index of
the output of machinery, not the entire GDP, that was preexisting at the time,
and put together the data, annual data between 1899 and 1922. And then fitted that data
with the mathematician Cobb doing the work there. Again, of course, this is on paper.
We probably had manual calculators back then. I imagine that would be extremely expensive.
They would have existed. Maybe it was done by hand, but the calculations were much,
much more painstaking than we're used to today by pumping numbers into a
computer programming, almost instantly getting the result. So just 23 numbers,
all index numbers, all starting at 118.99, and then going through to different values in 1922.
And when they did a regression against that, they use what's called a homogenous of degree one
production function. And what that means is that you had output being some constant, and it was a
constant, not a variable, a constant, multiplied by capital raised to one power times labor raised
to one minus that power. And so the question was, what is the term? I'll call it alpha here,
because they use k and one minus k, and that's getting too confusing. Most economists use alpha
for the share of machinery in GDP, a share of capitalists in GDP. Now, back at the time,
roughly speaking, the share of capitalists in GDP is 25%. So the value for alpha is 0.25,
and therefore the value for one minus alpha is 0.75. And the reason it's homogenous of degree one,
if you multiply all labor and all capital, you double it, you get twice as much output
because the exponents sum to one. So that's the term they found. And lo and behold,
the regression came back with values of 0.76 and 0.24. And they said, hey, this is so close to what
we expected. That's pretty close to 0.75 and 0.25. Yeah. So they got a number which, and in fact,
I've redone it just using a modern program, of course, and I get exactly 0.25. So you get a
very strong apparent confirmation of their data. And the correlation, they gave this a correlation
coefficient. The r squared is the square of that, of course. And the r squared for doing it now is
0.94. Now, the correlation coefficient is 0.97. The response is all that looks fabulously high
correlation coefficient. And it fits exactly what we expected from neoclassical theory. Now,
they got a lot of pushback initially, but that was a major reason for why it became so popular,
because the results looked very strong and they supported neoclassical theory.
But the entire formula was based on a data set from 1899 to 1922.
Yep. And what Colburn Douglas did, they showed the numbers, the regression for
regressing GDP against the index for capital and the index for labor. But they said that their
change data also gave the same correlation coefficient at 0.97. And what they used was not
what we do use today, which is the annual change in the indices would take the log and
the log difference. Or you'd, they'd look at percentage rate of change and say,
what's the percentage rate of change? That, when you do it, and this is where I start finding a
bit of, you know, there's a hole in the bucket, derelizor, derelizor. The correlation coefficient
that they claimed was 0.97 for exactly the same value of alpha. So you got a, you know,
higher at confirming, you didn't just get the high correlation with what's your GDP and out labor
and capital, which are all growing. Okay. So there's a good, you know, the fact that they're all
rising at the one time will give you a higher correlation. They said same correlation coefficient,
same value for alpha. When I do it over the alpha minus 0.15.
And why is that? Because they didn't use the annual, the percentage change. They used the
three year moving average. And I don't know, there would be, you know, we can't, I wouldn't
be able to find the original notes, but it wasn't the, the same result that they got for the
data, which was all rising at one time. And any statistician will tell you that if you have data,
which is all rising, you're going to get a high correlation coefficient
just because they're all growing, not because they're related to each other.
So we should be looking for the differences and try to get something where the trend
should be around zero. And, and even that doesn't apply to the first differences here.
But it's, in other words, they didn't get the results that people accepted that they did.
And the confidence people had in their results wasn't justified.
But people were confident. Like in the 1930s and 1940s, this was considered a valid and profound
explanation of the inputs and outputs of an economic system describing our wealth and productivity.
Yeah. Now we had all sorts of other approaches to how you model production in the meantime.
And there was a long time, and this actually still applied when I was doing my PhD back in the 1980s
or 1990s, that the neoclassical economists were doing what they call computable general
equilibrium models. And these models had an input-output table as part of their production
system. Now that's all sorts of issues for them, which we dig in that's
tangential to what we're talking about. But at the same time, you had the rise of the,
what they call, called themselves the new classical economists. And these were neoclassical
economists who wanted to revive the idea of the market economy being perfectly flexible,
get rid of this nasty Keynesian stuff. And they started using, much more commonly,
the Cobb-Douglas production function, because they replaced an input-output model for the
production today with the idea of production over time. And they went back to a single commodity
idea. This is the aggregate production function. Of course, they used the Cobb-Douglas production
function. Now, we've had 30 or 40 years of that, and typical neoclassicals, they don't know their
own history. They've forgotten they ever used anything different to that. And all of them
use a Cobb-Douglas production function. And they've all done what Solo brought in in the 1950s.
And that's bringing in what they call technological change as part of the system. So they have
output as a product of the state of technology, which they use the capital that are A for,
multiplied by labor to 1 minus alpha times capital to alpha. And that's where I think
everything went wrong. Not that there was already going wrong with Cobb-Douglas, but
this is where you got myths taking over economics. Well, it was already going wrong with Adam Smith.
Yeah. It's era after era. I can define economics as compound era.
All right. We're going to eventually translate all this because I'm mostly tracking with,
I mean, you're an economist and you're a friend and you care about the system of humans and our
planet. But you're also here, you're functioning as a historian, which is a totally separate skill
that you have. And I've talked to you offline on what you've all been working on. And it's
quite the detective story. So keep going and bring us up to the present. So what did Solo do?
Well, you started with the Cobb-Douglas having their function was a constant,
multiplied by alpha the 1 minus alpha times K to the alpha as the production function.
Now, then one of the criticisms that was made of Cobb-Douglas by other neoclassicals is always
technological change here. And Solo said, well, we can bring technological change in. This is in 1956
and says 57. We can bring it in. And the way we have to do it, there's a cost to actually read
them here. The new wrinkle I want to describe is an elementary way of segregating variations in
output per head due to technical change than those due to changes in the availability of
capital per head. Naturally, every additional bit of information has its price. In this case,
the price consists of one new required time series to the share of labor in total income
and one new assumption. And here we go. That factors are paid their marginal products.
There was rather than being a mathematical derivation by Cobb-Douglas that alpha is 0.25 and
1 minus alpha is 0.75. Let's just assume that they're what the current values of the share of
labor and capital in output are. Alpha is 0.3, which means capital is to get 30% of output and
labor gets 0.7. So we just assume that. And then we fit the data to the, we have a data series for
labor, a data series for capital, a data series for GDP. We don't have technology. So the gap
between the result we get for GDP and the sum of labor and capital is what they call the growth
of technological change. And that ended up being 0.85. So 85% of the variation in output
was explained not by the proportions of labor and capital to each other, but by this technological
component. And that became known as a solar residual. So hold on a second. So from 1928 onwards,
they had 75% was described by labor and 25% by capital of our productivity.
Productivity is basically could be, could be said our wealth change year over year. Then
30 years later, they changed it and said that 85% is, is unexplained, but it's by some change in
technology. Yeah. And how does technology, how does technology in, in, in, in solos definition
versus your definition, how does technology differ from capital?
Well, this is the problem. Technology, in my opinion, is embodied in the capital.
In that sense, when we have technological change, we get as new machines that have a
higher capacity to process energy and produce more complex goods than the previous ones had.
So Cobb and Douglas were, in that sense, right, not to differentiate out technology and capital,
but by solar bringing in this idea of a residual. First of all, he assumed that the
exponents for labor and capital were given by income distribution data. By that stage,
it was 30% going to capitals rather than 25%. So he did do data from, from the 1920s to the 1950s
at the, the 0.25, 0.75 shifted to 0.3 and 0.7. That's what he found when he's looking at his,
his, in his paper, he does include the national distribution of income. And it's pretty much
the 30%, 70% capitalists and workers. But he found, he looked at the numbers and said,
wait a minute, there's something not right here. And when you find a residual of something,
a residual effect, sometimes it's 5% or 10%. But in his case, it was 85%.
85%. The vast majority of the productivity was not just, could not be described by capital and
labor. Well, actually 87.5% national paper. And that's, that's okay in one sense. You can say,
well, the most of our improvement isn't because of adding more labor or more capital or getting
the ratio between labor and capital correct. It's technological change. But fundamentally,
that was because technological change turns up on the machines. And you think the labor component,
when we're talking about unskilled workers, you basically have people working on a process line.
I've actually done that at some stage in my youth. But, you know, you just get told,
now press this button, pull this lever, press that put that, dig that hanging magic and that
watch them or call it. And that's your role. Okay. So what, where the technological change
actually turns up as the machine itself. So if you go back before I worked as a manual
hand inside a factory, one search, you would have used rivets to weld aluminium together. And now
you're using spot welding machines. And so the technology is actually embodied in the machinery.
And this is where the confusion of machines with money becomes a reason why you,
your mind gets clouded if you don't distinguish the two. But the terms we use, capital for machinery
and capital for money, and capitalists for the social class, does confuse the matters.
And what I'm talking about is progressive confusion.
Yeah, I'm a little confused myself now, but I know you're telling a really important story,
which you outlined to me on the phone. I mean, on our call earlier this week. So keep going.
And by the way, from Marx onward, Marx and Cobb and Douglas and Solo in the 1950s,
they're all using terms like land and capital and technology. And the word energy is found nowhere
in these papers, correct? The only one who really does, I mean, for example,
Marshall talks about energy. He uses the word 79 times in his Principles of Economics. Every last
time talking about the innovative spirit of humans, not energy. Right, energy is our,
is our, yeah, not fossil energy, but the human spirit. Yeah, human spirit. So he actually talked
about energy as various raw materials, which of course contain energy, coal and oil as inputs.
But when it came to talking about energy itself, there was no awareness of the theories of
thermodynamics or the, the role of energy as a production force. Whereas in Marx, Marx was actually
reading the early thermodynamic workers and going to lectures in London and so on. So there's more
awareness of the role of energy in Marx than there is in the neoclassicals. But what's happened
is energies dropped completely out of the picture at this stage. So first of all, Cobb and Douglas
give you a theory of production, which fits the marginal productivity theory of income distribution.
They give you coefficients, which are what neoclassicals expect them to do,
but they're derived from the data. And then along comes a cell and said, let's assume those
coefficients are correct. So the marginal product of labor is 0.7 and it is equal to their
contribution, their share of GDP. And then let's work out the residual on, oh my God,
87.5. But that's okay. We're talking about technological change. But it was an unnecessary
fudge. And it then shielded neoclassical economists from looking at the data again
to see whether the share of workers in GDP is equivalent to the contribution that labor
makes to output and capital makes to output. And that's where it goes all orry, because when you
take a look at the data that solar was looking at and data subsequent to that, and you do a regression
based on the change in white GDP, the change in labor and change in capital,
rather than getting a coefficient for labor of capital of 0.3, which is close to the income
distribution, you get a coefficient for capital of 0.85. And that suddenly means hang on a sec,
we've got a contradiction between an empirically derived term for the contribution of capital to
output and the theory of income distribution. The return to capital is actually much higher.
So the the exponent for capital is much higher than capital share in GDP. And suddenly,
we would have seen this if solar hadn't jumped in with the idea of separating our technological
change from capital itself. So that was like red herring that took us down a different flawed
pathway on understanding the production function. So what happened after? Go ahead.
We're leaving energy out all the way through. So what we have is in the neoclassical camp,
the idea that labor and capital get the payment of the labor and capital affects
their marginal product becomes just ingrained in the mindset of neoclassicals. And they stick
with the coefficients that that solar first worked on in 1957, and half a century still today,
still today, they haven't changed them. So if you look in any almost any neoclassical paper,
it will assume the exponent for capital is 0.3, and the exponent for labor is 0.7.
Using data that's that's solo used from 1928 to 1950s.
Yeah, if anybody's smart, they might go and take a look at the income distribution and find that
capital now gets 40% and labor gets 60%. So they change to the 0.4 and 0.6. But they simply
assume they can use the income distribution data to choose what the exponents are on the
production function. When you're getting a PhD in economics today, or when you were in school,
was it a requirement to read these fundamental papers of Marshall and Cobb Douglas and Marx and
no, no, I mean, that's one of the reasons why neoclassical economics has gone so totally off
the rails, they don't even know their own history. And so they did, if you go to a like when I went
through, you had to sit through master's courses on advanced micro and advanced macro and so on,
they were part of, there's now what's called an America ABD, all but dissertation. So you do,
and the American system has enormous coursework load, and I'm not sure, thankfully, they didn't
go through the American system. But I think something like two thirds of your time is spent
doing courses rather than writing a thesis. And in you don't go back, the oldest paper you might
read is one where the Lucas critique was developed in the 1970s. So they just don't know their own
history. What's the Lucas critique? There's another rabbit hole, but arguing that microeconomic
macro should be based on micro, that's the fundamental idea behind the Lucas critique.
Okay, so from Adam Smith, to Marx, to Marshall, to Cobb and Douglas, to Solo,
we've had a progression away from the physiocrats of something physical. Back in France,
it was land and the free energy from the earth. And then we had a bonanza of fossil carbon added
to our economic system. What happened next? Solo all the way to the present day, or was there
another? Solo all the way to the present day, in terms of production and function that neoclassicals
use. And then, of course, energy, we've got to bring our people back to energy all the time,
because the thing is, what happened to energy? We know energy is absolutely critical for production,
but it's left out of these theories. And you then had a group of non-orthodox economists,
Bob Ayers being the main one, a physicist who became fascinated with economics, and then
realized economics didn't include the role of energy and thought we've got to bring energy
into production, working with Coomble and quite a range of other non-orthodox economists.
I know both Bob and Reiner. And so did I. And you. Yeah.
So for our Bob Harding, what about three, four weeks ago?
I know. I know. I saw that. Maybe two months ago. Now, I'm glad I got to see him.
Would have been only two months before he died in Holland at a conference that we caught up.
So working with Bob, I thought we've got to bring energy in. There simply has to be a way
of bringing energy into production. And what Coomble and Bob were doing was, at some point,
they went from using total numbers to index numbers in what they call the Linux production
function. This was the attempt to bring energy in, but through the legs of the Cobb Douglas
production function. So at some point, they had the idea of index number values for output, labor,
energy and capital being part of the way they derived the Linux function.
And my discomfort was that fundamentally what they were doing, and this is what neoclassicals
themselves have also done, is add energy in as an additional factor of production.
So you see the way you produce output is you combine labor and capital and energy.
Now, there's two problems with that. One is that if you combine labor independently and
machinery independently and energy-produced independently, you don't have output. You've
got an explosion. Energy has to be an input to labor and capital. And so what finally occurred
to me, literally while being in Bob, is this flat in France, which was full of statues,
the walking through it one day and a trip from the bathroom, the little thought popped in my brain,
labor without energy is a corpse, capital without energy is a sculpture. And bang, that's it.
And I sat down at a table, five minutes typing in a program called MathCat, as it happens,
and feed that into the Cobduckers production function. So the basic idea was that energy is
not an independent factor. It's a factor you have to input to labor in one form and input
into machinery in a different form. Otherwise, they can't produce anything.
So it said differently, the laborers need food and housing and shelter and such,
and the machine's capital need to be turned on and powered by electricity or heat or movement,
absolutely requires energy. Without energy, the machines are worthless.
Yeah. Now, what then happened out of that was that in the Cobduckers production function,
if I fed energy as an input to labor, the basic point was that the number of workers you've got
times how much energy they consume multiplied by how much of that energy is used in production.
Now, if we go back to the days of the Roman slaves, most of the energy they consumed went
into production. Now, Feta-Pittons worked to the bone, and therefore, if they got given like
200 watts equivalent of energy input, they could put out 100 watts output, and so their factor is
50%. But if you fast forward today, you and I are surrounded by energy. We're consuming tens of
thousands of watts of energy in our houses with our devices, the heating, hot water, etc., etc.
But only a tiny amount of our energy actually now goes into production. And fundamentally,
the amount of physical work we can do runs out at about 100 watts. And I'm terrible on the terms,
by the way, being an economist, I haven't been properly trained on the terms of energy and
watts and jewels and so on. So I'll make all sorts of mistakes there. But the basic point is
the energy input of a worker to production is in terms of actual measures of energy is no greater
than it was 2000 years ago because we haven't evolved in any sense to be able to consume more
energy and output more energy. On the other hand, machinery has had an incredible increase in the
energy input that I mean, sharing can take. My favorite instance, I like what Musk is doing
with SpaceX. So I'm a bit of a space junkie. And a friend of mine was being abusive about this
last rocket blowing up. And I finally, I worked out what was the energy equivalent of the energy
inside that rocket was one third of a Hiroshima bomb. Now, for that to actually not lead to an
explosion, the devastated Boca Chica, but led to a rocket taking off and reaching 100 kilometers
above the surface in a few minutes, that is the amount of energy that the ultimate machine of
our day can consume. If you go back to James Watt steam engine, it was about 30 tons of coal a day.
Now, that's a dam site less than one third of a Hiroshima Hiroshima bomb. So most of what we've
seen is a growth in our wealth, our growth in the consumption levels we have have come from that
increase in energy. And now we're now we're cooking with gas in that sense, because we're
finally we're acknowledging the role of energy in production. But that's what may not what
neoclassicals doing, of course. So this was a story of kind of false turns at at intersections all
the way. And now, what would what would a neoclassical economist listening to this
last 45 minutes of say to you in in rebuttal or defense or contradiction or alarm?
I'm going to get a bit of fun here. Rudy, if you're listening, Rudy Bachman
sold me the case of saying what a neoclassical economist would say by actually saying what he
said in a paper, because now I'm going to come down to how have economists on the very few occasions
they've tried to include energy in a Cobb Doctor's production function, what they've done and
therefore deduced about the role of energy and production. And I really think I haven't got
a sense of him, but I laugh at him all the time. So I want to show what I do that. So Bachman and
Co, about three or four authors wrote a paper for German, a German work language working
paper with an English translation on the issue of what's going to happen to output in GDP of
Germany, if we're caught off from Russian energy during the Ukraine war. And the argument they
made was that was done by saying, we're going to include energy in the Cobb Doctor's production
function. Now what they did, and this is where the mistakes compound upon mistakes, is they took
the standard coefficients of 0.7 and 0.3 and then said, let's allocate 0.04 of the capital's
coefficient to energy. So you still got the same homogenous production. Because energy is four percent
of four percent of GDP. Therefore, okay, the coefficient is 0.04. And this is where you get
the total, this is where the twist comes in. Because the coefficient is 0.04, the mathematics
of the Cobb Doctor's production function that entails you, that the contribution of energy
to change in output is also 0.04. But all of the labor and all the machinery is fully dependent
on the energy. Far more important. Now here, I'm going to get some quotes out of Rudy here.
Okay. So they compared their work to the, what's called the Lyontia production function,
which we haven't even mentioned yet, but I'll bring that in now. And Lyontia,
vassally Lyontia, was one of the few winners of the Nobel Prize that I absolutely applaud.
He was a Russian mathematician, stroke economist, and he gave us input, output analysis, and a whole
range of other positive contributions. But when looking at the ratio, a good level of capital,
a level of output in most economies doing whatever, how other than others were developed,
what he realized was the ratio of labor to capital to output was roughly constant,
different between different countries, very different between developing and developed
countries. But generally speaking, the ratio, whichever your way was roughly constant. And
he then said you could use that as an aggregate production function. So rather than saying the
aggregate level of output is, you know, labor to one power times capital one minus that power,
you said output is capital divided by capital output ratio. And it was just an empirical
regularity. And the post Keynesian school, which I'm part of, basically said that'll be our production
function. So rather than the complicated neoclassical with, you know, exponents and marginal products,
et cetera, et cetera, we just say output is K divided by V. And V, normally in terms of the
conventional figure, people normally used about point about three for the value of V. So output
each year is one third the value of capital that same year. And that's what near and then we get
ridiculed for that. And because it's all you don't enable the possibility of substitution between
labor and capital as input. So you must be less sophisticated than we are with the
production function that can enable for substitution of labor for capital.
So Rudy then dived in, and Rudy, which I've dived in this and took a look and compared
the Cobb Douglas production function to the Leontief using a form which is called constant
elasticity of substitution. But I won't go into that basically in regard the Cobb Douglas is one
extreme of that and the Leontief at the other. And they said that if you, if you have the
standard Cobb like this production function, then it tells you to have a 10% fall in energy
inputs, you will have a 0.4% fall in GDP. So we lose 10% of our energy and GDP goes down by 0.4%.
Yeah. Yeah. Now, that's ridiculous. I know. You and I both know that's ridiculous. But he didn't
know that because they don't look at the data. So what they then said was that, and this is the
quote from Rudy's paper, it's in the heading as extreme scenarios with low elasticity of
substitution and why Leontief production at the macro level is nonsensical. So they had the blue
dashed line and the figure shows that output falls one for one with energy supply into the Leontief
case. The marginal product of energy jumps to one over alpha, which is the exponent they use for it,
so one over 0.04. Well, the marginal products of the other factors falls to zero and then
is an assumption. If factor prices equal marginal products, this then implies the price of energy
jumps to one over alpha and prices of others fall to zero. This also implies expenditure energy
jumps to 100%, blah, blah, blah. We consider these predictions to be economically nonsensical.
They are, but not because the Leontief case is wrong. The Leontief actually fits the data.
It's because the assumption that wages equal marginal product of labor is wrong.
So it's an empirical contradiction of the neopastical theory of production.
And the basic argument is that they think that production is quite insensitive to energy. That's
also a quote from the paper. So because the exponent of 0.04, that means that 10% change in
energy causes 0.4% change in output. So labor is far more significant than capital
second and energy of far distant third. When you look on the data, energy is 100% of the answer.
Explain that. I mean, what is the truth based on all your work with Bob Ayers and Reiner Kuhl
and others? What is the actual equation of labor and capital and whatever other variables?
The basic truth is that the output is fundamentally energy transformed into a useful form.
If you take a look at the rate of growth of energy, the rate of change of energy,
and the rate of change of GDP at the global level, you find a correlation coefficient for them.
I'm looking for this now of 0.7 roughly. And the relationship between change in GDP
and change in energy is 0.97 times change in energy. So in other words, fundamentally,
what GDP is, is energy transformed into useful work. And so the core flawed assumption, which is
taken, built upon some basic flawed assumptions and changed over centuries, is that we can describe
our wealth. I mean, it's almost like there's been a supernova the last two centuries of energy
use and wealth and productivity. And people are just trying to scramble in real time putting
math equations on that and increasingly divorced from the truth because the supernova keeps growing.
And so the energy blindness is that adding more energy, particularly energy dense,
fossil energy to the whole thing every year, that itself, that little addition of more energy
is a big explainer of our productivity. It's the fundamental explainer. And therefore, if we,
and what we've really done over time is develop machines which can handle more and more energy,
more and more precisely, that's where our wealth has come from. And we've, again, economists have
been blind to that by having this, first of all, inversion by David Smith to throw out the physiocrats
and say, labor is the source of value. And then you have the neoclassical saying it's labor and
capital. Then you had Cobb and Douglas saying it's 0.7 and 0.3, which means that the contribution
of labor to change in output is 70%. And the contribution of capital is 30%. That then gets
locked in by a solo to turning their empirical nondiscovery into an assumption and then putting
it all in technological change which becomes disembodied from capital itself, but also hides
them from the fact that the relationship doesn't hold up on the data anymore anyway. And now,
when they come bringing energy, they just tack it on as a third factor and give it a coefficient
based on the percentage of energy in GDP, which is trivially low, and therefore say energy has
almost no role in production, which is complete bollocks. And part of the reason is that the
energy input into our machines and into our economy is only the cost of energy that it is to
extract, plus a little profit for the oil company or whatever. It's not the value that it provides,
which is four or five years of my physical labor and all that.
Yeah, I mean, seriously, this is Nobel Prize sort of observation,
I think, because it's so decoupled from what people say at high positions of authority in our
world. Again, I'll ask you what is just a standard economist, not Rudy, someone you know, but just
anyone listening to this who has a PhD in economics or maybe someone who's in grad school
getting a master's or a PhD in economics listening to this program,
is their initial reaction going to be one of critical rejection? Steve doesn't know what
he's talking about, or is it like, yeah? Absolutely. I mean, because it affects their
identity or because they know otherwise in their research? It affects their identity. I mean,
if a younger one might actually go, oh, hang on, that's surprising, you'll get a few who might
react that way and change, but the old ones are locked in their ways. Okay, so speak to the
young ones right now. If they're curious about this and something doesn't sit right with what
they've been told and what they've just heard, what would you recommend that they do to get clarity
on the truth? The main thing is to realize that economics can't be derived from the laws of
thermodynamics, but it can't be inconsistent with them either. And what you're being taught within
your production functions and so on is leaving out the role of energy in an absolutely critical way.
Now, if you go and want to do it empirically, you're going to take a look at what is the
relationship between energy and production, drive it empirically, and you'll find that
it's somewhere between like a point in GDP is 0.7 to say 0.95 minus 0.97 as I got in that particular
Excel regression of the value of change in GDP. So the fundamental insight from a thermodynamical
point of view within economics is that the first to a first approximation, GDP is energy
turned into useful work. And then that means that the whole argument you were taught in
neoclassical economics that the wage reflects the marginal product of labor is completely wrong.
The wage and the return to capital for that matter have nothing to do with their contribution to
production. What labor and capital do is harness energy successfully in factories to produce output.
And that will normally be done with machines that machines have very
fixed ratios of per workers per machine and energy throughput per machine. So fundamentally,
you get a fixed ratio on that sense. Leonty is an empirical observation we now have an explanation
for that explanation is that the Leonty production function is actually output is equal to machinery
multiplied by the efficiency with which machines turn energy into useful work.
Neoclassical economists I mean back when I was in school are among the smartest people in my class
and smart people can be fooled, but they're not dumb. So like really, it still today boggles
my mind how neoclassical economists can totally neglect energy given anyone with three minutes
on the internet can find that a barrel of oil has 5.7 million BTUs in it, which is a lot of energy
relative to the 0.6 kilowatt hours that I do per day. So what do they really think this?
They really do and the trouble is this is where your mind gets set by your training.
So if you get trained on the idea that production is a combination of technology,
labor and capital and energy doesn't even turn up there, you don't even think about energy and
you can be completely energy blind in the sense that I now lead that book with that it would like
where we know humans know better much about energy as fish do about water,
they simply take it for granted. And then you see this when neoclassicals actually come to pose
themselves the question of what is the role of energy in production. So this is again,
this is from the paper by Back When and Co about the impact of the loss of Russian energy on German
output and they to take the Klobdokos production function and differentiate it with respect to
the inputs and then say that we can say what's going to happen to GDP from a change in energy
and here's a quote from the paper. Therefore, for example, a drop in energy supply of minus 10
percent reduces production by 0.4 percent, which shows that production is quite insensitive to
energy as expected. This is expected. Production is quite insensitive to energy as expected.
Expected on neoclassical economists. Right, it's a tautology of sorts. It's a tautology. They think
that energy has a trivial role because it has no role in their production function. But when you
revise it... Why aren't there people calling them on this? Like a... Well, I am. The Prime Minister
or a Senator or a CEO. They all do one unit of economics. They all get the idea of labor and
capital producing output and the production function if they go that detailed in first year.
But fundamentally, they get taught the whole idea that we get paid our factor products and that
actually ideologically is very reinforcing for a CEO because it says my enormous weight per salary
is because of my huge contribution to production. So it ends up having an ideological role and that
lines them to the physical reality that you simply don't have that impact on production.
If you come down to the nuts and bolts of it, it's energy which is producing the output
and you are getting a share of it and now an overblown share given your system and the power
structure of capitalism. So if we truly defined energy correctly in the production function,
that giant gift from nature might not all be funneled to the top the way it is now.
And that of course leads to one of the reasons why people continue being energy blind because
it enables them to be blind to their outsized share of the wealth of the civilization
that goes their way. And also continues to indicate why we're blind to the waste component
as well because if you include that, that reduces. Yeah. The other side of the production
function is waste and when I do the ontario function which makes sense with the empirical
interpretation or the logical reinterpretation of the empirical regularity of the ontario
that output is capital divided by capital output ratio, the coming output is capital times the
efficiency with which machines turn energy into useful work, that coefficient is going to be less
than 0.5, substantially less than 0.5. So it means most of what we've used is waste, waste energy.
It can quantify it and say if the energy, the efficiency with which machines turn energy
useful work is about roughly 0.2 or 0.25, then 0.8 to 0.75 is of energy input produces waste.
And that's what we dump into the environment and that of course feeds back and damages our
capacity to produce output. If we had that inside 50 or 60 years ago, we would never have got to
the conundrum where we are now overlying so much upon fossil fuel energy for our production today.
Okay. I'm going to ask you an easier question but it might be a harder question for you specifically,
Steve. What would you tell to a graduate student learning about the world in another discipline
like philosophy or French or chemistry or biology who will never take a class in economics?
Can you, to those people, why is it important that energy underpins the production function
and that our economists and therefore our politicians and such have been misled about the
the core driver of our wealth the last century plus?
Fundamentally, humans as the lasation only exists because we exploit energy. If we didn't have
energy in the form of the coal and oil deposits we found, we would still be sitting around
fireplaces starting fires with flints. We might have moderately sophisticated culture to the
stage that you got with your animal power and slave power under Romans and the medieval period
and serfs and so on. But there wouldn't be the philosophy, there wouldn't be the art,
there wouldn't be the computers that we take for granted today. So if we don't understand
the role of energy, we don't understand where our civilization came from.
And how does your view and that of Bob Ayers and Reiner Kuml and other what we might call
biophysical economists or in your case post-Kinsey economists, how does your current
understanding of energy and the production function differ from the biophysical economists
that started to gain traction in the 1970s? You know, Howard O'odham and George Eskewer-Roligan
and Charlie Hall and such. Is it nuance? Is it different?
It is just basically finding a better way to put it together. I mean, for example,
Bob, of course, was in the house when I made that discovery with the listang in his flat.
And it took me 10 minutes or less to work out the mathematics. It's ridiculously simple.
But he then just said that that solves it. That rings in the role of energy.
So because he and O'Kuml had ever thought making energy and input into the labor and
capital, they had energy as a third factor. And once you've just said it's got to be an input,
it all falls apart, falls together, pardon me. I totally agree with that. But here's what I
don't understand. If we don't have energy, all technologies are sculptures. And I added to
your statement and said cities are museums. But we do have energy. And we're probably going to have
less energy in the future. But how we use that energy, how we combine that energy with materials
and human imagination and creativity, that does add something to just the raw value of the energy.
So it's the combination of machines, raw materials like copper and silicon and
phosphorus, you know, neodymium and water and phosphorus, and the fire, some electrons or flame,
either kinetic or potential energy. And that comes up with a product that humans value.
And so how do you distinguish the contribution of actually the flame or the electrons versus
the machine and the new invention? I'm actually going to go right back to 1774
and give you an explanation for that. And I quote this in my new book, because I think
Turgo wrote one of the most brilliant paragraphs in the history of economics. And I just wish this
had been where economics came from rather than 1776, two years later, with Adam Smith. So pardon
me, reading out a substantial slapper and looking above the camera to do it. The husband and the
mistakes are seen as just being with agriculture as any production system, including manufacturing,
obviously. The husband and the man is the only person whose labor produces something over and
above the wages of labor. He is therefore the sole source of all wealth. The land pays him
directly the price of his labor, independently of any other man or agreement. Nature does not
bargain with him to oblige him to content himself with what is absolutely necessary,
what she grants his proportional neither to his wants nor would have contractual valuation of
the price of his days of labor. And this is one of the punchlines. It is the physical result of
the fertility of the soil and of the wisdom, far more than of the laboriousness of the means with
which he is employed to render it fertile. So that's the role of humans in involving
concepts, changing how we bring out the energy. As soon as the labor that the husband produces
more than his wants, he can with this superfluity that nature records him as a pure gift over and
above the wages of his toil. There's energy return and energy invested by the labors of the
other members of society. This latter and selling to him gain only their livelihood,
but the husband and gathers beyond his subsistence a wealth which is independent and disposable,
which he has not bought and which he sells. Now all the ideas we're talking about are tied
up in that one paragraph. Earlier you said you had a quote that you start with a seed and
you plant it and nature gives you back 1,000 seeds. But what if the husband was really clever
and found out a way to plant a seed and get back 2,000 seeds? The gift would still be from nature,
but it was doubled because of his creativity and intelligence.
And that's the line in the middle. It is the physical result of the fertility of the soil
and of the wisdom, far more so than the laboriousness. So in the terms of wisdom,
what he's saying is we devise new ways of doing different things and that wisdom is far more
important than the effort we put in physically to do it. So again our ideas play an essential role
and we wouldn't be able to exploit this free energy without our minds that can devise new ways
of harnessing the energy far more rapidly and far more effectively. So the wisdom is definitely in
there and the wisdom itself turns up in the machines. So it is embodied in the machines. So
all this stuff, right back in 774, that paragraph has far more wisdom than the whole world of nations.
So this is all kind of testable although we're on a roller coaster ride. So I think there's a
possibility and I know this is a totally separate conversation that we could lose
20% of our energy in coming decades for various reasons or more or more. But let's just say 20%.
So I would think that would cause a 20% or more drop in GDP. What would economists say?
They'd say, of course, 0.8% drop in GDP. 0.8. That's a strict timeless thing.
Do you think most economists actually believe that?
Yep, I do. I've worked with them for long enough to know they swallow this stuff.
So if you look at the data, like changing in GDP and changing in energy, that's figure 57 at the
moment in my book, it may change. But it's such a one-for-one relationship, it's ridiculous.
And yet they don't even look at it. And when Rudy and Berkman and friends made that comment
about the 0.10% fall in energy, 0.4% fall in GDP,
obviously they didn't look at the data. And they ridiculed Leontia when Leontia actually
reproduces the data. That would be like the opposite of a Nobel Prize. We should develop
something like that. Well, the Nobel Prize isn't the opposite of a Nobel Prize. Do you
know why? No, I don't. Okay, so there's that.
In economics, yeah. The synergy. All right, big, big picture. Let's move to the stratosphere here.
What are the implications of everything that you've said for our modern society and for our future
and for our decisions and planning for that moment?
The fundamental grounding is that without energy, there is no GDP. And we have been getting our
energy out of fossil fuel forms. And of course, with fossil fuels, we generate carbon dioxide
that is causing global warming. And that is destabilizing the climate on which our production
systems depend. And we've been blind of that, particularly the economists who so-called specialists
in climate change, William Nordhaus and friends, have no idea of this either.
So that's another flaw in the production function is there's not the waste capacity that feeds back
in to the biosphere that is our only source of wealth. Because without oxygen and
viable ecosystems, we all die.
Yeah. Now, that's not concluded in the way the neoclassicals think about climate change.
And that's why we've got nonsense statements like by Nordhaus, for example, saying that
it's really, really difficult to find any direct impacts of the expected climate change
on the bulk of the economy in the next 50 to 75 years. Now, by the bulk of the economy,
all of manufacturing, even included all of mining, services, industries, government, etc., etc.,
could see no way in which climate change will affect that. Well, if we have energy, if we get
like a blanket ban on using fossil fuels because of totally destructive change to the climate
in the next five years or so, or 10 years, there'll be an incredible plunge in GDP.
And we're not prepared for it at all.
And I think if James Hansen and his colleagues are right, we're going to have a spike in
climate warming temperatures in 2024 because we're shifting from the PDO from La Nia to El Nio
on the backs of the sulfur aerosols being reduced as a masking of the thermal inertia.
So, we're going to see. And if we go up a half a degree Celsius next year, as they're suggesting,
that's going to have massive impacts around the world. And then, yes, you're right, people are
going to be like, oh my God, this is like real and our emissions are rising and fossil energy is to
blame. But I think most people still don't understand the deep linkage between fossil
energy and the size and scope of our economy because they're energy blind.
Yeah, and economists have contributed to this blindness rather than
clarifying that it's absolutely essential. And on your previous podcast here, this is your third
appearance on this show, you predicted that economists, because of their identities and
status and built personal situation, they will not change until there's a crisis.
So, can we anticipate what's going to happen with the environment with
oil depletion, though that's going to happen gradually, with what's coming and create some
blueprints and break grass and case of emergency plans that are actually based on
what a physiocrat might advise the French king, the modern equivalent of that?
Can we do that?
I think it's incredibly late timing to be doing that. But as you know, we've depended on
fossil fuels for about 85% of our energy. And that hasn't changed much in the last 20 years.
It's gone down to some extent for some time because of growth in fossil fuel production
decline in hydroelectric, which is the main form. That's the main form of renewables,
even now as hydroelectric, it's not wind and solar. So, we're going to see
quite serious climate catastrophes coming our way. The ones with most of the climate
scientists I'm in touch with are scared about are global famine caused by a collapse in
food output from one of the wheat belts or corn belts of the world. And that then leading to
social breakdown because suddenly we haven't got the food we need. Or, you know, wet bold
catastrophes, the other one, which would hit third world countries more than it would hit
westerns probably. But something which is catastrophic, which causes a massive collapse
in population and then leads to probably rogue behavior by governments around the world then
because we haven't managed to even reach an agreement to phase our fossil fuels
at the last cop-out meeting. It'll be every country for itself in what could be a very chaotic
environment, will be a very chaotic environment if we see something like a global famine.
So, you're saying that we shouldn't look to the neoclassical economists who are the
current economic shaman and cheerleaders of our cultural narrative of the early 21st century.
We shouldn't look to them to change their minds and chart a different course.
They will be the most shocked and most confused while it happens completely. They're useless.
They've led us astray. It's just been a cascade of errors right back to Smith as I've said that
led us to the situation. But the last people have any understanding of the physical role of
production on the planet are economists. And the last ones who realize the dangers of climate
change are also economists. So, I would just like kick them out of the room. They don't belong here.
I tend to agree, but let me play devil's advocate. There are a lot of bright,
pro-future young people in college, in graduate school, in postgraduate. Couldn't some of them
take the kernels of truth bombs that you've been laying out here and contribute to the science
and understanding and translate between what you're saying and what the traditional neoclassical
economics departments around the world? I suspect your answer is going to be no, because
their boss and the people that gets the funding are the tenured economists and they're not going
to fund this sort of research. Or what do you think? It's a waste of time. I mean, some of the
young ones are worth reaching to say, look, if the cards say join rethinking economics,
fight against your curriculum. But fundamentally, if you want people to give you a guidance right
now, it's going to be the engineers. And they're the ones we should be. Get the engineers to look
at it. The first thing an engineer is going to look at is the energy supply. That's the nature
of training of engineers. It's all about how you use energy and how you direct it to produce useful
outcomes rather than blowing things up. So, the engineers are the ones we need to rely upon,
and we should have been getting them to build the alternative technologies in the last 40 or 50 years
rather than me getting a lot of them to go off and work out as financial engineers instead and
give us speculative bubbles in real estate and shares. So, we have had a huge misdirection of
our intelligence for the last 40 or 50 years. And again, economists, it'll blame for that.
When does your book come out and what's it called?
Hopefully it'll be coming out. It depends upon the publisher's process, of course,
but hopefully by March, I would say. And the title is going to be the rebuilding economics
from the top down. Well, I've read the energy chapter and it is quite compelling. Steve, you
and I talk about what's going on now in the world, but I didn't know a lot of the things that you
have dug up by reading these original papers. You also told me that most people in economics
don't even read these original papers. No, they never go back and read the original.
Yeah, originals is just terrible. Yeah. So, this was a little bit of a Sherlock Holmes treatment
of the history of the production function and the complete absence of energy in describing
our wealth and productivity. And yet, energy is embedded in everything including the labor
and capital functions. Do you have any closing words for listeners who might be a little shell
shocked by this conversation? The main thing comes down to how economists, by not understanding
energy, have trivialized the dangers of climate change. So, we are likely to see that striking
this decade. I mean, we both know the potential 0.5 degree increase in global temperatures out of
the both El Nino plus the hypothetical role of losing, leaving the sulfur emissions as
we've been masking some increase in global temperatures. That should cause absolutely
chaotic weather, probably starting in the next northern summer. So, it's going to be brutally
certain that this starts happening and we have to prepare as soon as possible that all the XR
activists dial it up. Engineers start realizing we have to, as soon as possible,
start producing whatever alternatives we can work out to reduce the amount of carbon we're
putting into the atmosphere as soon as possible. That's the most important thing to have some
potential to hang onto human civilization over the next two decades. If we don't do it, it's back
to the starting edge. Thank you, Steve, as always, to be continued, my friend, and good luck with
your book and all your future sleuthing. Indeed. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of
The Great Simplification, please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the
greatsimplification.com for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate
Hagans, edited by No Troublemakers Media, and curated by Leslie Battlutz and Lizzie Siriani.
