Greetings. This is an intro to my intro to this year end, frankly, what you're about
to see a 13 minute, frankly, I had my staff and inner circle watch it and they're like,
Nate, that's pretty doom and gloom for a year end holiday season. And that's true.
Our situation is different than it was five or 10 years ago when we couldn't imagine
one thing that could go wrong in the next week in our world. And now everything is interconnected.
And what I'm trying to do here is act as a witness and a synthesizer of how these various risks
fit together. So I'm not going to apologize that the following short reflection is is on the dark
side. I'm trying to describe what 2024 may look like. And there's a lot of things that are
converging. And as from day one of this podcast and this, frankly, sandbox side channel, I want
to be honest, have candor and talk to you, the viewers on things relevant to your lives, our
lives. So here's the original, frankly. Greetings. We're approaching the end of the year. This will
be my last, frankly, in 2023. Later today, I'm going to record another one or two to be broadcast
sometime in January. I am taking a six week technology hiatus, which I will explain why that's
relevant to the followers of this website and podcast in my next, frankly, here, I'd like to
talk about some themes ahead of 2024. And longtime followers of this podcast know that I'm not trying
to predict the future. I'm trying to explain how the systemic parts and processes of the human
situation fit together, and what that might infer about our future preparations, plans,
interventions. So here are a few themes that I think are going to be worth watching in 2024.
First of all, climate change. I just had Leon Simons on a podcast. His podcast will be out
sometime in January. He is the climate scientist who drilled down and did a Sherlock Holmes treatment
of how aerosol sulfates historically and recently have been masking the warming
that is due to the thermal imbalance in our incoming solar radiation versus how much is
outgoing. So both James Hansen and Leon and others believe that the combination of the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation, the PDO, switching from La Niña the last few years to El Niño,
and the reduced masking effect of aerosols is going to bring our current 1.4 or 1.5
degrees Celsius in late 2023 up another half a degree Celsius. So by summer, we might for a
month or so see two degrees Celsius over pre-industrial baseline. That's going to be crazy. That is
going to be horrible for Europe, the Asian subcontinent, etc. If that happens, lots of people
are going to wake up and freak out and probably die. Sadly, to be honest, if we do Pierce two
degrees, it may be kind of an emotional wake-up call for humanity to do something. Clearly,
we've done nothing so far, but it's kind of like arguing with a forest fire, but at least there'll
be more citizen political awareness that this is real and it's serious, if not for us, for our
children, grandchildren, and the biosphere. So the next six months, there's going to be a lot
of news in the climate space and global ecosystem craziness, I expect. The second theme is related.
If that happens, and if many other things happen, it kicks in antibodies to people have
built their identity and reputation around that not happening or anything else not happening,
end of growth or AI or anything else. And so I think cognitive dissonance with humans
in aggregate is going to increase because as the futures that we attached our identities to or
our hopes and dreams and beliefs not only don't manifest, but the exact opposite is happening.
People adopt strange behavioral vocal stories and I think cognitive dissonance
is evident in so many areas of our culture and I expect that's going to accelerate. If we do hit
two degrees Celsius by summer, I really wonder what those people who say climate change is,
a socialist hoax or the climate's warm before and it will again and humans don't have a role.
I wonder what stories they will be saying. Less important for the long term, but much
more important for our near term. Another theme is geopolitics. There is a changing world order
the US, NATO, Russia battle within Ukraine is not over and each side is going to
increasingly get desperate on not losing and there may be things like false flags or extreme
reactions and it was my hope that the Middle East would kind of
de-claw the nuclear war risk in Ukraine and Russia and NATO. Maybe it has, I don't know, but
broader situation is we're heading from a unipolar world to a multipolar world and there will be
lots of different agreements and financial new partnerships and new energy and commodity things.
A subset of geopolitics is the issue of choke points and global transportation.
The Panama Canal because of drought is running out of fresh water and able to fill the locks.
On a larger risk is this week. I'm recording this on Sunday, December 17th. This week the
situation with the Suez Canal which is close to Yemen and the Yemeni Houthi rebels are attacking
ships and many of the world's shipping companies are saying this is not an acceptable risk and
they're choosing to not go through the Suez Canal and instead go around Cape Horn in South Africa
which adds probably a week or two from a Singapore to Rotterdam route and also roughly double the
cost. I don't know that for sure but it's in that ballpark. I don't think the United States will
allow this because it will cause inflation and supply chain disruptions etc. I expect there's
going to be a protection of the Suez Canal in the near future. Then the biggest choke point is of
course the Strait of Hormuz where around 20% of the world's oil is transported every day around
17 million barrels on ships and if that were to be disrupted by any military or other means
that would cause major chaos in global financial oil and delivery markets of things. Long time
followers of this podcast see that we have a six continent supply chain and it's predicated on
peace and credit and available affordable oil and all those things are now less certain going
forward. What else to watch in 2024? AI is going to be a bigger deal as far as its behavior, its
impact on our behaviors and our culture than many expect. Yesterday I was watching a football game
and in the box seats at a football game people were on their phones watching things while the
real football game was on in front of them and this is an example of hypernormal stimuli that
things on the phone shout louder to our brain than the things on the real field and I think AI
is going to exponentially increase that because all the color and the perfectly situated to your
brain and the beautiful artistic brainstem stimuli is going to even be more than we're
currently used to and we're just going to lose people to the fantasy world among many other
influences of AI including some systemic risks. AI is going to be an unfolding story. There are
some people who think we don't have the energy to power the servers and it's going to cause disruptions
on energy. I think it's going to accelerate damage on the environmental front and we'll
have to see what happens there. I think another theme in 2024 and beyond is a stretching of the
haves versus the have nots and I may do another frankly if I have time on how we define haves
and have nots because there's a lot of things that we have that are not measurable in monetary or
bank account terms but I think at least in the United States there are a lot of people who are
suffering already and the sugar high from the COVID stimulus is running out. We have higher
interest rates, we have higher car payments, higher house payments. 40% if you watched last week's
reality roundtable 40% of US households are asset limited income constrained and yet they're still
employed. I think the wealth inequality when it gets to the point where people can't afford their
health insurance, their health payments and their rent and their food it's going to be bad and I
think that's coming. Of course any of the stories that I just talked about could be big but the US
election is going to be kind of a keep things in a holding pattern until October, November
and unfortunately no matter who wins Biden or Trump or someone else a third of the country
is going to be pissed off and I think the splintering of the tribes which happens from
polarization which happens because our present is tougher than the past which happens because
AI is going to hone in on people's confirmation bias and beliefs. There's going to be all kinds
of deep fakes. It's going to be nasty and I wish it could be avoided because the things that the
United States faces, the things that our world faces are going to be the same no matter whether
the Republicans win or the Democrats win. We need some sort of a civic resolve that we suppress
our identities and get beyond the technology and the blame but I'm not holding my breath. I'm really
worried about the social discourse because if we can't talk to our neighbors or people that
disagree with us then we're not going to be able to solve these issues. Lastly of course we have
managed to keep our central bank finger in the financial dyke to hold things together.
There are still many policies in place from the great financial crisis, the great recession
in 2009 that were temporary that are still ongoing. Global central bank balance sheets
have ballooned. The Bank of Japan is printing money and buying their own stocks and bonds etc.
And so I think we're going to see another version of the banking crisis where we're now
look at the larger banks, reverse repo rates are going to potentially require
Fed intervention and I think the larger story is it's the central bank monetary narrative
meets the biophysical ecological narrative and as oil peaks and declines, as climate change
requires a lot more spending and things to mitigate, we can't just cut rates because the
economy is low and then there's more inflation. I think the Fed and other central banks are
about to have big problems. So all this being said we have a lot of work to do in your communities,
in your own life, in my own life. And I've got a lot to say and hope you tune in next year.
There'll be another one or two franklies that I'll record before I leave. Be well everyone.
