The
world to come will be different from our expectations.
The arc of human history informs the trajectory of our future.
We need to know who we are and how we got here, the ecology, biology, and physics.
To know which paths remain open to us and which lead to dead ends.
Four and a half billion years ago, stardust coalesced to form a planet.
A billion years later, simple life emerged.
By 500 million years ago, a profusion of life had exploded on our blue-green planet.
Fast forward to 66 million years ago, and dinosaurs were taken out by our planet's
most recent mass extinction.
And small shrew-like survivors continued an evolutionary line that would eventually
become us.
Of all our hominid ancestors, one species would ultimately remain homo sapiens, a creature
variously curious, creative, kind, cruel, cooperative, competitive, combative, and clever.
When Earth's climate warmed and stabilized around 10,000 years ago, homo sapiens tribes
who pivoted en masse to agriculture and pastoralism out-reproduced their hunter-gatherer cousins.
Unbeknownst to them and to most of us, this was a planet-changing event.
Sustained by new agricultural surplus, these early humans slowly spread out around the
globe, expanding trade and technology.
For thousands of years, the average annual growth in the size of the human economy would
be unnoticeable from one generation to the next.
By the 16th century, however, more complex social organization and advanced navigational
technology kick-started a unique period in human history.
Yet even with these advances, human cultures remained powered by biomass in the muscles
of humans and our draft animals, limiting growth.
Until in the early 19th century, 10,000 years after the agricultural revolution, humans
discovered how to extract fossil energy and materials from under-Earth's surface to
boost their economies.
This new discovery of geologically stored sunlight in the form of coal, oil and gas
changed everything.
For the first time, human and animal labor played second fiddle to the power of these
new energy sources.
When combined with a machine, a gallon of gasoline could output the same work in a few
minutes as a person laboring for an entire month.
We increasingly replaced manual human tasks with machines at a tiny fraction of the cost.
The result?
Higher profits, higher wages and cheaper goods.
Sudden access to this bank account of stored carbon energy turbocharged our populations,
access to good services and technology, and quadrupled our economic growth rate.
Yet humanity's great acceleration was still ahead.
In the latter half of the 20th century, with this new power source and an upgrade from
coal to higher quality liquid oil, the human economy's average growth rate doubled yet
again.
To now over 30 times what it had averaged during the last few thousand years.
Compared to a global labor force of around 5 billion real humans, the machines and work
powered by access to buried carbon energy added the equivalent power of 500 billion
human workers.
Access to these fossil energies and materials brought billions more humans into existence
and brought billions more out of poverty and led to the creation of new myths, institutions
and expectations.
Our ancestors' lives were tightly linked to the natural flows of the earth, the sun,
the rain and the soil.
But during this moonshot of growth and consumption, our fundamental tether to nature was first
neglected and then forgotten.
The main inputs to our economies were now mostly free.
We nearly had to pay for the cost of their extraction, not the cost of their creation,
their true worth, nor their pollution.
To our ancestors, the benefits from carbon energy would have appeared indistinguishable
from magic.
And instead of appreciating this giant one-time windfall, we developed stories that our new
found wealth and progress had emerged purely from human ingenuity.
We had become energy blind.
Energy is and always will be the currency of life.
Animals were the first investors.
Obtaining a larger energy surplus gives an animal a competitive advantage for survival
and reproduction.
This role of surplus energy is a core driver of the natural world and dictates what can
and can't happen.
We rarely think about it or talk about it, but we're all alive during the carbon pulse,
the few hundred years where humans are drawing down earth's energy battery millions of times
faster than it was trickle-charged by daily photosynthesis.
Chemical hydrocarbons at a vast scale have enormously increased the surplus energy available
to human economies.
Pulses, by definition, don't last forever.
High-quality ores and energy deposits are now mostly things of the past.
Plenty remains, but it's of lower quality and both more costly and ecologically destructive
to extract.
In nature, there are countless examples where energy exists, but the effort to obtain it
is so large that the meal is effectively off the menu.
In our lifetimes, society will have to redirect increasing amounts of our energy surplus towards
obtaining the surplus itself, leaving less affordable energy to support many of our current
economic activities.
One day, the energy it will cost to extract energy will be so large it won't make sense
to do so, even though resources remain.
Energy depletion will act as a growing tax on human societies.
In this unprecedented era of large surplus, we have excelled at combining energy and materials
into technology and inventions that improve the human experience.
New technology can allow us to use resources more efficiently or it can transform natural
flows into energy.
But mostly, technology just creates new ways for humans to consume and builds higher future
requirements for energy and materials.
Things that are more complex require more energy.
When we add nodes to a supply chain, each connection requires energy to maintain.
The complexity of our globally interconnected system currently requires the equivalent of
170 billion light bulbs constantly turned on, burning brightly, powered by the carbon pulse.
Even rebuildable technology that harnesses the sun and the wind grows our total consumption
and has not yet reduced the use of carbon energy globally.
Most people believe that money is real wealth, yet everything we spend money on requires
energy to mine, create, deliver, run, maintain, and dispose of.
In this way, money is ultimately a direct claim on energy and resources.
More economic stories assert that with more money, we can create more of anything.
The truth is, we cannot create energy.
We both extract it and burn it faster by using technology and printing money.
Natural capital, particularly energy, is the true foundation of our monetary systems.
As we create more money, we don't create more resources, we merely access them faster.
The highest sustained growth rate of human economies ever before and likely ever again
peaked 50 years ago when oil production growth was at its highest.
But rather than living within our means, we found creative ways to extend growth for a
while longer.
We created complex supply chains, outsourcing the heavy lifting to countries with cheaper
labor.
We turned to debt in a large way to maintain high levels of consumption, a behavior that
accelerated in 2008 and has gone into overdrive since 2020.
Debt allows us to spend resources from the future and call it economic growth.
This phenomenon has become so pervasive in the last 50 years that we think it's normal
to consume today and pay tomorrow.
The developed world is now using debt to enable the extraction of things we couldn't otherwise
afford to extract.
To produce things we otherwise couldn't afford to consume.
This strategy has an expiration date because all this new money will one day be spent on
real things requiring energy.
Enabled by an extraordinary but temporary energy surplus, the human economy is now over
1,000 times bigger than it was just five centuries ago.
Most of the benefits of this one-time geological surplus now flow to a fraction of people,
not to the rest of living humans, nor future generations.
As we extract minerals and burn fossil carbon to support modern living standards, their
waste streams are in turn diminishing the life support systems of other species and
future beings.
The impact of our global energy metabolism on nature has been tragic and is now accelerating,
resulting in, among other things, animal bird and fish populations dropping by 50% since
the 1970s, plastic now weighing more than all animals on land and in the sea, and a
child born today being expected to outlive Earth's coral reefs.
As a culture, we have recently, but almost entirely, financialized the human experience.
Not only have we parsed the rich fabric of human life into a single monetary marker,
but in doing so, we've used the wrong prices.
The price of money is wrong, because we grow it with a keystroke with no tether to finite
natural capital.
The price of energy is wrong, because we don't treat it as the extraordinary, irreplaceable
resource it is, non-renewable on any human timescale.
And in setting prices on everything, we've lost sight of the large cost their use has
on Earth's ecosystems.
This biophysical story is all connected in an emergent and unexpected way.
As the carbon pulse boosted our economies, our institutions and governments self-organized
around expectations of growth.
Now, 8 billion members of a social species collectively seek profits, which are linked
to energy, which is linked to fossil hydrocarbons and minerals.
Growth, as measured by increases in GDP, is now required for stability.
We have arrived at a place where we as a culture have outsourced our decisions and
planning to the financial system.
The market's compulsion to grow now outcompetes any alternative paths of wisdom or constraint.
The system is no longer in anyone's control.
The human species, at least to this point, has become a mindless, insatiable, energy-hungry
superorganism.
The superorganism is an emergent phenomenon of the animals that comprise it, us.
Human beings are related to all other creatures on Earth.
We are the product of an unbroken chain connecting to the first life, which means that hidden
beneath our stated motivations of what we do every day in industrial society, we are
driven to pursue the same neurochemical brain rewards our ancestors pursued.
This has huge implications for our behaviors, our economies and our futures.
Reaching for our phone to see if someone liked our Facebook post or to see if Bitcoin
is up or down, aren't really our goals.
We are in reality just seeking the same brain rewards that led to success for our hunter-gatherer
ancestors.
Dopamine is a molecule that in animals and in humans leads to motivation and action.
In a materially rich modern world, the habituation to the action of consumption leads to the
wanting of things, culture-wide, being stronger than the reward we get from having them.
This is a fundamental problem for an economic system that's turning billions of barrels
of oil into microliters of dopamine.
As a carryover from ancestral tribal life, we are highly tuned to social signals, comparing
ourselves to others seeking approval, acceptance and jockeying for status.
With material and now digital wealth as today's primary status signal, consumerism is now
largely based on having as much or more than those around us, rather than focusing on what
we may actually need.
Modern humans are still tribal beings.
We staunchly support those in our in-groups and easily ostracize out-groups, from trivial
divisions like sports teams to political affiliation, race or nationality.
Our evolution has primed us to blame other humans for situations we don't like or understand.
We have rich, creative and colorful imaginations that reside in the virtual worlds of our minds.
The human brain can imagine and verbalize limitless combinations of physical impossibilities,
sustainable outposts on Mars, self-perpetuating energy machines, and an economy based on
physical consumption growing continually for centuries.
In ancestral times, these virtual worlds overlapped with the physical worlds we inhabited, making
us more content and effective as a tribal unit.
But in a culture of vast material wealth, information overload and social media, it's
increasingly difficult for us to separate fantasy from reality.
When these individual virtual worlds connect with the virtual worlds of others, the result
is widespread shared beliefs that money is real, that our current wealth is due mostly
to our cleverness, and that technology will lead to limitless growth.
When we look to others to try and understand our complex modern world, as social beings
who said it, becomes more important than logic or the quality of the evidence, celebrity
and group affiliation now matter more than truth.
Our stone age brains are no match for the social media algorithms that now constantly
hijack our attention.
Modern media outlets prey on our evolutionary inclinations for novelty and in-group defense,
via capturing our attention and turning clicks and shares into consumption.
Computer algorithms optimized for profit are splintering our society by reducing attention
spans, accelerating addiction, polarization, apathy, and mistrust in science.
A metaphorical technology worm driven by exponentially improving artificial intelligence
is silently eating our minds.
Humans are creatures with finite lifespans.
The future is not a priority to us emotionally.
Instead, we are focused on the very short term, this weekend's plans, this quarter's
earnings.
In this term's election, the next set of compelling images were urged to scroll to.
We often promise to make big changes starting tomorrow, until tomorrow becomes today, and
the cycle repeats delaying any actual change.
Like other biological organisms, humans seek gains and are averse to losses.
We look for undervalued stocks to invest in, sales on new shoes, or two-for-one cocktails
at happy hour.
Unlike squirrels or cheetahs, we are an extremely social species.
We coordinate as families, small businesses, corporations, and nation states to maximize
our virtual surplus, dollars, which we then spend on real things.
Our core economic and environmental challenges stem from a mismatch of hunter-gatherer minds
inhabiting a competitive consumer growth culture.
Together, these human universals have led to incentives and behaviors which have created
a metabolic superorganism whose objective is disconnected from the well-being of its
parts, us.
It is tempting to look at how we live today and conclude that this is how humans are.
But modern society is only a single brief example out of thousands of successful arrangements
in human history.
Humans alive today don't choose to be hierarchical or greedy.
Many of our choices are constrained by the economic system we were born into.
Our current high consumption, high inequality, high technological distraction, and low levels
of daily human connection are a direct product of the carbon pulse.
Though human brains don't change quickly under the right circumstances, our behaviors
and cultural norms can move at lightning speed.
Our species is incredibly adaptive when we're challenged.
The way we've been living is an anomaly, but we take it for granted because as individuals,
it's all we've ever known.
Going forward, a lifestyle adapted to lower energy use will reconnect our virtual and
physical worlds.
By necessity, our lives will become less global, more interpersonally engaged, and more tethered
to natural flows.
As a species, a global superorganism is not our destiny.
Who we are has brought us to this precipice.
Who we are capable of becoming as individuals and as a society will be the question of our
time.
We are alive at a time of wonder, peril, and possibility.
Ahead are a million unknown destinations, some dark and foreboding, and some welcoming
and beautiful.
Many of us sense that something is different, something is coming, but we lack a shared
understanding of the path that brought us here and of the terrain ahead.
Each future we expect depends upon which lens we use to see the road.
Modern society is polarized, stressed, and overwhelmed with information, good and bad.
As a result, common points of view are lenses, focused on the road just in front of us.
For the view to the future, we defer to culturally accepted guides who are confident they know
the way forward.
Through the lens of an economist, for example, we see a glorious road leading to growth that
never stops.
Any scarcity of energy or material inputs will be solved by price signals, creating incentives
which increase our productivity and growth.
The economic lens shows us that human ingenuity and the market will solve everything.
A financial lens translates stock markets at all time highs as a sign of society's health,
pretending a rich and virtuous future.
With enough financial capital, we'll be able to build roads to anywhere.
A technology lens promises a shiny road of comfort, novelty, and prosperity, enabled
by future inventions.
Innovation, artificial intelligence, and a vibrant metaverse will sidestep any energy
or resource constraints.
We envision future humans breaking free from the confines of Earth and enjoying high-tech
lifestyles where the biggest problem is runaway robots.
These lenses are all optimistic, but misguided.
All these lenses are energy blind.
The real paths ahead can only be seen by integrating energy awareness with biology,
sociology, physics, and everything science has discovered.
We need a systems lens to read the map.
A systems lens reveals the holistic story that explains humanity's path.
In pursuit of the same emotional experiences of our ancient ancestors, we transform materials
and energy into technologies that make our lives more comfortable and fun.
We keep score of our progress using money, which has become a psychological stand-in
for all the things our ancestors valued.
The massive scale of humanity's consumption is evidenced by the excess CO2 being absorbed
by Earth's oceans and atmosphere.
The emergent result is a metabolic superorganism, with oil as its hemoglobin transporting goods
through the arteries and veins of a global supply network.
Like a shark needing to swim to get oxygen flowing through its gills, our current economic
system has an imperative to grow in order to satisfy prior financial commitments.
We can't stop, nor can we slow down, or the system will crash.
A systems lens reveals that the road ahead is closed to our current cultural expectations,
yet we continue to bear down on the accelerator.
Wearing systems lenses removes the blind spots created by any single issue lens.
Global economic growth will never meaningfully decouple from energy consumption.
It cannot, because the world's GDP, by definition, has always been a proxy for how much energy
we burn.
If we were to grow the global economy at 3% a year, as most governments and institutions
expect, we would use as much energy and materials in the next 30 years as we have in the past
10,000.
Stock markets are poor guideposts for prosperity when inflated by government and central bank
support.
All the cash, stocks, bonds, and pension funds in the world will need energy and materials
to be cashed out and turned into real wealth.
Creativity and innovation will be central to human futures, but modern technology requires
huge amounts of energy to build and to operate.
As long as GDP is our goal, efficiency gains from new technology will serve the superorganism.
Transitioning from fossil hydrocarbon to rebuildable energy won't change this dynamic.
Ultimately, in addition to using different energy, we'll need to use energy differently.
Bringing our future through a systems lens changes everything.
We have spent the last century harnessing enormous amounts of fossil energy to build
a world of complexity like nothing seen before.
In the coming century, humanity will experience a great simplification.
There will always be energy on earth as long as the sun burns, but the amount of surplus
energy available to human societies will soon be diminished.
As the extraction of geologically stored energy becomes more difficult, everything we're
used to in society will become more costly or less available.
We are not planning for this because it's never happened before.
The onset of the great simplification will be financial and economic turbulence followed
by contraction.
When we can no longer grow fast enough to maintain all the increased financial claims,
economies will recede to a scale that can again be supported by physical flows without
credit.
Complex global supply chains, the related high consumption lifestyles, and many of
the conveniences and freedoms we take for granted in this era of abundant energy surplus
will diminish.
The ensuing simplification will be among the most significant events ever experienced
by our species.
Those who look through a systems lens can serve as early visionaries of a simpler life with
new ways of relating to technology, to consumption, to each other, and to earth's ecosystems.
There are many pathways wending through a great simplification.
Some are wise, humane, and even preferable to what we have now.
Some are so dark as to be nearly unthinkable, yet it is precisely thinking about these pathways
and actively choosing among them, which offers the only realistic hope for a long and meaningful
human future.
Nature has gifted us with a productive and beautiful home, the ability to understand
how we got here, and the creativity to imagine which paths are possible.
The future need not be dystopian.
But cleverness alone will no longer suffice for the next leg of our journey.
We will need imagination, foresight, empathy, and above all, wisdom to navigate the path
to the future that is arriving.
The great simplification.
Copyright © 2020 Mooji Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this recording may be reproduced without Mooji Media Ltd.'s express consent.
