When I worked on Wall Street back in the day, I had to leave my apartment in Chicago, take
a cab to the Sears Tower at 5.15 in the morning to be there at 6 and for a while memorize
Intel, Apple, Home Depot, stock symbols.
But then we had to be there for the morning macro call.
We had these little squawk boxes, these little 4 inch by 4 inch speakers where the experts
on interest rates and the economy and earnings would broadcast to the Solomon Brothers Network
around the world what happened overnight.
So there is something called global macro, which is every morning now and today people
read summaries of the news that happened in currency markets or interest rate or stock
market or the economic data that happened in Europe or the United States or China.
This can be a full time job for those people in the hunting and gathering by amassing digital
claims on reality space in Wall Street and finance around the world.
There's a lot of news.
We saw that the Federal Reserve is kind of having to pivot from a tightening cycle to
an easing cycle because of the economy slowing rapidly because of the duration risk in the
banking system and the payroll employment numbers coming in showing a weaker economy.
Inflation is still high but is moderating versus where it was before.
Currently I don't know how much control the Fed has on some of these things but today we
saw stocks down and gold up $40.
We saw recently that OPEC cut a million barrels of production which boosted oil $4 a barrel.
This is simultaneous with some other things going on that China has brokered somewhat
of a piece between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
We see that the US still has not replenished the Strategic Petroleum Reserve which again
is kind of like let's save American consumers a little bit at the gas pump so that politically
that looks good when that entire thing was meant to be a reserve for an emergency situation.
We also saw probably the most environmentally climate aware president of our history a couple
weeks ago approve the Willow Project, a big drilling project in Alaska for more hydrocarbons.
We see Malaysia and the news coupling with China to de-dolarize.
There's been a lot of momentum this year in de-dolarization which if that were to occur
if the US was not the reserve currency of the world that commodities especially oil
are priced in that would have massive implications for our economy.
All kinds of financial things in the news but followers of this podcast know that although
finance is one of the four horsemen of the 2020s there is a much broader global macro
okay.
I saw today or yesterday that ocean temps are the highest ever measured.
The oceans are now 21C and that is following a La Nina period we're about to head into
an El Niño period which means they're even going to warm further.
We saw the train derailment in Palestine, Ohio.
There's been massive research and risk warnings on PVC since one of the train cars was filled
with vinyl chloride.
My friends in the plastic space are just flat out working 60 hour weeks trying to look at
the implications of plastic supply chains globally in the United States.
Also on the climate front we're seeing that the reduced sulfur content in marine vessels
has caused a band, a swath around the northern latitudes of much warmer temperatures because
the dimming effect has been reduced.
We see in the news that South Africa is having over 200 days of blackouts this year forecast
by the central bank because of their electricity, coal, mismanagement and other problems.
We see Israel bombing the airport in Damascus in Syria.
The ongoing way higher than the average person perceives to be nuclear risk either a tactical
strike in case Russia wins or Russia loses in Ukraine leading to a potential strategic
release which by my research would show an immediate effect on a six mass extinction
with billion plus people dying, all kinds of negative impacts to food supply chains
in the ocean, phytoplankton, everything else.
We see our former president was indicted in court today and the larger political backdrop
is it looks like we will have two octogenarians running again, Trump versus Biden, to be president
of this country.
There's all this news that comes every day, this global sapiens macro that we pay attention
to and it becomes overwhelming how do these pieces fit together, how are they relevant
to our lives, how do we mitigate and adapt to the craziness and I didn't mention all
the chat GPT 3.5 and chat GPT 4 and 5 are in training and people with deep fakes they
don't even know what's real in the news anymore and I think six months from now that will
even accelerate.
So in my work I try to make sense of all this by prioritizing three main pillars, one energy
and resources energy is the currency of life and it underpins human systems but there's
a metabolism, a power of how this energy gets used and that links to dollars and trade and
economic growth.
Number two is human behavior as individuals and as aggregation of individuals we can kind
of predict how humans respond in certain situations and number three is the ecology
and the environment of the only known planet in the universe to host complex life.
That is increasingly getting known by people, the fragility of earth's systems.
There's even a word for the million species that are at danger of extinction.
It's called endlings which is once there are too many of a species gone to continue that
species existence even though they still are alive and exist those last remaining members
of that species are called endlings and humans can relate to them and study them etc.
This all brings me to say we didn't evolve to handle this amount of complexity and toxicity
and anxiety and worry and tragedy.
Not only in our daily lives reading the news but our sense of dread about what's coming.
The neuroscience of dread shows that if people know they have to have a root canal that is
expected pain of 9 out of 10 I don't remember the exact numbers that if they could get the
in two weeks if they could get the root canal over with tomorrow they would be willing to
take a higher amount of pain just to get it over with.
So we're all living with this anxiety and worry about the future and it's not normal
to carry this much with us.
Our ancestral times you know would be kind of happy go lucky hunting gathering singing
storytelling sleeping and then a lion would attack or something like that and we would all
galvanize and respond to the threat and the threat was passed and we would go back to our
normal lives. This is a steady ongoing diet of conoscary existential systemic stuff so
I'm sure many of you have found ways to cope. I cope by hanging out with my dogs. My dogs are
instant you know fire extinguishers of the cortisol and dopamine that I have on these daily
calls and learning about the global sapiens macro condition. I try to spend a lot of time in nature.
I'm learning how to meditate being surrounded by friends and oxytocin is a little bit of an
antidote but again my day job which is this podcast and intervening on these things
makes it difficult for me to move away from these topics because I have to stay on top of
these topics to talk articulately about them. But it's impossible to stay on top of these
topics right there's just the few little things I mentioned. There are people who are expert on
climate and on oceans and on finance and on geopolitics and on US politics and on community
and on species extinctions it's really hard to be buffeted by these facts every day.
So I'm just calling that out to say that a lot of people in the world are rewarded for playing
the game that results in more digits in the bank account and shifting around the largesse of
the peak of the carbon pulse to garner monetary power which results in social power.
But these broader concepts the oceans other species the ecosystems of earth
the plastic the longer term pollutant impact on our culture a lot of these people don't even
have salaries or if they do they're low salaries society doesn't champion people working on these
risks and yet we still have to learn about them and engage with them. So this is just a shout out
to all of you that are working on things other than the financial macro and my conclusion in all
this in addition to hoping you all have coping mechanisms and one thing I'd like to do in the
future here is create the coping mechanism of building community where people that are fluent
and paying attention to these risks and choose to swim in this pool can fight each other and get
the solace and camaraderie and you know metaphorical pat on the back to work together on these issues
and there may be a way to expand that. So again I really just sat down here I didn't know what I
wanted to say but today's been one of those days where I get these emails with information on so
many different things and I expect this is going to get crazier I think we're at the calmest time
of the next 10 years there's going to be so much news and chaos and things and try not to get
super pulled into each different item you can kind of squint and and take a look back at how
these things fit together and play a role in your life and in your small area on this planet earth
but I will see you next week thank you
