Professor Murphy. Good to see you. Hi Nate. So we are old friends and colleagues and earlier this
week you posted an excellent essay, The Simple Story of Civilization. I was so struck by its
simplicity and brevity and hard-hitting points that I gave you a call and thought we could
have a conversation for you to unpack it. Yep, glad to do that. Okay.
So in your Do the Math essay earlier this week you compared the span of human life on earth
to a single human lifetime to bring perspective on how much of an anomaly our current culture
and economy are. Can you walk us through that analogy in brief? Sure. So what we're going to
do is take 75 years as a typical lifespan, plus or minus, and map that onto the two and a half
to three million years that humans have been on this planet. So for a little bit of context,
that itself is only one five thousandth of the age of the universe. So this is still a narrow
time slice and the big scheme of things. But all the same, in the 75-year span of human habitation
on the planet, the first 70 years are various species of humans evolving and coexisting on the
planet, mostly in a sustainable way. The last five years of the 75 years is the age of homo sapiens.
You know, somewhat recent but we're getting used to it. It's 200,000 years and mostly in a sustainable
way. It's the last 15 weeks that we would call the age of civilization. That's 10,000 years where
we've had agriculture settlements leading the cities. And the last four days, just four days in
the 75-year lifespan, it's the age of science. That's 400 years for us. Then the last 36 hours,
a day and a half, the age of fossil fuels. That's 150 years of significant use. But really,
that's ramped up so that the last 50 years are the most important. And that comes to the last
little time slice, which is the last 12 hours of this 75-year lifetime has been an age of rapid
global ecological devastation. And it's not coincidental that that overlaps with the
heaviest use of energy by our society. So I've seen this over the years presented many different
ways and videos online. I thought this was a clever way of doing it. So now let's consider
going a step further. What might this look like if our 75-year-old friend or relative went through
a similar progression? Yeah, I think that really helps to bring it into focus. And the first 70
years in this case, not much happens in this lifetime. It's kind of like a boring uncle,
a very kind and enjoyable uncle. We don't want to diminish that life.
But not too exciting. Then another five years in the Homo sapiens mode, it's Homo sapiens turn
to be boring. Not a whole lot happens the next five years. It's just in the last 15 weeks, you
notice your relative doing something completely different, different behavior, different values,
different relationships, different personality. It leaves you wondering, who is this person even?
And it's as if they've adopted a new hobby or even maybe a gateway drug and they've just transformed.
And so I think about it is imagine you're briefing your cousin. You're talking to them on the phone
after just a horrendous day dealing with your relative who's kind of gone off the rails.
And you say, get this four days ago, this new hobby of his, he took it to a whole new level
and things just really kind of took off. And what I'm talking about here is adopting science,
which we can think of maybe as stepping away from the gateway drug into something like cocaine.
It really amps things up. Okay, and then the conversation. And then early yesterday,
he found the most dangerous substances of all, and now he thinks he has superpowers,
he thinks he can fly out of windows. And I'm talking about fossil fuels, which in this
drug analogy might be something like PCP, where you do imagine you can jump out of a window and fly.
And then, you know, since this morning, he's destroyed most of his environment
and his uncontrolled accelerating rampage.
Well, the first question that comes to mind is, will we make 80 or even will we make 76? But
let me keep unpacking your paper. So, so that's what we're doing right now. We're on a, as a
species, we're on a destructive rampage. I thought we were just living our lives.
Well, to an individual life, it does seem like that. But if you really look at the data and look
at what our ecosystem is doing, we've lost about 85% of our primary forest. And it's just gone.
That's a lot of important habitat for a lot of animals. Then, you know, 70, about 70%,
average decline in vertebrate populations since I was born in 1970. So that 50 year roughly
time span, huge decline in animal populations. At this point, wild mammals are now just 4%
of the mammal mass on earth, most of its humans in our livestock. And so they're really being
squeezed. That's 2% on land and 2% in oceans. So they've really been kind of squeezed down.
It's very alarming. It's happening in the blink of an eye on this time scale. That's the last
12 hours of this 75 year life. But this was happening the prior 12 hours as well. It just
wasn't as globally huge in its impact. And it was happening 24 hours ago too.
Yeah, we just, yeah, it's absolutely been ramping up. But it's all part of this new hobby.
So it's all, you know, over the last 15 weeks that we've seen
traumatic changes. So in your essay, you also challenge your readers to question
whether the very foundations of our civilization are wrong.
Can you justify such a bold statement? Why go that far, that extreme?
Yeah, good question. And I think this is an extreme moment. I mean, on this, from this
perspective, you see that things have really kind of unraveled quickly. And it really all
does trace back to the start of what we call civilization, our civilization, meaning agriculture
and then settlements and cities. So prior to that, we lived in approximate equilibrium
with ecosystems. And, you know, occasionally we might cause some extinctions, but generally we
were playing by the same rules as all other animals played by. I mean, we were part of that
evolutionary set. But once we took control of our food production, a lot of things happened.
So suddenly we had surplus. We needed ways to store that surplus. We had settlements to stay
close to our stores and the land that was producing our food. We started accumulating
material possessions. That led to hierarchies and systems to kind of preserve that status,
standing armies to protect those stores from yourselves and other nearby populations.
It led to property rights, this crazy idea that we can own the land. And the property rights,
together with accumulation of material possessions, led to want a desire to continue
that ownership into further generations. And that led to a patriarchy scheme,
which by the way got tied into our religious schemes and became monotheism. So you have this
great paternal sort of overseer. And then, you know, we had subjugation of humans and animals to
do work for us, led to all kinds of ecological problems from soil degradation, habitat destruction,
extinction rates far above normal, and all the rest, all the things that we see today,
just sort of a connect the dots straight from this idea of agriculture. So not now that we've
kind of dialed up this rate of destruction, it's more obvious what the pattern is showing us,
which is that this initial impulse to control nature was itself kind of a flawed
premise and consequential, very consequential. So since then, we've actually been doubling down on
that idea of control so that we keep trying to control more and more, but it's never going to
be enough. We're never going to be full masters. And so it's going to fail, it's guaranteed to fail.
And unfortunately, this system that we've constructed is so huge that the failure
is almost by definition going to be spectacular and awful and lamentable,
because we just built it up so large. So when you say the failure will be spectacular,
are you saying that as a physicist or just as a human who's learned all these facts and are
observing it? Yeah, and sorry, there's a deer walking through the snow. So very much, you know,
have a great moment here. You're entitled to a pause. Yeah, so that's what it's all about after
all. So yeah, I mean, the spectacular failure is just, it saddens me that we can be as destructive
to ourselves and to nature, especially to nature, all for the wrong reasons and all for something
that never could have worked and could have been avoided sooner before we built it up to this colossus.
So at its core then, Tom, what is fundamentally wrong with civilization?
Yeah, so I think it's really kind of the philosophy behind our civilization. It's not
even remotely predicated on principles of sustainability. And just to be clear,
something that's not designed to be sustainable is almost certainly unsustainable. You'd have
to get, you know, crazy lucky for something that wasn't designed to be sustainable, you know,
accidentally be sustainable. Our civilization is very clearly not sustainable. And I like to think
of flight analogies here. So a rock is not designed for sustainable flight. It can't continue a level
indefinite flight. It can, however, be launched to soar upward for a while. But inevitably,
it's going to come back down toward Earth. And I think our civilization is very similar because
it's also like a rock not founded on principles of sustainability. It can soar upward for a time,
as we're doing now, as we spin Earth's inheritance. It's a big spinning spree. And it's great fun for
the paying passengers and lost the satisfaction, but it's temporary. And patiently waiting is Earth,
and what I would call planetary limits. So that's going to find us before long.
So is this our fault? Is this an immutable flaw in humans?
I used to kind of think so. But I've come around to thinking, no, it's not really,
it's a flaw in the systems that we've adopted. And we've done so not fully conscious of their
long term ramifications. So I don't blame us for going down this road. But the fact is we have
lived sustainably before for much longer stretches of time. And our recent binge that we call
civilization is the anomaly. So we ought to be trying new ways of living on this planet that
are sustainable. It doesn't mean necessarily a reversion to other ways that were sustainable,
it just, it's a proof of concept that our current way is not the only way and other ways can go
for millions of years. There might be other constructs that can do the same.
Well, it depends on how you define civilization, because couldn't we hold on to civilization
and maintain it as a much reduced level for a very long time, kind of like a steady state?
Yeah, that's a very appealing notion that, you know, hold on, we don't have to ditch the whole
thing. Maybe we've got enough to work with here, and we can just eliminate the bad stuff. And I
can't say for sure whether we could hold on to civilization for long term. But the fact is no
one can. And so it's important to recognize that the concerns I have kind of come from a
quantitative origin, in that, you know, we've blown through a large fraction of our inheritance
in the timescale of something like a century. And to be clear, it wasn't our inheritance.
We're just the ones that found it and dug it up, but go on. That is true. That's something that I
still fall into is this possessive instinct. But yeah, we had this non-renewable inheritance that
we did stumble onto and claimed for our own and spent a large fraction of that in the course of
a century or so. And if we greatly reduced our footprint, say a tenth of our current scale,
which by the way, you know, maybe a billion people or so, but living at global standards,
which is already much lower standard of energy and resources and materials than we're used to in the
U.S., for instance. So even if we did that, maybe we'd get a thousand years or a few thousand years
out of it. And if we did the most aggressive recycling campaign and had more materials than I'm
giving credit for, maybe 10,000. But that's still short. I mean, on the 75-year span,
that's still just weeks or months. And it also says that we're perhaps nearer the end
than the beginning of what we call civilization. And this thing we have at the end of the day,
it's still fundamentally unsustainable. It wasn't built on sustainable principles. And so
you could stretch it, but it's not built for the long term. It can't really do that.
The most energy-efficient invention, to my knowledge, of mankind is the bicycle,
because it combines technology and materials with human effort to get person from A to B
in the most, using the least amount of energy versus a car or a plane or a tractor or whatever.
Can't we use the remaining fossil and mineral seed corn
in combination with technology to find and fix the problem that we face?
Well, I don't want to be someone who rules out anything, but I do see that the problem that
we're having today or the set of problems that predicament is due to technology at some level.
It's the illusion that we can completely control nature. And I'll just point out, again,
it's not working so well. It never really has. We've only really mounted problems at the global
scale, and we just sort of blightly keep trucking on and ignore them, sweep them under the rug.
But we'll never really fully master, we'll never own nature. And the sooner we stop thinking that
we can, the better and stop floundering in our attempt to accomplish that. So I don't see it
really as a matter of solving problems or mastering nature, of exerting our will and our efforts
of defining what nature should be according to our notions, or dictating what it should be.
That's all kind of a hubristic way that's not working and can't work at some level. So I really
think we ought to spend more time considering not technology as an avenue, but humility,
and figuring out ways to tuck into this amazing, biodiverse world that we live in in a way that
doesn't use that world, but it builds a relationship and a kinship at some level with that world.
Well, I agree with you on that. But let me continue to talk to the physicists within your human body.
So renewable energy, renewable technology, isn't an answer to fossil depletion and climate change?
Well, you know, I used to think that that's kind of how it started out as a physicist approaching
these problems. And I did a lot of calculations about how much we could get from solar and wind,
uh, ins and outs, and limitations. And the problem I have now with it is it only really
doubles down on this destructive scheme. And the question really is, what is it that we do
with abundant energy? What have we done? We tend to expand the human enterprise. We clear more
land for agriculture and other human use. And the way, the humorous way I tend to put it is,
if every jackass on the planet had access to abundant, even clean energy, what would they do
with it? Would they do good things like ecological restoration, where there's no money in that?
So our financial economic system won't support such things. Or will they do what I would call
bad things like, you know, plunder the earth more for their own personal or economic gain?
So I think it's very clear what unleashing a lot of energy would do. And the other framing is,
what would the animals want? If you ask the squirrels and the nutes and the parrots and the
lizards, you know, what, what do they hope will do at this crossroads? Are they hoping that we're
going to pull off this renewable energy transition so we can keep civilization fully powered and
trucking along? Hell no. That's the worst possible thing, the most destructive decision we could
make from their point of view. I remember from our first podcast last year, you are a newt and
salamander aficionado. So maybe we should make a reality TV show or movie and call it ecological
jackass. No, I'm kidding. So, so here's, here's kind of the problem I have with this or not,
it's not the problem, but it's, it's a little bit of a pushback. You say that we didn't plan
to be sustainable or we chose to do this economic system. I think everything that you just said
would have been true 100 years ago or 50 years ago or 10 or 20 years from now, probably. We are
part of nature, Tom. We didn't make the choice to create civilization. It was the byproduct of
a social species finding this huge amount of ancient sunlight just under the surface,
self-organizing around this energy surplus and expanding our nodes of trade and transport
and dopamine. So when did we as a culture ever really have a choice and will we ever have a
moment in the future where we have a choice? Yeah, I think that's a really deep and interesting
question and I know that you've had some guests on your podcast, especially I remember Daniel
Schmackenberger talking about technologies being kind of an obligate thing that it's,
it's a game theory. It's whatever outcompetes other, other modes just ends up winning. And so
at some level, no, it wasn't really a choice. We never sat around a table and plotted this course.
We're just kind of along for the ride and it's been a fun one. I also think of it as, hey,
look what we can do approach to, to living in this world. So, you know, the issue is that,
yeah, we didn't make this conscious choice and part of it is that very few people could have
understood the long-term consequences. You know, it's, it's hard to, nobody has crystal balls,
hard to peer into the future. Some had some really interesting insights and premonitions and
Malthus comes to mind. And now the, you know, named Malthus is ridiculed because he didn't see
the fossil fuels as part of the story. And, you know, that's a lesson. There are things that maybe
we're not seeing as well. Like, yes, sure, you could always say that. But, but, you know, the
writing is on the wall in a lot of ways. We do have this, you know, tremendous decline in biodiversity.
But when you ask, you know, when or will we ever have a moment to make a choice? We always have
this moment. In fact, that's the only moment we ever have. We don't have the future yet and we
can't do anything about the past. So we have now to make a serious change. I just don't know how
to precipitate that effectively or if it's even really possible. But, but sure, we can do something
now. I feel you on that. And that's why, my friend, I'm doing these podcasts. I don't think you or I
are going to change the world or make this choice. But my hope is that passing the baton of ecological
information, systems, education might inspire and inform other people around the planet and
in aggregate, some emergent process happens. I mean, that's a naive hope on my part, but
hope nonetheless. So how would you even define success? What would have to happen for us to
achieve success and what is success? Yeah, I think in order to get to success, every human concern
would have to be built on a foundation that's biophysically sustainable. And so what I mean by
that is if you look at what I mean by concerns, economics, politics, belief systems, human rights,
science, technology, everything that, you know, look at a university catalog, you know, everything
that we care about and teach would are currently not predicated on an insistence for long term
ecosystem sustainability. The first chapter in all of those books of the first lecture is not
about that sustainability and the conditions for that. So all these concerns will fail in their
current formulation. It's almost guaranteed that if they're not built on sustainable principles,
then they're insustainable. They will fail. So you have to start every consideration with something
like this question of would this action be a net help to the whole world, which by the way is mostly
non-human, or would it be a net harm? Now, most decisions we make today are clearly net harms
because they're very narrow in their focus and their goals. And so that's a start. You have to
sort of start on that foundation, but it would require a reformulation from the ground up of
all human interactions and organizational schemes and how we interface to the planet.
And so I don't really see it as an evolution or a tweaking or knob turning of our current
civilizational aspirations and mindset as a new start from scratch. It's kind of a, you know,
hey, this civilization idea has so many flaws, we can't salvage it. We have to build something
completely new. So do you have any hope for that sort of a major transition?
Well, I always have a little bit of hope that we could embark on something as radical as that
voluntarily in aggregate. I mean, that's what it would take. We'd have to all or, you know,
enlarge numbers want to go in this new direction. I'll seize whatever hope I can. I mean, it might
sound counterintuitive and like a disjoint, but I'm actually an optimistic person. I am
fairly happy, go lucky. And I see a lot of the troubles, but I fundamentally just have to believe
that there's something we can do. It can't be false hope. It can't be based on a faith in
technology. I think that's mostly peddled today. But I think that's, you know, if you step back,
we can see that this period is an anomaly. And most of what we've learned in our mindset
is a very temporary stage. It's not likely to last. And I guess the final thing I'll say about hope
is that the human mind is incredibly plastic. And one thing that means is that a child born
a thousand years from now, we'll see whatever world that looks like to them will just be normal
and accepted. And so, and they'll get on with things. And so, or 50 years from now too. Yeah,
you could say that about any moment in history is that to a child, it all looks just normal. It's
by definition normal. So I think that we have a great potential in the sense that
this system isn't part of our DNA. And it's something that once gone
is not going to plague us. And those children of tomorrow aren't going to cry over what
we have that they don't. It's just not part of their world view.
So I think in this very articulate unpacking of a simple story of civilization, I think we
there's two paths ahead, the two questions ahead. There's one which you're working on
with this line of thinking, which is what does a more sustainable future look like where we
do no harm and we help. And all the ecological, biophysical, social, cultural
research and study and inference from that. And then the second question is how to get there
from here. And those are two things that need to be worked on concurrently. Because once we start
to have less energy every year or more costly and less energy every year, all of the current
cultural assumptions of what technology can do for us start to change from what they've been the
last 50 years. So thank you for this. I appreciate you, Tom. And I look forward to having you back
again on this show. And thank you for doing the math with your head and doing the carrying with
your heart, my friend. Do you have any closing comments on this short little conversation?
I appreciate the opportunity and I'm constantly striving to get a handle on what this is all
about and how we might make those transformations. I think a large part of it, it's kind of like
Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz. We've had the special shoes on all this time and we just
need to decide that we need to click them and do something different. Because this culture and
the civilization only exists because we create it in our heads. And so in a sense, it's the easiest
thing for us to dismantle if we put our minds to it. So I do think that's a really important thing
to start thinking about how that happens. Well, I mean, this is our work. And finally,
after 20 years, people are now recognizing the truth of most of what you just said on this call.
And there's a lot more people that recognize that now the what to do about it. That's another
question. So to be continued, my friend, and thank you. Great.
