Good morning, good humans.
I have decided to attempt weekly franklies.
Our podcast comes out on Wednesday mornings and we will have weekly franklies as long
as it doesn't impair my constitution or I run out of things to say.
And I think the latter is pretty unlikely.
Today I would like to give a reflection about climate change.
Not about the science of climate change, but about the different stages of awareness when
it comes to the issue of global warming and our future.
I can't categorize that everyone follows the same sequence, but this sequence of stages
is roughly what I've followed in my own life and I think it's important to attempt to explain
why lots of people use the word climate change, but their solutions and their fixes and their
hopes and interventions are wildly different.
So seven stages of climate awareness.
Well they're stage zero, which is that the human sphere and the environment are not separate.
Many many humans go through life taking that forest walk to work or getting a fish out
of a lake and it all seems like it's part of their life.
The natural world and the environmental processes are invisible to people.
It's just all their life.
Which brings us to stage one, which is a recognition that the human system is embedded in an environment
that has its own ecological processes, creatures, systems, etc.
I learned about this at an early age for no, I mean for one reason at least when I saw
the American Indian ad with the tear streaming down his face for litter in the 1970s.
But it became relatively apparent to me that to get the conveniences and stimulation and
comfort of modern life, we do things that have a deleterious impact on the natural world.
So that would be stage one, being aware that there is an environment.
Stage two is that we recognize that climate change, that climate itself is a part of the
environmental processes on earth and that climate can and does change over time because
of influences and some of this awareness is looking at paleo data and the science from
the past that many of earth's mass extinctions were due to volcanic pulses of laval basalts
from volcanoes that had huge amounts over tens of thousands of years belching CO2 into
the atmosphere and that dramatically changed the climate.
We also had snowball earths when CO2 got very low.
So the third stage is awareness that CO2 is the culprit and the effects we see of floods
and wildfires and massive northern forest loss and polar bears and all these things are from
accelerated warming due to CO2.
The fourth stage of climate awareness is recognizing that two thirds of the CO2 that we emit every
year comes from the burning of fossil fuels and that we know that the CO2 in the atmosphere
is predominantly from the burning of this ancient carbon because of the isotope difference
because relative to pre-industrial times.
And so this stage there is a blame towards fossil fuels, towards fossil fuel companies
because Exxon knew about climate change 40 years ago and suppressed it, etc.
At this stage of climate awareness it's blaming this part of our system, fossil oil, coal
and natural gas and we just need to get rid of that, replace it with something else and
we will solve climate change.
Which brings to the fifth stage of climate awareness, our energy reality and the fifth
stage which I learned around 20 years ago or longer is got three components.
First of all is that we use a hundred billion barrel of oil, equivalents of coal, natural
gas and oil to power the modern economy and these equate to around half a trillion of
actual human workers in what they provide in labor and power potential and that our
entire global $90 trillion economy is completely supported by these labor and power equivalents.
They explain the entire globally interconnected system of transport, trade and basically fossil
hydrocarbons especially oil are the hemoglobin of modern society.
Our wages, our profits, the size of our economy being a thousand times bigger than it was
500 years ago are predominantly due to this giant amount of ancient productivity that
we're adding to our economies.
So that is a big recognition in the fifth stage of climate awareness which is followed
by the fact that this stuff is a pulse.
We are drawing down this ancient carbon battery of earth millions of times faster than it
was sequestered in the past by daily photosynthesis.
Our culture is treating this as if it were interest when we are rapidly drawing down
the principle.
The underlying decline rate of existing oil fields in the world is approaching six percent
a year.
To offset that we have to drill faster and more and deeper in order to offset what's
already depleting.
So this is a one-time pulse.
There's plenty of natural gas left and there's plenty of lower grade coal left but oil as
the master resource will start to decline soon.
The third part of energy reality is that energy has different properties and so-called renewable
energy is powerful, it's robust, it's the right answer to the wrong question.
The question that's currently be asked is how can we reduce our emissions by replacing
fossil fuels with renewable energy and that's not what's happening.
We're adding renewable energy to fossil fuels to grow the economy and so the gross GDP is
growing but we're allocating more and more resources to the energy and material sector
and in order to scale renewable energy to a level equivalent we would have to massively
increase the mining of materials like cobalt and copper and nickel and we would have to
take energy away from the regular economy and direct it towards this scaling.
It's kind of like getting a job that pays you $100,000 a year and you forecast forward
how you're going to spend that $100,000 the next 10 years but you forget that you owe
the state, local and national government 40% of that in the form of taxes.
The taxes in this biophysical situation are the energy and materials it will take to get
to these fanciful net zero scenarios.
This is the fifth stage of climate awareness is that energy underpins our modern society
and we can't just wish it away nor can we replace it and actually we're going to have
to do with less total energy in the not too distant future which brings me to this sixth
stage of climate awareness which is that climate change is not the problem it is a symptom of
an underlying problem that has been long in the making of a social species self-organizing
in an economic system around profits.
The profits are tethered 99% to energy consumption which is in turn about 80% tethered to fossil
hydrocarbons.
We live as part of a system and you have to understand human behavior both individual
and aggregate our anthropological background of how we got here today that we as a global
system of 8 billion of us try to replicate the emotional states of our ancestors in this
wildly consumptive economic system and this consumption is tethered to energy and materials
and technology and we have a monetary overlay on all of it a monetary symbols that represent
this reality and the whole thing is out of control of billionaires and politicians.
No one has control of the system because of the momentum.
So climate change and many other things biodiversity loss overpopulation plastics toxicity one could
argue increasing polarization a lot of these things are downstream of this huge amount of
energy growth imperative which brings me to the seventh stage of climate awareness which
is if you understand this systemic overview of the human situation and how we are much
like a blind amoeba sloughing forward grabbing low entropy goodies without a plan without
even thinking about it.
This changes substantially the choreography of how we will solve climate change.
Most of all the really bad climate scenarios are energy blind in they just assume that
we will continue to grow at 3% this entire century and that there will be enough fossil
hydrocarbons available to continue that growth that's not going to happen.
What will likely happen is we will continue to optimize for growth.
We will not optimize for carbon.
We will not optimize for biodiversity.
We will continue to make choices like Germany is making right now by importing train loads
of coal and restarting a massive biomass program.
They are repealing their environmental rules in the service of energy security as opposed
to low carbon energy and you see as the economic pie begins to shrink around the world you
will see populist leaders like what happened last night in Italy and a couple weeks ago
in Sweden because loss a version of what people have versus the past is a very strong
motivator for political response.
So once you understand this, this seventh stage of climate awareness is we are going
to have to respond to a smaller economy probably gradually and then suddenly when the musical
chairs financial situation ends up having too many people versus the amount of chairs
available and that I think is in the next five to seven years and so this means that
our regenerative agriculture and our low carbon technologies and our 50 to 100 years solar
panel yet to come inventions and our communities having more local and regional supply chains
and all the things that would benefit a reduced emission economy are not going to happen directly.
They need to be happening in tandem in parallel with this other story that's unfolding and
I think there's too few people in the climate community that are paying attention to this
sort of a flowchart of the future and that doesn't mean that we shouldn't stop caring
about climate change or other species or the natural world.
It just means to understand that the way the game pieces are moving we are not going to
collectively galvanize around this problem because finance the economy and an increase
in poverty to lots more people in the world are going to take precedence.
So this is kind of how I see the seven stages of climate awareness at least that's how
I have kind of moved through them in my personal and professional life.
I still care deeply about climate change and biodiversity but I'm trying to work looking
two or three steps ahead on what the interventions that we really need to be doing to save all
these things and future reflections on this show and podcast guests will be discussing
those.
Thank you have a good weekend I will talk to you next week.
