Greetings. I had lots of ideas for this week's, frankly, I was going to follow up the one
ring with artificial intelligence versus real ecology. I've also been constructing a framework
for philanthropy on eight broad categories that philanthropy needs to urgently consider
and start to fund ahead of the great simplification. I also start to write one how I could be wrong
about the great simplification. And another idea that I'd like to share publicly is I've
started doing these things in moderation called silent Saturdays. And I plan on talking about
all that. Of course, last Saturday was not a silent Saturday. And I have various contacts
around the world who were calling me Saturday morning, letting me what's going on of the
horror and the tragedy in the Middle East, in Israel, and subsequently Palestine, Lebanon,
etc. And so I didn't do that, frankly, and I'm going to give a very brief reflection on my thoughts
on Israel today. Okay, so those people following this podcast are aware that energy is the currency
of the universe, and that oil is currently doesn't always have to be the hemoglobin of modern
culture. What you might not know is that within around 800 miles of Israel, in a triangle called
the black gold triangle by some contains around 50 to 65% of all the world's remaining oil. So
without getting into, you know, predictive speculation on what's going to happen the next few
months, which I never really do this podcast is about painting the game board of the next decade
and beyond. I really don't have an edge in predicting what's going to happen in the near
term. But if you squint and take a step back, and look at this situation, there are all kinds of
complex potential Archduke Ferdinand like situations here between the Sunnis and the Shias
between the Muslims and the Christians between the Middle East and the West between a new potential
axis of Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and China, and Israel, the US and the UK, I don't know. But in a
world where interest rates are starting to rise, government deficits are ballooning, polarization
is high, the agreements between who's buying what using what currency and what letters of credit,
and what banking system, it's like there's this choosing of sides that's occurring behind the
scenes from the unipolar world order that we grew up with into something else. So my only comment
there is, I think the timeline to the great simplification just got shorter. And of course,
again, when I say that Palestine and Pakistan and Madagascar and Sri Lanka and Cyprus and many
other places have already experienced a great simplification. So when I say great simplification,
I really mean when is it coming from me or for you listening to this program. So I think the
timeline just accelerated because oil is precarious and important. Having said that, I think the
aggregate market opinion of what has happened is far more sanguine than what I just said.
You can buy oil futures out five, six, seven years. They're not too liquid, but there is a price
structure out many, many years from now. And oil seven years from now is a dollar higher than it
was a week ago. So that's either energy blindness and geopolitics blindness in the financial markets,
but oil traders are not energy blind. So I suspect that they think that there's going to be a
a short resolution that Israel is going to gain control over things quickly,
like they did in the two crises in the 1970s. I don't think so, but I'm not an expert on that.
One more thing I will say about this is just like with Ukraine and Russia when I learned my lesson
last year, there are two wars now happening between Israel and Palestine and beyond.
There's the kinetic war, which we will see on the news. And there's the informational war
and the propaganda from both sides, tilting public opinion. I've learned not to trust
especially things that come out right away and are well crafted. Sunday morning, the Wall Street
Journal published an article saying that this was all planned in advance with the backing of Iran
by three major journalists with all kinds of data. I mean, Sunday morning, color me a little
skeptical on that, but I think Iran is going to become a four letter word. And I don't know the
details here, but I think we are spiraling out of control with the geopolitical peace and relationships.
But actually none of that is what I want to talk about today. My girlfriend was out of town
last weekend, she got back Sunday night, she's like, so what's going on? And I told her all about
the horror and the tragedy, the people in Israel and what was going on. And she's like, well,
that sucks. But I was asking you, did you dig out the potatoes? Did you clean the duck pen?
Did you chop the wood and stack it like you said you would? And you have to stop worrying
about the future and start worrying about today. Of course, I had no response to that other than
she was right. And I think we that are aware of the great simplification
are in some senses, storm watchers. And now with Ukraine and Russia and interest rates and the
election and the House Speaker and the polarization and now Israel and the Middle East, the species
loss and insects and the one and a half degrees spike in climate, all time standard deviation.
The storm is here and the storm is going to be here probably for the rest of our lives,
some version of it. And I realized that this was a term Mark Gaffney coined.
And the pre-tragic is when you don't know anything about species loss and climate change and oil
depletion and war. And tragic is when you see it and you're like, oh, my God, this is so horrible.
And then post-tragic is when you've kind of had a stoic response to it and you come to terms
and you live with it. Living in the storm, which is what this podcast does a lot of the time,
constantly pulls you back from the post-tragic to the tragic. And I think we have to understand
the world, but we also have to live in the world. And this week was a big reminder of this,
because there were so many things going on and so many deadlines that yesterday I just had to
take a knee. I did go out and dig some potatoes and I set out some new straw for my ducks.
Because I never did get my silent Saturday. Another thing that brought it home to me is
yesterday I had a podcast roundtable for next month's roundtable. This month's roundtable will
be out two days from today on Sunday with Pelletiel, Dougalde Hine, and Chris Smagy on
Food and Community in the Ruins. Next month is Vandana Shiva, Andrew Millison, Daniel Zeta,
and Jason Bradford on Growing Food Without Fossil Fuels. Daniel Zeta called me on Tuesday night.
He's a farmer here in Minnesota. And he's like, what's the plan for tomorrow? I'm like,
I've just been jammed since this is real thing. And he's like, what is real thing? And I was like,
dude, it's Tuesday night. This happened Saturday morning. Are you not aware of what
happened in the Middle East? And of course he wasn't. He was in the fields all day processing
and before a hard frost, getting all of his crops in, doing chores with his animals.
And I felt like, I felt shocked. And then I was like, I felt jealous. I felt envious of that,
that he had spent the last four days working outside on things and wasn't aware. So I think we
all who are aware of this need to live in both worlds. And yeah, it's a privilege to be able to
take a knee. I think people living in the Middle East right now don't have that option. But if we
spend all of our times worrying and thinking about the future, we miss the beauty and the potential
of today. And so I got that tiny, tiny little bit of wisdom and insight this week. So understand
the future. Yes. But don't live in the future. Lots more to say in the near future.
Salam, shalom, mir, peace to all of you.
