Wow, that was awesome, Nate.
Thank you very much.
We've got quite a few questions here.
So first off from Farmer Zoomer Boomer,
why is debt to GDP ration so important?
Well, it would be the same way
that if you made $50,000 a year in your job,
but you spent more than that,
and in order to spend more than that,
you had to borrow it at the bank.
And so you borrowed 20 and 40 and 60,
and eventually you owed the bank $200,000.
That would be 400% debt to GDP.
So if you owe the bank 200 grand
and all you make is 50 grand,
that can only be manageable if your interest rates
are really low or your friends with the bank manager.
But there is no one that can bail out
the central banks of the world.
So if Japan is over 500% debt to GDP,
they've had zombie companies for a while
that can't support their earnings,
don't support their interest and debt
unless the government helps them.
So the issue is that if we continue
to maintain consumption today
by issuing more and more credit,
eventually people won't believe
that that credit will be paid back,
and all of a sudden the credit magic wand stops.
And at that moment, if you were,
oh, the bank 200 grand and you were making 50 grand,
you cannot buy anymore, you cannot borrow anymore.
And not only that, but you're gonna owe 20 grand
an interest to the bank, so you're down to 30 grand.
So it ends up eventually being
a giant deflationary pulse to the economy
where there's defaults and all the prices
come crashing down because we can create money,
but we cannot create energy.
And this is not known to most people
because we've been swimming in this
since you and I have been alive, Ivan.
We've created more debt every single year
that you and I have been alive.
Actually, when you were one or two years old,
that might not have happened.
But since I've been alive, we've created more debt
every year than we've grown our GDP.
That's just unsustainable.
Okay, thanks, Nate.
Um, from Heidi Kass.
Please re-explain the term biophysical alchemy.
Well, biophysical is a type of economics
that's biology and physics,
but what it really means is it's tethered
to the real world.
So most people in our culture think
that money is wealth,
but money is just a marker for real capital,
social capital, which is our relationships
and our networks, built capital,
which is our house or our cell phone or our tractor,
natural capital, which is the soil and the trees,
and human capital, which are our skills and our knowledge.
So biophysical alchemy is in a musical chairs game
when the amount of financial claims exist,
existent will unlikely all be paid back
to use that financial capital ahead of time
to turn it into, to transmute via alchemy into real things
as an individual, as a community, as a nation
to invest in a different sort of future.
It's basically biophysical alchemy is turning
digits in the bank and linen in your pocket
into real things that will help your future.
Okay, thanks.
And I also wanna, before we go on,
encourage everyone to put in some more questions
in the Q and A, which is the button
in the lower center of your screen there.
So I'd love to hear your questions.
The next question is from Jeff Brown.
I love the bullshit meter.
And I wonder with all our cognitive biases,
what would be the best way to catch our own blindness?
Yeah, it's hard, right?
So I, of all the topics I know,
I probably know cognitive biases and the brain the best.
And so when I confidently say something about the future,
I check myself because I have to handicap
that 99% confidence by a third,
because I'm human and therefore I'm delusional.
I think learning about cognitive biases
gives you empathy and a little bit of kindness
for other people when they make mistakes
or are very confident.
It allows you to see the witch doctors we have
on the national press briefings right now
on this coronavirus.
I think, I don't know that it's possible.
We can't change who we are,
where we see a shadow as a burglar instead of a shadow.
I mean, we make those errors all the time,
but educationally, we need to have scientific filters
on energy, behavior, ecology,
and those have been lacking in our education system.
I don't know how to do it, Jeff,
but I think it's imperative that we head in that direction.
Well, for instance,
Europe has a better bullshit filter than we do
on balance on a lot of topics.
Some two thirds of our population
don't believe in evolution,
and I think 90% in Europe do as one example.
Okay, thanks.
From Lorette.
Please share how you started the lecture
regarding to educate, inspire, and enlist people.
Right.
I think in order to influence the future,
in order to respond to the crises we face,
we have to see the right game board.
We have to see how pieces fit together.
We can't just look at climate change.
We can't just look at poverty.
We can't just look at renewable energy.
We can't just look at racism or politics.
We have to see how the picture fits together,
and that we are headed for a smaller economy.
We are headed for less goods and services per capita,
but it doesn't have to be a disaster.
Once basic needs are met, the best things in life are free.
We're gonna need help from the government in the near term.
We're gonna need help from each other, building community.
I can see how this all unfolds relatively clearly.
So what I wanna do is educate more people
about the real chess board,
where the pieces still look like chess pieces,
but they're not.
It's a new game entirely.
And so what I will not do is not scare people away from that
because it is a scary story.
I mean, this was a lot of intense stuff in this lecture,
but to inspire people to, you know what?
We're only alive for a short time.
What better time to engage in these things?
Get off our ass, go meet your neighbors
after lockdown and all that, et cetera.
And enlist more and more of our society
to play a role in this emergent future
that we don't know what it's gonna be like.
So I'd rather have a lot more people trying different models,
different ways of doing things.
And a lot of those things might not work,
but some of them will.
And so that's what I mean by enlist.
Okay, thanks.
From an anonymous attendee,
I've been reading reports of fracking and well-permits
being approved in California and Texas in the last month.
Does that mean that oil and gas companies
are planning new investments?
Yes, I'm sure they're, I'm sure they are.
And I don't know the legislative tax subsidy rule changes
that are happening,
but I can assure you that I talk to a lot
of very smart energy gurus,
and they're agreeing with me that we're at a point now
where it almost has to be nationalized
unless we somehow miraculously have a V-shaped recovery,
which I just think is impossible.
We're not gonna have a V-shaped recovery.
First of all, this virus is gonna,
the reason that we had the declines in cases and deaths
is because we've shut the economy down.
As soon as we open the economy up again,
we're gonna get a second wave.
So a V-shaped recovery, even in China right now,
the thermal footprint of China is around 65%
of where it was a year ago,
despite them claiming that they're recovering
and all back to work.
They are back to work,
but consumer spending is down dramatically.
And the amount of coal and electricity they use
is only at about two thirds as it was a year ago.
So I think it's a big unknown with fracking.
And the thing is, is when you stop drilling for frack,
for tight oil, your production declines 30 to 40%.
So we're gonna see massively sharp declines in production
in the next year or two.
And there's a lot of oil still left there,
but it's costly.
And remember the difference between price and cost.
There's also a difference between cost and value,
because one barrel of oil,
if it's $40 or $80 or $200,
still does four and a half years of my work.
And we're gonna need some of that
to build the United States equivalent
of Spanish Paradors in the future.
So I'm, you know, here's another narrative
that's happened that's very frustrating to me.
I think the environmental movement
has kind of been co-opted by techno-optimists
and big business.
And it's left its ecological roots from the 70s.
And there's a lot of bullshit there too.
There's actually a movement now,
since oil is negative or so cheap,
that environmentalists wanna buy up
all the fossil fuel companies
and let's just leave the oil in the ground.
That is completely delusional
because our society would,
we would be in Mad Max in a month if that happened.
So we do need to nationalize the oil industry,
but not to keep it in the ground probably.
Okay, thanks, let's see.
I'm gonna ask a question from me.
So Nate, I know that you were very involved
in the peak oil movement back in the early 2000s.
You were one of the front runners on that.
So what happened to peak oil?
I am not sure.
I was distracted a little bit during your talk.
And I'm not sure if you really covered why
that didn't happen back then.
Yeah, well, so if you wanna understand peak oil,
you have to understand money.
And if you wanna understand money,
you have to understand energy.
If in a hypothetical case,
our culture would have disallowed debt.
The debt would have been illegal.
Can't imagine that.
But if that happened,
oil would have peaked in the 1970s.
And we would have peaked and then had a lot of slow plateau
and a slow decline.
But since we were allowed to have debt,
we kept borrowing and borrowing
and building a bigger system.
And so we accessed more oil,
but the oil that we produced
had a steeper decline rate like Cantorail in Mexico.
We had nitrogen injection and infilling
and all these horizontal nipples.
And we got this huge amount of production
in the late 90s and early 2000s, and then it crashed.
Well, that's akin to what's happening in shale
that we've already used the really low cost stuff.
And now we're accessing the higher cost stuff,
which has a much faster decline rate.
So what happened, people were talking about 2005 to 2008
being peaked oil.
And it was, we never pierced that on just conventional oil,
which is the traditional conventional crude oil.
Since 2005, we've been kind of on
what's called a bumpy plateau.
The increase in oil from 2005 was this shale oil,
biofuels, natural glass, plant liquids,
things that aren't really oil, but we count them as oil.
And so what happened was is the world went to debt
and credit in a huge way in a response
to the great financial recession in 2008.
China issued $6 to $7 of credit
for every additional dollar of their GDP.
So China alone since 2008,
that credit alone accounted for 50% of the demand
in the world for oil since the financial crisis.
So what we did is we kicked the can of peaked oil
by growing the risk of finance.
So we added more and more credit
and a lot of shale companies accessed Wall Street.
But the larger story isn't the shale bubble per se,
it's the entire human access to credit
that allowed us to consume more of the last decade
at an eventual cost of a steeper decline rate
of the underlying dynamics of the oil fields.
Okay, thanks.
So there's several questions here
that are kind of tie into the whole oil debt.
And so from farmers boomer boomer.
So have nots, we use stated have nots
are really gonna suffer unless government step up.
So how, what more can they do?
Shirley and I print more money.
So in regards to that, how much debt can we get?
I mean, how far can we go?
Well, you know, here's the thing.
We have a longer term sustainability crisis for sure.
And now it's been made worse,
but we absolutely need to stabilize the patient.
And I don't care what we need to do to do that
because there are systemic risks
of connectivity and knock on risks
that I don't really wanna get into here,
but it's really a dangerous situation
if we don't support people, companies,
and the financial system.
So how can we do more?
We can have the government send little snap cards.
We could even call them Trump cards to every American
and have $500 a week or whatever it is,
and you top those cards off electronically
for as long as the crisis lasts.
We're gonna need things like that.
We're gonna need the treasury, not the Federal Reserve.
We're gonna need the treasury
to make direct investments into companies
that once the economy recovers,
they can reverse those and sell them back.
But the domino zipper effect of all these companies,
for example, a company like Neiman Marcus,
we don't really need all that fancy stuff at Neiman Marcus,
but Neiman Marcus has a lot of employees.
Neiman Marcus had a lot of companies that sell them things.
Neiman Marcus bonds are owned by a lot of portfolio managers.
If a thousand companies like Neiman Marcus go under,
it's this domino effect
where the entire financial system implodes.
And then we don't even have the ability
to go buy things with our cash station cards
because they no longer work.
I mean, there's deep systemic risk
if the government doesn't sufficiently bail out people,
in my opinion.
How much?
Well, I mean, quite a bit actually.
I think Japan has been over 500% debt to GDP
for a long time.
They've been in this zombie deflationary wave
since more than 20 years.
And they're still doing okay.
It's definitely not sustainable.
But I think we need to kick this last can,
which then buys us a few years to do this biophysical alchemy
and come up with plans,
both as a nation and as a communities,
on living with less,
having a more local, less materially intensive economy.
But if we don't navigate these next couple months,
we're not gonna ever get to that point.
So I think it's really important
that the federal reserve and the government
need to do more, need to do it faster,
need to be more comprehensive,
and they can't let anyone behind.
There's a lot of people that were in the gray area
between having jobs and not
that are completely left out of this right now.
And we need to somehow support everyone.
And I'm talking to people about this in DC.
And I think people are starting to wake up
to the magnitude of the problem,
but we need to do more
and it needs to be more comprehensive,
not these waiting a month
to get a check in the mail sort of thing.
Okay, good.
From Elaine, what's a V-shaped recovery?
V-shaped recovery is when the economy has a heart attack
and drops 20% or 10% or whatever.
And then we fix the problem.
Like the coronavirus is cured
and all of a sudden everyone goes right back
and to consuming exactly the way we were
in December of 2019.
So it looks like a V.
I think it's gonna be like an L
or like maybe like a C or a J.
We will recover from this.
The question is what will the economy look like?
What will be our goals?
What will the financial claims look like?
And how bad will it get first before the recovery?
And I think we have to be really careful
about reopening the economy is too soon.
But even if like Ivan,
even if Governor Walts opened the economy again right now
wide open, would you go to a restaurant?
Would you fly somewhere?
So this is not only a physical thing,
but a psychological memory that in the Great Depression
people were psychologically, there was a memory like,
well, the people that you knew that grew up
in the Great Depression are really tight.
They don't like to waste money
because things were so hard in the 30s
that every penny counted.
So they're very frugal.
Whereas you and I growing up, things weren't that hard,
which is why we're spend thrifty on average, maybe not you.
So I think this is already taken a little psychological toll
on our population and that if you're up in China
and everywhere.
Okay, good.
So a couple of questions here I'm gonna combine
because they're on similar topic.
First from Farmer, Zoomer, Boomer,
from Drain America first to what?
Drain Canada, Venezuela, and Nigeria?
How about Drain it not at all?
And then as an aside, wouldn't it be politically
and ecologically more implausible for the US
to use that oil, say in 2100, if that's what you're saying?
So the concept of my super organism paper
is that animals have a metabolism
and human economies, if you aggregate
are large numbers of animals collaborating working together.
We also have a metabolism.
So whatever happens with this coronavirus,
we are gonna self-organize around energy
because energy is what is the veins and arteries
and brings the hemoglobin to our society.
So I think energy is going to be incredibly important
in the next 20 years and there needs to be a way
to make it more costly.
Because if we make it more costly,
we're gonna make better longer-term decisions about it
and it's scarcity and how precious it is.
The market system is not giving us those signals.
The market system is gonna say it's $10 a barrel
for the next three years
because the economy's in doldrums.
So we have to have some emergent structure on top of that
in order to make it more costly
so that we make wiser long-term decisions.
But we can't just leave it in the ground
because it is vital to our country, our world.
Now we're gonna be using a lot less of it,
which is why I think this coronavirus
has completely lopped off the riskier RCP scenarios
in the climate models.
We're certainly, we're not out of the woods.
In fact, if we stopped all fossil carbon
and hydrocarbon burning today,
we would still continue warming for decades
because of whatever is built in the cake.
But the really scary scenarios,
I've never thought were possible
because of our inability to afford biophysically
the last half or the last third
of oil, natural gas and coal.
So I think what's happening is kind of good news for climate,
assuming that we don't have a geopolitical response
to this growth crisis,
meaning a war or something like that,
which could have bad outcomes, bad for nature.
Yeah.
Okay, from Lorette.
Back in the day,
how did you come to leave a financial institution
like Solomon Brothers?
Well, I left Solomon Brothers
because one of my female Korean colleagues in Hong Kong
sold too risky of an instrument to a wealthy investor
and it cost the firm $4 million.
And then the head of Solomon Brothers
shut down our division.
But I think that Lorette is asking more
about why did I leave Wall Street?
And the answer to that is
that I started to read books by Herman Daley.
I started to recognize that resource depletion,
oil depletion was a thing that was gonna happen
in my lifetime.
I started to learn that the externalities,
the negative prices, the negative impacts
on the natural world were not included in our prices.
And that just seemed so strange to me.
And eventually I started reading books about the brain
and ecology and human behavior and oil so much
that I wasn't doing my day job that well.
And so I gave my clients their money back
and I just started to read in this stuff full time.
To be honest, well, I'm always honest,
to be blunt and open,
I've spent 15 years piecing together this story
of humans collectively acting
as this energy hungry super organism.
And I see that clearly now.
And the question is,
is can we be something other than that?
And I think we have to understand what it is
that we're doing and why in order to imagine
and navigate towards better paths.
Could we have some sort of governance?
Could we have some sort of cultural metric
beyond just GDP?
If we're like the people in the movie Idiocracy,
the answer is no,
because we wanna get these feelings
and the feelings are correlated with energy
and the energy is correlated with fossil carbon,
which has CO2.
But a lot of the feelings we can get,
oh, by the way, don't need all that energy.
When I'm with my dog, that little Frank,
where is Frank?
Frank, come here, I'm talking about you.
Frank, come here.
Frank is a tiny little animal.
Come here, Frank, I'm talking about you.
Wow, here he is, Frank.
Frank hardly needs any money or food,
a little bit of kibble every night
and how much serotonin, oxytocin, dopamine
do I get from this little man, right?
Right?
So I don't know if that answered your question.
Good, good, thanks.
That's something I never could have done
at the Rochester church, by the way.
Okay.
Question from Scott Endler.
How can we encourage those that have had the good fortunes
do well in the previous economic free market system
to feel compelled to step up and contribute more
with progressive income taxation and wealth taxes
to begin to provide a basic minimum basic income
in order to maintain social coherence?
It's an excellent question.
It might be the question in coming years.
First of all, we have to have the government started.
The government has to support all people now.
How do you get people that did well
in the last 30 years or whatever to help out?
I think, to be honest,
the only way is if they're gonna fear
that their money is not gonna be worth anything
and that they won't have a society to spend it on.
And that's a real risk, I think.
So they have to be educated and aware
of how all these pieces fit together
and they have to have some empathy
and pro-social views to begin with.
But as you know, this coronavirus was a medical issue
but it laid bare inequality, finance, energy,
all kinds of other problems.
But the biggest problem it laid bare
is our political situation.
We are in such a vitriolic battle
between the left and the right
that I'm afraid that we won't do what's necessary in May
when we have this new 2020 coronavirus tarp moment
that the political will isn't there to go across the aisle
and do what's right for the country.
But to Mr. Endler, I don't know the answer to that
but I think it's really central.
Maybe we have to explain to people
absolute versus relative wealth.
It's a really difficult thing to do
because there's also the psychological cognitive bias
called loss aversion,
which is if you start with $10,000
and you make it to 11,000
and then they measure your brain chemicals
and how happy you are,
and then you lose a thousand
and go from 11,000 to 10,000
and then they measure your brain and interview you.
You feel much worse after losing the thousand
than you do after gaining the thousand.
We are averse to losses
because a little bit extra food
in our ancestral environment wouldn't have meant much
but a week without food meant you would die.
So right now a lot of people are experiencing
subjective and monetary loss
and they don't feel good about it.
So on top of that say you need to support other people
that don't have it as well as you
is a difficult conversation
but I think it's an important one.
Okay, so this next question is kind of a two part.
So it's from Jeff Brown.
Thank you for the radical reframing.
I especially liked consumer to humans people
and collapse to decline, Ben simplify.
Can you share some ways you have done these
in your own life?
And as a follow up, he goes on to say,
please know that my question about reframing
is with the intention that Nate
can show some day to day examples for people.
I'm not questioning Nate or his obviously integrity.
Well, I mean, the consumer to human is an easy one.
I used to make a lot of money back in the day.
I haven't really had a job in 15 years
and I lived off my savings for a while
and then I do some consulting and some teaching
and I get paid and things not in dollars
but in Ivan, you're not paying me to do this call
but I'm getting neurotransmitters
because I'm trying to help humanity.
I'm getting a feeling that I'm passing the baton
of what needs to happen in our culture to other people.
That feels meaningful to me.
I'm not a consumer.
I'm a human, I'm a citizen in doing that.
Lots of examples where you have a choice of going
to a fancy trip or a restaurant
but instead you make a simple meal at home.
These last few weeks, we've been drawing down our freezer
instead of going to the grocery store
and I think the grocery store would be fresher
and better food but we're trying to get rid
of the things in the freezer.
So there's lots of examples like that.
As far as collapse versus bend or break,
like I said earlier,
I view the world as a probability distribution.
There is a possibility of collapse.
Anyone studying this knows that is true
because we live in a complex system
and there's lots of moving pieces.
First of all, I've already processed that.
So I think that's maybe a 20 or 30% chance
and I deal with that and I try to increase
the 70 to 80% chance of it not happening
because I think we need to bend and not break
and if we get to that next bend,
then some new thing might happen.
Some new technology, some new ethics,
some new meme with young people.
We don't know what the future is gonna be.
We could probably be confident about it,
what it's not gonna be and it's not gonna be
unbridled economic growth the next decade.
So I just think we have to keep fighting
and do these things in our own life
where we don't consume just because we can,
partially because that trains us to be more resilient
when things will be more expensive and more difficult,
partially because it sends a message to others.
Wow, look at that Jeff guy.
He doesn't consume a lot, look how healthy and happy he is.
He's smiling all the time.
I wanna be like him, what's he doing?
We haven't had the chance to have that cultural example
because everything is Kanye West and Kardashians
and TV shows and now we're having examples
of how real people are responding and living.
And by the way, Kanye West emails Forbes
to say you undercounted my wealth.
I'm worth three billion, not one billion.
I mean, what a cultural iconic example
of exactly not the direction we wanna be headed as an aside.
Very good, thank you.
Heidi Cass is wondering,
could you talk a little more about needing warriors
and mystics?
Well, I'm a scientist, so I usually talk in charts
and graphs and things like that and there's a lot of things.
I mean, science really is pattern recognition
at the end of the day,
but there's a lot of unspoken things
that you don't need a scientific explanation.
And frankly, I think we eventually will need
a technocracy of some sort,
which is systems, literate scientists making plans
for a decent, a viable descent in our future.
But we need, before we get to that point,
we need storytellers or warriors and mystics.
We need people out there that are artists
explaining to others the best things in life are free
once you have your basic needs met,
explaining the importance of nature,
explaining the authentic community and how important that is.
And so you don't need to be this practical dot the I
across the T, scientist to influence the future.
You can take your own path,
which I summarized as warriors and mystics
as just someone who's passionate about the world,
about our future,
choosing their own way to engage with these things.
Ivan, you're on mute.
Yep, okay, I had to get a glass of water.
Suzanne Derby, I know it was from Rochester here,
and she is wondering,
I appreciate your proposal to nationalize the oil.
How can we do that without a social
and probably violent revolution,
given how private industry wants to hold on to profits?
For example, New York Times covered how children of oil
now identify as energy producers as opposed to oil producers.
I doubt they want to be nationalized.
Well, I mean, generally, yes,
but they're not making any profits now.
So I think it's a very real question
that I'm really not an expert on how it would happen,
but at the prices right now, no one is making money.
Now, if we go back up to 20 or $30,
most will not be making money, some will.
But not only does it make sense,
but actually, if you've got someone with skills, of course,
and that's the other problem,
is the government couldn't mismanage it
worse than the companies are.
But if you had the right people doing it,
you would actually be able to extract more oil,
do it on a better timeline.
And in my opinion, I think in the coming decades,
we're going to have rationing in this country.
And yes, that's not a free market statement,
but let's be honest, we do not have a free market,
and we haven't for a long time.
The Federal Reserve and the central banks of the world
are managing the levels.
They have to.
They have to support the amount of financial claims
that are extant in the system,
dwarf the amount of actual productive capacity and resources.
And as long as people look to the Federal Reserve,
there was always this thing called the Powell put,
or the Bernanke put, or the Yellen put,
which meant that if the stock market went down enough,
people knew that the central bank would come
and do quantitative easing,
which adds liquidity to the system and liquidity
does not go to Main Street.
It goes primarily to banks that then
have to put that into financial assets.
So the financial market now,
we've rallied like 30% off of the lows.
That's not because the economy's getting better.
It's because the Federal Reserve came out with bazookas
to support and buy things like junk bonds.
So I don't know the answer.
I just see, what I see is the problem,
and the problem is having all these oil companies
come out of this, given the economic landscape I see,
they're not gonna be able to.
So they're gonna need help,
otherwise the entire industry is gonna collapse.
And the only help I can see
is Federal Reserve or the Treasury
giving them huge amounts of money
or some sort of nationalization.
But the money isn't really gonna help the situation
unless we somehow get back to 60, 70, 80, 90, $100 oil,
which the global economy is not gonna support,
not remotely.
So it is a pickle.
And I'm looking into it.
So I'll get back to Ivan with what I find out.
Thanks.
Now, this next question is something that,
when I first met you several years ago, Nate,
I was not in agreement with you
because I was a techno-optimist,
but I've been reformed since then by you.
So from anonymous attendee,
I completely agree with you on techno-optimism.
But what is the best way to persuade people
that technological innovation is not going to save us?
You need to do a lot of reading
and a lot of understanding.
It's, you know, we've been alive in an era
where we've mistaken abundant net energy for cleverness.
And cleverness is what people say has gotten us through this.
It's like every maze has cheese at the end.
And if that's the case,
then of course we're clever enough to find the cheese.
But the net energy, which is how much energy we use,
we get after we spend the energy and materials to get it,
are what really drive society.
Technology in many ways is just a vector
for how much energy we will require next year.
So if we invent some new things,
Nintendo Switch or a new microwave or a new lawnmower,
then there's more demand for that next year.
We've never had a decline in energy, really,
to show the relationship between energy and technology.
But if oil declines, continues its decline,
and I argue that it peaked in October of 2018,
we're gonna see what technology can provide for us.
So most technology just uses energy
to give us the feelings that the technology produces.
It's a difficult thing to convince to people,
but you have to read about ecology and energy and nature
and the concept of net energy.
I mean, I know it's difficult
because I've spent 15 years trying to do it
and I've not made it that far.
But you could read my super organism paper
called Economics for the Future Beyond the Superorganism.
It's freely available online.
And here's another suggestion.
I made a one hour and a five hour short course
of my reality 101.
It's called the Human Predicament Short Course Online,
and then there's a full 36, five or six minute videos.
And in there is an hour and 45 minutes
on energy and technology and money,
well before the coronavirus,
but it's all still quite valid.
You could find that on just a Google search on YouTube.
Okay, good.
And then we're coming up on three o'clock.
We can keep going.
We've got pretty much everybody's still online.
So I'll let you decide one order
when you're ready to...
I had already committed to going on a bike ride,
although it looks to be threatening.
Is it raining down in Roch or not?
No, but it looks threatening.
Yeah, no, I'm gonna try to get a bike ride in.
So maybe one more question and then we will carry on.
Okay.
Let me pick between these two then.
Well, if there's two, you can...
Okay, I'll give you these two.
The first one is from Jeremy Emmy.
I like your idea of real assets
as opposed to money, financial instruments.
How do you create liquidity,
which most people will need
if capital shifts to real assets?
E.g., if your retirement is in the form of a share of a farm
or office building or trees?
Well, I mean, that's a good retirement plan to have.
You know, the myth of barter is we never really did trade
a chicken for a wheelbarrow or things like that.
So that's why money is so important
is because there's liquidity.
You're not gonna have liquidity on a farm.
But my point was if you don't have a farm
and you don't have land and you don't have equipment
and you don't have friends and you don't have skills
and you have a big 401k,
the time is to get out of that financial marker of reality
and get into some real reality.
But yes, you will then have less liquidity,
but liquidity shouldn't be the end goal.
The end goal should be sustainability
and a good life and a community.
Good.
And then the last one then from Andrew Bolu.
Thanks for giving this talk.
On your statement about there not being
enough affordable fossil fuels
to cause really bad climate change scenarios,
what is your estimate for the amount
of affordable fossil fuels out there?
I didn't say there wasn't enough
to cause really bad climate change.
I said it wasn't enough to reach the RCP 8.5
or the RCP 6 or even the RCP 4.5 scenarios.
We don't know what's gonna happen.
There are a lot of biological feedbacks
that are already kicked in.
I just have been more sanguine about,
some of these hysterical books that are out
that it's too late and we're off to the races.
I think, like I said before,
we live as part of a system.
You can't just look at how much coal and oil
is under the ground and say,
oh, we're gonna access that
because what happens if China can never get back
to the credit engine that they were?
What happens if global trade
because of some sort of geopolitics kind of breaks down?
What happens if this virus lasts for years?
There's all kinds of nonlinear impacts.
In that case, I believe there's a 50% chance
we will never as a global economy
get to the 2019 level of energy use,
which is 17 and a half trillion watts,
17 terawatts of energy, but we could recover,
we could get things going again
and pierce the 2019 level.
But if we do that,
we're still doing that because of a pop in debt to GDP,
which means we'll only have a few more years
before we have this natural financial recalibration.
I don't have estimates in front of me,
but I have talked to a lot of people about it
who are biophysically literate.
I think there's a decent chance
that if the models are correct,
that we do stay below two degrees Celsius,
which means there's a 50% chance we don't.
So I think climate and ocean acidification
is the single biggest risk of our lifetime.
But in our brains, it's not going to be a big risk
because people are gonna be worried about food and jobs
and safety and security.
And I think this virus pretty much took the wind
out of the sails of the climate movement,
not only because of the things I said,
because a lot of climate activism
isn't gonna be funded anymore
because we're gonna be in a recession or depression.
But that doesn't mean it's not a risk.
I just think the risk is now less than it was a few months ago.
Okay, well, thank you so much, Nate.
Farm Resuma Boomer had several more.
It's gotta be someone I know.
But this has really been awesome.
In this uncertain times, it's really much approved.
And thank you, Mayor Norton, for your introduction
and talking about Rochester a little bit.
So yeah, thanks again, Nate.
Have a good bike ride.
Thanks, Ivan.
Thanks for everything you're doing down there
in Olmstead County.
Talk to you soon, man.
Bye now.
