Hello. Good morning. Time for another. Frankly, this week's commentary is on the global situation
with forests and using firewood for home heating in the winter. I originally was going to
call this post the Lorax. I also considered calling it the TDE, the Terminal Deforestation
Event, which is a little gloomy, but possible. I decided to call it the sixth pool, as in
the sixth pool of terrestrial carbon, that humans access to add to our economies. So
this week, the European Commission just voted to remove subsidies on using pellets, sawdust,
etc., for home heating because of growing recognition that there are limits to forest
biomass in Europe. As many of you are aware, since early this summer, firewood is virtually
sold out across northern Europe. You cannot buy firewood at any price in Germany, and
this is because people are anticipating even a normal winter that there won't be the natural
gas available to provide home heating. So in this brief overview, I'm going to talk
about the relationship between humans and forests, the relationship, at least in the
United States, between the amount of fossil fuels we use and the forest biomass, and the
fact that there are virtually no models in climate space or in governmental forecast
looking at humans returning to biomass in a large way. So let's start with the history
of forest. Humans and even our pre-Homo sapiens ancestors have been accessing forest or wood
for hundreds of thousands of years. The standing forest we have today is around a third smaller
than it was when we started the agricultural revolution. So there are five pools of terrestrial
carbon. The first pool is soil, which is at the agricultural revolutions, humans started
to en masse access the chemical bonds in the soil, not directly for carbon reasons, but
for nutrients, phosphorus, potassium, etc., and this thus released the carbon embedded
in the soil. The second pool was forest. We used forest for timber and fuel and heat and
construction materials, and we're running out of forest when we puzzled out how to access
buried ancient sunlight under the ground in the 18th and 19th centuries. So the next pool
was coal, and the next pool was oil, and the next pool was natural gas. Those are the five
pools of carbon. Note that there's an increase in energy density as we go from wood to coal
to oil, which means how much energy is in one unit volume or weight of the mass of the fuel.
So coal is significantly more energy dense than wood, and oil is significantly more energy dense
than coal. So we don't think about it much, but in the early years of our country, the mid-19th
century, much of the eastern coast was denuded. Vermont was 90% deforested because of the access
to using trees for all these things. So if we look at the last two centuries of humans and energy
use, this is where the superorganism or the Lorax comes into play, is we started to go to coal,
then oil, then gas, then nuclear, hydro, and renewables. But now 150 years later, we're using
more wood in total than we were 150 years ago because of the size and the scale of the global
access to timber and veneer and pulpwood and furniture and all that has dwarfed what we used
to use. Okay, so how does the amount of forest in BTU terms compare to the amount of energy we
currently use from hydrocarbons to heat our homes in winter? The following several graphs were
something I made 15 years ago, comparing the United States home heating situation. The same data
applies today, it's just there's more people and more energy use, but the graphs roughly remain
the same. So if we think about the standing forest stock in the world or in the United States,
it grows at around two and a half to 2.8% a year. And actually, this is declining for various
environmental reasons. 50 years ago, it was 3% a year. So you think about the forest capital or
principle, and then the interest, which is the growth per year, that would be the amount that we
could harvest in a sustainable fashion. So 2.7% of the forest standing forest, that amount could be
sustainably harvest. So we use very little wood in the United States directly for heat. We use
forest for a lot of things, but only around 10% of it is used for wood, I mean for heat. The majority
of heat in the United States is natural gas, and followed closely by heating oil or distillate,
which comes from a barrel of oil. Using wood is really a small fraction of our total energy use.
So these next few graphs show a GIS overlay of the United States. This is how much heat per
person we use in the winter in the various states in the United States. You can see the darker the
color is the colder the environment. This shows the same graph, denominated by population. So
California isn't that cold, but there's almost 40 million people there. Same thing with New York.
We use a lot of fossil natural gas and distillate for those places. Then if you take the tree
census in each of these states and you divide it into cords of wood, this is the number of
cords of wood that exist per person in these states. Now of course, my analysis looked at
stoves and heating at home, which you can only really use hardwoods because softwoods
have creosote and have fire damage. So hardwoods, deciduous oak, maple, things like that are around
40% of our forest stock. So if you relax the assumptions I'm about to say, it would be two
to two and a half times longer is the result. So the other point that I would make is a lot of
our forests are inaccessible. If you consider living in a house like this, the trees right
close to your house are definitely accessible. Maybe you go up the hill, you can access others,
but some of them on a steep forested slope either don't have the complexity and bridges and
infrastructure to get to or the energy required to get to them is too much to actually have it
useful. So the upshot and the bottom line and kind of the smack in the face conclusion that I had
is that we have very little forest biomass relative to the amount of fossil energy that we use.
This is broken out by state and of course the green and the lower southeast is a combination of
they don't get that cold in winter and they have a lot of forest, but many of our states
would be denuded in a year or two if we had to access our trees to heat our homes in winter.
So the relationship between our standing forest and the amount of fossil energy we use each winter
is massive. I don't think we talk about this much. We take it for granted that our fossil
stocks to generate heat in the winter will always be with us. So the open question then
is what happens on the downslope of the carbon pulse to the world's standing forest?
History would suggest Easter Island, many other historical cultures denuded their land because
they were compelled to use the remaining forests for timber, fuel, etc. We look at a modern example,
an aerial view of Haiti versus the Dominican Republic. Haiti for various economic social
reasons has completely denuded their landscape. Dominican Republic either because it's a wealthier
country or because prior generation they had a dictator that would not allow people to access
the forest has standing healthy forests. So one of my concerns here is that we don't recognize the
importance of forests as both sources of ecosystem services. They act as biological pumps that create
weather that offer sanctuary for insects, birds, animals, and ecosystem services,
but also a sink. They are the biggest sink other than the oceans in the world. Right now,
the world's forests sequester around 60% of our fossil carbon from emissions.
Okay, now if you subtract from that the deforestation that comes from the Amazon
and other places, it works out to be about 15%, but still it's a massive sink that we take for
granted. In fact, there is no integrated assessment climate model in the world that specifically
targets a decline in economic growth this century. And more importantly, what humans will do to the
standing forest in that moment and what that would do to our climate scenarios, not so much
how much carbon we emit, but how much the earth's natural systems can absorb. If we turn back to a
lower density source of energy, the way that we used not so long ago, it was the year 1910
before wood was no longer the number one fuel source for humans on the planet.
So it's only been 100 years that coal, oil, and natural gas have supplanted wood. If we go back
there, what does that mean for the carbon sink capacity of the world? Already the Amazon forest
because of deforestation is no longer a net sink. It is a net source of carbon emissions.
I think now and in the future there will be many examples of humans
rising to the occasion and being altruistic and helpful to other humans. But this is human
versus human. It is not human versus ecosystem. And unless we plan ahead of time, unless we
think and process the importance of earth's forests, they may be a casualty on the down slope
of the carbon pulse. So this is kind of a brief rant on the importance of trees and the importance
of forests. What do we do about it? Spend time in nature. Go spend time in forests and learn
about them. Hug a tree. Plant a tree. Love a tree. And protect a tree. Thank you. I will see you next week.
