Greetings. Regarding last week's, frankly, I didn't realize that people listening on
iTunes in international countries might not get the metacognition attempt I had with those
bleeps, so I will never do that again. That was an N equals one experiment. This week,
I would like to do a reflection on a Lord of the Rings theme. If, like me, you're in
your 50s or 40s or 60s or younger or older, the Lord of the Rings four books along with
the Hobbit might have had an influence on your upbringing, not from a moral philosophical
standpoint, but it was an escape, another world with morals and good guys and bad guys and epic
stakes. In many ways, it was prescient in a allegory for our modern society. There were
many archetypes in the Lord of the Rings. Gandalf was the leader, Aragorn and Frodo were the hero
Legolas was the warrior, Gimli was the industrialist, and such. Today, what I'd like to talk is
about the various archetypes in modern society and how these archetypes are probably not suited
for the archetypes we're going to need in the future. What does the fellowship of the ring
metaphorically mean for our culture? What is the fellowship of the ring metacrisis style?
That's what I'd like to riff on today.
So first of all, our modern archetypes, there's lots of them, but let's just look at some main
ones. There's the banker or investor that uses optimal foraging theory dynamic as a biological
organism coupled with a culture with lots of energy surplus. It is a respected profession.
Finance is overlaid on top of energy materials, technology and ecology. Another is the worker.
Around the world, there are billions of nine to five workers that combine with machines and energy
to create products. They don't make a lot of money. In fact, the correlation between
money supply and income is incredibly correlated to the top 1%, and the bottom half
have basically been flatlined the last few decades. I digress. The third category
of archetype is the technologist. Better and better chips and innovation and efficiency and
inventions have continued widening the straw and propelling growth forward in a naive progress
sort of way. Technologist is an archetype. Next, we have the Barker in a society full of energy
surplus near the last stage before the energy surplus gets dissipated or consumed in society
is the salesman. The salesman add on 10% or 15%, which keeps them employed. So we have salesmen
or Barkers as an archetype riding the carbon pulse. Next is the scholar, and we have academic
scientists, university professors around the world. Next would be the warrior. We have military
people in the United States, especially in the United States and around the world,
young men and women that work for the Air Force, the Army, the reserves, the Marines, and other
foreign militaries. We have the preacher, which is not a salesperson per se, but someone who
evangelizes ideas, often connected to religion, but not necessarily. We have the consumer,
which is those people, especially in the global north that on the backs of energy surplus have
created houses full of 60 or 70 items that need to plug in and have access to electricity,
short-term stimulation, technology, iPhones, Disney land trips, sporting events, vacations, etc.
And the last archetype of modern society is the elite, the 1% of people that are living high on
the carbon surplus and their roles in modern society. Irrespective of what they do, a lot of
people still aspire to this archetype of being elite, except these nine archetypes are what has
worked in the past, what our culture has aspired to and accepted and culturally advocated in the
past 50, 70 years. We are now approaching either a Mordor economy where AI and the productivity
straw widens our sucking up of ecosystem services, planetary health, or we reach limits of productivity.
And as our energy declines, we're going to have the name of this podcast, a great simplification,
which is a reduction in energy and material benefits to most people. So where do these
archetypes, these current archetypes morph to, lead to under a likely scenario in coming decades?
Well, the banker may morph to a hoarder where loss aversion keeps those people from being pro-social
and part of their community and tries to hold on to what the excess claims on reality that
they've accumulated. The worker in a place where AI is getting more prevalent, energy surplus goes
away and wealth inequality increases, the worker can become the indentured or even the slave in
many places. Patrick Nodal on recent podcast told me that, depending on the definition,
we have more slaves today than any time in human history on the planet.
Technology, the technologists used innovation in the past generation or two to invent devices
that improve the human experience. But with AI and big data and the like, a good part of the
technology space may morph into the cyborg, a transhumanist merging of technology and humanity.
In short, in an effort to save humanity from ecological and material limits, we may lose
our actual humanity. The Barker who lives on the energy surplus that powers salespeople going
forward may morph into the grifter, someone that doesn't have the ease of having a job
as they did in the past and turns to whatever method they can to make ends meet. The scholar
could morph into the farmer as we need a lot more people working on the land and generating
real surplus as opposed to a deputy dean for student affairs or some esoteric PhD that's
not really contributing to what the future will need. The warrior, will all these military people
instead of fighting other countries be need as an enforcer to keep civilians and the peace?
We recall the George Floyd situation, is that going to repeat and escalate?
The preacher, well, the preacher will always exist as an archetype in human cultures,
maybe with a lowercase p and a smaller megaphone because they won't have access to
their own AM radio station with the way the internet works today.
The consumer may morph to the addict where we still have access to goods and services and
stability but a lot of the things that gave us our short-term dopamine hits are no longer available
and that could be fine but for the average person that might have some mental withdrawal
symptoms. Lastly, the elite, this morphs into a wild card that could go two different ways.
I almost thought of saying the loci which was the Star Trek episode with the half black face
and half white face with two different personalities. The elite could go the way of the hoarder and
just try and build bunkers around the world and live off their historically stored surplus
or the elite could play a huge role in a collective response to the great simplification.
These are the archetypes just hypothetically how I see them potentially unfolding in coming
decades. But what are the archetypes that we need? What are the archetypes knowing what we
do about the system science of our world? What would be the nine archetypes that our future needs?
First, the ecologist, someone who understands the interrelationship of things, the interrelationship
of humans to nature, to soil, to the biosphere, the interrelationship of academic topics and how
they explain reality from a fundamental level. The engineer, someone that has the scientific
knowledge of building and blueprints and scaffolding and electronics and how to actually
look at a system from an engineering perspective in case hard decisions need to be made on
in that realm. The ancestor, we're all here as products of our successful ancestors,
but what's happened now is all of our ancestors lived on a ecologically empty planet. We don't
and we are ancestors to what comes after not only our species, but other species as well,
complex life. We are the ancestors of complex life in coming centuries and millennium.
Almost this replaces the preacher in a way. It's someone that has sapience, has wisdom in
addition to cleverness and looks at our impact of being good ancestors to the future. The craftsman,
I thought about saying the MacGyver, but some younger people might not know that is,
but someone who can build things with their hand using a variety of materials, perhaps not with
the global supply chains and Home Depot and Walmart access that we have today, but a craftsman.
The healer, right now we have doctors and nurses. I think in the future, the healer is going to be
an important archetype. We're going to have to get 80% of the health benefits using 20% of the
plastics and overnight resources that we have today. That's going to require more of a generalist
sense in medicine, but also a lot more mental, physical, psychological resilience and well-being
before people are sick, including potentially new food systems. The stalwart, Sam Gamgee, was such
in the Lord of the Rings. There are people who are, and Carl Jung had one of his 12 archetypes,
if I recall, was the regular person. We're going to need an anchor or a ballast or someone that just
acts as a rock in the room to support others that is strong and is just kind of an even
keel temperament. The warden or the earth warden, this is going to be someone who understands ecology,
but stands in defense of the natural world and the other critters we share the planet with,
and that this is someone who lives in our communities as an archetype that actually
prioritizes the health and protection of other species and our local ecosystems and watersheds
and prioritizes that over monetary profits. The merry maker
also could be jester or artisan or musician or something, but we need someone in our society that
lifts us into joy with poetry and art and music and dance, and right now we've got
supernormal stimuli sort of access, but the merry maker isn't of the human
quality and the way it was in the past. And finally, the matriarch, some
bastion of feminine wisdom that's more longer looking, more right-brained centered than
our current society, we need an archetype for the future that is akin to that.
So, these archetypes of the future are not the fellowship I had in mind,
because there are three timelines of the future. There's right now, our current business as usual,
which is unsustainable and has a road close sign in the future. There is the distant future,
20, 30, 40 years from now, after we've navigated the bringing the ring to Mordor
situation, which I'm going to talk about in a second. That's where these nine archetypes reside,
is in the future, and we need those people today as well, but this is not what's going to get us
through the bender break moment in coming years and decade. So, there is a third time frame,
which is the next decade or so, what are the archetypes that we're going to need in our society
to meet this incredibly difficult challenge of respecting our biosphere and having the human
economy thrive, but not eat our home. So, here in no particular order are some archetypes for the
bender break moment. The silver tongue, we have a tribal temperament, and we have social media
has polarized and splintered all the various demographics in our society. We have so many
single issues, siloed analyses, and we're going to need an archetype to translate and act as a
diplomat between these various factions. Otherwise, we have no hope. This is one of the
dearly needed archetypes and at high levels in your community, but also at the UN and
in Washington and abroad. The alchemist, the alchemist historically combines different
chemicals into potions and formulas. The alchemist during the bender break moment understands our
biophysical balance sheet and knows that we use money and technology as society markers for energy
materials and ecosystem impact, and we're going to have a shrinkage on the former versus the latter,
and the alchemist is to be fluent in this and to prepare benign pathways for how that shrinkage
occurs. The disarmer, I think that I like that word anyways because we should disarm people with
the truth and move to a different overton window sort of conversation, but that's not what I had
in mind. We have over 12,000 nuclear warheads. Hardly anyone is focused on what's going on in
Russia and Ukraine and Israel and Gaza other than the horrible loss of life,
but this undergirds a huge instability in the way the world is in coming decades, and unless we're
able to take the non-military path, I don't see how this all doesn't end up in a conflagration.
We need serious disarmament techniques, so an archetype there is a
peace activist if there is such a thing, or something more Machiavellian to reduce the risks
of bright flashes. The muse, we need someone without a specific goal that acts as an inspiration
as some little turbo boost to other people with warmth and love and music and kindness,
and that this is infectious and spreads that dynamic around more people in a time of
increasing chaos and despair. The muse is going to be an important archetype.
The Effectivist. Many trends in social and especially environmental space are getting worse,
not better. In addition to the sharing of facts, demonstrations, and social signaling that defines
conventional activism, we need Effectivists, those humans who care more about end results
rather than the social accolades, and make plans and execute the plans accordingly.
The Barber. We are in a biophysical way playing a giant planet-sized game of musical chairs,
and there are going to be haircuts. There is going to be triage needed, and we're going to need
people at local levels, at all levels, that prioritize what we spend resources on. Some
things are going to be dead ends, and some of our financial chits that represent reality in our minds
may not actually ever be called into being spent on reality, and there's a difference
between nominal and real reality as far as inflation. I think there are haircuts on the way,
especially in the global north, and to have an expert archetype, understanding that and
prioritizing it is something important. The governess could be governor. I chose governess.
Our ways of making decisions right now are not suited for what's ahead,
and we need different forms of making good decisions, and I'm not an expert on that,
but that archetype is deeply needed, the governess. The wellspring for this fellowship
that I'm describing here, there could be one who acts as just a central node of power and energy
and enthusiasm and support that when the others get beaten down or discouraged or slip up,
there's always this pushing, this thread, this unity. Gandalf was kind of this in the
Lord of the Rings, but it doesn't have to be a powerful, charismatic person other than a really
strong, deep running ethic of a human being, and you know those people in your own community,
we need more of them. Last but not least, we need an archetype of the catalyst.
If we recall in the Lord of the Rings, Frodo was the hero, but even he was unable to take the ring
to Mordor. It required Sam and Gollum, who was kind of a tragic monster. They were catalysts that
changed the result of the story, and I think many of you may think, what role can I play in
what's coming? You can be a catalyst. You do your job, live with your family, enjoy your life,
learn and pay attention to what's going on, and you never know when your actions could shift
the larger story. The most important part of this little, frankly, reflection,
I've outlined some, you know, playfully some categories of archetypes. When I read the Lord
of the Rings, I loved the magic swords and the dragons and the different species other than humans,
but the really great feeling I had when I was reading it for three hours a night and didn't
want to put it down, it was the feeling of camaraderie and fellowship. These nine archetypes
I just outlined have to work together and not, we can't solve what's coming, just solo. There's
got to be little groups, little fellowships all around the world, and this is one of humans'
superpowers. It's forming small groups of diverse skills and temperaments and attitudes
and bells and whistles and collaborating towards a greater goal. The greater goal is how do we
navigate the great simplification without a collapse, without a nuclear war, and without
collapsing the biosphere. This is the largest, David and Goliath, or I forgot the Bard's name
versus Smog in the Hobbit, but we have to create these fellowships metaphorically on a societal
level and perhaps not so metaphorically in your own community and watershed. I hope this made sense
and we'll talk to you next week. Thank you.
