Greetings. I'm going to do an ad lib conversation here on the topic of energy return on investments.
20 years ago, almost, oh my gosh, I started my PhD program, and I wrote my PhD thesis on net energy, a framework on how to better use it for society.
I thought that the importance of net energy, which is how much energy is left after we subtract out the energy we needed to get it, is one of the most fundamental drivers of our civilization and what is possible in the future.
And so I ended up writing my PhD thesis five papers around this topic.
In the intervening years, I have discovered that EROI, or energy return on investment, not only has been unable to solve and inform policymakers, but has also become kind of a constructivist tool to, you know, depending on the boundaries that people use,
give some ideological response. Renewables are the best, or fossil fuels are super powerful, and we really haven't advanced too much in the last 20 years on biophysical analysis using net energy analysis to inform our future.
So right now, I'd like to just explain what EROI is, what some of the nuances are, and why it's important in kind of a whirlwind presentation that I haven't prepared for, but it has to be done in the next half hour because I have a podcast.
Okay, so in nature, energy is one of the most important inputs into an animal's existence. An animal spends energy to receive energy, and those organisms that have an access, a surplus, have had evolutionary advantages.
This same dynamic occurs in human systems. Back in hunter-gatherer times, also in agricultural times, shown here is the expense of the laborers, the income is the grain, which is food surplus.
And then the actual surplus for society enables, in the distance, the city and the ships and other things that people don't have to be, it frees up their time to work on those things because the food is coming from somewhere else.
So EROI is basically a ratio of the energy return divided by the energy investment. This is different than net energy, which is the energy return minus the energy investment.
So an example would be, if your return is 100,000 megajoules and you invested 10,000 megajoules, it's a 10 to 1 EROI. The same example would be 9 or 90,000 megajoules worth of net energy.
Net energy is what powers society. We need energy left over after our energy investment to power shopping centers, cars, schools, universities, technology, innovation, etc.
Okay, so over the last 700 years, because of technology and eventually because of the carbon pulse, where we suddenly drew out coal, oil and natural gas from ancient deposits, the percentage of our economies that were allocated to the energy sector has basically had a seven century decline.
This graph from my colleague, Kerry King, shows the United Kingdom, the colored graph shows how much of the economy of the day in the year 1300, in the year 1600, in the year 1800, all the way up to the year 2000 was dedicated to energy.
And as we can see, it hit its low point in 1999 when around 6% or 7% of the UK energy was directed to the energy sector, leaving 93% for the rest of the country.
Now this is going up and there's lots of different data that we could share, but this is going up to over 10% of our society now, headed to 15% maybe or 20% in the future, we don't know.
Why is this relevant? Well, at large EROI numbers, like 50 to 1 EROI or 100 to 1 EROI or 30 to 1 EROI, the amount of energy needed by the energy sector is very small, shown in the red line here.
But as the EROI, the energy return declines, especially when it gets down to single digits, the amount of energy allocated to the energy sector, the discovery, the extraction, the refining, the distribution, it ends up taking up a lot of the energy required,
leaving much less for the rest of society. And this is conceptually called the net energy cliff, irrespective of how much gross energy we have, if a larger and larger fraction of it is used to the energy sector, there's less benefits for the rest of society.
Okay, so now we're going to get complicated. So this is a graph from the first or the second chapter in my PhD thesis, we don't really have a definition that is standard across EROI analysis, the simplest definition is energy invested, energy return divided by energy invested.
But we can also include non energy inputs, and then turn them into energy. And we can also include other products and externalities and things like that.
So I came up with, with my co author, Kenneth Mulder, these mathematical formulas on the left axis to show what is included in the EROI analysis, and in the top axis, how it is included, do you just turn the copper or the sand or the rail transfer into energy equivalents or do you treat them separately, etc.
So the hope was this was written 15 years ago that there would be more standardization of comparing EROI across studies. Okay.
And, you know, this this from the same paper, the more accurate you are about how things really work, the less consensus there is on that so there's a trade off between the precision of an analysis and the scope of the analysis.
Okay, so when we talk about EROI, we're really talking about efficiency, how efficient is an energy source, but there's really three stages with which to measure that most EROI analysis looks at how much energy to take us to get a barrel of oil out of the ground.
Oh, it used to be a one barrel would get 100 out, or something like that. That's the EROI or the efficiency of extraction. But then we have to refine and and distribute it.
So to turn it into gasoline that we can use in our cars. That's the point of use efficiency. And there's a there's another bit of a loss there.
It takes about one barrel of oil or rather it takes one tenth of a barrel of oil to turn the rest of the barrel of oil into useful products so there's a 10% loss there.
Here's where renewables get a boost, because when we generate electricity, there's no waste, the electricity is is 100% going to the electric motor in like a Tesla.
So there's all kinds of boundaries here. And then ultimately, and this is not included in any EROI analysis to my knowledge, is what do humans do once they've already gotten it at the point of use.
So if you choose to drive a big gas guzzling car by yourself, you're not really using that energy too efficiently, relative to carpooling, a smaller car, etc.
So a lot of our cultural decisions. I'm sitting in a 10 room office building right now. I'm the only one here.
Lizzie is off and Leslie's camping. And there's no one else here yet the air conditioning is on, for instance. So that that's a use of energy.
By the way, another issue that I want to point out is there is an energy quality issue. And much of fossil hydrocarbons are potential energy.
They're stored energy that they sit there and you can burn them if you need to. And if you don't want to, they'll still sit there.
That is in contrast to kinetic energy, which is energy that's in motion, electrons that are moving and you have to use them now, or they will be dissipated.
So that's another quality argument. If you have the human demand and the infrastructure and the devices to use electrical energy right then, it's a much higher quality energy source.
But if you don't, then you have to store it or curtail it, etc. This is horribly, horribly complicated. And it's about to get more complicated.
So, you know, it also depends how you determine the chaining of a process. I mentioned the 10 to one year away of gasoline.
So here's a new paper by some friends of mine. And they point out that even if crude oil was measured to have an EROI of 1000 or more at the point of extraction, the corresponding EROI at the point of use would have a maximum EROI of 8.7.
Well, first of all, that still would mean, you know, 870 units of net energy for society. But more importantly, it could conflate how the EROI is calculated.
This is also a picture from my PhD thesis. And I think the Murphy et al paper used the top graphic, which is there was a one megajoule of investment into getting oil.
And you got 10 megajoules of oil, so 10 to one. And then you added another megajoule into the processing to change it into gasoline.
And so the formula would be 10 as an output divided by two is a five to one year away.
Actually, there's another way to do this, which is the bottom graph, which is you input one megajoule of energy, and it creates 10 megajoules of oil and you use one of those to refine it, leaving nine megajoules of gasoline at the end, and the EROI is nine to one.
So depending on how you define EROI, you can get wildly different numbers. And in the case of oil to gasoline, most of the energy used comes from onsite from the natural gas and the oil itself in in the process.
So it's closer to the bottom number, not the top number.
Okay, more PhD papers to share with you on this odd but important frankly.
So this is a graph showing the energy investment at the outset to create a wind turbine or an oil well or whatever shown in blue.
The green is the energy output over time here shown as 27 years. The red is the ongoing energy input the energy investment needed for maintenance, etc. And the black is the energy that is required for disposal and tear down at the at the end of its life.
But it depends a great deal on when this energy is made available. So as biological organisms, humans and our institutions care about things now or soon versus in the future.
So if you look at these two EROI graphs, they both have an equal EROI of say 20 to one. However, which one of these would society prefer, which would be preferred in the markets or by investors.
And the answer is B, because this is more energy sooner. And this is called power in physics is energy per unit time. And so with equivalent EROIs, the sooner the energy is paid back, the better that would be for society, even if they have the same academic paper that says they're the same EROI.
So what does this look like if a wind turbine here from my paper has a 19 EROI. If you discount that by 5%, the EROI goes down to 12. If you discounted by 15%, the EROI goes down to six.
In contrast, natural gas, when you make an energy investment, you get the majority of the energy out in the in the first couple years oil is even faster. And when you discount something that had an original EROI of 10, the discounted value is only 9.96 because most of the energy is right up front.
So long story short, here's a complicated graph showing the light circles are the discounted values of the EROI of various sources in the dark.
So look at wind. Wind on the far right has a 19 to 1 EROI at a zero discount rate. But if you attach an 8% discount rate, it gets handicapped sharply. If you attach a 15% discount rate, those flows are worth much less to you, your nation, your corporation, etc.
In contrast, oil and gas have very little time handicap. So this is a way that EROI can be not comparable depending on its time. In addition to time, there's also variability. Look at these two graphs. They have the same EROI of 20. Which one would you prefer, the graph on the left or the graph on the right that has very much more energy at time?
At times, but at times doesn't have any energy. And again, the answer is you would prefer the graph on the left because you don't have to make plans for all those gaps in the middle. So there's actually an energy cost that accompanies
Intermittence. This was from another one of my PhD papers. The dotted line shows the human demand. This happened to be in Denmark.
The nuclear is the dashed flat line. And the wind is the peaks and troughs on the black line.
So what ends up happening is there are many periods where nuclear has massively more energy than, sorry, wind has more energy than we need. And sometimes it has a lot less than we need.
Nuclear is not intermittent, but it is variable relative to human demand. So what offsets these? Natural gas, which can be turned on at a moment's notice to smooth out these peaks and valleys.
What Europe is going to be dealing with in the coming years is they either need to massively scale batteries or hydroelectric storage or have natural gas, LNG, or somehow make peace with Russia and rebuild pipelines, which I don't know how likely that is.
So the intermittent and variability of EROI is also important.
Another way of looking at this is, here's another way of looking at the energy investment and return. But what we forget is the huge amount of energy that goes into society and the existing grid.
Can you imagine all of the fixed EROI that was spent in the past to build our complicated infrastructure?
And so we look at this EROI, it's kind of on the margin, right? What are we adding to this system where the energy surplus from the last 50 years is still enabling us?
So the real story is something like this, where there's this existing energy surplus largely powered by the carbon pulse in society that enables all these additional technologies that we add to the grid.
And if we're honest, it's ginormous this subsidy that's added to the rest.
So there have been very few papers that look at what I think is the most important thing is we tend to look at the marginal cost of adding a solar panel or adding a nuclear plant static.
And what is the EROI of that? What really matters is the EROI of the whole system.
And my colleagues, Carlos and Inigo Kaplanparez from Valladolid, Spain, have created a paper like that that shows that the EROI of the system for the world has declined from 16 down to 11 or so.
And then in a green growth scenario, if we go to 50%, 75% or 100% renewables, what the system EROI, the whole system would be out until 2060, and it drops in the green growth scenario all the way down to three.
And this doesn't include the wider boundary impacts, and I don't think our society functions at three or even five, to be honest.
But my point here is we have been using EROI as more of a laser-like tool than it's capable of being.
Net energy is super important, but EROI is more of a conceptual guide than a way to make decisions about technologies.
So getting back to this paper, furthermore, as the quality of oil, gas and coal continue to decline in the future, the energy cost of the associated process chains will increase, further reducing the EROIs.
Probably true.
On the other hand, as the technologies used to harness renewable energy improve, the corresponding EROIs will continue to increase in the future.
I don't see this as being true.
Already in the last two years, wind turbine prices are up 30% because of supply chains, because oil is going up and oil is the fundamental driver of the global economy now.
So long story short or long story medium long, net energy is what powers society.
And we are headed for a time where we have a 19 terawatt global metabolism.
Let's call it we roughly have a 10 to 1 system EROI, which means we have 1.9 of those terawatts are fueling the system, constantly getting the metabolism going.
As we grow the gross energy as 19 terawatts maybe goes to 20 or 20 and a half or 21, we're going to be growing the energy input more.
And that is what I call the direction of the Mordor economy where a larger and larger percentage of our energy gets allocated to the energy and materials sector.
And I guess I did this post because I've read some papers that take an ideological view, trying to support a future that is politically driven that isn't grounded in the biophysical reality.
And so I just kind of wanted to call out how complicated energy return on investment is, how many nuanced explanations there are.
And ultimately, the takeaway for me is as society continues to kick cans, continues to add gross energy while the net energy stays flat or declines,
I think the environment is fucked. And it leaves me with much sadness that super organism now enabled and empowered by AI and more debt and more things.
There's not going to be much left of nature unless we have a change in consciousness and some more energy awareness that we can have systemic analysis of how all this fits together.
The energy system, the climate environmental system, the human behavior system.
We don't know how to do this, but we're really taking tiny, tiny baby steps now and that needs to change.
Sorry for the long rant. Energy is important. Energy return on investment, very cool idea, operationally not so useful, net energy, critical concept for coming decades.
I'll talk to you next week. Thank you.
