Hello. Good humans. I have Frank here. Frank, say hello. We're doing a frankly and you're
going to start out on my lap, but now you better get down on the what because that
is going to talk about some adult stuff. Okay. Today we're going to talk about finance
and just as we are energy blind, we swim in a sea of finance since I've been alive and
basically modern society has financialized the human experience. We've done this in three ways.
Number one is we've parsed all of the rich fabric of our ancestral lives into one metric,
dollars or euros or yen or renbing B or pound sterling. We measure our self worth by our net
worth. Maybe not everyone listening to this, but generally in society, we ascribe success and value
to people that have money. Money is power. We've financialized our cultural scorecard.
The second way is we've also financialized growth and our expectations and institutional rules
around money and money is what lubricates the system and changes our expectations for the
future because we always think we will have more or the whole pie will grow and we measure the pie
or our success, our success by money, digital electrons and linen paper in our pockets.
It's this third way that we financialized the experience, which is going to be the subject
of this podcast, which is that we are using finance to solve or kick the can of the problems
that finance created. It's like a slow boiling frog that we're in a pot of hot water economically,
but we don't feel it because we're using financial responses too big to fail, artificially low
interest rates, quantitative easing, guarantees, rule changes, expansion of debt, etc. In order to
avoid facing the problems of previous installations of those efforts. That's going to be what I'm
going to talk about today because I think at the core of the logic of the great simplification
is this divergence between our financial representations of reality and our underlying
technological material and energy reality. What is finance?
Humans historically have faced different frameworks of our money and our worth, and for
the longest time we used the ecosystems and hydrological flows of the sun to represent the
scale of our society. Then a couple hundred years ago we started to farm vertically in addition to
horizontally, and we accessed these stores of one-time energy and materials that deplete,
and we accessed the best first and then the next best, and eventually what's left is the lower
quality hard to get at. On top of all this we've overlaid financial markers. Until around the 1950s
you could flip a coin you wouldn't know whether prices would go up or down the following year,
because our economy was growing so fast with seven or eight percent oil growth, lots of ideas,
lots of open spaces that we needed more and more money to catch up with this extraction profile,
this Gaussian profile of non-renewable natural resources, but since the 1970s or so that dynamic
has changed. Our productivity, our growth peaked 50 years ago. We're still growing, but we're growing
at a lower pace, but what we're doing is we're adding more financial claims every single year
that are the same claims on a shrinking pool of natural resources. So where does money come from?
Well, most teenagers have the talk about where babies come from. We don't get the talk about
where money comes from. Up until around 2005, 2007, 95 percent of our money came from commercial
banks when they made a loan. And that still happens, but since most countries are operating a
budget deficit, they actually create money when they run a deficit. So right now around 80 percent
of our money comes from commercial banks making a loan, and about the rest of it comes from
governments deficit spending to meet budget deficits by creating more currency. When this
money is created, the same amount of coal, oil, fossil water, trees, etc. exists. So we are diverging
from our monetary representations to our underlying biophysical reality. So what is this situation?
Okay, let's take, for example, a family where you, listener, as the household of this family,
make $50,000 a year. Well, right now you owe the bank $175,000. Okay, so not a great situation,
but manageable. But here's the challenge. This is what's happening today. You continue to consume
more than your income. So you need to borrow more money from the bank every year on top of the 175
year radio. You're now growing that debt three times faster than you're growing your income.
And oh, by the way, the economy is starting to slow and you're not getting the raises that you
used to and you might actually get laid off. Not only that, but the interest rates used to be
1% or 2%, which for $175,000, it's no big deal to pay that interest. But now at, for example,
5% interest, the interest on what you owe is becoming a big chunk of your income,
and that is a problem. The other part of this is that's your family, but you have a network of
families. The Homo sapiens Corleone family and all of your distant cousins and brothers and grandchildren,
you owe some of them money, some of them owe you money. And if some of the grandchildren or distant
cousins go belly up, it's no big deal. But if some of the patriarchs and matriarchs of the family
go bankrupt, there is a ripple effect. So this family, you may not be surprised to hear,
is a representation of countries around the world. 50 to 175,000 is 350%. The total global
debt is 350%. And now this has been increasing over decades. So it hasn't really been a problem.
We've talked about nuclear war and risk homeostasis. That also applies to a financial reckoning. We
have not had a financial disaster. So therefore, it's never going to happen is not exactly sound
thinking. We came very close in 2009, and we came close again in 2020. And by the way,
the answers or the responses in 2009 and 2020 were to use central bank bazookas
and huge guarantees that are now, we've kicked the can so many times that you could argue that
the road is full of cans. So what are the risks? Well, first of all, we run the risk as higher
interest rates of creating lots of zombie companies and zombie governments. Zombie government is
or a company is one that has enough income and revenue to pay their employees and pay their
wages and their supply chains and their interest on the debt, but they cannot service the debt.
So they have to get perpetual help or low interest rates or new debt in order to stay
solvent. They're not bankrupt, but they're insolvent. And this applies to corporations and to
entire countries. Another risk is our entire pension model is built on growth. Our pensions
generally have a model where they expect 7% return in perpetuity. And if they don't earn
that 7%, then they're in a deficit and they're underfunded. So even in the massive increase in
financial markets in the last 15 years, a lot of pensions are underfunded. Take, for example,
the state of Illinois, they are only 30% funded, which means that if they're expecting a 7% return,
they have to do three times that in order to stay funded. They have to earn 20% or 21%.
So what ends up happening is we've had this incredibly stable low interest rate regime
for the last couple of decades, where interest rates were very low and they didn't bounce around
a lot and they didn't go up a lot. So in this time, a lot of financial people, and remember
around 30% to 40% of our economy is the fire sector, finance, insurance, real estate.
And a lot of them use gearing or leverage. When things are stable and the interest rates are low,
they can borrow five times their money and invested and have a very low cost of capital.
So a lot of pension funds did this and they're still underfunded. So what are the pathways
for the pension system? Well, number one is they can boost productivity. We can have some new
technological invention for society and continue to grow and maybe get back to some of the higher
5% or 7% growth rates of 40 or 50 years ago, because that would allow stocks and bonds
to do well enough that we would eventually have these pensions fully funded. The second way is
to increase new deposits and get new people to pay into the pension program, which is kind of
another word of saying that it's upon the scheme. And then the third way, which I think is by far
the most likely outcome of this, is there's going to be haircuts, there's going to be defaults,
there's going to be people that get 30% or 50% of their eventual pensions. This is not good.
We fully expect all these monetary claims that we have in our bank accounts that will one day be
paid off and we don't have the resources to pay them off. Money is a claim on energy and materials
and we keep growing our money, but we don't keep growing our energy and materials. And in fact,
I could argue and will argue that oil peaked in 2018. What's another risk from this? Interest
rates. We've based so many things in our economy around 2% or 3% interest rates, including mortgages.
Now, mortgages are spiking. So people that were in the real estate market bought a house. Now,
if you want to buy a house, the mortgages are 5% higher than they were a couple of years ago.
And this means the house and the interest payments and everything costs more. The interest rates
are also going to impact, for instance, energy investment, upstream investment into oil and
gas infrastructure or utilities or lots of things. For instance, renewable energy, the largest
component of the cost of renewable energy is the interest payments. So if all of a sudden we
shift from 1% to 2% rates to 5% or 6% rates, the net present value of the projects no longer
makes sense because it's going to be much higher interest. Finally, the other risk is that the
family example I gave of 50,000 to 175,000, this is the whole world. And so what ends up happening
some of those cousins or grandchildren could go belly up and the rest of the system stays intact.
But if some of the big players go belly up, like the UK Sterling, which right now is going through
a pension crisis and a funding crisis and the UK government is bailing them out,
well, eventually the bank in this example, in the private example where we owe the bank
$175,000 and our income is 50, in the world example of 50 to 175 being the whole global
economy, the bank is the financial market. And at some point, the financial market will start to
lose trust in central banks and government's ability to guarantee and service these increasing
financial claims on reality. So we could head for a too big to save moment in lieu of a too big
to fail moment 14 years ago with Lehman Brothers. There are probably other Lehman Brother risk
scenarios on the horizon because what's happening is the USA, in addition to being one of the wealthiest
countries in the world, we've used more fossil fuels than any country in the world. We also have
the seniority, which is the economic benefits that accrue from having the world's reserve currency.
So a lot of countries in the world borrow money denominated in dollars. And right now the dollar
is on this rocket launch rise of getting stronger and stronger. And what that means is that if your
debt is denominated in dollars, you owe more money. So there's a lot of countries in the world that
are under extreme financial duress right now. And this Russia Ukraine situation plays into this
as well, because a lot of those countries are really financially strapped. But if we head towards
not only a multipolar military world, but a multipolar economic world where the United States
is no longer the United States dollar is no longer the world reserve currency, there's a ready
talk of Russia creating a different payment system for the BRICS. And all of a sudden these
countries possibly could say, you know what, I'm not paying, and I'm going to be part of this new
system that actually is going to guarantee me natural resources, energy and commodities,
which is what we really need. So there's a big risk there of a real cluster in the global
financial system. I think it's inevitable that we will have a recalibration of the global financial
market, including potential new currency currency reform and new Bretton Woods. And I don't like
to make predictions with my work, I'm trying to describe rather than predict. But personally,
I'm very confident that finance and the problems with humans, financializing the human experience
to build the biggest bubble in the history of the world will be the story of the coming decade.
So how can I be wrong? Well, I'm not wrong that energy and materials underpin society and that we
create monetary markers and overlay on top of that. I'm not wrong that productivity peaked 50
years ago, and that economists don't attribute productivity to our growing energy and materials,
but rather to capital and labor. I'm not wrong about the ecological impact of our situation.
A standard neoclassically trained economist would say that I'm wrong, because money doesn't matter.
Money is neutral to our economic output, debt makes companies more productive. So debt is also
neutral to our GDP situation. They would also say I'm wrong, because capital and labor and some
productivity factor akin with some natural law means that humans will naturally innovate and grow
over time. Where I would disagree with them is that energy is special. A barrel of oil is four
and a half years of my work, which means that a vast majority of our productivity is due to us
drawing down this ancient sunlight bank account and treating it as if it were interest.
A modern monetary theorist would correctly describe where money comes from. They get that part of it
right, but they also use the same macroeconomic logic that is energy blind, that a country can
continue to create and print money and can never go bankrupt, and they're right about that. That is
true, but what they're wrong about is, number one, the rest of the world may not trust that that
country can pay back their debts. And number two, that energy is what is the core driver of this,
energy coupled with technology, and energy is soon to be depleting. So where I could be wrong
is we might come up with some massive new productivity that kicks the can further
and forestalls this economic financial reset, and that's possible. I don't see anything on
the horizon with that amount of scale that could do this. In my opinion, the speed bump ahead of
us financially will be the onset for the great simplification for a much, much larger percentage
of humanity. I think we are going to try to forestall this by printing more money,
more guarantees, issuing more debt, and trying to inflate our way out of this problem. But the
markets may preclude that if interest rates continue to go up. We are probably headed for
yield curve control, which in addition to quantitative easing, we take a certain duration
of interest maturity, like five years or 10 years, and we target the cap of rates that that could be.
Japan is already doing this. They're buying all the long term Japanese debt to keep a cap on
their interest rate. But we have countries issuing debt and then buying their own debt.
This is a recipe for disaster. So what to do? As an individual, if you made $50,000 a year and you
were afraid a little bit for your job and you owed the bank $175,000, what would you do?
You would probably tighten your belt. You would probably change some behaviors in your life. You
would probably try to focus on what is most important and get rid of some of the extraneous
discretionary things in your life. The good news is that you have a house. You have a great family.
You have knowledge and skills, and you're creative and can learn and adapt,
and that is the same good news for our culture. We have all those things. This doesn't have to be
an absolute disaster, but it's the delta between this reality that I'm suggesting
and our cultural expectations and the fact that central bankers, government officials,
have absolutely no plan for this financial speed bump other than to kick it further down the road.
So again, on this frankly, this wasn't so much a heart-based reflection of my hopes and dreams
for society. I'm trying to describe the severity of a financial roadblock that's ahead of us,
and I don't see a way out of it. I think we'll try to inflate our way out of it, but ultimately we're
going to have wider and deeper poverty, and I expect a 30% across the board pay cut for everyone in
society on average, including me. And that's kind of what I want to help people understand and prepare
for, both as individuals, as communities, and as governments. Thank you. I'll see you next week.
