To look at metacrisis from the Indian context, we have to understand also the mind that is
approaching the problem. Because the starting point itself is very different. The Indic mind
may not look at the same thing in the same way. And that's why we're saying that the starting
point of looking at any crisis might also be a little different. And hence, we started with that.
Greetings or should I say namaste. Welcome to reality roundtable number eight.
I took a break from reality roundtables because I was in India for six weeks this winter.
Near the end of my stay, there was a symposium of activists and thinkers and people talking about
sustainability and the future and NGO leaders. And I was fortunate to meet and befriend three
Indian NGO leaders who are with me on this conversation today. The topic is the Indic mind
and the metacrisis. When I went there, I expected to hear a lot about climate, climate justice,
plans for climate, and what I found was surprisingly different. And by the way,
as I'm recording this, I just noticed a tweet that it is 45 degrees Celsius plus in the Indian
subcontinent, which translates to 113 Fahrenheit. And if you account for humidity, it's much hotter
than that. So climate is a central part of the metacrisis for the Indian subcontinent.
With me today to discuss this and other aspects of India and the human predicament and what we
face are Mohit Trivedi, who is the co-founder of 2069 Ecosystem and is actively stewarding a
pan Indian movement to bring together various individuals and organizations who are looking
to practice collective leadership and decentralization. Also with me is Abhishek Thakur,
who is the founder of the Blue Ribbon movement and co-founder of the 2069 Ecosystem. Abhi has
created an ecosystem of initiatives aimed at building youth leadership, civic engagement,
and thriving cultures across the social sector. Last but not least is Kajal Savya, who is the
co-founder and CEO of Wisdom Tree, which offers services to nonprofits in order to reorient their
cultures towards wisdom. I encountered much wisdom when I was in India. It is very heart-heartening
to me to be aware of so many humans around the world working collectively and individually on
these problems. There's much wisdom in this conversation as well. Please welcome Mohit, Abhi,
and Kajal. Namaste, my friends. Kajal, Abhi, Mohit. Good to see you.
Namaste.
Namaste.
It seems like a lifetime ago that I met you. It was three months ago, less than three months ago,
in the south of India. Welcome to the program. If you could each briefly say who you are and a few
words to introduce yourself. Namaste. I am Mohit. I live in Udaipur. It's in South Rajasthan.
And I'm living in a family where we are all trying to learn things naturally and trying to flow with
life wherever life can lead us.
Well, I'm sure we're going to hear more. Abhishek.
Abhishek from Mumbai, deeply into culture. That's what gets me going. I've been in the space for
two decades and a part of this larger family of all of us.
Namaste. My name is Kajal. I live in Mumbai, which is in west of India. And for me, the last 10
years I've been exploring social change through inner and outer change processes.
Excellent. So we all met in Oroville where we had a seminar on the metacrisis. And I didn't know,
but you all follow this podcast, the work, the metacrisis space. And I thought it would be
fascinating to have a conversation about India and the metacrisis and some of your reflections,
some of your efforts, some of your philosophy on the Indian culture and how that can play a role
and what humanity faces. Speaking as an American, India is this massive country with almost a
billion and a half people. And I don't, you know, I cognitively know things like who is the
president and the population and where it is. But it was until I was in Tamil Nadu met you and
others that it emotionally hit me, the vibrancy, the warmth, the depth of the culture and the
striving of people. And it was just a magical experience. So I wanted to give you each the
mic to talk about your work, your perspective on what we're calling the metacrisis. So without
further ado, who would like to start? Explaining what we are trying to do, I would say that we can
touch a couple of doors that can explain, explore the work that we are trying to do here
in our context. So I would say that first door would be IndicMind. And the question that comes to me
is what if we can reclaim our uncolonizable gene from our colonized DNA? What becomes
partly if we can do that? And when I say IndicMind, I would definitely say that
the mind which has been or which has gone through lots of extractive
oppressive systems, but still there is deep down something which cannot be colonized,
which cannot be affected. And that stays there. And there is some sort of rich
roots of collective that we experience every day. There is non-linearity,
interdependence. And there is a rural mind in this India. We still have like
7.7 million villages and almost 70% of the population live in villages. And in that,
I would say 100 millions are tribal population. So there is huge
play between the indigenous and IndicMind. And there is lots of porosity, diversity,
and vastness among you would say most capitalist and extractive mindsets. So we have that
play here. We play between these paradoxes. And definitely there is scarcity in the mind.
But there is some sort of memory of abundance in our bodies. So if you go to a village,
they would not ask you why have you come. First thing that they would ask you is do you need
water? Or would you have chai if I am having chai? So there is some sort of warmth and
welcomeness that you would find. Doesn't mean that they are not affected by the metakai or
superorganism or they are affected fairly. But there is this
like some sort of wisdom that we need to reclaim. And I would also say that
the work that we are doing is something more like reappropriating our culture. Like the co-option
process went through this four, five, six, seven hundred years. And in our group, I find that there
is this IndicMind is very alive. And we keep on staying in that process where we see that whatever
has been co-opted and whatever is connected to the context now, how can we reclaim that?
In a very compassionate way, very non-violently. And in that what I feel in IndicMind is the role of
elders, the wisdom keepers in our work, their presence, their rigor, how the stories of their
success and failure inspire us and it gives us more insight, foresight.
It also keeps us in a place where we are more playful. We can explore more about mind. I would
go towards the second door which is access to spirituality. How Abhishek says spiritual lab.
So we are in a spiritual lab. And I feel that what if deeply spiritual people can be on the
front side or front line or forefront when it comes to societal transformation. This is a very
rich land where access to spirituality is very easy. And I would say that there is a spectrum of
raw spiritual unpopular knowledge and very cryptic Vedas. So you can understand something
from Vedas which is like layer, then metaphorical and all that. But there is also if you go towards
the villages you would find saints and seers and the kind of knowledge or wisdom that they can give
you. It's very unpopular but deeply spiritual. And I would say that this is the land where Krishna
came and shared the Gita with us, where Buddha came and shared, Buddha and Mahavira shared the
value of non-violence and how to be fully with yourself and expansion of the self. And then
people keep on coming like Meera with her devotional aspect and then Nanak and Kabir and
Bhulesha and Bhuribaya and Ashoka and then Krishnamurti comes with those nuances and then
Gandhi comes with very practical raw spirituality. So it's like huge. We have so many ancestors
who keep on poking us that stop, pause, think, connect to yourself and then move. So in that way
there is a lot that we can access and it's also visible alive in our day-to-day life.
It is practiced widely. And like in Metacrisis, if I connect with Metacrisis and connect with your
work, I would say that there are higher chances that we would find people here, those who are
spiritually grounded and can stay in post-tragic space where they are not nihilistic, they are not
impulsive, but they are grounded and their responses are generally in the gray.
While saying that, I would go towards the third door and then I would stop here. The third is
Gridat, how Rumi invited us that let's go to the land which is beyond right and wrong,
which is beyond white and black, which is beyond polarities.
I mean if we can relate to polarities differently, then what becomes possible?
I would say that the wisdom that we are tapping into is the wisdom of gray,
which goes somewhere underneath the black and white. It's not even on the spectrum,
it goes down, it goes below and deeper to understand what's happening on the polarities
and how to relate to that. Though gray is somehow marginalized voice, it is somehow
critiqued by all the extremes. Nobody likes it, you get, you know, because you don't take a stand,
you are constantly realigning with the context. And when that happens, there is nothing right
and wrong. You are somewhere where you are under, it's like you are not glorifying anything
and not demeaning anything. And in that sense somehow it's very important to not do name calling,
but at the same time understanding the patterns of, deep patterns of, like how you say,
your super-organism, the malloc, to understand and how its patterns play out in our collectives
and day-to-day life. Several times you mentioned the Indic mind. So could you describe for the
viewers what is the Indic mind? It's a mind that has developed over thousands of years of an
uninterrupted civilization, a mind that has had close proximity with nature and has seen the
diversity of life. It's a mind that has had time to philosophize, imagine, dream and so on.
And so in its lived memory is the capacity to see cycles. There is enough in the culture that it has
seen cycles, which is a cyclical mind. It's a mind that can hold ambiguity and paradox very easily.
It's a mind that can say this is true and it's opposite can be true simultaneously and it comes
very naturally to somebody who's not an Indic mind that may seem like double standard or hypocrisy
saying how could you do this and this. But there's a lot of comfort and ease with holding all of that.
So the mind is also very capable of dealing with ambiguity. It's a mind that can hold a lot of
diversity at a lot of ease and a mind that kind of doesn't other as much. The other is a reflection
of you. And the culture, the mythology, the scriptures talk a lot about interbeing and seeing
the divine in the other person. So Namaste is also the divine in me acknowledges the divine
in you. So your greeting itself begins with the acknowledgement of the sacred. Of course,
the mind is wounded. There is anger, guilt, shame, there is modernity, but there is some
lived memory of that which still continues. And would you say that the Indic mind
exists in most of the population of people in India? Well, I would say the seed exists,
the DNA exists and it can be evoked and it does get evoked time to time. But I think it needs to
be evoked. And I would add to that that it stays just in India. It stays all over, like even in
the western mind where there is that native DNA that gets ignited in different ways. That is also
some sort of similar to what Indic mind is. I had just a quick thing made to add that I think
the reason we spoke about the Indic mind first was that to look at metacrisis from the Indian
context, we have to understand also the mind that is approaching the problem. Because the
starting point itself is very different. The Indic mind may not look at the same thing in the same
way. And that's why we're saying that the starting point of looking at any crisis might also be a
little different. And hence we started with that. So this wanted to add that. Well, that doesn't
surprise me, Abby, because the first time the first day that we spent together, you spent like
four hours talking about process and relationships and we never said a single word about the
metacrisis or climate change or economy or anything. And that's what impressed me by the three of you
and your other colleagues is your deep synergies and trust and bonds with each other and just the
way you approach these things. It was noticeable and striking to me, which is one of the reasons
that the four of us are here today. I want to continue from where Mohit has shared. I would say
that when the culture starts with an assumption of interbeing rather than individuality alone,
when it starts with saying that the divine exists in each of us and each of us is an
expression, a unique expression of nature. From that starting point, relationality becomes very
important. And in responding to metacrisis where you have to sense and respond, you don't know
what you're leaning into. You need deep coordination and resonance. And in our work, while each of us
understood the metacrisis, we also spent a lot of time building our relational field.
We see this relational field as kind of a non-negotiable if we want to make a response to the
metacrisis. We feel very often people say that is not the real work. The work is on the outside.
And I would argue the work is inside and in between as much as it is on the outside.
And we are convinced about that. So what happens is the way I would say is building a resonant
field. Not doing that means that later on you have a lot of energy spent just kind of jostling
with egos, trying to convince each other and trying to one up. And coordination is much harder
between people who have not taken the time to deepen their relationship field. By the resonant
field, I mean different layers. So of course, there's a cognitive resonance of a shared image
of the world, a shared language. There's an emotional field of love and deep care for each
other saying, you know, I want you to do well and your goodness and my goodness are one.
Your well-being is tied to my well-being and we're really one at that level.
And at a spiritual level, getting curious, wow, what an expression of divine are you?
What an expression I am and how can we support each other to walk our paths with more integrity.
So a lot of this involves the messy work of dealing with envy and jealousy and anger and
a lot of subtle things that arise between any two people who are working together.
Right. And I feel the first place where the metacrisis kind of shows up is within us.
And the second place it shows up is in the relational field. And I feel then it shows up
in the world. So if you're dealing with it, first I have to deal with it within me,
which is my feeling of division, separation, individuality, overly specialness and so on.
And as I clear that up, working with others who are also doing that and kind of building that,
our experience has been that that creates a sort of what I call the inner net, right?
Like we have the internet. I feel there is an inner net that happens between any two people.
Inner net means that you're able to transfer a lot of meaning, context, energy in a short
period of time because you are vibing with this person deeply and you've done the work required
to do that. We experimented with the idea of ashrams. India has had ashrams forever,
but those ashrams were permanent ashrams where people would stay and there are still so many
ashrams, but we realized we are all busy people. So we need to do pop up ashrams.
So we started with something called artivist ashrams. We said artivist as a person who
looks at social change as an art form, not social change as a must do or a science, but
as a unique expression of their gift into the world. And we started with these 100 hour,
six day gatherings of 10 to 12 people and slowly build the field amongst ourselves.
And to us, that building block still serves us because even today some of that collective time,
energy, understanding that we've built with each other, not just intellectually,
but really living in the same space and all, we feel that serves us. Those building blocks became
a gathering of the tribe. The gathering of the tribe became a festival called 2069,
which is a 50 year journey we committed to. So the reason I'm saying relational field is,
it is not that we're not doing actions in our local context. Each of us has our own organizations.
Each of us is a local node. We're doing things. Yet I'm saying that equal time to our inner
practices and equal time to building the relational field is how we would approach the meta crisis.
I would say that the Indic mind therefore may not look at it as a very unique and urgent problem
to be solved. But say this has happened, man has faced crisis, humanity has faced crisis time to
time. And one of our scriptures is the Mahabharat. It's a large epic. And it is about a time of crisis
where everything kind of reaches this boiling point. And people have to make choices. And
Mahabharat is not a one time event. It happens again and again in our personal lives, in our
collective lives. So the culture remembers, the culture has passed on a manual across generation
saying, what do you do when you're pushed against the wall and nothing else is working? You have
to take a dharmic decision, a decision that serves life. So there is, there is a precedent for that.
There is enough references for us to not feel too scared and yet be invited to our kind of
highest selves. And I think we lean a lot on all this, because this gives us a contextual frame
to make sense of what is happening. Instead of being lost, scared, confused, this says,
okay, there are pointers, there are pointers that have been passed on. These are metaphorical
pointers. They're not literal pointers saying do ABC. But really a lot of metaphors, rich archetypes,
characters and so on. So I feel, and just to kind of tie this down, I would kind of say that
if you're able to build the relational field, which we've kind of spent time doing a lot of,
a lot of the work later becomes easier. And I really feel that globally also, how can we,
you know, activate this layer which is around the world? I feel the world is wrapped around a
layer of all of us. We're all doing sincere, great work. And there is a, what I call the
nameless tribe, right? We are a nameless tribe around the world. There is immediate recognition
and resonance. And yet I feel that alongside, we have to do our work with each other. And in
our work, everybody's doing, I think global work, everybody's doing relational field. I think we need
to hang out together. We need to start really falling in love with each other. When we do that,
we'll be like really super sync and unlock like a lot of superpowers and collective wisdom. So I
think, yeah, I would make a shout out for that kind of work. Also, you know, it's like if you want
aeroplanes to land, you have to build airports. I think if you want complex solutions to land,
you have to build landing pads for that consciousness. And I feel a relational field
needs to be there for new solutions and ideas to land. And I don't think we're building that
spiritual infrastructure for answers to emerge from the unknown.
Let me ask you one question and then I'll let Mohit and Kijil jump in. You said that part of
the Indic philosophy or the Indic is a way of living is interbeing. Is that with humans only
or does that extend to nonhumans like animals and nature? Yeah, it absolutely exists with
nature and animals. And I guess the sense of sacred nature is all around and all pervasive.
Even in a modern city like Mumbai, when you go on the street, you will see some lady worshiping a
tree or somebody feeding a stray animal. So it's built in, it's programmed into the culture,
which makes it easier for us in a way. That's excellent.
Mohit or Kijil, would you like to follow up on what Abhi said?
I think just a very tiny point there. I think it's generally very hard and contrasting for
people when they hear they think it's just like a nice thing to say. But this is like solid work
to put the time to make the relational field happen. And we really feel that's the core.
Everything else surrounds it, but it's like the centerpiece. It's not like a by the way piece
that okay, we have a few hours of hangout after our agenda driven meetings to say, okay, you know,
make sure that you have good relations. So it's literally the core, it's the center,
everything else then comes around that orbit. Just taking on the thread, I think the conversation
that we've been having. I think one of the important aspects in holding the relational
field together, responding to the metacrisis is to make sure that we walk longer, because
metacrisis is not a one day challenge or a few years question. It's almost an ongoing journey,
which probably at times may not even get answered in our own lifetimes. And it's for after our
lifetimes work also. And in that process, one thing that came up for us is how do we hold this
together? What will make sure that we are added together? Because it is wherever humans are,
it is inevitable that fights will come, battles will happen, issues will come up. And how do we
kind of hold ourselves together? Because the moment life happens, practicality happens, action
happens. Finding something that helps us navigate this systematically or step by step or something
that guides us is essential. And that's where for us, the idea of collective decision making,
the idea of holding the collective from a space that we all not just say what our shared principles
are, but also organize based on our shared principles. And how do we not have like a one
leadership model? Because in a collective, it's also the space for everyone to collectively
lead and walk together and move forward. And in that, the idea of collective decision making
has been very powerful for us. Again, some elders have inspired us to arrive there.
Vinoba, who is a spiritual successor for Gandhi, he, after his experience of doing the Bhutan
movement, and at the end of his life, came to this insight that if shifts have to happen,
masses have to also transition and arrive at that shift, not just their leaders were inspiring them
to do a few actions because the leaders will come and go, the masses kind of stay and take on.
Another source of inspiration for us has been Menda. It's a tribal village in Maharashtra where
for the last 30 years, the village has been practicing collective decision making. They call
it Sarvanumati, where how all decisions happen collectively, which means even if one person
objects, you literally pause and look at the objection, inquire into the objection because
we believe that the wisdom of each person is a grain of truth. And that truth is here to help us
understand a voice of minority of concern that we may have not thought of. And then with that
collective spirit, we walk together, walk ahead. And those guiding principles for us have been very
useful in how we have made decisions in our collective, this whole creating a network of
people or a web of people who are walking together with these spirit. And it may not always become
very technical form, formal processes, but it's in how we inquire and how we make decisions,
how we pause. Maybe we spend two extra hours to listen and find out if a concern comes in.
And that's something for us to be very important because the Indian mind is also diversity oriented.
It wants to hold the paradox and it's a practice into it. It's like we can say all this jargon,
but the practice is when we spend the extra time to talk about the paradox and the polarity through
these processes. And we've experimented Sarvanumati in this, we've never used the language in our
collective always about Sarvanumati, but we have those principles. And again, another place where
we've practiced this is the blue ribbon movement in, which is a youth group in Mumbai, where we
have kind of tried to maybe formalize a little form around the spirit, and then some work in the last
four, five years to articulate this, create more step-by-step processes so that the processes
also guide us and make it a little more tangible for a young person to literally look at this also
as a way of learning for themselves and inquiring into something which we do not know at the start
of it. But at the end of it, we reach a place where all of us collectively feel that we have
arrived at an answer that serves all of us and serves the higher purpose we are here for. So
I think that I would say is another piece in our journey that's helping us walk together and to
enable that, then of course, there are a lot of organizing principles in terms of how do we structure
ourselves in our collective space where all of us are trying to respond to the metacrisis. How do we
go beyond logos? How do we go beyond egos? And how do we not make formal contracts? And how do we
really trust our word when we are signing up? We don't really sign an MOU saying that, oh,
are you part of our network? Are you part of our collective? But there's trust and there's a shared
spirit and that we can say it without really feeling the need to formalize it. And how is it
going? How is your efforts, the three of you and your other colleagues, how is that scaling,
building relationships and networks in India? Right now where we are, we have from when we started
about now seven years or so and the form has constantly evolved. How we've added up with
currently where it is together, there is a new sense of energy that is coming up to respond to
the current way we are looking at the metacrisis. And that has brought people together who probably
wouldn't have otherwise. So if, for example, it was a network meeting and all of us have
showed up with the same enthusiasm and energy, I feel no, like each of us who are right now part
of this loose collective that we are seeing are people who have highly opinionated, aware people
who have their own ways of how we would want to go and what really would excite us to be there.
So there's a lot of independent leaders who are individuals or organization leaders who are then
saying that we want to come together and we want to do this. And at this point also we are each
invested in what we are doing individually at the same time, taking time to come together
and do this. And it's active, it's going on where local and collective actions continue to happen.
Excellent. Mohit, Abhi, would you like to add anything to what Kijal just shared?
I'll just add a quick one, Nate. It is difficult and it's messy and just as we need people to
transcend and get into enlightened self-interest, we need organizations also to transcend their own
interest, to nurture the ecosystem. And in the DNA of every organization is built in survival,
growth, scale, and for an organization level, transcendence to happen. And then the leaders
of those organizations being willing to kind of say, okay, the ecosystem has a space. We feel
that is the journey we are undertaking. So it's a couple of hundred people around in a loose network,
like Kijal said, there's a loose V, so we can't take a membership roster. But and how ideology
intersects with relationality. What happens when our ideas don't match? We love each other, but
our visions are different. So it's, yeah, it's messy and tough.
But you're doing what I actually think is really important is you're acting as an
Overton window to change the conversation at the same time building relationships and changing
the initial conditions of a future that you can't really predict. I think that's pretty solid.
Yeah. I think what whatever we are trying to do, somehow the application of that
loose V that Kijal also talked about and Abhishek shared. And I would say that loose V comes with
that kind of equity or equitable organizing, where authenticity is something which is very
important. And when we share what we are, then it's easier to navigate in that complex chaotic
collective. And I would also say that we have actually traveled in this 10, 15 years or seven
years together from the form, which is more mechanical to the frameworks to the process
and to the context. And now whenever we do like more like collective decision making or
so it is not just attached to the form or the framework. It goes beyond the process and the
context. And that's why it helps us take decisions that are truly collective. I would not say
they are truly collective, but somewhere closer to that that and somehow we are able to navigate
that space. And it is also helping us to not be in a space of martyrdom that, oh, I am only doing
something or some sort of when there is a space of service or then there is no resentment. I want to
give without resentment. So we are still struggling in that space, but somehow because of these
heritage, somehow we are able to be in that field.
I have so many questions for the three of you because I want to learn. When I've spent time
with you in person, like everything you said was interesting and novel to me because it's so different
than what I'm experiencing here, but doing similar work. So let me just start with a couple of
questions that anyone can chime in. Indian subcontinent as scientists will articulate is going to
have a higher preponderance of drought, flood, heat waves, fires, and a higher incidence of
wet bulb temperatures. And I knew that cognitively before I came to Oroville, but then I met all
the people there and I experienced, I think early January when I was there in Mumbai, it was 100
degrees Fahrenheit in the middle of winter. So my question is, what do everyday people in India
think about climate change? My assumption was that they were going to be really pissed off at the
global north who burned all the carbon, but that's not what I found. So my question is, what is the
dialogue around climate change two-part question to everyday people in India and to maybe the
NGO people that are following the science and know what's going on?
And I would say there are several India's existing in parallel. There's one India that is just trying
to get its basic needs met and will be at the receiving end of this, but there the preoccupation
is not even climate change as much as just getting a good job, surviving, coming out of the poverty
cycles and so on. There's a middle India, I would say the modern India, which is kind of
saying, yes, climate change is happening, but we want our creature comfort and kind of emulating
the global north in some ways and it kind of aspires to that. And then there is kind of,
I guess, the woke India or the active activist India where I think we'd locate ourselves,
which is asking these kind of questions saying, how's it fair even? How's it like we're bearing
this brunt and can we reach out to the brothers and sisters in our global north and say, guys,
this is happening to us, so like we're connected, can you see this? So there is all this happening
in parallel, I think, but as a culture, I don't think resentment comes that naturally. I mean,
there is resentment, there may be anger, but there is still a lot of ownership to say,
I'll improve my own circumstances, we will do something about it. So I think that's,
that would be my quick take. I mean, I don't live there, obviously, but there's got to be the cultural
memory of what Britain did and the colonizing that eventually ended. But now there's a different
form that's happening, which is indirect, which is the climate is going to warm and have impacts
on everyone's lives in coming decades, not because of something that India did, but something that
you know, the global north where 90% of the emissions have been burned. So to me, it seems
like there would be naturally a resentment or an anger or something, but you're saying that that is
not really in the Indic mind as much as it would be in somewhere like the West.
I would say that something that is coming to my head is like how in 1835 Macaulay came and
tried to change the education system of India and kind of came up with some minutes.
His idea was to really go deeper into the Indic mind and change it from there to reform it,
to bring the more evolved language and understanding and the wisdom. He was deeply
illusioned, but I would say from there came the diesel engine and the tractors got into the field
of the villages and then came the processed food, I would say, in the village.
And like this is the journey, then came more like the TV and Macaulay came before and then the
processed food and then the internet, AI, whatever. You can see that I come from a village in a tribal
area of South Rajasthan and I'm seeing this growth that how from that schooling system to right now
to AI or other. So I would say that there is a spectrum like how Abhishek shared and this journey,
seeing that journey definitely there are masses that are not privileged enough
to think about all these things, but at the same time they are experiencing all these things.
If you go to the hills, they are experiencing what is happening to their land, their hills,
their mountains, their water system. So they can easily see the change from 100 years. They never
had to buy water and now they need to buy water even in the village. So that is happening. Somehow
I also see that in the coastal areas. But the most important thing is, I would say that
more than resentment, there is something that is deeply understood by these people.
Like if something needs to happen, needs to happen through us
and it cannot come from somewhere else. And I think that would definitely help us
because it is more contextualized. But at the same time, understanding that this journey from
the schooling to the AI is definitely affecting us deeply, conditioning us deeply.
And I would definitely, I would finish with this thought that there is an illusion of choices
in any system. Either it is colonizers or capitalism or any other
system. I would say again, superorganism or malloc or inner language shaitan
is very intelligent now. It's like it is giving us that illusion of choices.
The more you are pet of this malloc, the more you are of its victim. So it's like the person who is
living in the ultra urban city and consuming everything that capitalism is saying or extractive
systems are saying. But he or she is the biggest victim of the same system. So I would say that
those who are living in marginalized ideas or in rural areas, they have consumed less. So they
are less victim of the whole superorganism. So that is what I am experiencing in India.
But yes, it is climate change is definitely affecting lives and people are actually seeing it.
Though there is no blame game right now because they don't understand the bigger game.
But sooner they would understand and they would start asking questions.
I would say even the confidence to stand up and say that guys, this is not okay. I think we are
only now starting to build that confidence to look into the eye and say guys, this is not okay.
It's just slowly happening. When we said the index rising, it's now happening after so much
of just coming out of the colonial era and then saying, okay, guys, this is happening. So I think
that's slowly happening. Yeah. And just like one other thing we feel is that there is a sense of
community that has always showed up in times of all crisis until now. So we've gone through
enough floods and we've gone through all kinds of challenges in our history also,
maybe not the same of different kinds. But what has come together and prevailed always
is a sense of community that shows up in solidarity and finds a way out of it.
So we have a history of finding a way out of something and then figuring hence what to do,
how to move ahead. So that faith that this will help us again persists. You're not hopeless about it.
Let me ask of a follow up, maybe more personal question. But if it was 100 degrees Fahrenheit,
I don't know what that is Celsius in Mumbai when I was there. How has it been since then in the
last three months? We're in an El Nino year. I haven't been looking at the Indian weather.
And how are each of you personally, you know, thinking about climate change living in India,
the rest of your life? Or don't you give it much thought? I'm just curious.
For us, because we are an unschooler family, so we also have to travel. So we travel according to
the weather. In the summers, we try to be in the hills. And in winters, we try to be in Auroville,
so that it is like manageable. And rest of the time we stay in Udaipur when the weather is really
good. But I would also say that because we want to live more sustainable life and we don't use
air conditioning, air conditioning here in our house, we have taken a house which is open,
which is airy. And even in this month or till maybe 15th of May, which is like 37 to 40 degrees
Celsius, we'll be staying without ACN. We figured out how to stay sleeping on the ground and all
those kind of things, keeping all the doors open and just using the fan. That's a personal choice
that you're not having air conditioning. I mean, you could get it if you wanted, right?
Yes, yes. Wow. I would not do well in 40 degrees Celsius.
But it is still manageable. I'm not kind of glorifying that we are not. I don't have problem
using air conditioning if it is needed. If we'll stay in Udaipur and then we might buy,
like or we might stay somewhere where there is air conditioning. It's like non-violence is very
important when it comes to self too. So I'm just clarifying that not to glorify that part.
Thank you. I just looked it up 40 degrees is 104 Fahrenheit. Never gets that hot where I live.
Yeah. I think I grew up in Mumbai. Mumbai has always been a hot city. So winter is less experienced
in that sense. But of course, heat is growing too much. Climate change is happening in many ways now.
I think while one part of it is there is privilege and there is access that we have to be in home
most of the times that work is such it doesn't require us to be on feed all day,
every day kind of thing. So that's a lot of privilege that takes us away from
facing it every minute. But other than that, if there is work and we have to travel and it's
needed, I think a part of me just like all Indians is also trying to build residents because it is
not that we have an excuse and we have a way out of it. We take it on to ourselves to say,
how do I build my resilience? Maybe we will wear cotton clothes. Maybe we will do a few tricks.
Like, you know, we have all these desi nuskas will put some will put sub ja in our water so
that it keeps our inner board inner system cool. So we'll do all these small, small desi nuskas
and prepare to show up. So I'm going to be traveling to mid of Maharashtra, which is even
hotter than Mumbai. But there is no way I can not do it because that's the reality of where I live.
And I have to equip myself to show up. And that's how most Indians try to cope and live.
What percentage of the population in India has routine access to air conditioning?
I would assume it's relatively small. It's a small, it's a, it would be a very small number.
You know, I live in a city that has 24 seven power, which is not everywhere in India. But
and I live in a financial circumstance where I can have all my air conditioning blasting all the
time. And yet, you know, what we manage to do or what we do every night is to have the air
conditioning on for an hour and then stop it and just let it stay. Not because we can't afford it,
not because there's no electricity, but just it's our act of stewardship towards the planet.
And I remember walking to my daughter's room in the morning and seeing the air conditioning off
and I asked her how come you didn't sleep without, why did you sleep without air conditioning?
And she said, I turned it off after an hour because that's what she sees us do.
And these are things you do because it's one planet, one family and nobody is watching,
I guess, but it's what we do. So following on that, what might the Indic ethos or the Indic mind,
what do you think that might contribute to responses to the Metacrisis that might be
different or quite different than in other areas in the world, like Europe or the United States
or elsewhere? I think one idea, Nate, would be that the calling of the times, the word dharma is
a very complex word that people have interpretations, a simple interpretation have is an action that
enlivens the self, the other and the context. So what is the right action that one can take in
today's time and you dharma calling of the times. So I think the Indic mind would evoke each person
to look within and say, what is the dharmic thing to do? What is the right thing to do today because
the crisis is not about you. Each of us is a central character of our lives
and here we are located in the crisis. What are you going to do? And what is the dharmic thing
to do? What are you being called upon to do? So I definitely think one evocation would be to be in
service of life and be invited to act not from a solo space but act from the calling of the times.
So you dharma, I would say. So that would definitely be one evocation for each one.
I think it's one of our application too. I would say it's spiritual and sociopolitical
and in that I would definitely say that doing your inner work which is collective sadhana and
connecting it with the collective work which is collective sadhana, individual sadhana and
collective sadhana and doing that practice constantly is something which is very important and
somehow going through this process of unsqueuing a relationship with power, money,
authority or ego or shadows is very important and that journey is something that I think
would definitely help us in responding to this chaos. I would also say that deep understanding
of this spiritual crisis or metacrisis, understanding of the bigger game and not coming
up with some reductionist bogged solutionism but to come up with some sort of more balanced or
into an equilibrium and I would say the last one would be being fully aware of where we are,
where we are living, what systems that regulate us, maybe not just IndicMind but at the same
time capitalism or patriarchy or colonialism, all those systems are how deeply regulating us.
So beyond that coming from that space which is nonviolent and compassionate and in those
ethics I would say definitely help. So is the Gandhi ethic of nonviolence that was practiced
against the British? Does that have a metacrisis parallel that we can apply to our global situation
right now? Have you thought about that? With Gandhi ji there is no othering, right? There is
we are all one and so you are not my oppressor, like where our destinies are linked. So first
starting with no othering, so not othering the global north for example but also insistence on
the truth, the truth being that the impacts of actions are not equally distributed, right? So the
nonviolent insistence on truth till that kind of gets the person who is so-called doing the sin,
not hating the sinner but hating the sin, right? And making that kind of resisting that
and really evoking that kind of a response, right? So I think to me it has a modern application
which we will have to apply in our own context. We will have to reinterpret it. Now the problem
is many more is much more complex but the principles are timeless, the principle of
nonviolence, of oneness of spirit, of humility, patience. So I think we will have to kind of
re-code it in our times. Yeah, I think the idea of violence has also evolved, right? Like first
it used to be physical violence, you kill somebody and then from there it was maybe use
structures and policies and you know that's how we evolved. Now violence has become so subtle
and it's also evolved with time. So our responses also have to evolve with times like all the kind
of mental health challenges that we see are happening because there's another form of violence
that has happened in the last maybe a century or so that is creating rise to all of this.
So there is definitely a role of non-violence or ahinsa and a lot of that is to reinterpret it in
these times and I feel a big part of that from the Indian mind that comes is surrender to something
higher that we do not fully understand. Just trying to understand it from the space of mind only
in itself also is a form of reducing it to saying that my mind knows everything and I will be able
to solve it all and I think what probably I feel a lot of us try to understand is that mind doesn't
know everything we try to use it to make sense of some things but also create that space of the
unknown the surrender where the answers will come maybe because we are together maybe because
something else happens in nature and that is important also as we evolve globally not just
locally. What are each of you most concerned about in the coming decade and also what gives you the
most hope for the coming decade? I can start this one off. I think for me what gives me hope I think
there is no option to not have hope. I think the only way humanity and all of us have evolved and
survived is that hope is not a choice hope is a stand that you take and then you act from there to
figure out hence what where how etc so that definitely is a big part and I think for me the
concern is a lot of the social fabric that is breaking down a lot of the relational field that
has been the strength of where I come from that seeing this mantling in different ways at different
levels and a lot of the idea of isolation and individualization that's coming in which is
causing troubles which we are not even able to write now voice out fully. I think for me that
really is scary because that was our strength and that's where I also see now cracks coming in.
I would say that my fear is or concern is around more disassociation more divide
and in that I would say that this how I said that
this re-appropriation of our culture is happening by the extras so what we are trying to reclaim
in that reclaim process something is again being co-opted by the extremes so first by
the colonizers and then by other extremes so this process is somehow in a loop it's a very
I would say cycle so that I'm afraid of that more dissociation more divide would happen
I think hope is illusion word I would say that I would say confronting what we are going through
and realizing acknowledging honoring that chaos and embracing the unknown and staying there
grounded would definitely help I don't have any answer for the hope right now
but yes yes this what we are doing together might help us.
My most I'm most concerned about us forgetting how to love and I think not being loved or being
able to love creates a deep void in each of us we try to fill the void with everything else but
that restlessness just doesn't go and today I think we don't know how to deal with the energies
of love we don't know how to deal with eros we don't know how to communicate non-violently
we don't know the brotherly love we've forgotten so much and if there's one message that's
passed on across generations I feel it's like guys don't forget to love each other because
that's at the heart of being a human family right and I feel we're rapidly losing that ability to
technology to individualism and so I just feel that if we forget to love and if we are out of
the meta crisis I don't know if it's worth being on the other side of it if you're like still hostile
to each other and to nature and so on so I think that's my biggest concern my biggest hope is us
Nate you give me hope Mohit Kajal give me hope I I have personally experienced that there is a
global family every day shows up to respond to this with full integrity with full spirituality
to the best of their ability they recognize each other they there's an energetic recognition of all
of us around the world and and I I have seen it so I can kind of bear testimony that such a such
a thing exists and we are here we're inspiring each other we are a part of a common team and
and I genuinely believe we'll make it like I I'm not just saying that I feel this layer of this
layer has a purpose in humanity today and I think this layer will see it through so that that's a
sort of deep belief or knowing that I have and yeah and one podcast at a time Nate it's it's
happening it's it's I mean each of us is doing it right so thanklessly so tirelessly I mean and
you inspire me in that way right just just at it it makes me very emotional to be honest
to just see each of us every day in face of such difficulty just showing up and just quietly doing
this you know and I think that's very humbling that's very powerful thank you I feel very privileged
to have traveled around the world as much as I have and yeah there's politicians and crazy fanatics
and violent people in every country but under the surface there are people like the three of you
in every country I've been to and we're all the same and we care about music and food and love
and our family and nature and I I hear you and I feel you with what you just said and there is
some energetic field there that's hard hard to describe so thank you thank you for that
um and we don't know so we just have to keep moving forward so um well said so um speaking
mostly though not entirely to a western audience as you are right now what is one thing or a
couple things that you would like the audience to understand about India's present situation
culture future that is perhaps unknown and unrecognized if we don't live in your country
I you know I can't I can't speak for my viewers but I think a lot of people don't know that much
about India so what what would you like to share with our viewers I would say one is that we're
still healing and recovering from the centuries of what has happened to us and therefore there is
a need to feel proud there is a need to reassure ourselves we were at a peak at some stage there
is a need to deal with the guilt anger shame everything that's piled in our shadows so we
are at it the the culture is healing itself and you'll see all kinds of things but the deeper
process is healing I that's how I see it and it'll take its own time we're just a 80 year old
nation state so I think so that's underway second is that we are your family I think we're the
largest part of the family in one and and just to kind of say that we have gifts to offer and
we are beneficiaries of the work that other countries have done for sure so there is there is
a mutuality we have some wisdom we have some experiences of an surviving civilization like
we've survived for 5000 years so we're like okay there's hopefully something that we may have to
share with the world about how to get along how to survive and see us for who we are do not see us
because just do not see us only materially don't see us as rich poor GDP alone there's so many more
layers of capitals that are present here we're much richer than that and hopefully also wiser
than you know being seen as as just naive or as undeveloped so I think see us for who we are
I think that's that's what we'd say yeah that's that's well said and that's new to me because
three months ago I had never been to India and I did see you for who you are and here we are today
I made a lot of lifelong friends in my brief stay there and I I love India I have to say
Kejal Mohit what would you like to share I think the the presence enough us is the second
wave of co-option I would definitely say that
while we are definitely healing and there is something happening underneath but also
superficially or on on the top there is lots of other kind of appropriation by our own people
is happening I would say that again I'm not demeaning them but they are coming from
affected by Moloch and they are coming from that extreme culturally I would definitely say that
somehow we have that gene again I would say that uncolonisable gene in our colonized mind
is somehow mainstreaming non non-violence or mainstreaming different evolved
virtues in a very raw practical unrecognized unpopular ways and in day-to-day life if I'm if
if you go to a village and they are practicing something very evolved but they would not even
give much importance to it so that is something that you see it's it's very present and I would
say the future is something very connected to what Abhishek shared is that some of the answers
would come from this land I would definitely say that from its rich roots and and rich roots of
collectivity and and the wisdom most of the answers and this is not just in India you would find in
Africa or some countries of Europe those who are less affected by modernity and those who are still
in their native sense would come up with more cohesive more interesting answers or responses I
would say like one of the core thing for me is that while India is a country in all of Azar
we have a lot of because we have we are a huge population there is a lot of survival instinct
that's all the time playing out for us and that's all the time something that we've deeply ingrained
and it's present in every action and how we think and how we show up but I also feel that gift of
the challenge has been that makes us be at something too much like we will be at it till we solve it
and that makes the wisdom or that makes the knack of the person so much more stronger
that while yes we've gone through a lot of challenges and questions Indians aren't people
or I don't see people around to be people who will give up and lose it like they will try to
figure it out till the last moment they have because that's what survival instincts have
taught us that you have to be at it till you figure it and there is that memory of trying it
relentlessly and there's that hard work and my hope is that is what is going to keep us like even if
we've probably forgotten some of the things we're trying to heal we're trying to recover but that
being at it and constantly trying it which is something which is very very ingrained which
will I think take us to a future where we'll go back and go back to what we forgot about spirit
our spiritual roots and maybe reconstruct that and live them and bring them back in a very different
way and the spirit of unity of being a global family I think deeply always touched with it
and deeply always holding that value at the heart of it thank you a couple more questions so let me
ask each of you if your work is wildly successful what do you envision the impact or the trajectory
of your current work extrapolating it out five or ten years what what can you envision
I would say 500 to the such people who would definitely understand the significance of
inner and outer work and that goes hand in hand and they also value while staying in the head
and more articulate even everything you need to really do something on the ground
those who can actually dance between different paradoxes micro and macro and self-organized
emergence to completely organic and forest kind of organizing so all those kind of things I would
say that if it thrives we might have 300 to thousand such people and a big community which
would be able to influence the larger audience I mean it's it's more like still on the on the
surface level there is deeper but this is what I see if everything goes well I believe it I believe
it could happen Abhi Keja I would say that the our governance system or our resonant field
building scales I think that's the secret sauce the magic recipe if you're able to scale that
a certain network will come online which Mohit is saying is maybe 300 to thousand people in
India but also the global network because we'll be able to plug in more seamlessly with other
collectives also and I feel when such a network comes online we'll have access to an intelligence
which we don't currently have a collective intelligence that's able to sense respond
at an entirely different level come up with non-linear miraculous responses and then there
is enough trust and capacity to locally contextually execute so it's not uniform the sensing is
collective the tapping is into forces beyond us and and a collective intelligence but action is
you know thousand flowers blooming with the right season but thousand plants blooming different
flowers blooming so I feel we're able to being wildly successful one is I don't see us as like
only us as being wildly successful I still see us as the global family being wildly successful
and if we're able to collectively create this super intelligence to deal with the super organism
I think we'll we'll have cracked it so I think that's what's worth attempting yeah very similar
lines I think if we've fully cracked then we've done what we are doing at its best and it's fully
successful there will be a deep rootedness in nature where nature doesn't feel violated nor
individuals feel violated and we would have created a process which helps us organize ourselves as
groups in a way that we live in sync not just internally with ourselves but with nature so
it's something that will work for everyone and all organisms and that's when I think we would have
actually arrived because we will be fully nonviolent well said so I am 98.7 percent confident
that the four of us will be lifelong friends based on our interactions so I would like to
extend an offer for you three to come back on this program either individually or as a group
or cross pollinating with other groups working on the meta crisis but let me put you on the spot
right now what is one topic that if you were to come back that you would like to spend a whole
hour talking about that one thing something that's relevant to our collective futures either in India
or for the whole world that we just wouldn't have the time to unpack on this initial conversation
but that is that you're passionate about and you think is relevant to our future one would of
course be Sarvanumati I think there is so much more that we can talk about collective decision
making collective processes all of that that was one the other for me was also this feminine and
masculine ways of organizing and leadership and I think that's another thing that also helps us
organize the way we do which is again a whole conversation itself I feel how to organize to
organize it's something which is very important I feel how we as a group or a collective or a
network is more important than the agenda how do we deal with the conflicts and everything
which is happening in between us and then how to navigate that and still understanding the
meta crisis look at that how to become that stepping stone while organizing well so that if
something happens if hits the wall if we hit the hit the wall that stepping stone would definitely
help others and you have a kind of a formula for that based on your experiences I would say it is
very dynamic it keeps on growing it's like we have to look at the fruits and and have them and
they are very juicy and all that but at the same time we have to go back to the roots and work on
our foundations and and that is also juicy difficult but roots are also juicy here so that
keeps on happening this back and forth to for me also the first is the critical link I would call
it the critical link I think the one person to one person the relational link I feel is the
building block that we need to master and the violence there manifests as violence in the world
everything that that unit for me is is primary it's the primary lab in which we catalyze the
change we want to make so the relational field so that would be one I can't stress enough how
important the dynamics there are the other would be Nate would be talking about the beyond I feel
the conversation of energies archetypes ancestors future generations forces which we can't name but
can comprehend and how they may be of assistance to us we steer away from it because it sounds to
esoteric but I do feel something beyond our comprehension is going on I do feel we can tap
into it I do feel it has a role in our response and I just feel we need to talk about it thank you
any closing words for the audience I would say that I would again say that this is an invitation
to to sincerely inquire and and somehow go deeper into our sense making together it's it's not that
a small group can crack anything it's it's that together togetherness or that oneness or that
collective that can do something bigger than an individual so you all live in India but you do
speak on zoom and occasionally travel is is there any way that our viewership could help you or you
can help our viewership or how do people engage with with you and your work in India
I would say three things let's meet we're happy to come and talk we're happy to have you in India
let's meet if this resonates with you I would say let's share I think we have a lot to share and a
lot to receive so I would say that and third we love good vibes so let's care was my third thing
let's let's kind of nourish each other and so on in whichever ways we can so we're happy to show up
we're inviting thank you all for your time namaste to be continued and uh thank you
if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification please follow us on your
favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification dot com for more information on
future releases this show is hosted by Nate Hagans edited by no troublemakers media and curated by
leslie badloots and lizzie siriani
