Good evening. I am back with Frank for this week's, frankly. So, what are you 100% certain
about in the world, in your life? What do you have absolute certainty of? I'm gonna list
some things that I'm 100% certain about and why that is important and why some things
I'm less certain about in this week's, frankly.
I am 100% certain that humans are delusional. Social confidence, even overconfidence has
been adaptive and uncertainty takes up our mental bandwidth. So, I'm human and therefore
I'm delusional and overconfident about something. So, as confident as I am about all the things
I'm about to say, it's not really 100%, it's 99 points something just in case I'm missing
something. By definition, we don't know our own blind spots. So, I'm less confident than
my feelings would suggest.
I am 100% certain that those people in our world who are extremely worried about climate
change and those people that think our changing climate is either not human-caused nor important
or urgent, those two groups of people, I'm 100% sure they cannot both be right. A secondary
implication of that is I'm 100% certain that modern culture will never unify its behaviors
and policies and actions around climate change or any environmental issue. Something I'm
less sure about but still pretty hefty, confident, maybe 80%, 90% is that the Holocene and Thropocene
Thermal Maximum will be a thing that will certainly occur in the coming century and
play out over thousands of years will be the most significant event in human history barring
nuclear war. Though it might take a thousand years to play out, it's going to absolutely
become irreversible this century and maybe soon this century and that this is the actual
barrier to the survival of conscious life on Earth because once the sequestered methane
outside of our control hits the inexorable positive feedback territory, this geological
monkey trap that was set for us long before our species even evolved will be well and
truly sprung. There are things I don't know that no one knows about the complexity of
the climate system which is why I'm 80% to 90% sure of this but it's very under-recognized
as having this magnitude. In a related note, I am 100% certain that the environmental movement
not only the climate movement but broader biodiversity species, planetary boundaries
is increasingly going to be under threat and pushed aside by the tenuous social, economic
and geopolitical situation in the world. I'm less confident but hopeful that knowing this
we can plan two or three steps ahead on behalf of the natural world and use this knowledge
as foresight. Related to this and what was talked about last week's Frankly and last
week's podcast with Jeffrey West is I am 100% sure that humans as individual bodies and
as social units in families, towns, cities, nations have a biological metabolism. I believe
that understanding this is critical to responding and planning for what's ahead. As I mentioned
last week, something I'm less sure about but I'm very curious about is can knowing we have
a social metabolism change our social metabolism? I am 100% certain that energy, its availability
and its cost will enable and constrain human futures. This is not something that's well
understood even today because we've had more energy every single year and why should that
trend not continue is what most people expect. What I'm less sure about but increasingly
confident in is that ecosystem health and stability around the world will also constrain
and enable human futures and that is becoming true by the day. It was 48.5 degrees Celsius
this past weekend in Central Africa. It's the first week of April. This is going to
have real effects on global commerce, inequality, agriculture, supply chains are increasingly
going to be affected by the warming climate and other environmental concerns. I am 100%
sure that so-called renewable energy will not solve our environmental problems. If we
solve quote unquote our environmental and other issues, it's going to come from governance
change in incentives, a change in the consciousness of people at a cultural level. However, I
am confident, not 100% sure, that some sort of Goldilocks technology between the Astro
and George Jetson flying cars sort of thing and medieval or previous stone tools, something
in the middle can improve our human and planetary condition. I'm confident that the battle of
our times is not left versus right but is going to be technology versus ecology in the
way which we view our world. If we just look at the world in a technology lens, I don't
think we have any hope. We have to use technology in service of a broader goal of this blue
green earth and the citizens and denizens that reside on it. I am 100% certain that our
global macro situation is such that we are so far from equilibrium with debt and supply
chains and geopolitics that there are no longer any non-radical, non-disruptive pathways
back to equilibrium. I'm less confident that we don't have to have a disaster when this
happens. Disruption is part of human history because we can't know what will happen, doesn't
mean that we should accept just doom as a trajectory. There are lots of benign pathways
left, I believe. I am 100% sure that for what we crave and need in our particular evolution
as a social species, that after food, water, and shelter are met, that dogs are the best
invention ever by humans, even though it was a co-evolution, not exactly an invention.
I'm 100% sure of that, but I can't move my camera, but Frank is on the floor here snoring
right now. The population of dogs, man's best friends, is now around a billion grown
alongside human population and dogs now weigh as much as all wild mammals on earth. So the
point here is even the best inventions have negative impacts when scaled.
I am 100% certain that there exists a fundamental reality that cannot be deconstructed, like
D'Nella Meadows' systems framing of reality as an iceberg, where what we see is not the
entire iceberg, but just what little bit is floating out of the water, and the majority
of the ice is beneath the surface, including its mass and shape and structure. At times,
many of us, most of us, forget or at least assume that there is no fundamental reality,
no iceberg beneath the surface, and that every bit of reality is a construct, bendable to
human will and effort, usually in the name of human betterment or fixing inequalities
or social wrongs. That is not how complex systems work. They're intricate systems that
have interdependencies and known and unknown unknowns. So this hyperconstructivist postmodernism
of if we would only fix fill in the blank, patriarchy, capitalism, et cetera, fill in
the blank, sooner or later, these causes become nihilistic because explaining the world in
that way deconstructs everything and doesn't look how to build back a better reality, but
instead tears down both the good and the bad, throwing the living baby out with the bad
bathwater. So I struggle with that, especially with a multi-issue podcast. This is why I
try hard to come at the multiple problems and challenges humanity faces from a systemic,
one might say, metamodern lens, trying to understand the realities as best I can to
integrate them so that we all have a better map of the territory that we find ourselves
in and maybe just maybe we find our way through. I am 100% sure that the way humans in the
global North and West live today is but one of many possible ways that humans can live
and that it's anomaly relative to the way we lived in the past. I am 90-some percent
sure that we might be surprised at how 20, 30, 50 years from now humans living with considerable
less energy surplus might really have meaningful, good lives, assuming nuclear war and runaway
climate change don't happen. I am 100% certain that economic growth measured by 20% are
total global energy and material consumption per year will hit its maximum and decline
before the year 2040 and I am 90% sure it will happen well before then. I am far less
sure that the end of growth will result in collapse. I think there is a big difference
between collapse and what I refer to as a simplification and this is why this bend not
break work is so important. I am 100% certain that we are headed for a world of material
scarcity in coming decades for the average person. However, I am also highly confident
that the number of people who might experience such an outcome may experience it from a place
of abundance is possible and that is also part of the work because I have seen it. I
have seen so many people that use 10% of our current resources and live really good lives
because the people around them are living the same and also they are trained in meditation
and music and resonance and other things which is something that I am going to continue
to explore. So I am confident there is a difference between material scarcity and mental abundance.
I am 100% sure that humans are animals. We are mammals. We are primates. We are great
apes. We are predators. We are related to every single living organism on earth through
Luca, last universal common ancestor. I am less confident that people understand the
relevance and critical importance of this. Fewer people know what I just said and fewer
people still feel it and in a lonely universe the animals and organisms that we share this
planet with are kin and widening the boundary much like indigenous people have done and
continue to do of the self to include nature and other organisms and ecosystems is one
of the pathways forward. I am 100% certain that the beliefs and stories of the 3,000
odd religions on earth are not the literal truth but the rituals, the gatherings, the
singing, the other benefits from the major religions have been highly adaptive. In contrast
science gets most of the facts right but it doesn't have the benefits. It doesn't have
the rituals. I am less confident but I think the implications of this is that God isn't
going to save us. Whichever God someone believes in, they are not coming to the rescue in the
human predicament, the mortal economy, the great simplification. We, those of you listening
to this podcast, those 8 billion of us hominids alive at this time are the consciousness of
the universe as far as we know. It's up to us. Frank, get down. I am 100% certain that
humans evolved in spurts of cooperation and competition. In our evolutionary past and
both of those are part of our phenotype today depending on the cultural cues we get. But
we evolved in communities. We've lost this in the global north and the global west but
this is something I'm very certain about that each of us has a predilection to cooperate
with others and compete with others. Our culture is promoting the latter. Something I'm less
sure about but still pretty confident about is that expanding the definition of self to others,
other people, other cultures, other generations, other species, expanding our definition of
where the self begins and ends in our actions and our behaviors is one of the key pathways
forward. I am 100% sure that from this moment the future, though it has many constraints,
is not yet determined. It is emergent. And despite the title and the definition of self,
and content of this particular, frankly, certainty generally is the mind killer. We have to connect
things that are true without extrapolating that certainty into things we can't know.
I think saying I don't know is something we should be much more used to doing and in
social discourse not have to have all the answers all the time. I'll make a brief digression
here. Last week I was at Bioneers and Rex Weiler and Nora Bateson led a warm data lab and there
were about 100 people, I don't know, maybe more. And we had to get in groups of three
or four people and then she asked a prompt, discuss food in the context of a changing world.
But then we had to look down and everyone had a different setting. There was ecology and politics
and family and culture. And you had to discuss food in a changing world in that context. And the
first group I was in, I was really interested and I talked about ecology and hormone disrupting
things in our food. And then the second group was on politics. We talked a little bit about that.
And by the fourth group, I had realized that my thoughts and my eagerness to describe what I
thought had softened. And by the fifth group, I didn't even want to talk anymore. I was interested
in listening. And I think certainty has been adaptive because it builds our status, our
identity, et cetera. But along with certainty, we lose the ability to listen to others, which I
think is going to be about one of the top five things that we're going to need in coming
decades. Last but not least, I am 100 percent sure of my own values and ethos and principles while
I'm alive on this planet and what I care most about in the world. It is nature and my work is
in service of life. I am 99 percent sure that many of you who follow this channel feel the same.
And that is something important and non-trivial. And I appreciate it. So I'm pretty certain that this
whole little exercise might have been a little confusing. But this is what I thought up over the
weekend. And I'm certain you will have comments. Thank you. I will talk to you next week.
Thank you.
