This is my 12th Earth Day talk. They're all online somewhere. One main difference
from prior years is usually I didn't have time to get a haircut and this year I
did have time to get a haircut but I couldn't find anyone to cut it so still
no haircut. Last year I wrote a paper on humans acting as an energy hungry
superorganism and with that paper I'm kind of done explaining the problem and
now I'm working full-time on painting pathways of how do we navigate this
coming decade and beyond. Basically the goal for the rest of my life is to
educate, inspire, and enlist people to play a role in our collective future.
There's many people are interested in this sort of synthesis. Some of you are
tuned in to get insights on where the stock market's headed. Some of you want
to know what this means for climate change or your career but what I'm
trying to do today is describe the state of our species, the state of our
economies. My target audience today is smart, bold, pro-future humans who want
to live good lives but use a good portion of their remaining time on Earth
towards service to making the future better. So I am going to have, this is
almost an entirely new talk. I've got these seven sections, brief introduction.
I'm going to do a whirlwind story of how we got here. I'm going to list some
inconvenient truths about our situation. I'm going to suggest some radical
reframings of how we use language and how to think about our situation. I'm
going to offer some pathways and possibilities both for our species, for
our nation, maybe for our communities. I'm going to end with a list of suggestions on
how to be alive, cope, thrive, engage with these challenges and I will end with a
story about my family and our family. So why do I do these talks? Because I love
the Earth and the natural world. I have compassion for people in our species, for
people in other species and this talk is going to be a sledgehammer to some of
you especially who haven't been following along. But I think we need to have an
honest, just straight-on conversation about where we find ourselves. I also
really believe in systems synthesis and how the big picture fits together. Because
it's my hope that if enough people understand what we face, that there's
some pro-social emergence that happens between groups of people that ends up
making the future better. Civic, reasonable people, like when we talked to
Mayor Norton last year about different systemic risks to the system, then she
and her people make better decisions. So it's my hope that a lot more humans
engage with this larger story. Okay, the story so far, whirlwind tour. We are
related to every single living creature on Earth. The best estimate is there are
around 10 million species. Humans are just one branch on one end of that, that
large tree of life. Our ancestors have been in our modern form around 300,000
years, Homo sapiens. Most of that time, 290,000 of those years, we were living in
hunter-gatherer tribes on the plains of Africa. We share evolutionary history
that makes us today adaptation executors. We seek the same emotional states of our
successful ancestors. Now, after 290,000 years, we stopped hunter-gathering and we
started to stay in place, generate surplus from the land, and we built bigger
villages, nation states, and eventually an entire full planet economically
speaking. So for a long time, this is a hypothetical graph showing the ecological
flows of the sun and hydrological cycles, sun, soil, rain, etc. We maxed out at a
certain amount of productive capacity around the world. This was the agricultural
cap, which we hit in the 18th century. And then we came across this bolus of
fossil sunlight in the form of coal, oil, and natural gas, which added massive
amounts of extra calories to our system, which we pulled out of the ground to boost
our labor force, which powered our machines, technology, heavy industry. So
effectively, we're living, if you take a real bird's eye view here shown as 16,000
years, we're living in the middle, right in the middle of the carbon pulse, where
we're adding this ancient carbon to our economies, giving us massive boosts and
goods and services, etc. We're somewhere between the yellow and the red star on
this as far as time wise. So this chart looks different. This is something called
a Gaussian curve, looks like a normal curve, where we access the easiest, cheapest
resources, and then we increase our scale. But these things are all non-renewable on
human time scales. And our societies have been accessing these non-renewable
resources for, you know, 150, 200 years. Now, the amount of benefits they give us
are amazingly powerful. One barrel of oil, which last week we traded at negative
$37 a barrel, but that I'll get to later. One barrel of oil does four and a half
years of my work. So the total global economy extracts 100 billion barrel of oil
worth of coal oil, natural gas each year, which gives us effectively the equivalent
of 500 billion human workers relative to the four or five billion actual human
workers. So this is a massive subsidy that we just take for granted because all
we do is pay for the cost of extraction. So what we've done over time is we've
grown our economies by issuing more and more money to lubricate the system and
give us access to our technological ideas, combine them with oil and natural gas
and other non-renewable inputs. So with the access to these flammable fossils,
our economic system grew so fast and large that land no longer explained our
wealth. So economists started to refer to it as capital and labor. And using a
social construct of credit creation, where banks create money when they make
a loan, we continue to pull resource consumption forward in time. This black
line pulled the red line up and to the left. So now our society views the world
through a financial, we've not only financialized the human experience, but
also the explanation of it. So there's lots of different aspects of our
evolved human behavior, but a really important one. Two of them are we are
optimal foraging creatures. We like to invest a little and get out a lot. So
we're constantly looking for surplus as biological organisms. The other thing
about humans is that we are ultra social. We are incredibly social. We pair
ourselves to others. We live within a group of people that we collaborate with,
we cooperate with, because this is our tribal setting where we live between 30
and 150 people on the plains of Africa. So these two things, more than any other,
define the human animal. But with access to this fossil surplus, they've
manifested in an emergent way that we're all becoming aware of, because it's
a problem. We started to cooperate with each other in small businesses, at
corporations, as nation states, to generate surplus. And what happened over
time is our aggregate behavior resembled this giant metaphorical amoeba. The
amoeba doesn't have a brain, but it follows simple rules, whatever allows it
to grow. And this has led global economy to be in this perpetual hunger for
more energy. In fact, this led to a 14-fold increase in global income since
1800 and a 24 times increase for Americans. So if you add up how the human
economy increased, it's up by 100 times, which is the population time
consumption in the last 200 years and 500 times in the last 500 years. So this
superorganism is fed by a global transportation system with gasoline and
diesel acting as the hemoglobin. An aerial view of a city at night, which
show roads and highways very much like veins and arteries, and viewed this way
the global superorganism is always awake, always hungry as it expands delivery
nodes for good services and people around a larger and larger network. So
remember that every single good and service in the global economy requires
an energy conversion. And so the size and the scale of the modern human
endeavor is completely linked to independent on available energy. Because
of the zoom thing, this is supposed to be a GIF, but it's not working. Looks
much better when it's moving. But every single good and service here in this
picture is part of its complex interconnected system. And we've doubled
our energy material use in the last 30 years. As many of you are aware on
Earth Day, we've also incredibly increased CO2 in the atmosphere, which is at a
3 million year high. All kinds of deleterious impacts to wild nature. I'll
talk about that a little bit at the end. So we're now growth drained and we will
kick any and all cans forward to keep growth going. What will happen when we've
kicked the can as far as it will go and now blocking the road? Well, that is
happening now. In the last two years, I've used this exact same slide talking
about a coming great simplification where a reduction of GDP and advanced
economies is now likely when we remove the ability to add credit to a system
with a shift towards more costly, not costly at the pump, but costly to
extract resources. And with the return to what I refer to as rebuildables, or
technology and machines that can harness the productivity from the sun and the
wind. So what happened is our global economy had a heart attack a few months
ago. COVID has not created these problems. It has caused all these problems to come
to the fore so that we're now experiencing them even though we were
unaware of them. So this leads to the core of this talk, which is the
inconvenient truths of our situation. So COVID has been a complete shock to our
economic system. Our estimates are if we end the lockdowns around June, it will be
a 12 to 15% drop in GDP. If the lockdowns go into summer or into the fall, it's
going to be closer to 20%. So effectively, our economy has had a heart attack.
My opinion is that the virus is less lethal than initially thought, far more
contagious than initially thought. Personally, I think this virus will be
with us for a very long time. I think we will try to get a vaccine. We eventually
will get a vaccine, but in the same way that we have a flu vaccine, we'll have a
coronavirus vaccine. It'll reduce your chances of getting it, and if you do get it,
it'll reduce the severity. But this is just a very, very strange virus, and
there's a lot we don't understand about it. I think a lot of people talking about
this V-shaped economy are misguided, not because of the severity of the virus, but
because of the knock-on effects of non-linearity in our global economic
system. So in my opinion, the great simplification or a return to kind of
1990s-level GDP is probably already started. There are many variables, and
not only do I not exactly know what to do about the future, but I don't, no one
knows what exactly is going to happen the rest of the year. There's so many
variables, the virus, the government response. Will we sufficiently stop the
system with credit? Will we bail out people sufficiently? How do these
nonlinear things, for example, I'm going to talk about oil in a minute, we see
that a hundred percent of high blood pressure medicine precursors are made in
China, eighty percent of the API ingredients are made in China. All those
nonlinear effects are going to have an impact on our system that we can't
quite predict. Plus the social response, right now we've got these stimulus checks
that are trickling in, but in my opinion in the next few weeks we're going to
have another 2008 tarp moment in Congress because the responses so far are
going to have been too small for a lot of people. I'm going to talk about that in a
second. This is a major story that people are not yet aware of because they're
focused on the price of oil, which is $15 or something like that, and the price
of gasoline is under a dollar, but our oil system has just had a catastrophic
impact. So right now I can unequivocally say that globally peak oil was in fact
October 2018. You can see it was already probably going to be October 2018 before
this virus hit, and the reason I'm confident of that is because of the
underlying decline rates of existing production relative to upstream capacity.
This chart was made two years ago or a year and a half ago by the International
Energy Agency, and it showed that in 2018 we were at around 90 million barrels
a day of production right here. With no new investment, which was a hypothetical,
if we didn't invest in upstream capacity, global oil production would be cut in half
by 2025 and down by 90% by 2040. Of course we will invest in upstream capacity,
which is why this was kind of a hypothetical thing, but right now we're shutting production in.
There is no new investment in upstream capacity or very little, because it cost around $50 or $60
for an oil company to be profitable on a barrel of oil, and oil because it's priced at the margin,
we produce 95 million barrels a day, but we only are using 60 or 70 million barrels a day,
so we are a wash in oil. Worse than that, we don't even know where to put it. We've got 50
million barrels of oil coming in on tankers from the Middle East. We have nowhere to put it.
All the oil storage is leased, and this is a real disaster for many reasons. First of all,
a barrel of oil, around half of it, goes to gasoline. Around between a quarter and 30%
goes to diesel fuel and heating oil, and the rest is this complex array of products,
including asphalt, and football helmets, and crayons, and condoms, and fishing poles,
and cosmetics, and plastics, and hard plastics that go into machines, and all this. If all of a
sudden we have an emergency need for diesel fuel, and by the way, diesel has gone down in demand
much smaller than gasoline, because we need diesel for heavy transport, and trucks, and things like
that. But we can't, in a refinery, refineries don't run at 50% or 60% capacity. They either run at 100%
or at 0%. And so the problem is, is if we need diesel, if we urgently need diesel,
we still have to get the same amount of barrels of oil out and refine them. So what do we do
with the gasoline? This is a really serious environmental question in the coming year,
because if we stay in an economic depression, and there's very little incremental demand for
gasoline, but we still need those other products, are we gonna burn it? Are we gonna dump it in the
ocean or the rivers? So this is a real issue. Okay, the other inconvenient truth, which began in 2008
and is now being formalized, is our financial system has effectively been nationalized. And by
this, I mean that the central banks globally, including our country, are both the lender and
the buyer of last resort. So effectively, the risk signals in the market are completely false and
dislocated, and people are gaming not what they think the investment will do, but what they think
the central banks will do. And in response to this crisis, the central bank correctly
brought out the bazookas to support the financial architecture. What they did was too big
for the time in March and April when it was needed and probably too small for what's going to be
needed in May and beyond. But what ended up happening is they supported the stocks and bonds,
but that money didn't go to real people and real companies only indirectly. So although our financial
system has been nationalized, only the costs have been nationalized, not the benefits. The benefits
are not making it to Main Street. So my advocation is, well, I'll get to that a little later.
So our debt to GDP, which globally was around 330 to 350% last December before this crisis,
is now going to skyrocket because our economies are going to drop by 10 to 15% or more. And in
order to jumpstart the heart attack of our economies, we're going to have to issue 20 or 30%
more debt. My estimate is the U.S. debt is around $23 trillion. I think it will be $30 trillion
after this. And other countries are doing the same thing. So our debt to GDP is going to skyrocket
up to 450% or something like that. It's not sustainable. It's not sustainable anything over
one to one. And now we're going to be approaching five to one. So my opinion is that that debt will
never be paid back because it has to be paid back in energy. But we're going to have to support it
in the near term. So this is going to mean that the next crisis, if we navigate this one, is going
to be much nearer and more acute. So not so metaphorically, central banks are acting like
leveraged hedge funds. And I can explain why that is in the Q&A. People aren't focused on that risk
right now, which is probably good. We're focused on the virus. But underpinning all this is what
is money? What is growth? What is our cultural objective? Renewable energy is in trouble because
of this crisis because the costs of energy are so low that we can't afford the capital to invest in
long duration energy assets. I've always thought that the market system wouldn't adequately get us
to a large share of renewables in our system because we only plan for this blue line of growth
to continue in the future. But all the biophysical analysis, and I wrote my PhD on an aspect of this,
shows that using some of our remaining flammable fossils in tandem with solar and wind and
geothermal and nuclear, et cetera, is doable. But it's going to be in this lower total scale than
our current system. And our market wants to do this, where a systemic analysis would be some
fraction of that. I don't know how big of a fraction. My guess is 30 to 50 percent or something like
that. This is going to be a major, major issue in the coming weeks and months is the coronavirus
hit to our economy has caused the haves, like most of the people watching this webinar,
to have less. But the have-nots are going to have nothing. And we've got these $1,200 stimulus checks
that are staggered. This is not going to be enough to forestall foreclosures and a lot of suffering,
including lack of money for basic needs, et cetera. I could talk a full hour on exactly this. I think
we're headed for wider and deeper poverty unless the federal government really steps up. But it's
not just our country. It's around the world. This is going to hurt a lot of other nations,
especially if they have shortages of U.S. dollars because they've issued debt in prior years,
denominated in dollars. And now they have to get dollars when they're more costly. This is a real
problem. Higher education has been in a mild crisis in recent years. And this kind of broke the
back of higher education, in my opinion. My guess is about a third, maybe a quarter of
of universities and schools will go under, especially the liberal arts smaller schools,
especially those that are going to be offering classes online for political science or Spanish or
things like that. People aren't going to pay $100,000 to go to four years to learn stuff that
you can learn online. I think the STEM degrees at the large elite research schools will still be very
sought after. But this is going to be a bifurcation in our education system.
And I think a lot of schools are going to go belly up because of this.
The other major inconvenient truth is the experts don't have the answers.
Politicians, think tanks, TV personalities, we have a lot of reductionist expertise in our system
where our system the last 40 years has rewarded experts. But we have to fly up high enough and
see that we're part of a system to understand how things fit together. And our culture is not
only energy blind, but systems blind. So we get a lot of people just looking at one aspect of
this story, but to understand what's going on, we have to look at everything. Okay, so given that
backdrop, and I should say that when I say this is going to happen or 30%, I view the world as a
probability distribution. So what I'm telling you is what's in the middle of my distribution.
There's so many unknowns right now that I don't know what's going to happen. So what I'm telling
you is my prediction of the midpoint of my distribution. Having said that, here's some maybe
word changes, or there's so much power in language. How do we think about what's happening?
Well, first of all, we've for a long time called coal oil and natural gas fossil fuels,
as if they were laying there for humans to find and burn them. They are flammable fossils,
hydrocarbons, carbons. Oil production, we're not producing oil, we're extracting oil.
Consumer, the US consumer is spent, it's down 20%. We're not consumers, we're humans,
we're people, we're Americans. Goods and services, this is the goal of our economy is to have goods
and services. Maybe goods like being good to others and services we provide others and people in
the future and other species. These terms define who we are. Socialism is a word in our country
akin to devil worship. It really, even though we live in a socialist country, the markets are
supported, we have national parks, we have social security, we have all these things, we're not
as socialist as Canada or Sweden, but we are effectively a socialist country and many of the
things that we socialize, we're socializing the benefit of the cost and privatizing the benefits.
Socialism in the future is going to have to be re-labeled as holding our freaking nation together,
because if we don't support people, we are not going to have a nation that be able to have the
rich spend money on anything. Another common phrase that I think needs to be rebranded is once
people learn about kind of the dire connecting dots, some of which I'm connecting in this talk,
oh, we're going to collapse. Well, collapse is a spectrum and I think we have to talk about decline,
bend, simplify. We need to avoid breaking, but a bend of some magnitude is pretty much
faked in the cake and it's happening now before our eyes. Maybe we change the definition of rich,
we think of financial capital rich, maybe we need to think about wealthy in terms of social,
human-built natural capital. Maybe the definition of jobs given that 500 billion of 505 billion of
our workers are flammable fossils, we could change the definition of jobs to something more akin to
work or purpose. Maybe we could change the definition of the shortage of resources
into a long edge of expectations. So the average American, the average human,
I'm going to change the color on this, no I'm not, the average human generates the same amount of
energy as a 100 watt light bulb and the average American uses about 100 of these. We use 100
times more than our bodies use. So if you look at the bottom right graph here, those first few
light bulbs we get could charge a computer or charge a cell phone and our current cultural
goal is to have more, more than 100 per capita. So really our situation seems dire, but if you
catalog everything, we still have a significantly greater amount of energy and resources than we
really need. Here's another narrative that's been very common and I teach a university class and
I've heard this, humans are bad. There's a new movie out called by Michael Moore called Planet of
the Humans which is pretty negative about humans, negative about renewable energy. I'm sure some
of you have seen the movie which was meant to be a comedy and the director now calls it a
documentary called Idiocracy. I don't buy all this. I think humans are largely the same goodness
and badness as we've always been. It's just we're part of this emergent situation where we're
effectively acting like a super organism. Yes, there are some bad actors as they always are
and I think Mitch McConnell is probably not the greatest human being in the world,
but we are part of this system where it's the fault of the system, not the individual,
which leads me to this next point which is inherently as a tribal social species, we easily
and seamlessly and passionately blame others outside of our tribe. It's the lazy poor, it's
the greedy rich, it's the environmentalists, the Chinese, the people in the Middle East,
the liberals, the conservatives, but what we're facing right now is no one's fault and yet we're
all complicit. My final reframing is neoclassical economics was developed during this tiny period
of unbroken economic growth where correlation equals causation and they created all these
fancy formulas and I think 2008 was the first blow to that and now what we're seeing
is I think we can seamlessly start to refer to neoclassical economics as paleoclassical economics
because in the near future even now the etchings of neoclassical economics are going to look like
cave paintings, a primitive description of the world which are no longer relevant,
paleoclassical economics. It was my one joke, but not really a joke of this whole talk.
Okay, so what do we do? Pathways and possibilities. First of all, we have to stabilize the patient.
Stabilizing the patient is vital and frankly this is what I'm spending
all of my professional life on right now, the next few weeks.
We have to stabilize the financial system and we have to protect citizens with basic needs.
So the next few months we're going to have to have massive government support of businesses
and individuals. The left doesn't want to bail out companies and the right doesn't want to bail
out individuals. We're going to have to bail everything out and it's going to have to be
much larger than is currently being talked about in Washington. And yes, it discussed me that
Goldman Sachs front runs mortgages the day before the Fed starts to buy mortgages and that they're
going to be people that game the system, but we have no other entity as large enough to
restart the heartbeat of the economy other than the federal government.
And like I said earlier, we overdid the financial response given, I mean the Fed was very, very
worried, correctly very, very worried. So they put in too much stimulus and at the same time we lost
16 million jobs that Dow Jones had its best week in 80 years. So in my opinion, I did not predict
this pandemic, but I did and have been thinking about and talking to government about
the systemic risks embedded in our system, the massive inequality, the inability to have organic
growth and productivity, the relationship between credit and energy costs, the shale bubble in the
United States, etc. So the story once we do reopen the economies is we're going to be gaslighted that
we're through look at gasoline is 92 cents a gallon go out and enjoy your life, etc. I think
the story is more likely going to be one of mild recovery. I would guess right now there's a 50%
chance that we will ever pierce the 2019 economic high point, which means there's a 50% chance that
we won't. And how we respond to that is going to influence many, many decades to come.
So one thing we have to do, if not now, in the coming years is we have to shift our cultural
goal away from GDP to something more tethered to well-being. And globally, not so much in the
United States or the UK or service-centered economies, but globally, for every 100 units
that we grow the size of the economy, we require another 99 point something units of energy.
So effectively, the goal of human society, modern economy is how much things we burn. We burned
some fuel to get every single product. Now, a lot of that burning doesn't result in happiness or
well-being. And so I think we need, there's a lot of alternative metrics been researched,
genuine progress indicator, gross national happiness. I think all of them have problems.
I think what we need to do is have research for actually interviewing people and doing research
on people on health, safety, governance, education, access to information, employment,
their true life situations and get a real nonpartisan. This will work for the left and the
right metric of how their lives are doing. That's going to be correlated with energy if you don't
have much. But if you have quite a bit, it will be not much correlated with energy. And whether
it's this crisis or the next one, we will not be able to have GDP as a global cultural goal,
because we won't have the resources to do it. Nineteenths in the Netherlands made a distinction
between business and industry. Industry was making shoes and food and the things that we need in our
life. And business was this, what we now call the fire sector of the economy, finance, insurance,
real estate, which is just making money out of money. So I think in the future, we're going to
have to gear down much more towards industry and much less towards finance and business.
Biophysical alchemy, a term that I coined this morning at 5.15, which is to turn our financial
marker assets, magically transform them into real capital, urgently. This is what we should be doing
as people, as communities, as a nation, into things that will last over time, into things that will
be needed for a more rural, more local, more regional economy. This is a parodore in Spain
where I stayed a couple years ago. It was built in the 1400s. So 600 years later,
people are using this beautiful facility. So we need to use our seed corn wisely,
more than just consumption. Before this crisis, 71% of GDP in the United States was
immediate consumption. And if you add in the private construction,
it probably was over 80%. So what do we invest into the future?
If you watch the movie Contact with Jodi Foster, one of my favorite movies, some fundamentalist
terrorists destroyed the machine that was going to bring Jodi Foster to outer space. And thankfully,
no one knew, but they were building a second one in Hokkaido, Japan. And I think this is not
directed at Mayor Norton at all, but I know all politicians are stuck in this vortex where you
can only say what is culturally acceptable to say. And I think we need to have shadow councils
in communities across the country that at least think about the things that are hard to say.
Like, we don't want to use the land around our city to build another airport for growth that
might never happen. We want to protect that land because we might have to grow food in on the future.
All kinds of things that might not be politically acceptable, we have to have people talking about
them using science. So I'm thinking maybe a shadow council of former officials, people that have
systems ecology, people that are pro-social in each community, meet every other Saturday and talk
about what are we going to do in our town? We need Americans. We need humans to somehow have
better bullshit filters because there's so much bullshit going on right now in our world that
we lack the scientific filters to know what's real and what's not. If we don't use science going
forward in this crisis and beyond, we have no hope. And science isn't perfect, of course,
but it's much better than bullshit. So whether it be an education starting younger with ecology
and other things, this is a real dichotomy in our current culture. Okay, so some shocking
suggestions maybe. I think we need to nationalize the oil industry. And that may sound shocking
because free market, everything, first of all, almost 80% of the world's oil production right
now is not owned by public companies. It's owned by national oil companies. And around 90% of the
reserves are owned by national oil companies, Russia, China, Saudi Arabia, Iran, etc. Our
oil industry is in disarray right now. And there's all kinds of companies competing with each other
and daughter wells and having borrowing some production from another production and almost
all of them are completely bleeding money. And we're shutting in production. Once we shut in
production, the wells kind of seal up and there's the pressure changes and there's rust and other
things. And it's very costly to reopen these wells. And when we do, the structure and the
ability for us to pull the oil out has declined. So in the last two years in my public talks,
I've shown a chart like this that shows US oil production has declined in all regions except
for the source rock, which is the shale oil, the light tight oil. And I've suggested that what we're
doing, contrary to drill baby drill, what we're doing is draining America first of the most
important asset other than water, of course, but the most important natural resource,
what we've been draining America first by doing this. So today I'll offer this idea. Maybe we
should drain America last. We need to go from jobs to work, more emphasis on trades, skills,
ecological restoration and communities, etc. In these times, we're going to need a lot of
psychological coping, community meditation, community wellness. There's going to be a lot
of people that don't, and with the resources to really engage with these larger stories,
they're going to need help. And we're going to need to help them. I think every person that has
some money in the bank. Well, here, I'll say that on the next slide. I was fortunate in my life to
travel a lot overseas. I'll never forget an Ecuador in Zambia in Namibia. These kids are from Zambia.
Half of the people in their town had HIV AIDS, and yet look at the smiles because they knew what
their reality was. They had intense community. If you look at the areas in the world that have
the highest levels of depression, it's inner cities and big cities in North America. The areas in the
world that have the lowest level of depression are very poor places in Africa. It's because
the biggest aspect to their wealth was their community. And so I really think now this coronavirus
is a chance for us to start to build authentic community in the United States. If you are someone
with some amount of financial marker wealth, some amount of psychological and physical health,
you need to start giving back to your community. Have conversations with people, organize things
that people can have food or training, and stop looking at the stock market in New York,
start working in Rochester or Red Wing or wherever you are, because we really need to have pilots
and models of people living differently, talking to each other instead of just coming home from work,
putting on a steak on the barbecue and watching Netflix and not talking to your neighbors.
You know, broadly also, I think, you know, we're moving from an isolated situation to the world is
going to really have problems now in coming years. And we may be faced with a choice of using our
resources and wealth to continue partying and regaining the lifestyle we had the last 20 years
or helping humanity to avoid starvation and other problems overseas. So kind of we've left the
dopamine trajectory and we're moving into the oxytocin, serotonin, cortisol, which is a stress
hormone. Dopamine has been a precursor to addiction in our country in many ways is addicted to comfort
stimulation and the status quo. If we cancel the NFL season in the fall, I don't know what's going
to psychologically happen to this country, because we're going to need to get that that dopamine and
routine filled some other way. We need to have a new systems economics, which is informed by human
behavior by biophysical by environment by ecology with stuff about the brain, we need to look at
the larger picture of humans, our society and the biosphere. One one example, which I've had in the
last couple years, anticipating an eventual credit crisis is once natural resources are very low in
price, not in cost, but in price, to instigate a large tax on non renewable resources.
Simultaneously, because a lot of people would be poor or out of jobs, is we remove a tax on human
labor. And this would if we equated the tax on coal and phosphorus and copper to the renewable
equivalent, then we make better decisions about allocating our scarce resources. And we also people
don't have to pay as much income tax. I don't think this was possible before I was trying to build
constituency of that before some sort of a credit inability of us to issue credit. I think it's
probably still would be perceived as too crazy, because most people with this coronavirus, they
see the economy in a depression, but they have no idea that there are energy or climate issues
in the background, because the signals we're getting is that energy is like, totally too cheap to meter.
But it's it is in terms of its price, but not in terms of its costs and not where it's going to be
five, 10 years from now. So this is a very sensible strategy. I don't know how likely it is.
We need to localize and regionalize key supply chains. We can't have this Root Goldberg machine
of this global commerce, where very critical micro components are made in Korea, or Bangladesh,
or Johannesburg, for Minnesota. And I think for luxury items, that's okay. But for shoes and food
and things like that, we should use this opportunity to start to think about localizing and regionalizing
supply chains. Everyone is talking about this for medical APIs already. So some other things,
we should probably be working on this. What's that going to mean? It's going to mean things cost a
lot more, because the cost of labor in China is a fraction of what it is here. So if we do things
more resiliently, if we do things more sustainably, they're going to be more costly. And so that means
we're going to have to consume less. But what we consume might be healthier for us. And it's going
to be longer lasting because we've tightened up the supply chain. We need perhaps a new American way.
And that's everything is the left and the right, the elephant and donkey here. I put forth a few
suggestions just to consider. I don't know what it looks like, but we need some third way.
Maybe just all Americans, or maybe we need wisdom. Or if I was in political office, it might have
something to do with a golden retriever or a dog, but we need something with kindness and wisdom and
something different than the vitriol and systems blindness that we have today.
We need local superheroes, people that say, I see what's going on. I get it. I'm not alive at a
normal time. I want to make a difference in my community and have checklists of things that people
can do in Rochester and Red Wing all around the country. As humans, what do we do about these
challenges? I have a list of about 50 recommendations. I think I have passed them down to 15 or 18 here.
The first bottom is we need to cope. A lot of people are really struggling right now. It's easy
for me to work from home and do these Zoom webinars and consult and things. But a lot of people in my
community don't know where their food's going to come from this week. So we need some coping.
And I think we can surf the waves of what's coming or we can tread water or we can really
flail. And so here are a few suggestions on maybe surfing or at least treading water.
First of all, it's okay to grieve and reflect about the state of the natural world, the state of our
economy. If you suppress this and never address it, it ends up eating away at you inside. And so
it's okay to cry once in a while. It's okay to feel sad about this. In fact, if you didn't,
I would be worried about you. That is the appropriate response at what's happening.
But I think we have to have the skill in psychology. It's called compartmentalization,
where you feel sad about the economy or about dolphins or about your cousin or about someone
who got sick or died from coronavirus. But you can't let it dominate your entire day. Otherwise,
you would just never leave your house. So we have to have the ability to compartmentalize
certain aspects of the world. You grieve for a half hour and then later in the day, you go and
for a bike ride and then in the afternoon, you're productive at your job. And at night, you have
a conversation with civic leaders about how to make Rochester more sustainable.
We have to navigate the pathway between fantasy and doom. And both of those
poles pull at our brain because they resolve dissonance. We have to become more comfortable
carrying dissonance, carrying uncertainty with us. Because doom and fantasy are probably not
going to happen. We have to navigate this increasingly narrow pathway between them.
We have conditional goals and unconditional goals. And I would recommend you all to pursue some
unconditional goals. There's a lot of things in our future that depend on what government
response are or what central bank response are or what policies might be issued. But there's
a lot of things you can do yourself. For instance, I just got notification that my FedEx of potatoes
is arriving tomorrow that I got from Moose Tubers in New Hampshire, Urmaine. I took it upon myself,
I'm going to grow a lot of potatoes this year. That was an unconditional goal that I can do no
matter what the president does or no matter what happens with coronavirus. Doing these
unconditional goals in addition to growing potatoes, it actually reduces your stress hormones,
reduces your cortisol, because you've taken a little bit of control of your own situation.
Simplify and beat the rush. We are so pal-malful of activities and things and stress,
but the great simplification is upon us as a nation, as a culture, as a species. You can get
ahead of it a little bit as an individual. Simplify first and beat the rush. This is Shinrokyu,
three hattakana kanji characters in Japanese that means forest bathing. And I exhort all of you to
get out in nature as much as you can with the sunlight, with the trees in a situation that
our successful ancestors evolved in. For me, it's cathartic. For me, it's essential. I have to get
out in nature every day. Thriving. We need to use restraint and the agenda of the gene is very
strong. The default pulls us into this vortex of consumption and comparison and stimulation.
So we need to sharpen the sword gradually and try to suppress some of our genetic impulses
so that we're a stronger psychologically and physically more resilient human being.
The stuff that we have in our culture pulls very strongly at us, pulls very strongly at
our emotions. So we need to use our cognitive brain and build speed bumps in our own behaviors
ahead of time. I am addicted to my phone because of my job as a teacher, as a speaker and everything.
I get several hundred emails a day and the world now, there's stuff happening all the time. So I
created a little dopamine sarcophagus for my phone. It's a little ginseng container that every night
strike that every other night in reality, I put my phone to sleep before I go to bed.
I spend a night thinking about these things. I can't stop from thinking about them, but I don't
have the phone two feet away from me checking what's going on in the world. So I've used my
cognitive abilities to build my own speed bump in my own behaviors.
Again, like I said before, we have to embrace intermittent. So periodic breaks away from
technology, periodic breaks away from energy use. By the time we get our 20th or 30th light bulb,
most of us are probably not getting huge incremental benefits. And this is ultimately
very good news for the future, because it means we can reduce consumption as individuals and as
a society without really reducing happiness and well-being. Consider absolute wealth instead
of relative wealth. One of our neural carryovers from tribal times is we grew up with intense
equality in terms of consumption, but we were still very geared towards social status. The status
was by respect or popularity or hunting prowess or telling stories or all sorts of things like that.
So we naturally, in a material abundant culture, compare ourselves to everyone. And the average
American today is richer than kings or queens of old in terms of actual energy, goods and services.
But what we end up doing is compare ourselves to people who are richer than us. And I think it's a
really good idea to actually trick your brain into being happy for those people and being happy
with your own abundance. It takes some practice. I've been able to do this, but it's taken me a
decade, where if I meet some millionaire, I'm happy for him or her. I don't have a lot of money,
but I am rich in the ways that matter to me with friends and knowledge and animals. So I think to
flip your brain from comparison to abundance in your own situation is helpful. So 20 years ago,
when I worked on Wall Street, I was worried about risking my client's money, and I hired a neuro
linguistic programmer. And he said, when you're afraid of something, people move away from it and
actually move into your fear a little bit. So he trained me to pet spiders, which I was
really afraid of. And after three weeks, I could pet and touch a marbled orb weaver spider. So if
you're really afraid of something in the future, and I'm not talking about like, going your car
120 miles an hour or anything dangerous, but if you're afraid of something, lean into it a little
bit, you might be surprised what you find. Engaging with the future. I'm fond of the Lord of the
Rings, and I'll use a few quotes here. I wish it need not have happened in my time, said Frodo.
So do I, said Gandalf, and so do all who live to see such times, but that is not for them to
decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given to us. So knowledge of who
you are gives you at least some power over your daily lives. This century, this decade will consist
of challenges and massive changes. And I think the existing social structures, infrastructures,
conventions and rules are going to change probably pretty fast. Any of our plans and
goals which endure through these changes are going to require the type of resilience which flows
from who you are, your own ethics, your own dedication to the things you've decided to treat
as important or even sacred. What our organizations and institutions do will follow from who its
people are, not the other way around. This will be the decade which tests the human potential
for destruction against the human potential for greatness. And human potential comes from
intrinsic motivation, not from extrinsic validation. This is my colleague, one of my best friends,
one of the most successful environmental activists of our time, DJ White of the Organization Earth
Trust. I'm going to share another picture with him a little later. But when he was in his early 20s,
he lived in Indianapolis and he studied geology, but his passion was dolphins. And he knew there
were no dolphins in Indiana. So he bought a one-way ticket to Hawaii with no job and no plan. He
ended up teaching high school. He ended up cleaning out the poop from the cages, the tanks where the
dolphins were. And every year or two, he accelerated until ultimately he was one of the most successful
dolphin conservationists of our time. So find and think about something you really care about in
your life and take baby steps in that direction, even if you have no plan. In the context of the
superorganism, if you consume a little bit less meat or fly a little bit less or drive a hybrid car,
you're basically just being a little bit less of one-eight billionth of the problem. So I recommend
that you attempt to maximize your impact on the planet and on our culture and our future,
not minimize it. And this means that you have to be effective at larger scales.
We need more warriors and mystics to speak out and get involved during this time using a wide
variety of techniques and objectives. There are tens of thousands of endangered species in the
world. Most do not even have a single human advocate looking out for them. Maybe the baby
step you take is to choose one of the lesser known endangered species and think about what you as the
sole human protector trying to help it survive might do. Do something for the benefit of someone
else that nobody else, including that person, will ever know. Examine closely the complex
feelings that causes to arise within you as a first step of sorting social motivation from
personal altruism. Here's my family, my brother Todd, my parents, my nephew. This is my close,
close family. In fact, with this coronavirus every Saturday night, we have a Zoom webinar where we
make cocktails and visit for an hour. And for the last four weeks, every single week, it's
not only the hardest I've laughed during the week on these calls, it's probably the only time I
laughed. This is my extended family. I don't have children. These are my cultural children. These
are 19 of my students at the University of Minnesota. I don't need the world to have another giant
Sasquatch DNA, but I'm passing on my cultural ideas to these other human beings. This is my dog,
Murphy, who's very affectionate. My best friend when I'm working around the house.
This is Frank. Frank is, every day gives me, no matter what crappy is going on in the world,
companies like, dad, it's a new day, let's do something. And he just invariably gives me these
neurotransmitters that it's no wonder that these dogs evolved from wolves co-evolved with humans.
Bratching out from my direct family, they're creatures I share this place with, creatures
that navigated the same evolutionary bottlenecks as we did to arrive here today, Earth 2020.
This is not a badger on my land, but the badger, that badger, or he or she. My life is enriched
knowing that we share the land with her. If you're like my stepdaughter, you really don't like bugs,
but we've lost 25% of the world's insects since she was born. And right now the best
estimate is we're losing insect biomass at around 2.5% a year. It's unclear that humans
could ever exist without the ecosystem services of insects since we've never had to. Insects provide
pollination, pest control, nutrient cycling, decomposition, and food for other species.
The insects of Earth are trillions of tiny robots doing jobs in our ecosystem for which
there are no replacements. These are zebras, obviously. We know the stripes now. Scientists
tell us that they're an evolutionary adaptation to tzitzi flies, so that the tzitzi flies get
confused. Why am I showing you a picture of a zebra? When I was 21, I went on a safari with
my dad, and it was a hunting safari, but I was just taking pictures. But after two weeks there,
with the 12 other macho dudes that were hunting, they persuaded me to shoot a zebra because someone
needed it for a rug. So I did that because I could, and because of the peer pressure at the time.
I've cried about that a couple times in my life. I've always felt remorse, and it strikes me as
a microcosm of our larger situation, is that we do things because we can, and because peers say
they're okay, but a lot of times we're doing them just for short-term stupid reasons and dopamine.
I think it's a microcosm that we are all of us arriving at this cultural moment where things
could go a million different ways in the future. Who we are, our hearts and our heads together,
we could live differently. And this experience has stayed with me because these two are part of
my extended family. Of the self-aware species on the planet, we are only one. And the thing which
distinguishes us is thumbs, fire, and exosomatic information storage so one person can build
on the work of others. Without those things, which whales and other species could obviously never
have, we would still be hunter-gatherers in Tanzania. There are huge mines in the ocean,
which we can sign inferiority to with brain to body weight ratios and because they can't build
cars or skyscrapers, but cetaceans are people, full stop, by any rational metric one could propose.
We don't value this or include it in our discussions or cultural plans. This is DJ White
of Earth Trust, who I mentioned earlier. He developed labs to test self-awareness in dolphins
and in doing so, he was transformed as an individual. Shown here as a dolphin, he became close friends
with and who had, according to DJ, human-like ability to play, calculate, joke, choose, and
prefer music, turn the tables, be a friend, even though having no common ancestor with humans for
over 60 million years. DJ tells me that she was wicked, smart, playful, mischievous, and clearly
possessing of an advanced theory of mind. After rough housing with him in the water, she would hug
DJ with her pectoral fins, keeping his nose and her blowhole above water and sing to him,
sing complex songs that made DJ peaceful and fall asleep while she held him in the water.
His great sadness is that more people will not only never feel this kinship with another
self-aware species, but that so many of our species' humans are totally unaware that such
creatures exist and that our culture is indirectly destroying their home. We are hell-bent on mining
asteroids and terraforming Mars when we don't yet understand, let alone appreciate, the treasures we
have here on Earth. Could we culturally develop an expanded definition of family, first and foremost
other humans of different belief systems, mildly different looks and customs, but beyond that to
the lives and dignity of other generations and other species of conscious life. 50 is enough
Earth days, I think. We now need transition to something else which isn't such a burned meme.
The idea was good and it was helpful. Think about the Earth which created and nurtures us one day a
year. It turned out that that wasn't enough, so let's let this be the last one. 50 total sounds
better than 60 total and by the hundred Earth days it's just going to be sad or redundant.
They all seem a bit inadequate because the Earth is our every second, our every minute 24-7 from
the dawn of life to its last gasp. There is no Star Trek future of expanding to other planets
and the stars. There simply isn't an excess net energy to allow us to do so. Our story is now and
always been an Earth Trek and it's a trek in progress at a major fork in the road and Earth
day isn't about the Earth as a planet. It's about the living systems of Earth which have almost
accidentally arrived at this splendid profusion of complex life and webs that we all watching
this webinar were born into. Earth will continue even after the sun melts it, but is it really Earth
with no conscious minds existing to conceive of it? Do Earth days just peer out with a whimper
or go out with transitioning to a new set of goals? These are the questions that the coronavirus
heart attack or economy have opened up. Happy life day. May we have many more. We're not alive at
normal times. Now is the time for humans to morph into something other than what we have been
and steer for better collective pathways, for our families, for our descendants, and for all of Earth's
creatures. For some part of your life, I hope you do something in service to the future. Thank you.
