Alice is an acronym for Asset Limited, Income Constrained,
Employed. It's households that earn above the federal poverty
level, but below what we call the Household Survival Budget,
which is the bare minimum housing, childcare, food,
transportation, healthcare, smartphone plan, and Alice pays
taxes. And we are finding that instead of 12.8% of households
below the federal poverty level struggling to get by that
there's another 28.6%. So in total, we have 41% of households
in this country that are struggling paycheck to
paycheck, working often, sometimes two jobs and not
able to support their families. So the magnitude of what we're
talking about here today is not 12 or 13% of households, it's
41% of households. And I think that is a fundamental shift in
the way we understand what's happening in terms of equality
and in terms of policy, that we're having to address this in a
much bigger way.
What we found over the last over years is individuals who are
working sometimes two jobs, in a few occasions, three jobs, but
are unable to make ends meet. So it's not that people aren't
working. It's not that people are sitting on waiting for public
assistance or support. It's literally that they're working
and they're not making a living wage. We see people in
circumstances like making monthly decisions about whether or
not I'm going to pay my light bill, or I'm going to put gas in
my car so I can go to work. We see people in situations making
decisions about whether or not they're going to buy groceries
that month. The vast majority of the circumstances that we see
as individuals who even if they are making their dollar stretch
to meet their normal budgets, that one of the issues that
they'll run into, for example, is if they have a crisis of any
nature, their car breaks down, they have a flat tire, they have
a bill that's out of the ordinary. They're making those
decisions about, oh my gosh, I have to get my car fixed, because
that's the way that I get to and from work and get my children
to and from school. But if I get my car fixed, it's going to
make me $300 short for my electric bill. It's going to make
me $250 short for my insurance payment. It's going to make me
short for my rental payment. So you're talking about families
on a regular basis making decisions, on a monthly basis
making decisions about how their money is managed. The simple
fact is that there's not enough of the resource. They're not
being paid enough to earn a living wage to support their
families. One of the things we're looking at, especially here
in Illinois, we've realized that the reason why we have this
program and the reason why people come to our doors is
because they cannot afford their utilities. It's not because
they, like you said, not because they're lazy or they don't
want to pay their utilities. They simply cannot afford it. And
I don't know about Wisconsin or I don't know where Stephanie is,
but here in Illinois, our utilities have gone up
significantly. I mean, my household, we were used to paying
a monthly bill of maybe $100 a month to skyrocketing to $600
a month. So think about a household that is on limited
income. We've looked at households that are anywhere
from zero to 50% of poverty. And unfortunately, we have to use
that measurement because that's all we have to work with right
now. But for those households that are zero to 50% of poverty,
even after we've provided LIHEAP assistance, they're still
paying 30 to 40% of their income towards the utilities. So
there's no way for these households to really make it. And
in most cases, if you can't afford your utilities, that is
also connected to you perhaps being evicted, especially if
you're renting your apartment or house, you may end up being
evicted because, you know, you don't have any utilities. The
story of Katrina is basically that the more affluent folks that
had money and the means and a car got the hell out of there.
They saw the thing coming, you still see the images on the
freeways and they fled. And these are mostly white people in
New Orleans. And the people that did not have those things, and
again, mostly black in that city at that time, were left to
fend for themselves. 1400 died in that it was a horrific
experience. But we see so often on these kinds of, I call them
unnatural disasters these days, because they are happening at
such an unprecedented rate. But the neighborhoods were low
income people tend to reside. We're also in the flood plains,
they run lower ground, they had greater risk. And then when the
recovery came along, and this story again is so robust, turns
out that most of that help on a per person basis went to the
folks who were in the wealthier neighborhoods that actually had
less damage. The Southern Poverty Law Center just came out
with a big report on that. And it really is quite a tale and
it's corruption and it's, you know, people flipping contracts
and making a profit, they're supposed to be rebuilding houses
they ended up at the end of the day with blue tarps thrown over
the roof. And the houses were never able to be rebuilt or
recovered. And then a lot of people just had to leave. And
15 years after Katrina, the census in New Orleans was 100,000
people less than it was pre Katrina. It just lost it
forever and then disappeared. I think that really is a huge
issue when you're talking about poverty is it's also not a
level playing field in terms of what happens when these natural
disasters occur.
