Greetings! Last week I did a frankly talking about franklies. Really the
purpose of listening those things was kind of a social contract to remind me
to do those in the future and give a glimpse into what's going on in my
mind. Of course today is Tuesday October 31st. Happy Halloween! I'm going as a
podcast host. Today I'd like to talk about taxes and more specifically ten
ways that taxes and higher handicaps from the gross giving us a smaller net
are coming in the near-term future. So when we think about government taxes
let's just for ease of math say we make $100,000 a year and we get to keep
75,000. We have to pay the government 25%. So there's a difference between the
gross and the net. Everyone understands this. I'm going to talk today about the
United States and the coming taxes that I can see in different categories but
this generally applies to other countries as well. By the way I don't know
what to make of this but 38% of the watchers of this podcast are from the
United States and we're between almost 80,000 people have signed up on the
various podcast platforms and YouTube so it's growing which is good.
So government taxes are probably going to increase. Why? Because we have spent
and lived beyond our means for over a generation and instead of tightening our
belt and living within our means we're adding more and more debt. We had one
trillion in debt the last three months and the next three months we're going to
add 1.5 trillion in debt. Eventually we're either going to have to tighten our
belts as a nation or the government is going to have to reduce social programs
unlikely or they're going to have to increase taxes. So in the future the
government which is the manager of our countries roads and parks and social
services and everything else will probably require more from us. That's
really when most people stop the boundaries of analysis on taxes but I'm
going to offer nine other categories of taxes. The second is interest rates.
Since the 1960s interest rates have with the exception of some years in the
1980s have generally been declining and debt credit is easily available at low
rates. This era is over as governments around the world borrow more to keep the
financial fingers in the dike as it were. Interest rates will have to go up not
necessarily due to inflation but due to people requiring a risk premia to buy
this debt that is being monetized by more of the same. So this has also a tax
implication on citizens. For instance today October 31st 2023 if you buy a new
car in the United States the interest rate on that is 10%. If you buy a used
car the interest rate on that is 14%. This is much much higher than it has
been and this effectively acts as a tax. Another tax coming in the future is a
tax coming from higher energy. We've used the best and the cheapest and now
we're in the source rock shale oil and there's a lot of it but it depletes very
rapidly and it costs more. A lot of the world oil comes from countries that are
not so friendly increasingly less friendly to the West. This is all going to
mean higher energy prices which given the ripple effect given that energy is
part of everything in our economies and the transportation and the repair and
the maintenance and the discovery and the inventions and the combining and the
extraction it all requires energy. Higher energy costs will act as a tax to
society. Imagine that you had a motor scooter that had a one gallon tank and
you could get a hundred miles per hour in that tank of gas and the gas station
was two and a half miles from your house. So you would go two and a half miles
fill it up come back to your house two and a half miles and you basically have
95 miles to do whatever you want it with run errands do your job go on
vacation. Well what's happening is energy depletes is that gas station is
moving further and further away from you. The five percent that I mentioned two
and a half miles each way is five out of a hundred. That was the lowest that
human society ever had as energy as a cost of getting energy for society and
that hit its low point in 1999 and now we're at 10 percent which means that the
gas station is five miles away and we're headed towards 15 percent and maybe
even 20 percent in my lifetime meaning that society will have to spend 15 to
20 percent of our energy on getting the energy which means that this gas station
will move from two and a half miles away to seven and a half or even 10 miles
away. This all will act as a tax on the rest of society. Another tax related to
all this is the move from globalization back to relocalization. For the last 50
years we've outsourced our production of goods and services around the world to
the least cost area. There's a theory in economics called comparative advantage
where if a country is good at making computers and also producing bananas
that the whole world is better off if nations specialize and make only bananas
or only computers but this is predicated on frictionless transaction costs and
transportation costs and as we're becoming aware transportation namely oil
diesel fuel aviation fuel is not something that is frictionless and as
transportation costs go up and become less dependable maybe more sporadic for
geopolitical reasons or other this bananas and computer benefit that the
whole world has received is going to decline so there will be a reshoring
near shoring which is very important to do by the way but it will be more
costly if the United States had to make our t-shirts and our electronics and
things like that that we're currently importing we could do it we have the tech
to do it but it's going to cost a lot more and that will be a tax on us the
people that buy and use that stuff related to that is a tax from decreasing
complexity the great simplification will will necessitate a tax because we
have become so efficient and so razor thin just in time global supply chain
for inputs that any disruption to pharmaceutical ingredients or spark
plugs made in South Korea anything like that that all of a sudden like I've had
my dryer has been broken since January they keep waiting for parts and the
specific part that is needed it can only be made in China and there's a
backlog so there are lots of people that are in line to get things cleaned or
repaired and we can't quite get the equipment because of the snafus which I
think are only going to get worse in the future this is what you might call a
complexity tax another tax is I'll refer to as a tax of the machines so humans
10,000 years ago boosted our productivity by scaling our agriculture reducing our
free time but increasing the scale of stuff this boosted again a couple hundred
years ago with the industrial revolution where we had machines do the work for
people and and draft animals but humans the world over got the benefit of this
energy surplus combined with machines we got to buy refrigerators and air
conditioners and automobiles and so the benefits of cheap energy combined with
machines did go to CEOs and billionaires but it also was shared widely in society
the move to artificial intelligence will change that there's probably a thousand
AIs out there owned by billionaires and nation states and corporations you can
see it that the 5,000 Russell stocks for the year 4,993 are down for the year
or the top seven are all the AI companies and video and Facebook and others those are
up substantially so what's happening with AI is the wealth that comes from AI in our
lives is going to be uber concentrated and not going to be shared in the same way that
the industrial revolution shared wealth and power and influence not to mention the
fact that a lot of people will be out of jobs because the machines will replace a
lot of white and blue collar jobs so there will be a tax from technology for
the average person in the future another tax coming our way is from global
heating you can see inexorably every year there's more examples most recently in
Greece and Pakistan a few years ago in Australia and British Columbia these
events that are higher standard deviation higher wet bulb higher impact from global
weather events not only because we've expanded our population to the coast but
because of the amount of moisture that a hotter world holds in the atmosphere and
other impacts we're going to increasingly have to spend our own money and our
government's money on mitigating what's happening from the changing climate this
will act as a very real tax on our lives health is another tax in the United
States 40% of our population is obese Americans have a large population of
mental health citizens that have problems in the United States we have 50% of the
world's medical prescriptions and only 4% of the world's population so we were
either sicker or we're more baby like wimpy or our doctors write more
prescriptions or some combination of the three of all the developed nations in the
world the United States life expectancy is declining you could argue this is
from COVID long COVID or vaccines or any number of things but the fact is that
almost 20% of our GDP is in health care and we're not going to have access to
what we had in the last 20 years and what we do have access to will not be
evenly distributed so there will be a very real health tax on the average
person and a lot of people spend a good portion of their taxable income on
health care even with deductibles this is a growing tax next to last of the
taxes I can imagine for the future is a tax on our time this isn't a
biophysical expense per se but the ghost of dopamine past and how we've
become addicted to technology and how we have more free time because we're a
wealthier nation but we use that for free time playing Candy Crush or
scrolling Facebook this shortens our attention span and it it makes it more
difficult for us to read a book or plant a garden or do a long-form thing
because our attention span has been in the shallows especially for young
people who have massive health problems from so much social media use this is
going to be a really tax or a real tax on our productivity and our time going
forward because of our brains are attenuated to very short reward cycles
this is not what the future needs it's a very real tax on our lives last but not
least is is a tax on our sanity of course I feel this this is my job to
integrate energy ecology debt geopolitics war human behavior climate change
endocrine disruptors species loss of the sixth mass extinction the social
contract fraying it's almost too much to pay attention to and stay on top of and
so all what's happening in the world all the categories I've just listed
effectively act as a tax on our sanity most of the people watching this program
can remember the 80s or the 90s which were the sweet spot for maybe for our
culture and our species but things were more carefree and even if we had
stripes or troubles or drama or problems there was a quick recalibration refractory
period where were things were normal now every day there's chaos and drama in the
news and this weighs on the human consciousness and the the quick ease to
joy and contentment for an average citizen isn't what it used to be so all
all ten of these things are going to act as taxes on our lives going forward
holy crap that was kind of heavy I didn't I didn't intend for it to be such a
buzzkill but this is our reality and we have to start thinking about if we start
with a hundred and we pay to the government 75 a 25 so we have 75 and
then all these other things we have to start living at 50 or 45 or something
like that and anticipating in our own lives in our communities and as a
nation how to live with a smaller net from a biophysical perspective yes we
will have subsidies we're gonna have the same subsidies that our ancestors have
had a long time back we're gonna have love and friendship and my golden
retriever and jokes and humor and good food and community and family and games
and walking in nature and getting the biophysical flows of the sun and the
rain and the soil and the regenerative capacity of this blue green earth we're
going to have all that and we shouldn't forget that but there are taxes on the
horizon the biophysical tax man cometh I'll talk to you next week
you
