And so there's been this massive ontological physiological error in the middle of the climate or carbon movement, if you will, that has negated the role of biodiversity and nature at large, let's say, they are one and the same.
So first of all, our economy is 100% dependent on nature, not 17, not 16.
There's nothing that enables you and I to be here right now, if it weren't for nature, food, water, clothes, air, like you name it.
So 100% of the economy is dependent on nature, and yet they've been approached as siloed problems, right?
And maybe I can give like two or three examples of the ways that biological and life processes create the climate and how these feedback loops happen.
First of all, maybe some of your listeners know this, but one out of every two breaths that we take comes from the ocean, it comes from plankton phytoplankton specifically.
So every second breath is created by these organisms that are, by the way, dying out because we're packaging them up for omega threes and it's crazy, but they also seed cloud formation.
So about 60% of the clouds above the in the southern oceans around the Antarctic are seeded by plankton because when they breathe, they create little molecules as molecules go up into the air and they seed clouds.
So very practically, these plankton are seeding the clouds and seeding the climate.
Another example is the concept of keystone species, which I know that you know, but these are essentially key creatures inside of ecosystems that activate a whole series of other ecological processes.
So when you think of all of the animals that move and migrate through the earth, you have the wildebeest across the Serengeti, right?
And they're churning up soils and spreading seeds and making niches for other animals to live.
And by pooping, they're, you know, bringing carbon back down to the soils, but they're moving across the land in these like massive vein like corridors called wildlife corridors.
And you must see them as if they were cells inside of your body moving through veins.
It's the same with the salmon, right?
The salmons that take their annual migrations and looking out the window like from deep out in the ocean, they collect all of the nutrients and they come back up nitrogen phosphates and they come back up and they swim up river and they die.
You know, hundreds of miles from the deep ocean where they initially spawned, but those massive migrations like movements of all these fish are literally feeding the forest.
So as all these creatures move, they're feeding the trees, they're feeding the carbon, they're cycling these ecological processes and they are part and parcel of the carbon cycle.
And so a paper came out a few months ago that maybe you can link in your show notes that show that the reintroduction of a lot of these chiseled species like the muscox and the bison, the wolf, certain fish can detonate huge cascades of carbon capturing inside of ecosystems.
