I'm not surprised that people shouldn't be concerned about the ocean because they are forced to have
other problems. And the forces that make people have problems are the same forces that pollute our
world. On a global scale, major climate regimes can transition one to another. This degree is what
the public needs to know, that slow and gradual is not how major climate change works.
Something which is typical in the climate system, everything is coupled. So you change
something in the ocean and this has a feedback effect on the atmosphere, it has a feedback
effect on the ocean again and again. Humans have had a long and complex relationship with the ocean,
but one that is ultimately dependent on the deep blue mysterious water that covers most of
the surface of our planet. The effects of industrial pollution on Earth's seas and oceans,
including but not limited to CO2 pollution, are not typically discussed in mainstream
environmental discourse despite the critical role that oceans play in creating and sustaining life
on Earth. Joining me to today to discuss the future systemic risk to Earth's ocean are Professor
Daniel Pauley from the University of British Columbia and also the head of the Ocean Fisheries
Research and Activists Portal, The Sea Around Us, Antonio Turiel, a theoretical physicist
and a marine systems expert from the Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain,
and Professor Peter Ward, a paleobiologist and author of 17 books on prior mass extinctions
linking Earth's ocean to historical events. All three of these scientists were previous
guests on the great simplification. This conversation was intense and dark, but I feel
it is an important one. Without further ado, here's Reality Roundtable number four on oceans.
Welcome bienvenidos to another episode of Reality Roundtable here with me today.
Our ocean scientist Antonio Turiel, a paleobiologist and ocean expert Peter Ward,
and ocean fisheries scientist who runs the project Sea, The Sea Around Us, Daniel Pauley,
and you three, to my knowledge, have never met each other before right now, so you have in common
that you are friends of Nate and you care deeply about the oceans and what is happening,
and that's why we're here today to discuss what the heck is happening.
Great to see the three of you.
Yeah, indeed.
Thank you.
So we're still kind of feeling out the format of these little roundtables. What I asked you each
to come up with is a five or six minute opening statement on what is the most pressing issue
in dealing with the world's oceans that you as a lifetime scientist studying the oceans
would like the general public to understand, and then the others will ask questions and then
we'll have an open discussion. And Professor Pauley, in British Columbia, let's start with you, sir.
All right, so I have a standard lecture give to lots of people from specialists to non-specialists
about how human, the human conquest of the ocean, or the earth and the ocean, and basically human
came out of Africa 70,000 years ago, and at least some, and became spread all over the place,
and the spread was accompanied with the killing of the megafauna in all continents and all
islands where humans reached. And then agriculture was invented, and also the plants that suffered
and desertification continued, spread. And now it is continuing, it's frightening.
Then fisheries, and fisheries, we have traditionally fished since ever, since forever,
but with the launching of the first steam-driven trawlers, a new episode in the story of fishing
came, and this was equivalent to the hunting of the large mammals on our continent.
And these steam trawlers were the civilian equivalent of the warships that were developed
at the time, the first steam-driven and steel-hulled warships. And they made a short thrift of the
fish that were accumulated around the British Isles, and then spread throughout the world.
And this spread, I participated in it because in 74 and 75, or rather 75, 76, I was in Indonesia
in helping to introduce trawling into Indonesia. And basically, industrial fishing has replaced
artisanal fishing or supplemented and competing against it throughout the world. And these boats
and the device they used to find fish and to locate themselves have been developed for
warfare, warfare against submarine, for example, by the British Navy during World War I and World
War II. And this industrial fishing is equivalent to a war against the fish, and we were winning it.
So the fish are declining everywhere, especially big ones. And this decline of the fish have spread
from industrial areas, from industrialized countries, to now to the whole world. And
what maintains it is not necessarily the demand, the demand that is increasing because our numbers
increase, but it is subsidies. And subsidies, government subsidies that are given to fleets,
even when they don't work profitably. See, industrial vessels fish a resource within 10 years,
15 years, it is essentially gone. And from 100%, it will be reduced to 5%, 10% of what it was before.
And at that point, the fishery becomes uneconomical, but it is maintained by subsidies. And so
about one third of the income derived from fisheries is subsidies and industrial fisheries.
And these subsidies maintain the overfishing situation and maintain an industry which
compete against small scale fishers, which are by some notion sustainable. So industrial fisheries
are inherently unsustainable, and they can operate and continue to fish devastated
collapse stocks because of subsidies. So we have to get rid of them if you want to have any chance
of, of release, of release, establishment, something that is sustainable. Then the big
problem of our time though is global warming and climate change. And the, the small population that
we have, the, we have reduced the stock to, to 5%, 10% of what they were before has created the
situation of the, the, the genetic variability that was there in the stocks is not there anymore.
So the result of this is that the, the stocks and the ecosystem as a whole have little resilience.
So we, we are not, we will not be able to handle all the stocks rather than ecosystem will be
endangered particularly by climate change because the genetic diversity that would allow,
would have allowed some of the adaptation or to Darwinian mechanism isn't there.
So that's why, and that will be my concluding point, that's why there is a strong push
to create marine protected areas throughout the world where the stocks could rebuild themselves.
So the, the big challenge is, is temperature that is, is too warm for the fish. They have a big
problem getting enough oxygen in the, in their body when it's warmer, both because there is less
oxygen in the water and because the metabolic rate increase, they, they need for oxygen increase.
So there is, we have a real problem on our hands and it, it can be solved only really by,
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions always the same story, but for fisheries specifically
subsidies have to go. I think this conversation may go from slightly depressing to moderately
depressing to incredibly depressing. I, I'm, I'm taking the, the initiative here that rather
than to ask follow up calls of Daniel, let's just go to the next one of the scientific panelists
and then we'll have follow up questions after Antonio, would you like to, to go next?
If I'm going next, this is going to be very depressing actually.
Well, but you haven't met Peter yet.
Okay, okay. I am a physical oceanographer. So I'm working on the physics of the oceans.
And I think that currently our concerns, the problem is that we have many different concerns.
Some of them seem to be really accelerating especially this year, even if those things have been
in March, I mean, has been going on since a long ago. The first question has been also
raised by Professor Paoli regarding temperature. The ocean temperature now is arriving to
incredible highs. We have observed this year, the sea surface temperature, the average of the sea
surface temperature all over the world is completely off chart. This, we are now almost
one degree above the typical values for this time of the year. And there are specific zones at
which this value is incredibly high. For instance, in the Mediterranean, it is three degrees above,
three degrees Celsius above the average. And in the case of the North Atlantic, it is now
one point one point four above the average, which is very large. Thank you,
and the account that we are discussing about a very large area. And this, of course, is affecting
sea life in general, because the increase of thermal stress for the species and also because
it is decreasing the solubility of the oxygen in the water. So they have less oxygen and also
more thermal stress and this is causing a great mortality of the species. But for us, which is,
I mean, as a physical sonographer, one of our main concerns regards the effects on climate
on the large and the possibility of attaining some tipping points in the climate change.
So something that has been discussed very extensively during the last days is the possibility
of a sudden interruption of the amok of the Atlantic branch of the meridional over turning
current, which is a huge system of currents that goes around all the world and the distributes
heat and moisture all over the world. And what we are observing is compatible with slowing down
an even eventually the tension interruption of the Atlantic branch of the of the medial
over turning current. If this happens, it would imply that all the northern hemisphere will be
colder and drier, especially in Europe. At the same time, the accumulation of heat on the ocean
surface will be more likely will make more likely to have huge storms. Something that,
by the way, is what is happening in Europe this summer. We are observing unusual phenomena.
We could not say this has not happened before. This has happened. But the question is that we
have increasing recurrence of tornadoes or very large tempest, almost hurricanes,
that is not so usual, especially in this big amount in Europe. The problem with the possibility of
an interruption of amok is that this is at one of the tipping points in climate change, something
that will unchain a process in which the climate of the earth will radically change and make it
not recognizable according to our current standards. But the problem is that this also could
pull other tipping points and force the change of other parts of the climate system, for instance,
accelerating the deforestation in the Amazon or forcing also changing the in the rain all over
the world. So we are very worried because this situation seems to be more and more likely. Something
that also we have recently discovered is that the climate models by IPCC are too conservative
regarding this possibility and the succession of events that we have seen during the last years,
in particular this year, are indicating that the models are not too conservative and not able to
describe the situation. And right now the possibility of having this sudden change in the climate seems
to be very likely during this same century. And just to start with, I think this is enough.
Thank you. Thank you. Peter? Well, yeah, we have major changes. Well, the earth and the history has
always been about major changes. Clearly, past is prelude and referring to the AMOC, which I love
that term because the Atlantic Meridian Ocean Circulation or AMOC, it really is running AMOC,
if you will, by slowing down. So we have seen this in the past, which is the sad thing, as recently
is near the end of the Pleistocene. 10,000 to 12,000 years ago, this particular current
shut down. But this isn't something that is just a Johnny Come recently effect on the planet.
We have seen the changes of what they called conveyor belt currents. And think about what a
conveyor belt is. Ocean currents, we think of as something like clouds, we can see them sweeping
over the top. They seem to be working in a flat dimension. But think of what an escalator does.
An escalator will carry you up or carry you down. But those steps after they've died back down,
go all the way down below again before they come up again. So think of the planet's ocean,
not just as a flat series of currents, but also as vertical currents. And this is the type of current
that we're looking at and fearing will stop. It does very important things. The AMOC takes
oxygen from very cold surface water, drops it down near Greenland, where it is carried back
on the bottom of the Atlantic back towards the tropics. This particular conveyor belt,
carrying stuff down below is taking the oxygen necessary to keep marine communities on the
deep sea and in midwater alive. When this current stops, oxygen no longer makes it to the bottom.
The worst case of this happening coincides with some of the greatest mass extinctions in history.
The most recent was at the end of the Paleocene, the P-E-T-M, Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum,
when planetary temperatures went up six to eight degrees globally. And the oceans lost
most of their oxygen on the bottom, mass extinction. But even bigger effects happened
at the end of the Permian and several times to the Mesozoic. When these currents stop, it leads
to the formation of hydrogen sulfide-rich bottom waters, which begin to rise to the surface,
killing marine life on the way up, and then extruding into the atmosphere. So this really is,
to me, one of the most dangerous aspects of the coming century. Why is it stopping? It's stopping
because Greenland, well, for many reasons, but one of the major reasons we think is that Greenland
is melting because of higher temperatures. It is dumping fresh water into the North Atlantic.
So why would a surface current that's going to go down as an escalator sink in the first place?
This is part of the Gulf Stream, warm, warm tropical water. And as we've seen going by
Florida, we're seeing 100-degree Fahrenheit water off the Florida Keys, unheard of. Well,
this stuff is carried up the coast, east coast, to North America. It makes places, beaches in
New Jersey, tropically warm. So unlike my west coast, or even down to the middle part of California,
if you jump in the water, it's really cold. That's an Alaskan surface current coming south.
Well, this current goes up, and then it leaves North America and heads towards Europe.
As it does so, it gets to the colder and colder climates. The water, as it gets colder, starts
picking up more oxygen. Warm water carries less oxygen than cold water. So this gets ever colder
water, picks up ever more oxygen, it gets heavier and heavier, and it finally sinks.
And this is the conveyor belt part, the vertical aspect sinking down. Oxygen-rich water hits the
bottom of the Atlantic and works its way back again, conveyor belt, over and over. Every time this
particular on a global scale set of currents, and it's not the only one, the other really scary one
is off Antarctica. The same thing is happening. And when you're having enormous land-based ice
sheets melting, you're dumping fresh water in. That reduces the density of this cold North Atlantic
water. Greenwood is melting, it's causing the cessation of this current. The warming of the
planet is going to shut off these currents, and there will be literally hell to pay.
There's a lot of ways I could go with this, but let me ask you three, particularly this
follow-up question. It seems like a lot of people are suddenly aware of climate change,
not as many as need to be to make effective socioeconomic changes. Why do the ocean issues
seem to not be addressed? What the three of you just said is rarely shown in the media,
yet the ocean represents the vast majority of livable habitat on this planet. Why is the ocean
just such a distant thought in our scientific and public discourse? Yes, it's changing,
but given what the three of you said, it's hella important this needs to be heard and understood
by lots more people. Does anyone have any thoughts on that? Well, my thought is that we are a
terrestrial species, and that's the basic reason why we don't understand the ocean.
The relationship of most people to the ocean is on beaches and on cruise ships, maybe, but
the depth and its dynamics, I am not understood. Another point is, and this reflects my present
work and work not so much on fisheries, but on a physiology of fish, and I encountered a complete
failure to understand that it is extremely difficult to breathe water.
The biologists even have problems with that, because to us breathing and moving in a medium that
is very light, very easy, is a natural thing, and it's very difficult for us to imagine
how it is to breathe water. There is far less oxygen in the water as you would get two times the
height of the Everest, so we know what it is to ascend the mountain and not be able to breathe.
Well, there is very little oxygen, far less than on top of Everest, but it's in water,
and water has to be moved across the gills of fish for them to be able to breathe. The big
problem is that they cannot breathe, and they are problem breathing, and so you mess up a little bit
the requirement, or the demand, or the supply, the supply because it's warmer, is less oxygen,
or the demand because the water is warmer, and they are in deep trouble, and that's the reason why
the fish move to the north on the Nossan Hemisphere and to the south in the Southern Hemisphere,
because they cannot handle the temperature in the place where they lived before, and so they move,
they move toward the poles on both hemispheres, and this is the documentation of this, the presentation
of this, was 20 years ago, you could demonstrate that, you got a paper in science, and now you don't
because it's trivial. Everybody knows that fish are now moving north in the Northern Hemisphere,
and in BC we have fish that we didn't have before, we have even Mexico, we have even
giant squid from Mexico, stranded people freak out, so it's very difficult to imagine, to know
for the public at large what the ocean is, and it's unfair to expect, I think, to expect the
public at large to know and to care, because to our neoliberal politics, we have a problem that
most people, even in rich countries, are struggling to end the months, and they have to have two,
three jobs, and because of this, and in the background of increased productivity,
there is, we produce more, and yet people have no money to end up the month, and pay the rent,
and pay the, so I don't, I'm not surprised that people shouldn't be concerned about the ocean,
because they have, they are forced to have other problems, and the forces that make people have
problems are the same forces that pollute our world, that's the problem.
Peter or Antonio, would you like to add anything there?
Yeah, I have my own take on this subject, I think that there are some reasons for which maybe we
have not paid as much attention as so, at oceans as we should have, first, well, oceanography,
the oceanographic community is not the largest community in the scientific world, so we are,
let's say, a minority, and there are some reasons for this, apart from tradition, and so what I am
talking made it from a European perspective, which is probably different than that from American one.
So the question is, we are not that many, we are not few, but we are not that many first.
Second, the ocean has always been very hard to sample, by a few reasons, because it's very
hard to take measurements, it's much easier to take measurements on the air, about the atmosphere,
that on the ocean, you need to install systems that can be destroyed, can be lost, whatever,
and you can just sample for a limited amount of time, and then something that I know well
by working with the European Center for Medium-Rage Weather Forecast, is that the
typical approach to oceans in meteorological models, in operational models, is quite simplistic,
so many physical processes, which are important, are oversimplified, and for instance, something
which is crucial in the case of the slowdown or even interruption of the AMOC, is a variable that
is not very well described, it is well known for sure, but it's not what it will describe,
which is salinity. In polar regions, salinity is having a very huge role, the price to have
measurements of the salinity, and typically, meteorological models tend to underestimate
the role of salinity, the concentration of salt in ocean water, and this is affecting also climate
models, so overall, we have been paying attention more probably to the atmospheric part on one hand,
and also the question that oceans have sound to be much more complex than we thought,
or the public precession of them, and then for sure, there is the same point that we have with
climate change in general, because at the end, when you are reporting that there are problems,
that the human activity is affecting our environment, and this can have consequences,
so there is a tendency to try to move out from the topic, to not want to be very willing to discuss
this, because of the consequences that we'll have in the economy at large, but this is very similar
to what happens with other meteor topics that overlap, that concerns the arrival of the limits,
all the biophysical limits of the planet, so at the end, we will need to organize ourselves in a
different way, and this is very hard to be heard by, in general, politicians, authorities,
administrations, also big enterprises, and for the people, as Professor Pauly has said,
for the people that has problems just to pay the rent, you cannot go there and talk them about the
difficulties proposed by the slowdown of the emote, because they are going to say, okay,
I have many more pressing matters right now, and I know it's interesting what you are talking
me about, I think it's a mixture of all those things. Yeah, this is an interesting topic, and
for instance, to me, growing up, I was raised on a fabulous book brought by my mother for me,
by Rachel Carson, the sea around us, and it was Rachel Carson, of course, who then later began
really telling us how badly we are polluting the ocean, and therefore nature, but the problem with
understanding and getting the public to worry much more about the ocean is, as my colleagues have
alluded to, the visibility aspect, everything that seems to be going on down there is very difficult
to see anything going on there, we can see rapid climate change, we can see Arizona and Phoenix
going through a month of over 110 degrees, we can't see the raised temperatures in the ocean,
where even a three or four degree rise in temperature is just as catastrophic or
more so, we can't see it. Secondly, I think we all have this belief that the ocean will save our
collective bacon in some way, yes, there are changes coming, but we have the sense that for
sea level change, everyone I think recognizes this would be a bad thing, but look, we have these
estimates where a meter in maybe 70 years, well that doesn't sound so bad, that's just an
idiot little bit per year, but what the ocean does that I think people don't appreciate, it undergoes
enormous state changes in ways that are very non-intuitive, now perhaps the most common one
that we might think about are La Nina and El Nino, these big current changes that affect global
climate, they happen relatively quickly, within a year or less we've changed the state from one
to another, and it doesn't happen over centuries, it's a very quick change, this is the greatest
danger facing us, the ocean is going to go, it's going to undergo a state change from what we are
now seeing as the state change that we are used to in a very cold climate, we have ice sheets,
we have lots of ice in the water, to a change where they're gone and they go relatively rapidly
to an entirely different type of ocean, a stratified ocean, where we don't have oxygen
everywhere, where we only have oxygen in the very top surface area, look at the black sea,
there's not a great fishery, there isn't a lot of food coming out of the bottom of the black sea,
it has undergone a state change to a stratified system that cannot, as my colleague said,
it's hard to breathe underwater, it's even harder to breathe underwater when your oxygen is completely
gone, so we have a sense that the things are going to unfold slowly, as we go from a day to a night,
we can see a hot day slowly recede into coolness and then a cool night slowly turn into warmth,
but what we don't recognize how quickly on a global scale major climate regimes can
transition one to another, this to me is what the public needs to know, that slow and gradual
is not how major climate change works, and we have already put so much heat into the ocean
that it's now a sense of what can we save, rather can we go back to the state that we were in?
I said that, I don't know Peter what, but I was wrong, I use your book all the time,
I just didn't connect, I don't know.
Yeah, well he has like 17 books, Daniel.
I'm disconnected most of the time, so it's perfectly fine.
Peter, let me ask a follow-up to that, and all of you can speculate on this,
I'm not an ocean scientist, but I've seen a lot of graphs, today's July 31st,
and we see the sea temperatures are like five standard deviations of the typical anomaly,
one of you mentioned the temperatures off the coast of Florida are 100 degrees,
there have been some explanations, El Nino is causing some outgassing of heat,
maybe the Saharan dust storms have something to do with it,
but is it possible that we are undergoing one of those state changes right now,
can you speculate on that, does anyone have any clue, but things seem different,
and maybe that's my availability cascade, because I care about the oceans and climate,
and so I'm emotionally applying what I'm seeing to my own priors, but what do you think, start with
you, Peter? Well, I'm glad I have a colleague from British Columbia here, because we both,
I think, two years ago, underwent one of the most surprising climate effects that I've ever
known, I was born and raised in Seattle, Washington, I did my PhD in Ontario, but I've lived most of
my life on the west coast of North America, in this northwest corner, and we have seen temperatures
over the last couple of years, unlike anything over my pretty 74 years of life, you know,
as a Seattle resident there every year, I've never seen anything like this. Change of that magnitude,
where parts of BC were so unbelievably hot, as was Seattle in the entire northwest,
and yet we're seeing this all over the planet, we are seeing these crazy temperature changes,
and it's even more concentrated, in many cases, in the oceans. I've had the good luck of using
baited remote underwater video systems for the last 20 years in the South Pacific, we put down
these camera systems, the 300 meters. What has happened to the oceans down there is a combination
of very oxygen-poor water, very warm water, but the complete disappearance of big fish.
I've been diving in those waters, I used to be afraid for my life in Papua New Guinea for sharks,
on the last 10 years, I haven't seen a big shark, so we've denuded the world of its fish,
which has rapidly changed it, but it's in hand-to-hand with the temperature and oxygen
changes down there. I remember very well the heat wave that happened two years ago, and interestingly,
while in Seattle, which is about the size of Washington, sorry, Vancouver,
while there were about 50 people dead, there were five to 600 in Vancouver, because people don't
have air conditioning here, and they were surprised, the social services and stuff, all people,
like us, being stuck in the apartment and being surprised by the heat. I just worked
a number of travels in Belize, I was in Belize and I was almost choked in the fieldwork,
and the Belizeans who are used to the heat, and most of them are of African ancestry,
they said they had never seen anything like that. I was in China, in Hong Kong, and in
Qingdao, and in Xiamen, and it was intolerable, and the people in China were saying,
we've never seen anything like this, so it is happening on a grand scale, I cannot imagine
that these temperatures can keep on increasing, creeping up without massive death, and because
I'm old, and I could see that I was at the edge when I walked out in the sun, and I can imagine that
it is not in 20 years, or even in 10 years I'm going to be in deep trouble, but in a few years.
Antonio, do you have any comments on this? Yes, well regarding the question of what is
happening, especially this year, because this year seems to be a bit special,
I recently prepared a report for the Spanish Ministry on this. There are several possible
explanations, causes, that maybe, well probably they are influencing the situation right now,
but the question is that we don't know yet to which extent, which is a relative impact of each
one of them. There is something which is clear, is that the eruption of the Uga Tonga volcano
past year that projected a lot of water vapor in the stratosphere may have had an influence,
because it has increased significantly the amount of water vapor in the stratosphere,
but also it should be recalled that the stratosphere is not the place at which the majority of the
water vapor is, so the variation is relatively small when you look at the whole of the atmosphere,
but this may be causing an increasing of the energy which has been trapped, the greenhouse effect,
and so leading to an increase of the temperature. I don't think this is very large,
but this is something that needs to be examined for sure. The other reasons that could be,
could explain part of the things that are happening, something that we have observed,
particularly in the case of North Atlantic, is that there is a significant anomaly with winds,
with wind stress, so winds are blowing less in the North Atlantic, and this is leading to an
increase of the stratification, less mixing of ocean waters, and so this could lead to the
forming of a warm, a relatively thin warm layer of warm water on the surface, but in case that these
winds are established they could not mix again, and then the temperature will not be so dramatic
in the case of the ocean water, and in the case of North Atlantic specifically, but the problem
is that then the question is why the winds have decreased so much in speed. Regarding El Nino,
I don't think the El Nino is a living cause, because first it doesn't seem that this El Nino
is going to be as large as, for instance, the 2015-2016 El Nino. It seems it is going to be
relatively normal, and also we are in the starting in the onset of El Nino that will
peak by December, so it doesn't, of course, it has an influence, but it doesn't seem to be
well-leading influence, but I would like to point out something that was puzzling
scientists some years ago, is by the beginning of this century, we observed that climate models
were forecasting an increase of temperatures, of air temperature, which was not really
according to what we were observing, so the increase in the temperature of the air was not
as fast as foreseen in the models, and some years later we discovered that all this extra heat
was being accumulated in the first 600 meters of the ocean, and so the question was that this
heat is being trapped there. Something that may be happening, which is also a matter of concern,
is that either we are saturating the ability of the oceans to accumulate heat in the first 600
meters, because, of course, it is large, but it is not infinite, and also it depends on some
processes that have given efficiency, so the amount of heat that you can accumulate depends on the
ability of this process to restore the heat inside the ocean, and also our problem that
may be happening is that we also know that there is some cyclicity in the processes of
pumping heat into the ocean and pumping out from the ocean, so the problem is that maybe we are
changing this cycle that seems to have a predictivity of about, I don't remember, 40,
I don't remember, 20, 40 years, I don't remember actually, and maybe we are in the opposite side
of the cycle, in this case the ocean is returning us, the extra heat that it has been accumulating,
so there are several things that can be influencing this particular year,
but as they have said, what is quite worrisome is that it's not a local phenomenon, it's a real
global phenomenon, it's a global phenomenon that is accompanied also by other things which are very
worrying, as for instance, droughts, because the prevalence of droughts all over the world is
leading to a failure of the crops in many parts of the of the of the world, so this is leading
for sure to a diminution of the amount of grain, of materials, of wheat, of all the things that
the basic staple for human and cattle food, and this is going to be, this is going to be very bad
actually, and this force should combine with all the other products that we have, for instance in
Europe we are very concerned with the problem that now Ukrainian grains cannot exit Ukraine,
and this is going to affect many countries, especially in Africa and other places, so well
everything that said conspires for the worst in that case, but just to see that there are several
causes that could explain what is happening this year, we are going to examine all of them in detail,
we are going to try to determine what is really going on, but we cannot rule out the possibility
that we are starting a process that can last for several years, and probably that if we go ahead
increasing the temperatures, this is going to be very tough for many people in many parts of
the world for sure. So let me ask a follow-up Antonio, and then get also Peter's paleo perspective
on this, how does the top 600 meters become saturated, and what happens if it is saturated
with heat and it cannot absorb anymore, and then Peter after he answers that, are there historical
analogs when the top layers of the ocean absorbed all they could, and then there was a phase shift
where it released it, Antonio do you have any answer there? Well the question is that at the
end the capability of the ocean to trap heat is while it's completely associated to the mixing
at the end, I mean you have a transfer, by the ocean surface you have a transfer of heat,
because I mean the normal processes has to have two different things in contact, you have the
water you have there, they have different temperatures, and then it depends on the ability of the wind
to generate waves to mix, and take into account that when you have very intense winds, you have
a mixed layer, so in which all the water in the column is mixed, that extends for 20 meters,
the very least, and they can have 100 meters, and in some cases you have very very intense winds,
the effect of the mix layer can extend up to a thousand meters, this is not a usual situation,
but let's say to say something that in many places, it depends completely on the place of the world,
but it typically extends several tens of meters and sometimes a hundred, two hundred, this is
completely normal, so the ability of the ocean to gather this heat is strongly mediated by the
capabilities of, it's mediated by the mixing, it's the main thing, it's not the only one of course,
you have convection, you have diffusion, you have many many other processes
that are important in the long run, and this saturation effect will be more related to the
changes in the global winds, I think, I think, I'm not completely sure on that.
And the currents, the AMOC, like you guys were talking about before, that too?
Well the question with AMOC, yeah for sure, because AMOC, the question with AMOC as Professor
Ward has explained previously, is completely related also to winds, because winds are the main
factor in order to make water dense, because they are favoring the dimension of the temperature
in the water parcel, and when it is, it has reduced enough, you are still working with a very salty
water parcel, because these waters come from the Gulf of Mexico, from tropical areas, they are very
salty, they have a lot of salt inside, and when the temperature decreases, this makes these two
get very dense, very heavy I would say, and they sink, so you have a lot of over floating fresh
water coming from the the phoning in Greenland and the sea ice and so on, but mainly of continental
So this very very fresh water, so almost no salt, very low salt, is very hard to be sunk, and this
of course also is contributing to reduce the efficiency in the release of heat from the
ocean to the atmosphere, and also in the possibilities of mixing the first meters,
everything is connected, and sometimes there's something which is typical in the climate system,
everything is coupled, so you change something in the ocean, and this has a feedback effect on
the atmosphere, that has a feedback effect on the ocean again and again, so sometimes it's hard to
say okay this is starting here, no it's something that which is initiated some part of the process,
but this is a loop, and this is affecting in a cyclic way, and sometimes unfortunately we have
these positive feedback loops that tend to increase the problem instead of solving it.
Peter, I'm going to let you weigh in on this, but in addition to the question I asked before,
I'll append this part two, can you define a canfield ocean, and I know you are no way
capable of doing a peer review, a speculation on it, but just as a human, as a scientist,
what are the odds you think that someday we will have a canfield ocean due to the aggregate of
human activities? Well Don Canfield was one of the really great scientists in my field,
as well as in climate science, he was a great chemist, the interesting thing that he looked at,
he came out of Yale I believe, and he was able to think clearly about deep time, and so instead of
looking just at the now, and so many climate scientists today are really students of the
present, and the advent of ice cores has truly revolutionized our ability to look back tens
of thousands to hundreds of thousands of years, but ice cores only go back 100,000 in most cases,
and canfield and others are able to look back millions of years. So a canfield ocean
equivalent is let's think of what's the nastiest swamp you know of, so a swamp is some place where
we have very warm water, very little oxygen in it, big bubbles of swamp gas come out,
methane, rotting material, and material stops oxidizing, you use up all the oxygen, and the
bottom starts producing these bacteria that grow only in the absence of oxygen, and one of the
bright products is hydrogen sulfide, this very toxic, nasty poison. What canfield and others
began to think, gee maybe in the past, especially during the great mass extinctions, take that
swamp model and stretch it to the global ocean. Could there be a case where we don't have overturned
that we have a warm surface and a warm bottom with no oxygen throughout? Well we we have seen cases
in the deep past where that has been the case, and let's come about by the study of biomarkers.
One of the really great clues was the discovery that many types of bacteria in their body walls,
the fount of their cell walls, leave fingerprint-like molecules, and there are such things,
there are some nasty, what I call the nasty, bacteria that are photosynthesizers, they need
to live in sunlight, but they cannot live if there's any oxygen in the ocean, and they produced
a long biomarker called isorrenerotane, this is the product of green sulfur and purple sulfur
bacteria, again these things need light to live, so they have to be in the shallow ocean, but they
can't have oxygen around them, so we have evidence now during the Permian period, 251 million years
ago of a majority of the global ocean that was also dropping sediments, so we're talking about
shallow water deposits, where there were surface bacteria indicating the surface waters were
without oxygen or very low concentrations, this is totally unlike anything that our planet is seeing,
even the black sea next to the surface, there's enough wind, there's enough mixing,
that there is a mixed layer of oxygen at the top, to get these big bacterial blooms of the Permian,
you would have to have a very, very different world than today, and this is where this idea,
the concept of uniform materialism, that the president is the key to the past, totally breaks
down, there's nothing in the present that can get us to understand what's going on in the Permian
on a global scale, it was really different, and of course it led to an enormous extinction of
oxygen-loving organisms, the big mass extinction killed off the oxygen breathers, the world became
a global swamp, this is the direction we are moving now. So one thing that could have been
mentioned up to now, is that it was mentioned several times that the winds are diminishing
over all globally, and the reason for this is that the poles are warming faster than tropics,
and then the wind is nothing but a balancing act between these two, and therefore there is
overall less wind, because there is less, the gradient is less, and it's also the reason
why the jet stream, instead of being fast and straight, is now meandering around the globe,
which is falsely labeled as polar vortex in the US, the public doesn't understand what it means,
it means that in California you can be cold, and in the east coast you can be very, very warm,
and this is because one of the meanders goes straight to the US, and there is such meanders
also over the Black Sea and over Asia, and I've never seen in the TV programs any explanation,
any simple explanation for this meandering, which is straightforward, you can explain it as,
but because the gradient, because it's flat, because it's flat, and the point about the
canfield ocean that I want to say, is we already have little canfield oceans, and they are called
dead zones, in Mississippi Delta, in Oregon, in East China Sea, in various places of the world,
there are about 500 dead zones, and the Baltic Sea, the Black Sea, and so on, they are dead
zones, but they are increasing, and they are increasing in duration, if they are seasonal,
they are increasing in scope, so what is worrisome is that if they become permanent,
instead of being summer events, if they connect with each other, then we will have
the beginning of a canfield ocean, we could have that locally in the part of the ocean,
and then it would spread like a disease, because once the animals start dying,
they rot, and they contribute to the spread of this, so it becomes a self-feeding process,
so I would not argue that we cannot have ever something resembling the Permian
extinction, because actually we are on our way, and we are helping by killing the animals
before they have a chance to choke to death, and this warming thing, it very well could become
self-accelerating, and the ice melting can actually prevent this thinking of that Antonio
talks about, and the renewal of the deep water, and so I had physical or sonography as a minor,
and I understand all of this, and this is scary as hell.
There's a lot of different ways, gentlemen, that I could go right now, but if you'll recall my
invite to you a couple months ago, we were going to have a fourth panelist, DJ White, who co-wrote
three books with me and was one of the original founders of Greenpeace, and he wrote a question,
long one, that I'm going to read here to get reactions from each of you.
This is from DJ White. My big paralyzing worry as one who has gotten to know dolphins as people
is that food web collapses occurring in the coming 1,000 years, but locked in this century,
which scour the seas of most case-elected species, which are generally fairly vulnerable in food
webs. The loss of coral alone would do huge damage to ocean food webs, and that is no longer even
controversial now as happening within a human lifetime. Loss of calcifying plankton increased
energetic difficulty of animals with calcium endoskeletons to exist, all happening at the same
time that human pollution messes with them, and there's a tragedy of common's war against sea life.
It's too much. Most of the high self-aware species of earth are not apes like us. There are maybe
50 species of pelagic cetacean peoples or more, and we're setting up their likely extinction.
The fact that nobody is really talking about this as an immediate concern is very scary to me.
Turning it around, just how would a species of pelagic dolphin be expected to survive all
this stuff at once with niches simultaneously being claimed by very effective opportunistic,
simple organisms? I think we're committing the biggest crime it is possible for a conscious
being to commit. The seas represent something between 97 to 99 percent of earth's living habitat.
The part we care about is a rounding error. We only think about the oceans in terms of
how they affect us and what we can extract in the extreme short term. That's a pretty strong
statement from my friend and colleague, DJ, but do you each of you have any thoughts on either the
science or the emotion behind that? In the Med, for example, in the Mediterranean,
they catch tuna, the juvenile tuna, and fatten them in cages and for export to Japan. They are
fattened at the tuna of 10 to 20 kilograms of fish for one kilo of tuna. This has led to
the hunt on the last sardines in the Med than sardine and similar small fish. They are literally
taken out of the mouth of people because sardines are in Spain, for example. When I was a kid,
I ate sardine in a bun and it was the best thing in the world for kids. They are not available
anymore for people to buy because the mafia, and this is really a mafia operation, that sells
this tuna to you. The Akusa in Japan, other gangsters, they have completely monopolized
the availability of sardines. Now, that has led to a situation where in the eastern Med, the
dolphin that are there, the common dolphin, this is something that I had never seen and I never
thought I would see it. The dolphin that swim have nothing to eat, so you can see the rib cage
like a mangy dog and that is I had never seen before. A dolphin, you can see the rib cage
because they have nothing to eat and that is the case in eastern Med and I presume also in the
western Med that the marine life has nothing to eat anymore because it all goes into tuna
fattening operation and that is one example of the madness of it. In West Africa, the same
thing is happening. The sardines that were eaten by people go into fish meal that is exported mainly
to China and to produce in aquaculture, an aquaculture form, a form of aquaculture that
actually consume fish because it produce, it use relatively cheap fish to produce expensive fish
and the destruction of large marine mammal population will actually be accelerated by
plastics because they really suffer from plastic that fills a gut and so I don't know which of
the of these forces will be first, that the plastic problem will cause them to the population to
be reduced or they will have no food and this is also the case for the Serenian, the Sikao,
the manatees in Florida they have nothing to eat and there is a program to give them lettuce,
they put tons of lettuce in the water for manatees to eat because the seagrass is gone
so all these things together mean that marine mammals will be a large amount of marine mammal
will be lost. Peter or Antonio would you like to comment on the ocean food web query by DJ?
I would say yes to this because I am not a biologist so probably Peter would have more
interesting things to say but just two things that I have been evoked by that question.
First about this simplification of ecosystem this is something that we are seeing in some parts of
the western Mediterranean right now in which we have very simplified ecosystems in which we have
almost nothing on the floor. I need to see how it is said in English because I don't know
but and you have jellyfish on surface so these are very very very simplified ecosystems
and it's something that is happening in many places because well we have
this overfishing and we have these factories for fattening the tuna fish we have a couple here
in Spain and this is as as he has said so the word I was looking for sea urchin so we have
sea urchin on the floor and we have jellyfish on the surface and that's it it's a very simplistic
ecosystem I don't know how this may it can even work but this is something that we are observing
in many places in the western Mediterranean right now. The other thought that was coming to my mind
something that is happening is quite anecdotical but it's also interesting is that we have observed
during the last months a continuous series of attacks by killer whales against judge
so they are they are breaking parts of the judge so making them not possible to navigate
and this is continuous so for some reason probably one killer whale was hit by one of the judge and
it learned to attack it and it has taught these two other killer whales so now they are devoting
their force to try to interrupt the the transitive of judge across mainly across the Gibraltar
Strait so it dispatched from the Matron Sea to to Atlantic and well it is a there's a problem
it's quite anecdotical but they think it's also a powerful message there say okay they're fighting
back they're fighting back yeah in some sense well this is quite a romantic view of the fame
I'd simpler than that but but this is interesting anyway
Peter on the trophic food web question yeah one of my I guess one of my hats I sometimes wear
is the term astrobiologists trying to think of earth as just one planet that might have life
if you start thinking about is as some of the astrobiologists have done
try to decouple diversity the number of species from abundance of life
so we can look at life in terms of productivity so you can measure that but what about what if we
just had a simple measure of the number of kilograms of living matter on the planet
when would it have been highest the idea by mass extinction is that like a Gary Larson
cartoon you go walking in front of all the homes of the dinosaurs and the little sign up on their
doors extinct extinct extinct everybody's gone desert world empty that's totally wrong
my I guess some of the calculations I've been playing with is that biomass increases in mass
extinctions because you go ever lowered on the food chain you get more and more bulk we worked in
in western Australia at Winchester Gorge this fabulous Devonian reef which has been left stranded
without any sort of tectonic effect on it it's a giant barrier reef that is 360 million years old
and as you walk through the gorge cutting through it you see beautiful coral reefs that
there's a rapid extinction you see the black water the oxygen poor water the sediment the
biomarkers indicate that we had one of these canfield oceans and then we have the reef
lives it continues but it's no longer produced by animals it's a microbial reef and they keep
building and they even build bigger reefs than before they're slime they're slime they can produce
calcium carbonate that is the ocean we're moving towards so one of the the laughs for me I love
cephalopods and this this big fight global fights all through geological history the fish and the
cephalopods have been duking it out well in 2014 a team from University of Adelaide where I was for
that year came up a very influential paper the cephalopods are increasing as we wipe out fish
there's more and more cephalopods and all you need to do is walk on one of these Triassic
Jurassic mass extinction boundary in England or anywhere else or the end of the Cretaceous or at
the end of the Permian the first thing out of the gate are cephalopods and I was luckily enough
went off to Papua New Guinea in 2022 and spent a month at Cavian New Ireland and our cameras go
down there there's nautiluses everywhere down there no fish lots of nautilus there they are
save the nautilus well we're saving them by killing all the fish there's plenty of them down there
the cephalopods are doing fine thank you but we are going into a case where diversity is dropping
but abundance of life on the planet may not be so they're well there would be an abundance of life
just far less complex large life yep lots of microbial slime so is this gentleman ocean
scientists and activists is this the ocean version of the movie uh with Leonardo DiCaprio
called don't look up is that's what's happening here is we we won't do anything until it's
so obvious the disaster that's happening to the oceans that it'll be too late to do something
no my sense of it this is Medea hypothesis this is Medea this is not Gaia this is the
black evil twin of Gaia this is life doing it to itself we humans are life well life is really
going to constrict itself here from complexity to simplicity so the trouble is too many people
haven't been looking don't look up don't look down don't look anywhere the problem is people have
not been looking into the ocean as my colleagues are so eloquently said so so let me ask you guys
this um a lot of the things that we would as a global culture do to help avert the worst of
climate scenarios would also help the ocean situation but are there things we could do
separately to help the oceans that would be distinct from the the climate action and mitigation are
there things we could do to help the ocean situation daniel you want to start yeah what i
mentioned uh when i when i made my introductory speech that subsidies are one of the mortars of
overfishing and overfishing is one of the causes for the lack of resilience of of ecosystem marine
ecosystem so if you could get rid of subsidies then uh you you would have some stocks bouncing back
we have also produced proposed um and it's not impossible um to close the high sea to fishing
because it's essentially a place where you can go only when if you are subsidized and
this sounds like a crazy idea but uh this the suggestion that uh countries should have
exclusive economic zone extended 200 200 miles offshore was also crazy when it was proposed by
some latin american countries chile and peru and 20 years later we had the united nation
convention on the law of the sea so i think these two goals um um could be uh helping at least from
the uh removing the fisheries because let's face it the various things that we talked about they're
not designed to kill marine biodiversity but fisheries is fisheries is designed to kill marine
animals and to remove them from the ocean and so if we could get rid of subsidies and the agreement
at the wto or the world trade organization is a lousy agreement but it is possible that
that a better agreement come because the the right wing market market first fanatics are also
against subsidies not only the conservationist so we could get rid of subsidies and and maybe we
could also get part of the high seas close to fishing and we could monitor that easily and these
are measures that have nothing to do with uh with a global emission of greenhouse gases and it would
help the ocean a lot daniel let me ask a follow-up question to you i had sent you an email a few weeks
ago i didn't understand this but there's some uh science that shows that totally healthy rejuvenated
ocean fish populations themselves would have a positive effect on climate change can can you
explain that what what that means we are the chemists i i'm not a good chemist but uh but
essentially uh uh uh teleost fish bonifish um excrete uh in the faces uh calcium carbonate i
think or something that that uh remove remove some of the carbon from the sea and and and so
they themselves would contribute and also in an age in a time when tuna were dying of natural
causes the carcasses would drop to the floor to the floor this is an entire community of animals
that eat whales and and uh uh carcass fall and tuna uh that fell to the floor to the to the
bottom of the sea and these these we have uh these fluxes that remove carbon from the atmosphere
we have interrupted them and turn them around and so uh we if we had lots of fish in the sea
they they would actually contribute a little bit uh to offset the effect of greenhouse gases yeah
peter antonio are there any things we could do ocean specific uh you know leaving climate aside
that would improve the ocean's chances well yeah we do the reverse of the movie the graduate
um our poor hero is asking an adult what should i go into and the answer is plastic
well i think we need to reverse the plastic as my colleagues have stated that the ocean is being
strangled by plastic one of the saddest things for my life has been working every year in the
philippines and of course when you go out on a field trip you need lots of stuff right sundries
and in the philippines that every drug store every item you buy let's just say it's
tooth mouth toothbrush or band-aids or whatever you get they put every single item in its own
plastic bag so even a small shopping accumulates 20 or 30 or 40 plastic bags in a big plastic bag
they all end up in the ocean and they break down over that sun and we are now we know for the
deepest part of the mariana's trench plastic is everywhere i i would like to add something on
top of this because in the same sense because i think that something will be very useful
is to reduce all all the inflow of plastics going to the ocean we know that the majority
of macro plastics are coming by the rivers and there has been some interesting experiences
even in california uh just controlling what is going down the river because typically what happens
is that people abandon a plastic object or whatever and at the end by the way this finish
going to the river and from the river it goes to sea so there are some relatively easy uh
relatively easy ways to contain this plastic before arriving to the sea in which it will be
reduced broken up until it becomes very small another significant thing that can be done
for sure is to reduce the use of plastic the plastic is too wide the space is completely
absurd it makes no sense you know it's not useful and in fact plastic i think is too valuable to
to be used the way it is used because there are some specific uses in in that thing which
it will be preferable to have this plastic for that and something also which is important
has to do with clothings um the vast majority of micro plastics are having to the ocean come from
the microfibers that are getting out from our clothes uh when we are putting them in the washing
machine so um this is important because these micro plastics are directly entering entering the
the food web is affecting all the life in the ocean it's affecting ourselves also so we should
change the way in which we are making clothes because we should do it in a very different
manner maybe using more cotton i don't know or maybe not you not not elaborating the way the
in which they are elaborated and also to complement the things that the professor probably has said
um i understand something that we know for sure is that the healthy uh ecosystems are
very helpful in precisely in capturing in capturing co2 because there are many ways in which the ocean
captures co2 if he has indicated several so it's not only the the skeletons of the of the fishes
but also in general also the the exoskeletons of algae the microscopic algae and there is
a continuous balance between organic carbon dissolved in the water in organic carbon dissolved
in the water and when you have a healthy ecosystem the ocean acts as a real trap for co2 so just
allowing the life in the oceans to thrive is also very interesting from the point of view
of fighting climate change and from the carbonization and for that reason also it's
very important when we are planning doing some activities some industrial activities on the
ocean that we should not be disrupting ecosystems even more and i think in here about for instance some
offshore wind farms that are planning places which have a lot of biodiversity this is not the
place to place to place this kind of a facility and also especially um ocean mining which for me
is a completely absurd thing because it is too too energy intensive so it's too costly but they are
still thinking about this kind of stuff and even if they probably not not going to operate in the
larger scale this is the kind of things that you should not do uh if you want not to disrupt these
ecosystems that are so valuable on itself on themselves and also for our own interests of
fighting climate change is there anything on the geoengineering front involving oceans like green
sand or or or things like that olivine crushing is there anything that is potentially viable on
the horizon or are they all frankenstein sorts of um out of the frying pan into the fire uh
daniel would you like to comment these techniques are all dangerous because imagine imagine we would
put particles in sulfur particles in the in the sky we would have a fleet of plane darkening the
skies and then we would we would be we would continue with the emission obviously uh the the
ocean would further acidify and everything and then we would have a reduction of the temperature
for a few years and if it worked and then the whole thing would be exploding when when when
the system uh is pushed to to some limit and i would like to add a little thing uh i'm a
friend with lots of people from the aboriginal communities here and in the north of of uh
british colombia in so-called hara guai they a bunch of crooks from uh some from california came
and sold to the village elder the notion that he would grind up a few folks wagon and throw them
in the water and this would produce lots of salmon and they got from the from these people
from the travel council one million buck and they went away with it uh and uh obviously obviously you
couldn't distinguish what they have done from the normal spring bloom of zooplankton of zo and
phato and zooplankton and and this was this was a bunch of hocksters and this this stuff i i see
it as uh the same thing on a giant on a on a global basis peter antonio on the um on the uh
geoengineering topic any any words i don't know enough to know other than i certainly thought
thought that the the idea of putting sulfur in the atmosphere as was just mentioned
is such a terrible idea and i think it's equivalent to what people have said for trying to help out
the oceans at this stage we don't know enough to know what these things will do and in all
probability they can just make it worse well the question is that putting sulfur in the atmosphere
when it combines uh with water it gives sulfuric acid that this is acid rain and also this creates
a lot of health problems in the ecosystems and so on these are really a very bad idea and in
fact we have done the opposite experiment because since 2020 we have in in in force the new maritime
regulation that forces the ships to use um uh few years that create less so to emissions less
uh well the these emissions of sulfur and what is happening in places that were heavily
contaminated that especially in europe is that this this sulfur was creating a demon
so this was creating a scream between us and the medullaries of the atmosphere so we were
not experiencing it in all this intensity the climate change now that we have removed all
the sulfur the temperatures on land on europe have increased probably because of that and also
in parts of the ocean for which ships were passing continuously so uh in general it is
very dangerous because you are not aware of what we're doing you can trigger out a lot of other
processes that you don't know all those intended consequences the chemistry of the substances
tend to create something which is very bad and in general i i think it's it's a very bad idea
there are a lot of kind of your engineering which is a specific of the ocean that has been discussed
uh quite frequently is fertilizing the oceans using iron because the product that we have in the
in the oceans is that um there are a scarcity of several specific chemical elements and iron is
one which is a scarce so when you are uh disseminating iron dusts in parts of the ocean you can't
generate artificial blooms of algae and this algae in dying in principle should be uh capturing this
this this this CO2 because in the exoskeletons they are formed by by carbonates so they are
capturing this and going to the floor of the ocean so this will be good and this is the idea
behind this the problem with this is that you can create such a big amount of blooms that you can
really kill a lot of ecosystems this is absolutely it's a very nasty idea and you can at the end
create uh uh you can create a collapse of all these ecosystems and then even if you wanted to
go ahead fertilize those and to create more blooms maybe this is not going to have any effect
because probably you have not the algae there so in general these these things about your engineering
i think that they are very dangerous because we have the we are under depression we have in the
control of the situation but we are not there are many unintended consequences there are many
processes that we don't know and we wouldn't go for doing something in the larger scale with
how having tested this before this is very likely to happen and this is very likely to to turn on
the worst side yeah i mean the the arc of the story of the twilight zone that we're living in
suggests to me that once we get desperate we will try something systemically blind like like the
things you guys were just mentioning i want to be faithful to the time estimate i gave you all
because i know you're very busy i have one final question to ask you i could keep this going for
four hours you guys are all separately heroes of mine that you've spent your life work and
life force on behalf of understanding what's going on in the oceans and
uh the the the science so i really am grateful to you as human beings for your dedication to this
a closing question for each of you um if there was one question that as an ocean scientist you
would like to ask society those people watching and listening to this program for them to consider
um in order to solve a problem in an area of your specialty that you're working on what would that
be what would question or issue would you like listeners to consider i was in in hong kong and
in china a few days ago and um the same question came up what and um basically the question was
that in hong kong um they the people who see the ocean only via food via seafood this is the only
way they they appreciate the ocean and the point was being made that that the ocean doesn't is not
a larder it's not it's not only a provider of food and in fact it is if we see it only as a larder
we will lose the food the food provisioning that the ocean provide so we have to look i would say
we have to learn we have to try to get the people to see the ocean as more than a provider of food
and and thus we have to rein in the fisheries especially the overfishing in order to maintain
the ocean uh doing its own thing because its own thing is maintaining life in your on earth
i could i could say something on that i am now thinking more on the physical part of the ocean
i think that if i should pose a question to anyone regarding the oceans or what is happening
something to make they they then think about it is do you want to fear the ocean to be scared of
the ocean because for instance here in spain we have a lot of population living by the ocean
it's something which is generally of the all the countries that have coasts and the problem is that
for instance in some areas here in spain the water now in the material is so hot that it
starts to be uncomfortable even to take a bath there because it's very very hot actually and
the question is that as the amount of heat storing the ocean increases this makes that any
tempest any storm coming from the ocean is going to be more and more violent
and in fact we want to live by the oceans because there are many values of living by the oceans
but we don't like we don't want to be destroyed by the oceans so and that kind of tempest that
we're discussing are really becoming very dangerous it's not the typical tempest that we see here
so for me the question is do you want to be able to to live by the ocean do you want to have the
ocean as an habitat at which you can you can live by the side you want to be there or you want to
live a life in which you will be a scare for anything who comes with the ocean in the in the form of
these huge storms and so on there is something that I think that people should think about
which kind of environment we want to have even for ourselves yeah I think about the the greatest
single threat that I see to current human civilization is going to be a lack of food
and a lack of food is going to be coming from already as we've seen over fishing but also
as we melt the ice sheets the continental ice sheets greenland and Antarctica sea level rise
is taking out low level rice fields everywhere I mean salt goes sideways hungry people are politically
unstable people warfare look we've got how much carbon dioxide has gotten into the atmosphere
because russia attacked ukraine the u.s is building armaments like crazy the russians are
we have stopped the sense of a global sense the climate change is really the biggest problem
now dealing with yet another global war we've got to save the ice sheets we've got to keep ice
because if we lose ice we really lose sea level and we lose food and then we lose peace thank you
all I'm really reluctant to end this call because you all have such scientific knowledge to contribute
and also human vulnerability and honesty and maybe we could do this again because there's a lot that
we didn't cover about the importance and risks of worlds oceans and seas so thank you to the three
of you maybe the three of you now that are introduced could write some uh mind and future
changing academic paper together if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification
dot com for more information on future releases
