The reason that people try to follow fashion and season is they hope to connect with other people,
right? They're hoping that through that consumption, they get to connect with other people.
But like, what if we skip those steps and just started to understand those are the two main
things? Let's go build an economy around doing those two things really well. And then let's do
that for the Keystone species as well. And if that's all we did, we'd be in pretty good shape.
I'm pleased to introduce Tom Chi to this podcast. Tom has worked in a wide range
of roles from astrophysics researcher to Fortune 500 consultant to corporate executive
developing hardware and software. He's played a significant role in established projects with
global reach such as Microsoft Outlook and Yahoo Search. Tom was also one of the founding
members at Google X, developing technology such as Google Glass and Google Self-Driving Cars.
His current focus is much wider than these issues I just mentioned. He's delving into human
development with social entrepreneurs around the world. His new project is a climate green tech
fund called At One Ventures. We discuss his worldview, his philosophy, the great ask of
humanity ahead of us in the next century, his successful investment techs in the green sector.
This guy has a big heart and a big mind. And this was another fire hydrant full on conversation.
I hope you enjoy it. Please welcome Tom Chi.
Hey Tom, great to see you. Hey, good to see you, Nate.
And Tom and someone else you have on your lap. This is my cat.
So Frank was with me a few minutes ago. He's no longer, he went outside.
Tom, I will start with an admission of sorts or a self-reflection, self-observation.
You and I were at a dinner four or five years ago and I immediately was impressed by you and
liked you but I was thinking to myself, this guy doesn't get it. And you and I were at
a dinner a few weeks ago and I talked a lot with you about your projects and what you're doing.
And I had a realization that maybe it's I and the one that doesn't get it. So I hastily scheduled
you to be on the show and I want to unpack a lot of your ideas, your ethos, your work.
And I'm really looking forward to this. So let's start at the big 60,000 foot aerial view.
In one of your talks in the last couple of years, you explained your vision of the future,
which you break down into three epochs. Could you explain what these are and why they're
important and how you see them progressing? Yeah, absolutely. And the context for this is
I give a talk, you know, at our annual meeting, I give a talk to all of the investors in our funds
in our firm. And the purpose, I run a venture capital firm called At One Ventures, the purpose
of the firm is to help humanity become a net positive to nature. So a affirmative goal that
we actually want to move toward as opposed to thou shall not exceed 1.5 degrees C, which is
a very different goal construction psychologically, a whole different topic really.
So when I saw your email address and your company's name, I thought it stood for atone
ventures like we're atoning for wrongs. Oh, actually, that's on purpose. So
the way it's spelled out is at one ventures, like being at one with yourself, nature in the
universe, and that is part of the goal. And being at one with things, like with the kind of
greater totality of things is very central to a lot of Eastern spirituality,
whether it's like, you know, the idea of the Dao or many other phrases, chi, all that kind of thing.
And then atone is actually very central to to Western spirituality, where there's original
sin and atonement and forgiveness and all these sorts of things. At the end of the day, I do think
that there is a spiritual core to one's work. Because if you only, you know, try to use capitalism
as your as your kind of moral guidance, there's a lot of bad places you can end up.
So it's helpful, actually, in the name to go evoke, you know, both of the kind of large spiritual
traditions on planet Earth. And yeah, kind of on purpose. But yes. But with all that context, then,
you know, the the subject you're talking about is some framing that I did on what it looks like
for humanity to become a net positive nature. And one thing that I tell our LPs is that that's a
big project. It's a project that'll probably take 200 to 500 years. Right. And I don't know that very
many venture capitalists are basically saying our mission will not be accomplished in this lifetime
or the next three generations. But I'm a physicist as well. So I'm very used to like, what it takes
mass energy flow wise for things to go change their state. You know, the cryosphere is in a bad
state, like if everything was fixed to take at least 50 years for the ice caps to refreeze into
some sort of stabilized position, if not a bit longer. So even if everything was already fixed
right now, it'd be a half century to get to the actual moment of repair, even if you're on a good
trajectory of repair. So I think it's useful to kind of take the step back and start talking about
things on that type of timescale. And the the kind of arc that I built for them was this idea of
three different epochs of ecological technology that we will start on the ones that are closer
to us right now. We can actually do a huge number of our investments will be in that first epoch,
but we can build toward a powerful visionary one, which is actually where, you know, a lot of the
economy gets redesigned around that idea. And it kind of puts us in a spot where the basic function,
the economy helps humanity become a net positive to nature. But one doesn't redesign an economy
overnight and economy doesn't take a different form overnight. So even that project would take
50 years, even if everybody was totally on board and wanted to go change how all these systems worked.
So that's why to kind of think in those sorts of timescales. But jumping right into it,
Epic Zero is where we are right now and doesn't count that much. And it's actually the the one
that people are most familiar with. And actually, you get do a lot of talks about, which are kind
of the failings of an extractive economy. But I'll mention it very quickly, because
one way to go understand why economies become what they they become is to go look at what are the
what are kind of the axiomatic ideas inside of that economy. So inside of the extractive economy,
if you can go extract more resources in less time, if you can clear cut that forest faster,
then that is you getting financial leverage. And in fact, we have built generations of machines
that can go take the resources, you know, whether it's growing resources or mind resources,
take them out of the planet faster, and process them faster and then make them into board feed
or, or, you know, mineral stocks of various types and, and, you know, into primary manufacturing,
all that kind of stuff. And if that's your underlying principle for how you get financial
leverage in an economy, then of course, you are going to create an economy where the further
success of the economy is the direct detriment to the natural environment. And I kind of say that
the current economic design is either oblivious to or actively against, you know, the health of
the biosphere. And that's why it basically can't continue forever. But let's not spend that much
time on that. Like, let's get into the first epoch. The first epoch is called material productivity.
And instead of doing the kind of flat idea of let's maximize GDP or let's extract resources
as quickly as possible to go make the most money in the least time, then its guiding principle
is more along the lines of understanding that we live on a planet that doesn't have literally
infinite physical resources. There are some things that are infinite, and we will get to that in a
little bit. But, you know, it does not have literally infinite physical resources. So the
material productivity economy asks a slightly different question, but one that highly overlaps
with the existing economy, which is, what is the maximum GDP that I can get for a ton of feedstock?
What's the maximum GDP that we can get for, you know, if pollution must be created in this
industry? What's the maximum number of GDP, economic benefit, human benefit that can be
created if you have to have a ton of pollution? Right now, we don't ask those sorts of questions.
So we're actually very inefficient with those things. But, you know, to give you a sense of how
much room there is of people that really decide to be skillful around the use of materials,
well, you think about it like if you go grab, you know, a chunk of sand, like let's say I go and
grab a kilogram of sand and I go sell that to the construction market, it's pennies. It's literally
worth almost nothing, right? But if I take, you know, a kilogram of sand and it becomes, you know,
advanced chips that go into GPUs or new AI processing units or the, or fast, you know,
like multi-core processors, that same kilogram of sand might actually have $10,000 of economic value.
Now, the difference between a couple pennies for the kilogram of sand in a construction context
versus, you know, thousands of dollars in a semiconductor context basically shows the same
material. And I know that semiconductor sand can only be grabbed from particular places,
it's fine, right? But like, you know, like the same core material in terms of what it is,
silicon dioxide largely can become something that is literally thousands to millions of times
more valuable. And that's getting a lot more material productivity out of the same, you know,
kilograms of feedstock. But isn't the material productivity the same? It's just the incentives
or who's getting the benefits is different because someone now is paying pennies for that sand and
having it worth thousands of dollars if they turn it into chips.
No, because there was a point in the economy that that sand could never be worth more than pennies.
Right? So many inventions need to happen in the course of finding the new echelons of material
productivity. But once the stuff is invented, you can't un-invent it. Well, I mean, you can decide
not to use that type of production in the future. But like, we know how to do it at that point.
And back then, if you go back to before we knew how to do those things and you challenge somebody
to take a kilogram of sand and make $10,000 with it, they'd be kind of hard-pressed. I don't know
how you do it actually. So actual economic value is being created. And you're using the same amount
of physical resource to go do it. Now, this is a different type of leverage, right? In the extractive
economy, you want to make the money twice as fast. You cut down the forest twice as quickly.
And it's not really giving you orders of magnitude improvement. But if you are very
skillful at material productivity, whether it's from the feedstock side or from the pollution side,
then you can get a lot more human benefit in outcomes, economic benefit. Actually,
getting to something really concrete, like in our portfolio, we have a company called Gradient.
And Gradient, just like every other air conditioner on the planet, does have some greenhouse gas
impact from its refrigerants. And most refrigerants for air conditioners and
refrigerators in the world are based off of fluorinated gases. So EPA calls them broadly
classed as F gases. They're one of the four major greenhouse gases. And they're one that is not
talked about that often, but they are extremely potent per gram. And they also have an insanely
long half-life in the atmosphere. So it's not unusual for a fluorinated gas, including ones that
we use in industry to have a 10,000 or 50,000 half-life, 50,000 year half-life in the atmosphere.
So way longer live than carbon dioxide, mass and massively longer live than methane. Now,
if you think about the world in very short timelines, then methane proportion gets real big.
If you think on the GWP of 100, which most of our stats are kind of keyed off of, then carbon
dioxide first, methane second, right, go down the list. But if you think about a long time frame,
like 1,000 years plus, then the F gases are the main thing that's left. Anyhow, so Gradient is,
you know, for the refrigerant pollution that is created from air conditioning, we actually
use a refrigerant that has 6,000 times less greenhouse gas impact. So you're getting the
same cooling tons. And by the way, the OPEX is 2X cheaper as well. So it costs you less to run the
air conditioner. But like, so you're saving half, you know, twice as much money or like your bill
is half as much every single month for the same amount of cooling tons that you're getting from
your air conditioner. But in terms of the pollution footprint that you're leaving relative to the
the refrigerants that you're putting up in the atmosphere, because a little bit's always getting
out, then it's we're getting 6,000 times more benefit. But from a CO2 standpoint, you're not
getting a significant benefit. But from a total greenhouse gas over a long time, you're getting
a massive benefit. Well, the CO2 footprint is mostly related to the energy use going into the
device. So to wherever you live, and if you live by a cool plant. And on that one, you could say
we're not getting a huge benefit, but we're getting a 2X benefit. So it's about half as much, you
know, carbon intensity, depending on how carbon intense you're specific. Yeah, that's impressive.
Let me let me ask some questions. Yeah. Because knowing the way your brain works, I'm going to
have to interrupt so that I understand. Doesn't the individual and the societal
discount rate matter hugely for these sorts of questions? Because if we if our society
totally doesn't care about 100 years from now, because they don't believe in the future, or
they're too pessimistic, or any other thing, let alone 6,000 years from now, isn't this endemic to
the human biological condition that we don't see? I mean, the future is about as real to us as leprechauns.
And so does that matter to your investors, to the to the inventors, etc. For instance, if we had
a much shallower discount rate and cared as a culture about 6,000 years from now,
the gradient product you just said would go like hotcakes. And then there's the Jeven's
paradox, which we'll talk about in a minute. But what do you think the discount rate of our culture
affects some of the projects that you're talking about on these different epochs?
Yeah, the reason that it doesn't affect the way that we do this investment in epoch one
is because in all of our investments, we're looking for something that's called the triad.
Triad is a disruptive deep tech, which is ushering in radically better unit economics,
paired with radically better environmental economics. And I would say 95 plus percent of the
customers of our portfolio companies, they honestly could care less about the environment.
They buy it because it makes them more money or saves them a ton of money. So look, an air
conditioning bill might be $300 in a month during a hot month. It might be $200 a month in a hot
month. It's nicer if it's 80 bucks. It's nicer if it's 100 bucks.
So your, this company gradient or this product is two times cheaper than regular air conditioners
and it's over a long timeframe, 6,000 times better from a GHG?
Like immediately because right now you would be using F gas space refrigerants that have 6,000
times more greenhouse gas impact today. But in the long run, the proportion even gets worse
because of the long lived nature of F gases. Yeah. But yeah, up front it is also cheaper to run.
Okay. Well, then the logical next question is two part question. If it's cheaper to run
and we're headed into a warmer world and it's a groovy air conditioner technology, A,
why isn't that selling like hotcakes all over the planet? And B, if it does,
don't we run into the Jebens paradox rebound effect where people then save money and buy a
secondary conditioner or they save money and go to Home Depot and buy something to build? I mean,
that gets beyond the scope of your company and your vision, but we live in a-
I mean, if they bought 6,000 of them, then sure, they would catch up. But there's a point where
you win by enough that it's hard to actually create as much damage. But the answer to your first
question is it wasn't going like hotcakes initially because part of our investment
thesis is to get into these companies before they get to manufacturing scale. And we have a
bunch of people on the team that all three partners have a background in manufacturing. We have a
dedicated manufacturing support core. So by the time we're done working with you, now you're at
scaled manufacturing. So we've been working with them along the way and it is kind of selling
like hotcakes. They got a $24 million pre-order to go buy a bunch of units. They just closed another
$34 million pre-order. So they already have more than $60 million in bookings for a relatively
early stage venture. And look, $60 million is not going to change the planet overnight,
but when your unit economics are that advantage, then that is eventually going to be the way that
we do this industry. Well, I was just in India and India is planning to double coal production by 2030,
partially because they want to be self-sufficient in energy, but partially because they realize
they're going to need a lot more cooling and electricity for air conditioning. So I would think
something like this would be scalable. Yes. Oh, yes. No, like this will definitely
have some pickup in that part of the world. It's also going to get a lot of pickup in northern Europe,
places that did not traditionally have air conditioning and now really need it.
Okay. So the orders I mentioned so far are all US and North America based. So,
but yes, we see very strong prospects around the world. And did you fund this or the inventors
invented it with optimizing for CO2 pollution? We're a venture investor. So I got into this
pretty early. I actually got into it when it was a three-person company as an angel investment. And
then when the firm started, we warehoused it into the firm and then added to our position and took
a little bit more of a meaningful position. Yeah. But the inventors of it, the three-person team,
did they begin by optimizing for CO2 biosphere impact or for cheapness and profitability in the
epoch zero framework? They were thinking about both. Yeah. They definitely wanted to see if we could
use a refrigerant type that had way less greenhouse gas impact than fluorinated gases.
So that was definitely part of the original invention constraint and premise. Now that said,
if we happen upon an inventor that wasn't trying to invent it for ecological reasons,
but it still has this massive ecological benefit, we're not going to fault them for it. We're just
like, hey, you didn't, you may not have noted this, but you have created way more material
productivity around XYZ. We'd love to back it. Tom, when you and I met five years ago relative
to today, how many people are you coming across in your position that are those three-person
teams or what have you that are really developing products with an eye to ecological sustainability
and the longer timeframe? I think the number is definitely increased. I actually never thought
it was actually a small number. I will say that it's been chronically underfunded because look,
we had 20 years of everybody deciding that Silicon Valley venture capital is just software
and enterprise SaaS is the easiest way to make the most money for the least amount of money in,
but I think we solved a lot of the important enterprise SaaS problems. Not to say that there's
none left, but you're now at the spot where it's like, hey, this thing is going to optimize your
procurement system by 5%, but we already have 50 of those. I'm not saying that you can't build a 50
first version of that software, but the other 50 were okay already. I think we're running out of
gas on that, but what it means is that we have a lost generation. The place is called Silicon
Valley. It's not called enterprise SaaS Valley. It's not called lines of code Valley. It was
called Silicon Valley because we solved important things for the semiconductor revolution,
then we solved important things for the physical hardware of the internet revolution,
and then we got into the web software and other things on top of that, and then we got into these
overly easy business models around SaaS or advertising, and then everything just narrowly
popped into that. But ahead of all this, we had a couple generations of venture capitalists that
were very skilled at physical hardware and building physical things, and you can make a
lot of money out of it. Those people, they have their names on the side of buildings right now
because you absolutely can make money at it. Okay. So before we move off onto epoch 2 and epoch 3,
presumably, let me make sure I understand. So epoch 0 is business as usual, basically. Epoch
1 is determining how much GDP you could get from a certain amount of scarce non-renewable
material. Yeah, from a kilogram of material or a kilogram of pollution that must be put out.
Given the pollution that has to come out, how do we use the least amount of inputs to get that?
Well, how do you get the most GDP for each kilogram of pollution that you make?
This still makes refrigerant pollution. It's just 6,000 times less impactful,
and you're getting the same number of cooling tons.
Okay. So what comes next then in your longer term framework?
Epoch 2 is the first big leap, and then Epoch 3 is an even further leap. But the first big leap
comes from the fact that in epoch 0 and epoch 1, we were still treating resources as nouns,
right? Like this forest can become board feet. The forest is a noun. The tree is a noun. We cut
it down. We make it into board feet. That's a noun. The first big jump is to actually understand
that the resources are there not because of nouns, but because of verbs. A forest can also be
understood as a verb, like a piece of land forest itself, like a verb. And that comes from having
access to the right amount of water, nutrients, resources in the air, and then the right biodiversity
around it. And lack of chainsaws. Sure, exactly. Now, the whole point, if you understand the verb
to be the locus of where value is being created, as opposed to just thinking about that as the noun,
as the output of the value being created, then you can understand that there's a different way
to get financial leverage, right? By investing in the robustness of the verb. If the verb is
incredibly robust, the forest grows quickly. It grows with good disease resistance. It grows.
Look, we make all these monocrops, and then we end up with disease problems for obvious reasons.
And then we ask questions later on. It's like, why is it so expensive? We have to put all these
inputs on the land. You didn't necessarily need to. You didn't have a healthy verb. Because you
didn't have a healthy verb, because the only thing that you thought about was the noun at the end of
the day, you were focused on the amount of yield that was coming from this land and the idea of a
noun. But you can actually get an enormous amount of financial leverage if you invest in the healthy
metabolics of the forest, so that it is more self-sustaining, more pest resistant, more able
to go use the natural resources that are available to it in a skillful way.
Is embedded in your statement you just made, somewhat of an oxymoron, that you're getting
more financial leverage by treating the forest as a verb? Because if you're still focused on
financial outputs, then somehow that's not going to jive with ecological stability,
unless we're at a much lower scale. Well, not necessarily, because if you look at the ancient
land practices, including a number of indigenous people that actually used a lot of wood for fuel,
for building material, for basically a lot of the same stuff we still use it for, actually,
then there was practices where there was a lot more selective culling, but actually plenty of culling.
And they would go and purposely pull down particular trees that would open up canopy in
order to allow things to go happen on the floor around them. But they were doing it in a skillful
way, not just on a monocropped thing. And then they would rotate around the faces of a hill,
for example. So over the course of a generation, they would do one full rotation around the hill,
and the entire thing that they started with would have grown back even stronger than when
they started. So in that case, they're basically doing continuous take. Now, look, you can clear
cut and just move sideways and try to clear cut again and move sideways, but you just eventually
run out of space. So you end up with a business that might actually integrate to less value creation
over time than to skillfully rotate around and do a little bit of investment in the
metabolics of the forest. And what is epoch 2 called? Well, epoch 2 is focusing on the
metabolics. It's basically understanding the underlying flows of a system as opposed to
understanding everything as the nouns. So it's the verbs. Epoch 2 is the verbs.
Yeah. There's a lot of different ways to go phrase it. I think verbs is like the simplest
phrase for it. The more nerdy term that I gave in the talk was the idea of enriching ecosystem
metabolics. And this is just to say that, and this is actually a point that's worth making,
because a lot of people are saying, we're moving into a fully virtualized economy. Everything's
digital today, and all the money's going to be made. And it's like, no, everything in the economy
was either mined or grown. Look around you. Everything that you do, even the things that
we're talking about right now, this thing, the screen I'm looking at, all these sorts of things,
all of the stuff was mined or grown. Now, if you can go make a bunch of money off of the same device,
then great, this is material productivity wise better. So that's fantastic, but you cannot get
away. There's no such thing as a virtual economy, right? You can pretend that the system line stopped
there, but at the end of the day, there's a physical substrate that you're working off of.
Now, if you understand that everything in the world is mined or grown, then you understand that
there were metabolic processes of the earth that created the opportunity for you to harvest the thing
that was grown, to harvest the thing that you're getting through mining. And if you start to understand
that you can get tremendous financial leverage by focusing on the health of the thing that makes
the valuable thing, so this is like birthing the goose that lays the golden eggs as opposed to hoarding
all the eggs that come out, or cutting the goose open in order to grab the eggs that are inside of
it, we're way closer to that. So this is the first time I've heard this. Let me repeat it back to
you in a way that might clarify. So APAC-1 is material productivity figuring out how much
GDP you could get for a unit of pollution or a unit of raw material input, but now this is like
the first derivative of that where you're looking at the ecosystem metabolics and figuring out how
much GDP can I get from a stable, healthy ecosystem metabolics. That's right. And you'll actually,
because you start to work with the metabolics of that ecosystem, then actually nature's on your
side. Like a lot of times in the extractive economy, nature's either against you or at best
neutral. It's just like sitting there to be taken. So can you give us an example of APAC-2
versus APAC-0, how we're working against nature right now, and how that same product
or human service might be different in your APAC-2 framework?
Yeah. Well, there's a couple that I can go share. So one of them is actually a very well-known
example, which is the water purification of the Hudson Valley and the water system of New York.
And they basically used to have multiple billions of dollars that were going into waste
water treatment. And it's understandable. You're trying to make water for eight,
nine million people. So I get it. But then they realized that actually if they went upstream
and they worked with some of the landholders to go change a little bit of their land use practices
upstream, that it was reducing the amount of water processing that needed to happen downstream
by a factor of 10. And it was a very small financial cost for them to go talk with those
landholders and be like, hey, can you make this tweak? Oh, can you go adjust how you're working
on this land in this way? And they financially compensated some of those landholders as well,
but massively cheaper than trying to go solve that problem downstream. Because basically the
natural systems were doing a number of things that the water treatment system would eventually do.
Now, we call those nature-based services when it happens in this kind of
non-financial context, but to give you another one. So one of our portfolio companies is called
Dendro Systems. They use all sorts of tools like drones and other sorts of robotics and
scanning technology in order to massively accelerate ecosystem restoration. Now,
where in the world is eco restoration a business? Well, it turns out that in the regulated resources
market, it's definitely a business. And what it looks like is there's all this mining that we do
in the world. And let's say a strip mine goes and, you know, there's a strip mine and it covers
5,000 hectares. Well, typically, you know, in order for a mining company to keep their mining
license, after they have kind of destroyed that land, they are on the hook to go restore that
much hectareage times a small factor, typically between 2 and 5. So if you destroyed 5,000 hectares,
you'll be on the hook to restore, you know, 10,000 to 25,000 hectares, you know, and as the kind of
the repair that you do in exchange for doing all that damage. Now, what they would normally do
back in the day before Dendro is they would hire these super low paid field crews to go out there
and hand plant things. And the problem is that a mining site is actually physically dangerous.
And also like a bunch of, you know, people would get heavy metal poisoning just from like breathing
and touching the soil in that area was honestly not a nice work environment in any way either.
And they're being paid, you know, a terribly small amounts to do eco restorations that,
you know, we're just okay. But what the what Dendro is able to do is they're able to fly the
drones over, scan the landscape, analyze exactly where to plant things, including what species
and what locations as a function of, you know, light exposure, moisture exposure. So it required
the least amount of maintenance in terms of being able to have to go back to that land and take care
of those plants and plant them in the right proportion. And an example of nature working
with us is there's this landscape that had been completely destroyed by a strip mine
and the ore had been removed. And, you know, after the ores removed, they usually put the
dirt on the side. And they call it the overburden used to be called an ecosystem. But, you know,
in the context of mining, it's called overburden. And then once, you know, you've you've done the
thing that you've done, then they just throw the dirt back on. And then they try to start
ecosystem restoration. Now, if you if you don't have a good intervention, that becomes a muddy,
eroded landscape, it might as well be the surface of the moon, or if you have anything,
it's just some weeds, right? Definitely doesn't look anything like the ecosystem that was there
before. But working with local ecologists, we got advice on what are the sprinter species that we
should that we should plant? And by going in there, sprinter species, the sprinter species are the
ones that in the, in the course of ecological succession, those are the first that actually
get established, which then create the foundation that the that the next set of species can come
into the ecosystem. And then there are a series of, you know, phases like that, which is called the
series of ecological succession, then you arrive at the ultimate, you know, best ecosystem for that
that spot, which is, you know, in ecological terms called the climax community, this is like the peak
of biodiversity that that, you know, land and caring capacity could have.
So the, the enriching ecosystem, metabolics and the epoch two is trying to optimize for
climax communities in various ecosystems in a way. I think you'll get it when I share this data
point. So, so the ecologist told us what the sprinter species were. And instead of, you know,
having a bunch of unlo paid, untrained people just kind of willy nilly try to repopulate the thing,
which has a way lower success rate, we put the right mix of species in the right place.
And we planted about 15 different species in the right places in the landscape.
Now, once those 15 species were in the ground, 18 months later, you know, our survey of the land
had 70 species coming up. Now, where did all the other species come from? They were in the dirt.
The seeds were waiting in the dirt. And because we had put the right foundation down, we were
working in line with the metabolics of how that ecosystem wanted to come back. And we massively
reduced the time of that first stage of ecological succession. So 15 species actually became 70
species, which were then self propagating, and then speeding up the pace that the next stage of
ecological restoration succession happened. And did this whoever owned the land and got the minerals
out of it or whatever, how did this change their cost structure? What you just described? It's way
lower with a better outcome. And that's the case of basically all of our companies, cheaper cost
structure, way better outcome, both in terms of performance and massively better outcome in terms
of ecological benefit. How many places around the world is an example of what you just described
happening? Well, you know, that particular company is already planted across 20 different ecosystems
on four different continents. So I'll tell you many places in the world where we have very
concretely done this work. And, you know, the images, you know, that like relative to the,
the, you know, strip mine I'm talking about, we're done in dry land, you know, moderate
elevation, but we also have fantastic, you know, restorations that I can show you where we're
doing massive mangrove planting, which is obviously the opposite, very humid near the shore,
partially aquatic ecosystems. Actually, the team is out in Abu Dhabi right now. And on planting,
you know, during the planting season, when they go out, they're actually able to plant
about 120,000 mangroves a day with four field operation people. And in that process, restore
about 83 hectares a day. Now, the 120,000 mangroves, you know, once you put it through the actual
germination to successful survival to adulthood rate comes out to about 100,000 mangroves that
get established per day. So, yeah, no, it's a very interesting scale. And it's something that,
yeah, we look, I mean, there's a really simple way to explain this, like the tools of conservation,
we didn't give them anything, like you talk with the conservation and restoration folks,
they're still using the tools from 100 years ago, like binoculars, little quadrats where they can go
count the species inside of a square meter, little clickers to be able to count bird populations
and fish populations, they're still using the same kind of stuff we had 100 years ago. And every
other industry got to advance and do manufacturing in 1000 x the scale or 100 x the quality or what
have you, and we didn't give any better tools to conservation. And if you spend any of the modern
skills on those areas, you will find that there are 10 x 100 x wins to be had in those areas as
well. We just never spent the time working on those tools. 10 x to 100 x financial returns.
Well, in terms of efficacy per dollar in now, if that is related to something fine,
financial in the case of regulated resources, it absolutely is related to something financial in
that if the, you know, a typical mind that we might work with in in Australia, let's say,
is top lining like $700, $800 million per year. So if they actually have an environmental violation
that shuts them down for a month, the cost is astronomical. Now, if you could spend $2 million
to go have the ecosystem restoration come through really well, then if you can take the number of
down days because of infractions from 40 days to one day, then it massively more than paid for itself.
Okay, I have a lot of questions. So you're implying and your stellar returns of your fund would give
evidence to the fact that these technologies are working even without a major change in
incentive structures and regulations and things like that. That is by design. Those are the types
of investments that we back, yes. But wouldn't the type of technologies that the people you're
investing in are developing like be complete moonshots if we change the regulatory structure
and started to price in ecosystem services or externalities or things like that just a little
bit? Oh, look, if we did governmental changes and that type of incentive change, then yeah,
then the businesses are even more amazing. But everything that we get into actually already
has better unit economics. So it's already viable without regulation. And there are some things
that we haven't been able to go kick. And some of those things may require regulatory. Like
the death of honey bees in North America could be understood as a three-part
comorbidity model. And one of the elements, the neonicotoid pesticides, I don't think we're going
to be able to find something that has better unit economics than neonic pesticides. It's basically
a one-time application that then gets through the entire plant as opposed to surface applications,
which need to account for the weather, like whether things are getting washed off and need to be
applied multiple times in the season, blah, blah. Then I don't know how we beat the unit economics
and neonics. That said, we did back the first company in the world to develop a vaccine for a
number of critical honey bee diseases, specifically bacterial brood diseases, which is one of the
other three in the three-part comorbidity model. It's the diseases, the varroa destructor mite,
and neonic pesticides. I don't know how to go win against neonic pesticides on a pure economic
basis. The vaccine absolutely is actually getting really interesting kind of financial possibilities
for it because it's obviously not only the first vaccine to ever protect honey bees, but it's
actually the first vaccine ever developed by humans to go protect any invertebrate. It's
actually opening the door to so many other things that we can do that would be economically valuable
from it. Okay. This is all super impressive, as it was when we met a few weeks ago. Actually,
that's a good example because that is still an epoch, too, because the metabolics of pollination
are really critical for the health of the planet and to the extent that we can go work with the
pollinators that then give all of this oomph to how the flowering plants. The majority of biomass
on planet Earth is plants. 80% of all plants are angiosperms, which are flowering plants.
They're obligate mutualists that require a pollinator. To the extent that you have technologies
that really strengthen the pollinators on planet Earth, you are strengthening a huge swath of life
on planet Earth. Those are metabolics that are on your side. We're not paying for most of that.
Does the enriching ecosystem metabolic framework, is it scale agnostic? Right now,
we have a 19 terawatt metabolism as a global human economy. Let's just say that you use tech to
make all these things better that you were just describing. That adds a productivity
to the whole system while increasing the ecosystem health, except that productivity
gets turned into dollars and yen and rubles and euros and is then spent on Home Depot and NASCAR
and Walmart and other stuff. Is there a decoupling or does that environmental impact at the
broader meta-scale still happen under this framework? The reason that there's things
at different upboxes is if they then go to Home Depot and buy materials, for example,
we have an epoch one-bet that is about how to massively improve those materials and do it with
much less waste and do it at a way lower cost structure. I mean, I can talk about that company
if you'd like as well. We're trying to hit it on all these different fronts. It is true that
you solve a thing here and then you might get some reflow in some other spot, but if you're
solving on multiple fronts at once, then it's like, no, I mean, you'll run into some improvements
if you go in this direction too and you run into some improvements if you go in that third
direction. Well, it's not your job to change the entire incentive structure of our capitalist
society. You're just trying to- I'm not changing the incentive structure. No, I'm basically,
the incentive structure is exactly what we're working with. These businesses want to make
more money. That's the reason that they buy our equipment. That's the reason that they
use our materials. That's the reason that they save energy with the things that we ship to them.
Absolutely. Let's just assume that we stay at today's level of GDP and 19 terawatts of energy
are required to power it. If your company is doing these things would scale, then our pollution and
our footprint, our ecological footprint on hurting nature would decline quite a lot because we're
using a technology and applying it to improve the metabolism of ecosystems, for example,
planting mangrove trees, et cetera. Yeah, that is correct. Actually, look, we're at the point where
even without pricing in the value of nature-based services and all sort of thing, one of our first
big mangrove restoration projects in that company happened from land that was cleared in southern
Myanmar. The government purposely cleared out the mangroves because they're like, we're going to
start a huge shrimp industry down here and they're just going to make so much money. In practice,
they cleared all these mangroves and there was a large population of folks that were doing subsistence
fishing from the mangroves. Those people started needing federal government assistance because
they're starving now. They literally took away their fishing and hunting grounds. Basically,
it was more expensive for them to pay the folks to not die than it was to just put the mangroves
back. Actually, similarly in Abu Dhabi, they cleared their own mangroves in order to have these
particular types of beaches and a particular type of shoreline. Then they found out that,
hey, stuff is eroding away. Then all of a sudden, they were spending billions of dollars
dredging sand. Now, instead of spending billions of dollars dredging sand to put their beaches back,
they pay us $50 million and we put the mangroves back. Once again, insanely cheaper than what you
were already doing. Instead of boosting labor productivity, you're talking about boosting
ecosystem productivity. Yet, that's still from an anthropocentric viewpoint. It's boosting the
ecosystem productivity for humans. This is the bridge because at the end of the day,
would we have backed pollinators if we didn't need the honeybee economically? Probably not.
Would we have put the mangroves back in Abu Dhabi if it wasn't so expensive to do sand dredging and
try to fix that only for it to be a temporary fix? Probably not. This is why I say that some of
this stuff is going to take 200 to 500 years because we get to do lots of epoch 1 bets where
every normal capitalist is like, oh, I get why that's amazing because you're getting
same cooling tons for half the energy or you're getting it for a fraction of the pollution
or you're getting it for it. That's very easy for them to understand epoch 1 bets. I'm going to say
75% of our portfolio is epoch 1 bets. That makes it very easy. It's like walk up easy for people
to understand. Epoch 2, like I said, is the first big leap because we start to talk about verbs
instead of nouns. But it's a very powerful position to come from in terms of leverage. You think
about the Archimedean idea of if I find the right place to stand to get the leverage, the verbs
have way more leverage than mucking with the nouns. Now that said, at this particular moment in history,
we can only get epoch 2 bets off if they are half a step away from something that we obviously
economically care about, like pollinating crops that we want to go eat or restoring a coastline
that we want people to live on or we want to do real estate development on. And hey, man,
that's the world today on that front. I wish some of that stuff was different, but at least
one is able to go introduce how much leverage that can come through the backing of verbs instead
of nouns. I mean, this is not your job, but if society had a more longer term or an optimistic
view of the future, that would enable people to visualize and care about epoch 1 and epoch 2.
And as we head into what I call the great simplification with potential wars or climate
impacts or a financial reset, all of those things actually do the opposite. They steepen
people's discount rates, which makes it tougher to invest in and imagine the things that you're
doing, which means that there needs to be kind of a cultural in a way explaining your framework
of the different epochs. In some ways, that is a parallel and as important project as the tech
that underpins it. Well, I think the framework is important because, like I said, 95% of the
customers of our port coast could care less about the environment. They don't even know that they're
benefiting things because they're just going after their own economic benefit. But if at the core of
it, and the 5% that we're looking for something that was more sustainable, they happen upon our
companies and they're like, oh my gosh, I was just going to do like a pilot thing and then
make a blog post or a press announcement about it. But this is a better way to do this part
of the business. We should adopt it for the whole thing. We shouldn't just do a pilot.
I would say that even if you have a steeper discount curve on time, then these people would,
as rational economic actors, would still be excited about the stuff in epoch one, absolutely.
Remember, epoch two is still way cheaper than dredging sand. Epoch two is way cheaper than
hand pollinating. Epoch two is way cheaper than a lot of the other things that the tech that we're
doing at that level is supporting. And what's epoch three? Yes, epoch three is the biggest leap.
And in order to go understand epoch three, you need to have the foundation of understanding
that value can be created and leverage can be created by supporting verbs. But you got to build
on that even further. Now, in order to go understand epoch three, then there's, you know,
I call the philosophical foundation of epoch three the idea that there's plenty of room in
the middle. And this is kind of a nod to Richard Feynman. He wrote a paper and gave a talk back
in 1959 that was called plenty of room at the bottom. And what he was basically saying is,
well, you know, we mostly, you know, physics wise, we've mostly made things that are kind of human
scale, or we've made things that are factory scale, or if we've ever made a small thing,
then maybe like a Swiss watch, we've like made some pretty small components in the Swiss watch.
Because think about the world, you know, like up until the 50s, right? Like the smallest things
we'd ever made. But basically, what Feynman was saying in his plenty of room at the bottom was
like, well, you know, with, with, you know, with, with lithography techniques, we actually
should be able to make things really, really small. Right? We can actually make, you know,
like denser and denser computation, we could make micro machines, we could make, so he basically
predicted the semiconductor revolution, the nanotech revolution, you know, and half of the
stuff we still haven't finished yet. But he like predicted two huge economic arcs that happened in
the subsequent 50 years, because the physics basically said there's plenty of room at the
bottom to do more value creation at smaller and smaller sizes, as opposed to kind of the Swiss
watch being like the, the, like the detail limit for the size of things that human beings were
engineering at that time. Now plenty of room in the middle refers to the following. So almost
all the energy for life on planet earth comes from the sun. You know, there's a little bit that comes
from, you know, geothermal vents and all sort of thing, but you know, almost all the, all the energy
that powers the biosphere is coming from the sun and a photon will arrive from the sun and it'll
spend a certain amount of time on planet earth. And after a certain amount of time, it'll, the
energy from that photon will be re-radiated back to space in the form of infrared. And the input
and the output are always equal. If it didn't, then the planet would just over time would overheat
like crazy. Now the reason that, you know, the planet is warming at all is because of greenhouse
gases, there's just a longer residence time of that energy in the atmosphere before it radiates
back out, but it's always equivalent, the amount of energy in and the energy out. And the middle
is that time period between, you know, the photon arriving and its energy being radiated
back out in space. And what I mean by there's plenty of room in the middle is that one can go
design an economy around how many organisms are benefited in that middle time period between the
photon arriving and the energy exiting the earth system. Now to make this really concrete, let's
talk about some fates of this photon. That photon could arrive on planet earth, it could hit a rock
and it could immediately radiate back out as infrared into space and zero organisms were
benefited. You know, maybe if a lizard lays on that rock later, it'll like warm its belly a little
bit and like something would be benefited. But you know, there's many rocks where that doesn't
happen and therefore that photon benefited nothing in the middle in that time period between arrival
and re-entry in the of its energy into space. Now think about a second case where the photon arrives
instead of hitting a rock, it hits the solar panel. Well, now it's going to be part of helping,
you know, a couple organisms in that household. So whatever, maybe four people and a dog. Great,
fantastic. Well, five organisms got benefited because of this photon arrive before it got
radiated back out. Now let's talk about a third example where the photon arrives and instead
of hitting a rock or solar panel, it hits a green leafy plant. Well, now the plant is going to go
use that to go synthesize plant sugars that then get fed down into the roots and drive the entire
underground ecosystem and all the different critters that live in the underground ecosystem.
That plant, of course, it's powering its own body and it then gets eaten by an herbivore,
which then gets eaten by a predator, which then eventually dies and gets eaten by detrovores
and that sort of thing. You might be helping dozens of macro organisms and many millions to
billions of micro organisms with just that one photon. Now that's basically saying that the
amount of good that a photon can do between in the middle is incredibly elastic. It can get to
a very, very large number. And epoch three is called the maximization of diverse nutrient flows
because it's built off of two ideas of what life is doing in the universe. If you had to boil the
algorithm of life in the universe, or at least the life that we know of in the universe in terms
of what it's trying to do, life is trying to savor every photon, savor every water molecule,
which is do the most in the middle with the photon, do the most in the middle with the water molecule.
What the middle for the water molecule is, is most of the available water in our planet,
because a bunch of it's locked up in various places, but most of the water it's available to life
is part of the hydrosphere where it evaporates off of the ocean and then it rains down over the land
and it'll start at like a high peak like you know at the top of a mountain or in a snowpack
and it'll run back down to the ocean. And between the top of that elevation and the bottom,
that's the middle for the water molecule. And there's many organisms that could be benefited
in that middle. Now basically life is trying to go savor every photon while it's in the middle,
is trying to savor every water molecule while it's in the middle, and over time life works
toward the maximization of diverse nutrient flows. Is this akin to the maximum power principle that
says organisms self-organized to best degrade an energy gradient? You don't have an oak tree that
has one leaf, which would be maximum efficiency and you don't have a billion leaves because
they would be shading each other and they would cost so much. You have the exact number of leaves
to get the most sunlight in the middle. So I think you're talking about that from the
particular standpoint of an organism or a species and that's certainly part of what is happening
to go make this macro arc happen, but that principle by itself is not the whole macro arc.
The macro arc spans well beyond any species or any time era in the history of the planet,
but when one thinks about the maximization of diverse nutrient flows, we likely had life on
planet Earth, even in the late Hadean. In the early Hadean, it was literally like the floor is lava,
like it was pretty difficult for things to live because the-
What was the Hadean?
The Hadean was the very first half billion to three-quarter billion year of planet Earth because
there were still a bunch of bombardments from solar system objects and basically the whole,
the planet was pretty molten basically, conditionally cooled in spots and eventually
cooled down and had a hard crust. Then at the end of the Hadean started the Archean.
Now the Archean basically led to a massive proliferation of single-celled organisms
across the planet. We didn't have eukaryotes yet or anything, but we had really simple single-celled
organisms. Obviously, that's way more life in the middle than when we had the Hadean.
Almost nothing could live in the Hadean. That's part of the maximization, but it wasn't quite
diverse yet because it was just a couple species of single-celled organisms or actually even the
definition of species was a little funky back then, but we don't need to get into the minutia
here necessarily. If you give it some more time, what life wants to do is continue to go diversify
those nutrient flows by making new species that are taking different ecological niches in terms of
doing interesting things with minerals that are available, doing interesting things with
different forms of energy that are available. For example, like, hey, I can use acoustic energy to
hear things. Well, that's pretty interesting. Well, now I can do more diverse set of behaviors
that can then help me do interesting and different niches. That is basically what
life is trying to do in the universe, period. Okay, so I can't help but make a simplifying
observation from your explanation of epoch 3. You said that if a photon hits a solar panel,
it helps five organisms in a house, but if it hits a green leafy plant, it helps unknown ones in
the biology under the soil, et cetera. It's noble. Just such a large number. We don't spend a lot of
time counting it. Yeah, but does that imply that solar panels are not the optimal path
for this photon given the epoch 3 framework? Well, look, it might be the right thing in particular
cases, but actually the punchline is something different, which is because there's a lot of
discussion around like, okay, do we do donor economics? Do we go into degrowth? I mean,
even a lot of the work that you're talking about and the great simplification is kind of along
those lines because it's like, oh, we're in epoch zero and it's garbage. We absolutely need less
of epoch zero. So I have nothing against the idea that we need less of epoch zero. We absolutely
need less of epoch zero. And that leads to the ideas on degrowth and all these sorts of things.
But you have to understand that life on earth, if you follow the algorithm of life on earth,
you don't need less of it. You need more of it. What earth has been doing over these billions
of years is actually making more life and way more diversity of life touching more and more
niches. That is the algorithm of life on planet earth. And if you wanted to go-
It interrupted five or 10 times with minor and mass extinctions.
Oh, yes, of course. But even then, we actually have the most diversity of anything in earth's
history now, even after those mass extinctions. We can get set back pretty hard, but we had
the great dying. We lost like 95% of biodiversity at that point, but sprung back pretty strongly.
Anyway, the whole point is that is what life is trying to do on planet earth.
And one can design an economy that can go on forever if you focus on the maximization of
organisms benefited in the middle. Because you can keep on getting more and more economic benefit.
This is where you go beyond the anthropocentric lens in epoch three.
Because in the early Archean, the thing would go hit a single celled organism,
and it would kind of do its thing. And there wasn't a complex web of life in the soil. There wasn't
a complex ecosystem of herbivores to predators to detrovores or whatever. That type of diversity
didn't exist on earth yet. It basically would receive a little bit of energy from the environment,
live its life, and that would radiate back as infrared. So it actually, life itself was starting
at a lower level in terms of how many organisms were being benefited in the middle. But if you
give life enough time, it diversifies things, which are creating a type of wealth, which we
really do experience as wealth. It's not limited in the same way that like mineral extraction or
clear cutting of forests is limited. One of my recent guests, and I forgot who
was a climate scientist and said, in a three to five degree Celsius world, we actually could
have more life on the planet. But it would be cockroaches and jellyfish and bacteria.
And it wouldn't have much complex life like whales or dolphins or elephants or humans.
So are you saying that the more organisms, the better? Or do you
qualify by complex life or other metrics? The reason that we would have less complex life
is because of how acutely it happens. So if it happens as an asteroid strike, or if it happens
as human beings like careening the temperature out of control in sub 1,000 years, then, yeah,
a lot of things are going to die. I mean, things died during the ice ages to interglacial time
periods as well, even though that was a way more gradual transition, gave a thing, whatever, 10,000
years to go adjust as opposed to 100 years. So we will lose a lot of species because of how
acute the change is. But if it stabilizes for a period of time, then Earth will achieve a pretty
substantial amount of biodiversity. Now that said, I don't think we should be irresponsible.
Like when the Great Dying happened, it basically took easily tens of millions of years, but one
can interpret it like up to 50 million years for the biodiversity of planet Earth to recover.
And I don't know that humanity is wanting to be responsible for wiping out 50 million years of
progress. I think very few people are aware that that is at stake. That is what we are
engaged in, but yes. Yeah. So you are a businessman. You run a venture fund. I like the framing of
the epoch 0123. Epoch 3, though, is really almost your philosophy, your story about the next
1,000 years as kind of an Overton window ethical stake in the ground as a story. And I think if
more people thought of that story, then maybe that would change our values, our consciousness,
and maybe our decisions and our investments. Is that what you are hoping for?
I actually would frame it slightly differently, which is, in Epoch 3, I am actually just
describing how life works in the universe. And we can end up with an economy that is well aligned
with that or not. If we end up with an economy that's not aligned with that, then a lot of death
happens and, hey. Yeah. And look, there's many survivable civilizations where we don't get
fully in line with that. That's where some philosophical elements of economy design can
come in. But the actual underlying thing that's happening, I am describing just how life works
in the universe. So could you visualize and explain that if we, in the coming century,
graduate from epoch 0 to epoch 1 and we integrate epoch 2, what would an epoch 3 human
civilization society look like 500 or 1,000 years from now? Oh, yeah. I think we actually have little
peaks of it, right? Because what happens in that sort of, if you are really understanding,
maximizing the number of organisms that are benefited in the middle, and you start to
really go and build an economy around it, it means that you need to be listening to more
organisms than we are today. We mostly look at organisms as resources or food or materials
for ourselves. That's how we look at organisms. We don't think about, well, what is this organism
trying to be? What is a great life for this organism? What would be a maximization of its
life experience? Now, that said, we have little peaks of it, right? People interact with their pets
in a very deep way, and that actually shows that even across different species, we're able to start
understanding each other. Actually, I have a cat, and recently, it was established that
cats actually don't meow at each other. It's a very rare thing for cats in colonies to
meow at each other. That's not how they communicate. Cats actually developed meowing to talk to us,
and that's actually showing that a species can work out, like, hey, I need to relate to you
better, and I'm going to start vocalizing because vocalizing is a way that you guys interact,
and by vocalizing, I'm able to interact with you in a more skillful way. Now, in the same way that
a cat can have the consciousness to go figure out how to go do that, and because of that,
install themselves in households around the world, then imagine human beings had some of that same
affinity. Look, we do have it going one way with our pets and some of the animals that we care about,
but some of the protected species people are very passionate about, and they want to have
that deeper connection with. But imagine it was just part of the larger vocabulary that people
are thinking about organisms not just as resources, but organisms as other types of sentience that we
are effectively wanting to listen to you as a process of maximizing how many organisms are
benefited in the middle. So that sounds aligned with a lot of indigenous thinking, but let me ask
you a really difficult question, which might be slipping into the minds of some of the viewers.
There are now 1.2 billion dogs on the planet or something like that. I'm a dog person.
The amount of dogs on the planet outweigh all the other wild mammals on the earth
at this moment. So given your Epoch 3 goal of maximization of diverse species.
So we're not winning on diversity yet because we have such a small aperture for compassion for
other organisms. So right now we have a real small cadre right now. The reason that I know that it
can be much larger is that I've seen folks start to build relationships that are a lot more diverse
than that. And I live in San Francisco part of the time. I also live in Hawaii. And our old place in
Hawaii was next to these volcanically heated tide pools. And because of it, a bunch of people lived
along the shore next to wild fish. And actually one of our neighbors, Joe, basically had a puffer
fish that knew her and honestly loved her, right? Basically, like, you know, Joe would come out there
and over a couple interactions, like figured out, oh, the thing that the puffer fish likes the most
is stewed chicken. Nice. So they would have a little interaction where Joe would come out and
puffer fish was named Esmerelda. And it didn't tell us the name. That's what Joe named her.
And basically, but like Joe and Esmerelda had developed this amazingly deep relationship.
And because we knew Joe, we would sometimes go over there and hang with Esmerelda and feed them
as well. Like Esmerelda could absolutely tell the difference between our different faces. And it would
go behave differently around us. It actually would have a different personality around us,
just knowing how we were actually closer to home in that same house. We had a koi pond in the back
yard. And between myself and my wife, we have different feeding behaviors. Like I would like
look on the back of the thing, it's like this many koi that weigh this much, here's how much,
you know, food to put into the water. And I would typically put it in the same spot in the pond,
you know, just so, you know, it would be kind of organized. But like my wife, when feeding the koi
fish, she'd be like, you get food and you get food and basically throwing food all around, not,
you know, not consistently measured, just different styles. Anyway, these fish could
recognize us from 20 feet away. And when I was walking up, they would all swim to the one spot
that they knew they knew I was going to start putting the food in. And when my wife was walking
up, they start swimming in circles because they were excited because they knew they were going
to be fed, but they didn't know where the food was going to land. So this is all, you know,
in my wheelhouse of empathy with other creatures. However, from a biological scale perspective,
you're feeding, this isn't good for the chicken, the puffer fish and the farmed fish or cow parts
or whatever you feed to the goldfish. I mean, there's a preference of species. So here's my
hard question for you. If we value the relationships between species, between organisms on the earth,
and you're talking about epoch three 500 years from now 1000 years from now, what sort of
human economy could thrive in and live like that? Couldn't you argue that the rest of the world and
the rest of the species would be better off if they're worn to humans?
Well, this is really the question of how wide does our aperture of compassion eventually get?
If it ends up you including a bunch of organisms, then no, actually, things might go quite well.
And you know, one thing that I noticed from visiting a lot of indigenous lands is if you look at
how a number of things were actually organized in society, because I think we're already well aware
that when keystone species are healthy on a landscape, the entire landscape is healthy.
You don't need to literally take care of every single critter on the landscape, but if there's
half a dozen keystone species on the landscape and they're all taken care of well,
then actually the whole landscape is quite healthy, even if that might have, you know,
5,000 species on it. But if you go to the Pacific Northwest and you look at the totem poles,
the animals that are represented are basically all keystone species.
If, you know, I spent some time with the Iowa tribe, which, you know, it's Iowa with the letter
Y at the end, this cuts where their original lands where they now live in Kansas, because we
dislocated them multiple times. But like their, you know, society was built around 12 different
clans. And it was the buffalo clan and the beaver clan and the, and the, and the bison,
you know, sorry, the bison's buffalo and the wolf clan and all sort of thing. And every single one
of those clans was referenced to a keystone species. And the purpose of that clan was to be
more empathetic to, to understand, you know, how to relate to and pay attention to the health of
that keystone species amongst other responsibilities. Now that is a achievable point where a relatively
small expansion in the circle of empathy allows you to have incredible leverage over the overall
ecosystem becoming healthier and the thousands of organisms as opposed to thousands of species,
as opposed to just the six or 12. Earlier on this show, I had Vandana Shiva, Jason Bradford,
Andrew Millison, and others talk about the fact that we could, with the technology we have today,
grow as much or more food without using fossil fuels. But, but it would require a lot more human
labor input and applied technology, which would, which we didn't know before we had the Haber Bosch.
So what you're saying is almost the cultural equivalent of that, that somehow along the way,
we have the potential at least, it's, it's unknown that we could more from extractors to stewards.
Well, I'm actually saying something maybe even more hardcore, which is we already worked this out a
bunch of times in a bunch of different places. We just, through colonialism, we wiped out a lot of
those people. Now that said, it doesn't mean that we can't rediscover. It doesn't mean that to the
extent that they're, that any of their cultures are still extant. Because when I was with the Iowa
tribe, that I was like, okay, there's the 12 clans. And then she, you know, the person that was kind
of telling me about this history who is of that tribe was like, yeah, but, you know, all but three
of the tribes have died out, all but three of the clans have died out. And it's like, oh crap.
Right. So like, yeah, like think about the deep wisdom that happened in those nine clans that
were focused on the, you know, one is focused on the beaver and one is focused on the coyote and
whatever. Like think of what was lost with those folks. Now that said, luckily there were still
three left. And I got to talk with some of the folks from those three and the wisdom is there.
Now, can we recreate that wisdom? Absolutely. Can we make decisions, you know, about how we
run some things in society that would allow us to take a little bit more care? I think so. That
doesn't sound that hard. But yes, you can get incredible leverage out of that sort of thing.
And even like, you know, Andrew Millicent, Vandeveshiva stuff, one thing that I'll say is that
what happened with industrial agriculture is that we used to do everything by hand. We used to weed
by hand. You know, we used to like, you know, handle pests by hand. Right. So what happened in the
20th century is we replaced manual mechanical labor with chemical labor. But like what is
actually possible in the 21st century, because I have a background in robotic signal processing,
you know, I built very sophisticated robots, you can actually replace a bunch of that stuff again
with robotic mechanical, as opposed to human mechanical, and you can actually beat the
unit economics of input costs relative to chemical. Now that said, I love the work of
Vandeveshiva and Andrew Millicent, a bunch of the folks that you're talking about, because I think
embedded in their work is also more time with human beings building a more
fluent relationship with many of the organisms that I'm wanting the wider circle of compassion
and empathy to extend to. So you kind of get a two for one. But I will say that even within the
auspices of our current modern economy, where people are like flipping out that everything's
going to robotics and AI or whatever, no, you actually have a moment where you might be able to
start back down the right chain. Instead of like soaking everything in chemicals, whether it's
glyphosate or, you know, nitrogen based fertilizers or whatever, you actually start to fix some of
that stuff mechanically, the way that we used to do human mechanical labor to go do this stuff.
And yeah, it'll just be robotic mechanical labor with still compelling or even better
unit economics than chemical. What happens to the humans that used to be doing the labor
that are now replaced by robots? Well, what's actually happening right now in U.S. farms at
least, especially now that we have tightened up border, the border is that a lot of folks are
not able to actually even get the full agricultural output of their land because they don't have enough
labor available. So it's kind of the opposite problem at the moment. Look, you know, more than
half the food in the world is grown by small landholder farmers, you know, people that are
farming like half an acre to five acres, let's say. But I will say that a bunch of those folks,
if you do give them a better route, and actually to be, you know, very kind of
straightforward and connected to personal story, it's like, my parents are from rural Taiwan.
They were those people as well, that they were, you know, close to the land, growing rice, growing
tea, you know, up in the mountains of Taiwan. My dad's family did a bamboo export business,
you know, because they, they, he was born under Japanese occupation.
Anyway, so we were exporting bamboo to Japan. So, but like they were those people as well.
Now, as soon as they actually had an opportunity to not be farmers, they're like a bunch of them
were like, Hey, what's I'm trying to be a farmer? This is just how anybody made money in this setting.
So we had to do it. So look, there's, there will be a percentage that didn't want to be farmers.
And that's fine. Like, let them not be farmers. That's like my parents. There's a percentage
like in the Western world where we've tightened down on immigration laws where they can't even
manage the fields right now. There's a shortage of labor, in which case, there is no resistance to
robots. Now, if you have a setting where this actually is displacing displacing people that
want to be farmers, then it's a deeper conversation. Let's talk about it. But there's so much to do
before we got to like a head to head battle where people want to be farmers and robots are taking
their jobs. So let me, let me move on to the topic where you and I met
on a couple occasions, which is climate change. So much of the climate research currently is
focused on extrapolating business as usual, and our current trends to see that we're going to
negatively affect the biosphere, and we're headed for warmer temperatures, two degrees,
maybe three degrees. Oceans continue to absorb CO2, get warmer and more acidic.
You and your work suggest that we could perhaps reverse engineer this practice to figure out
specific actions that would result in better climate outcomes. You just mentioned Taiwan and
bamboo. And I want to ask you also is bamboo something I've been hearing about as a regenerative
ag sort of thing. So could you break down how you envision reverse engineering what's happening
to climate and some examples you're currently aware of? Well, I think we have, and there's a
communications question as well as a practical work question. But I think we've over rotated around
just that CO2 number. Now, the reason the CO2 number is important, and it is very important.
So I'm not saying it's an unimportant number to track, but we literally made everything just
about this one number, is that if you focus it just on that one number, then you'll start to see
things like huge direct air capture plants as a possible solution. But I did a calculation that
the biggest direct air capture plant ever built, it's actually going to have less impact than 200
beavers. And it's like, okay, well, trust me, the 200 beavers were way cheaper than the billion
dollars that went into making the plant. So whatever, right? Like, that's us missing the point.
Like, because we got so focused on this one number, and we got so focused on how capital can go play
with how you move this one number. But beavers do a fantastic job sequestering carbon because they
build dams. And then the river system feeds all this organic material, which then goes into the
sediment and gets trapped there. Fantastic. That's why a bunch of our historical, a bunch of our
oil and gas deposits were historical wetlands. Those were places where you really concentrate
a lot of kind of compressed organic material. And basically beavers make those wetlands.
Now, long story short, we don't think about that because we have such a narrow view of how the system
works. Well, we're like idiot savants that are focusing on one thing and to the detriment of
everything else. Yeah, because there's going to be a lot of resources that are extracted to go make
that direct air capture plant. And then of course, with that one number in mind, the, you know,
the biggest direct air capture plants they're focused on, well, I can use this carbon for enhanced
oil recovery, in which case they might even be carbon emitting. And it's like, okay, we're super
losing the thread here. Now, if we move beyond the price of carbon, and that's where, and I'm not
saying that we shouldn't try to do some of those things as well. Though honestly, I don't think
that we should have a carbon trading scheme. I think we should ramp it down the way that we ramp
down CFCs, the way that we ramp down DDT, the way that we ramp down lead and gasoline, all things
that happened in the modern era. These were not super long time ago type things. These are like
1980s, 1990s type interventions. And what that basically looked like is, you didn't put everybody
out of business on day one, but you made it more expensive to use those substances. And then after
a couple of years, you made, you turned the dial up even further. In a couple more years, you turned
the dial up even further. And by year 10, it was basically impractical to go use that stuff. Now,
it meant that the folks that had recently bought CapEx that was still productive, they're like,
well, look, we'll change over on year seven. It'll be pretty expensive for us. But by then,
you know, I would have gotten most of the use out of my productive CapEx, but I'm definitely not
buying new CapEx in this space. And the people that were about to retire their CapEx was like,
let's upgrade now. Because like, you might as well upgrade because we're about to start getting
penalties on this old CapEx. So effectively, you're talking about a slow release carbon tax or
or non renewable tax, that basically ramps up. So instead of a kind of trading scheme where you
need to go populate the stuff with credits, and then people can kind of dissemble all sorts of
things and play all kinds of games on how credits are counted. No, no, no, it's just
polluter pays and polluter pays on a graduated scale that kind of kicks up. And you can't do this
on 10 years relative to the carbon economy will take a little bit longer. But you might be able
to do this on a 25 year scale, in terms of the the age out of the productive CapEx related to a
high, high carbon intensity economy. So anyway, long story short, going back to the
more basic idea is, look, we made we over rotated on carbon and we made it too complicated, it
should just be polluter pays. And we shouldn't just think about, you know, carbon, we should think
about the natural ecosystems that are supporting life. Now, if we understood that, we would understand
the benefit of beavers in the first place and would have come to us pretty quickly, like, oh,
if you want to do that, and also make your landscape more fire resistant, we're also pretty
annoyed with wildfires right now. Well, it turns out that landscapes recover much faster if there's
beaver dams in the area, because they basically create an area that is that doesn't burn down that
repopulates the seeds around it, right? So on many, many fronts, like things that we are, you know,
insurance companies are retreating and losing billions of dollars, because we can't ensure
any of these landscapes anymore, they're fire prone. It's like, okay, well, you lost billions
of dollars over there, you're spending billions of dollars on direct air capture, a beaver would
solve both of those problems. I would be remiss and not asking, are you investing in beavers?
I'm not. And this is actually a really important thing, which is, why wouldn't we have already
done this if beavers are so much better at it? It's because it's hard to financially enclose a beaver.
And the things that get economic scale in the economy are things that are easily financially
enclosed, even if they don't create value, right? A credit default swap doesn't create any value,
but it's intrinsically financially enclosed. And NFT is really a financial enclosure envelope.
Like nobody even cared about the art inside of it. So basically, like,
financially enclosed things trade quickly, they attract money quickly, that sort of thing,
we don't know how to financially enclose a beaver. And because of it, we have that kind
of mismatch. Now, if there was a design problem to go do, it might be to ask the question of how
does one successfully financially enclose, but without poisoning how this natural thing works
in order to get more money into the spot to go have these things happen in the world.
Well, and then I don't know a lot about beavers, but I would presume if we scaled the beaver
population 2x, 5x, 10x, that that would be deleterious to some other animal or organism.
It probably wouldn't be because when the colonists came to North America, it's estimated that there's
over 100 million beavers in North America in 1600. And now we're down below 5 million, we almost
wiped them out. It's actually when the, you know, at the point that the colonists first came over
to the Americas, there was about 75 million people living in the Americas and 85 million
people living in Europe. And then we kind of wiped them out 95% as well. So like, trust me,
there was plenty of carrying capacity for those things and the land was healthier because of it.
The bison also built the soils on the Great Plains. Now we're at the point when, when we first
inherited the Great Plains inherited, I mean, we killed all the people and displaced them and the
Iowa tribe lives in Kansas. Now you get it, right? But like the, you know, like, like when we first
got there, there was multiple feet of topsoil in the Great Plains. Five feet, eight feet,
nine feet, very normally seen. Now in agricultural soils across America, the average topsoil depth
is a quarter inch. So like, we really mucked it up badly. And it wasn't because like, like,
you know, there was, there wasn't enough carrying capacity and the bison were mucking up. No,
the bison were creating the carrying capacity. The beavers were creating the carrying capacity.
That's why they all had clans assigned to them. Well, we, we financialized the human experience.
Sure. Well, look, like once we've worked out the corporation and a bunch of methods of financial
enclosure, then that, that kind of took over as a virus on everything. And look, I'm not saying
that that can't be an improved thing. Like you can have new mutations and you can have a healthier
version of an organism. So there might be a new mutation on financial enclosure that is able to
go include things in this more thoughtful way in a longer term way, and, and really pay attention
to the, the myriad explosive benefits of taking care of a couple of keystone species, taking care
of a couple of natural systems. So beyond beavers in your work, do you have hope? Are you seeing
regenerative technologies that potentially have the ability to pull carbon from the atmosphere
in tandem with maybe we cap or eventually slow the amount of emissions that the global economy
emits? Well, in terms of the practical stores, there's basically five. It's, it's forest soils,
histosols, ocean micro and ocean macro and all what's histosols are wetland soils. So it's like
a special case of, of, you know, soils in that histosols have incredible carbon intensity per
acre compared to, you know, like a grassland soil or like, you know, agriculture soil. And so like
when we drain the wetlands, that sort of thing, we really did. And, and, you know, you've seen the,
the, the math, I'm sure on like, when we like drain a peat bog and then we go and burn a bunch of
stuff, yeah, the emissions footprint is insane, because that was such a concentrated source of
carbon. So anyway, all five of those places in nature can store way more carbon than what we've
emitted since the start of the Industrial Revolution. Now that said, we have not been on a task of
actually putting any of that stuff back in a skillful way. But one thing I like about,
thinking about those five sinks is at the end of the day, one can, so I'm formally trained as a
physicist and electrical engineer with the specialization robotics and signal processing and
physics brain basically says, this is basically a mass transfer problem, right? We currently have
1.7 trillion tons of CO2 that's in the wrong place. About a trillion up in the atmosphere,
about 0.7 dissolved in the ocean, it's all in the wrong place. That mass needs to go to a different
place, right? Now that basically is a mass transfer problem. If you, if the mass needs to be transferred,
then and it needs to go through a collection aperture, then there's two ways to approach
the collection aperture. You can either have an enormous collection aperture, like a forest or
fields or wetlands or what have you, or you can have a tiny collection aperture, like a direct
air capture plant that you build on one square kilometer of concrete. Now, if you try to do it
on a tiny aperture, it's like trying to suck all the carbon through a soda straw. So if you look at
the balance of plant for a bunch of these direct air capture plants, a huge percentage of the energy
just spent fans sucking air through the tiny aperture. But if when you work with a huge aperture,
those things make no sense. When you work with a huge aperture, then sunlight powers the whole thing.
It typically improves the local ecosystem, which gives you more resilience anyhow.
And then, you know, the, you can capture a huge amount because your collection is so large without
forcing any air over it. So you're hopeful that we can move that pools of carbon from
the atmosphere into those five sinks? Those five things already store more than what we've done
since the Industrial Revolution and some of them much, much more. Can they increase the amount
that they store? They can increase the amount if you invest in the metabolics of them. This is part
of the reason for the talk as well, right? Like, if you understand Epic 2, you will understand the
metabolics of carbon pick up in these, in these five sinks. Except what if you have to emit and
burn more carbon in order to get the existing carbon back to the sinks? Well, you, that will
happen, you know, a bit no matter what. But I think it's really just about the ratio, right?
There's some things that give you a lot of leverage and something because look, a direct
air capture plant, you know, captures carbon, but you need to build a lot of facilities for it.
A beaver, you don't need to build as much facilities. Did it maybe cost you something to
go truck a beaver, you know, 300 miles over to like some other stream? Yeah, there were some
carbon emissions related to trucking the beaver over. So is this a core part of your work is
looking at regenerating, regenerative agriculture, negative carbon emission technologies?
Well, absolutely. You know, I am spending time on this and studying it like part of the reason
I was out in Kansas with that tribe is they are part of a, a large project to go regenerate their
soils. So I was looking at both, you know, indigenous practice as well as improved, you know,
regenerative agricultural practice and basically seeing, you know, at the ground level, what it
looks like to go do that. Now, of course, I come from the venture capital world and I work with
all these other capital allocators. So while I'm sitting there, I am thinking about like,
is there a party for which this would be the right, you know, kind of, you know, thing to
point their capital at? And how would it mesh? Now that said, these folks are getting done with
actually relatively small amount of capital already. So like, if capital doesn't need to play, then
that's totally great too. But at the end of the day, I'm quite interested in what does it look
like for us to do the work practically. And then if there is a way that a tiny bit of financial
enclosure helps to speed it up, then let's talk about it.
So from the practical standpoint, you've looked at lots of different technologies,
you clearly know the path we're on with CO2 emissions and the growing metabolism of the human
economy. How confident are you that we could move from 425 parts per million to 400 to 375,
keeping the economy, I mean, morphing the economy in the direction of epoch one or epoch two,
but using regenerative agriculture to move into those five sinks. Is it a moonshot? Is it 5050?
I mean, how confident are you that that can actually happen? And what and name a couple
of technologies that are promising? Well, I think it can definitely happen. And I gave a talk,
about the future of agriculture at this event. And one of the folks in the Q&A afterwards was like,
but how could it change? You got Monsanto and Singenta and these huge companies that have these
vested interests. And we've been doing this like huge, unsustainable agriculture. How could it ever
change? And my reply was like, hey, we literally just invented unsustainable agriculture 50 years
ago. So why in the world do you think it could never change? I'm not saying that it's easy to
change that it's going to happen in a day, it won't. But like, I think our scope of imagination
needs to be a bit bigger than what happened in the last 50 years must happen for the rest of time.
We know that it can't. Because like right now, we keep on burning down our tiny little, you know,
like wealth of topsoil. And you get to the end of that, there's nothing that you can do
in this current system. So like the kind of the turning point on that is coming soon,
whether we like it or not, just as a function of, you know, topsoil availability and how viable
these farming businesses are right now. A lot of American farming is a money losing business.
We can't keep on doing that forever. So can you briefly give me a couple of
technologies in agriculture that you are really excited about that can draw down carbon?
Yeah, so a couple different things. So we, one of our companies that is, you know,
kind of a half unicorn already, and they're, they're adding, you know, millions in top line
quite quickly, the product market fit is excellent is monarch tractors, it's autonomous
electric tractors. Now, what's cool about that? Well, obviously, you know, by being electric,
then you're saving all the kind of diesel emissions. And also the cost of the energy
is about, you know, four to five times cheaper in terms of all the work output that you're
getting and how much you're paying for the energy in the tractor. It's dramatically cheaper
than paying for diesel. So you see why farmers are already like that. But the autonomous part of it
means that, you know, because we have these labor shortages in American and Canadian agriculture,
then they can get a lot more done with the stuff that they do have. So even basic autonomy things
like, you know, mowing and, and bailing and all that sort of thing, well, just let the robot do
it then, right? You know, go and have your farmhands go work on higher value per hour tasks. And
we're seeing like a bunch of adoption. That's why it's kind of like a rocket ship in terms of the
demand for that product. And I look at that the autonomy stuff, right now we're doing the easy
autonomy stuff, like mowing is actually pretty easy autonomy tasks, though I don't want to oversimplify
the complexity of autonomy, still take some work, but still, like it is something that the robots
are confidently doing no problem. As you start to talk about the more sophisticated field operations,
that starts to overlap with some of the stuff that, that, you know, you know, Vanana Shiva and other
folks are talking about where it's like, no, there actually are ways of, you know, for example,
you know, drill tilling as opposed to, well, look, you can have a machine go do that, or you could
have a hand go do that. And if you can have the tractor pull something behind it, that is autonomously
doing that, then actually you are closing that laser labor gap. That's what I was saying about,
we had mostly a mechanical farm economy, where it was like human labor, you know, oxen as labor,
you know, like mechanical plows, all that kind of thing. And then we moved to a chemical type
farming, and we can move back to mechanical, but robotic mechanical. So I look at this as like,
well, not only are you saving people direct fuel costs, and people are already excited about that,
you're saving them labor costs, but you're also allowing more sophisticated labor to happen for
the same amount of money, including labor that would be the right precursors to be able to move
into some of the regenerative ag practice. Now, that said, there's still plenty of implements to
go build, still plenty of automation, automation routines to go build, and you start at the easy
end of it, and you work toward the middle, and then the human beings do the sophisticated end for now.
But that could be a huge boon in terms of making more sustainable agriculture within reach within
the labor fraction that we currently have available. Do you know anything about bamboo?
You mentioned it earlier, and I have some friends that think there's a big potential of
sequestration, if it's scaled like in Europe, even. Can you speak a minute or two about that?
Bamboo grows like a weed. It's a type of grass. It's basically perennial. You don't need to spend
a bunch of time planting it. It basically can grow laterally, rhizomatically. So it honestly
spreads out of control. Whenever people say to go plant it in their garden, it's like,
oh, plant it in a box that is contained so it cannot go and take over your entire yard.
So relative to farming difficulty, I'm going to say not that hard to farm as things go.
But as it grows laterally and upward and fast, it's sequestering carbon.
It's sequestering carbon, and if you go and harvest that and make it into durable goods,
then that carbon is stored for a reasonable amount of time. I live in a wood frame building
that was built in 1911, and yeah, all the carbon in that wood is still right here.
Even though it's a biodegradable material that's earth compatible, and if all the wood in this
building was broken down and thrown in the dirt, it would become dirt over the course of a year,
then no, you can go and grab useful building materials and effectively sequester them through
use. Are you looking at any companies that are scaling bamboo or using bamboo in different ways?
Yeah, we've looked at some things in that front. A lot of it has to do with the kind of processing
technologies in order to go make them more compatible with how people are currently building.
Because look, the more wild things, and honestly, I love this type of work,
are the folks that are really using all the properties of the bamboo, like the flexiness,
and the way that it dries over time, and all sorts of things, in order to make these really
compelling woven structures, every kind of thing. Now that said, that's not how we make
most of our buildings in the world. So to the extent that you can go and take a bunch of thin
strips of it, and then you can make it into something that's like a big old crossbeam,
then we kind of like that. We know how to build with that kind of material. So to the extent
that we can simulate some board feet or simulate surfacing and all these sorts of things that we
would otherwise use a different building material for, and then make it easily metabolizable by the
construction industry, then yeah, we can pick up a lot more. We can build out the demand side of
that pretty substantially. I don't know how you even have time to do a podcast with me,
because you're on top of so many things. So as head of a very successful venture capital fund,
how do you decide which ecological projects are worth investing time, brainpower, and capital
into? Well, I mean, the reason that we have time is actually really straightforward, which is even
if we hit all of our goals, and we raise every penny that we are trying to raise and deploy
every penny really well, then we're still going to be deploying like less than 1% of the capital
that's going into climate and a even tinier fraction of the money that's going into venture.
And given that, we spend a bunch of time, the reason that the three epochs talk was written
was to speak to our LPs. Our LPs in our annual general meeting represent over a trillion dollars
of capital under management across the funds that they manage. We obviously get a little sliver
of that, and that's great. But it's like, imagine what happens if a trillion dollars of capital
gets to hear messages like this, and starts to open up the kind of perspectives of where they
can look to get interesting returns. So I do things like this, reasonably regularly, because
our firm is like, there's a lot of things about what we do that I think people have said, oh,
that's very visionary, and that's very exciting. It's like, great. But I think about myself as a
boringly practical person. And like, I think the reason that I like to go share these things is
I'm not trying to go share some funky, you know, theory about the future. Number one, I'm just the
farthest up because just describing how life works in the universe. That's not a new thing that
happened. That's just an old thing that's been happening forever that we forgot. So there's
nothing to prove about it. That's just how life works in the universe. It's maximizing every
photon is trying to maximize diverse nutrient flows. That's just what it does. But like,
relative to the work that I share in investment, sometimes I call myself the anti-entrepreneur,
because most entrepreneurs are talking about what's going to happen if you give me money.
I'm almost always talking about the thing we already did. So like, the amount that you need to,
you know, the suspension of the belief that's required to go understand the thing is very
light because it already happened. You can go out to the site, you can see the restored mangroves,
you can go to the place where there was a massive outbreak of American foul brood, and then
it's been addressed by a vaccine. You can go to the places where they're installing
a ton of these air conditioners, you know, and it can actually both heat and cool.
These air conditioning slash heating units in New York, because, you know, they have way better
energy efficiency. And they also happen to have this fantastic environmental impact.
I think myself as a boringly practical person that just, you know, reporting to people, well,
I know this works because we just did it. And if you want to measure how well it worked,
then go ahead and measure it. But here's, you know, the headlines. And if you want to have
some further details on exactly how, then I'm happy to have that because, again, that leverage of
we're deploying less than 1% of the capital. So how does the other 99% the reason I'm kind of
dogging direct air captures, we've already spent more than 10 billion on that. And we probably
could have, you know, just recruited 2000 beavers, like it would have been fine.
So do you have any other colorful examples like that that you haven't mentioned so far
in this conversation, projects that you're really excited about, whether they work or not, that
are kind of novel and cutting edge that you think are cool?
Well, I think like, you know, if I needed to go summarize, like the, the more meta of the beaver
point is, I think it would be very advantageous for us, you know, just in terms of practical
leverage, like I don't care what philosophy you build around this or not, to become the
keystone species that takes care of keystone species. If that's all we did, we would have
amazingly good leverage over the health of the planet. And then that would return to us many
multifold, right? Because now the hawks are working for us and the salmon are working for us and the
coyotes are working for us and the beavers are working for us, not because they are actually
working for us, because we are opening our circle of compassion enough to understand what they need
and in providing mutual care, then all of us get huge benefit, including, you know, the bison,
including, you know, the wolves, the sea otters, I could keep on going, there's a ton of tapers,
whales, everybody, right? This segues into a concept that I've heard you talk about,
that we are all connected, not in the sense of mysticism, per se, but rather from obvious
observations in the world, like you just pointed out. Can you explain how you arrived at this
realization and how that affects your outlook and the work that you do?
Yeah, I mean, the actual answer is when I was 29 years old, I had built a pretty good career in
technology. I was already kind of an up-and-coming executive, but the way I had built that career
is I worked under this idea that, you know, when problems get hard, I just work harder,
and, you know, and that worked fine as an individual contributor. And then when I started
having people reporting to me, I would do this thing where it's like, hey, you know,
so-and-so is working hard, but they only got 80% of what needed to get done done. Okay,
I'll pick up the other 20%, right? Oh, you know, so I would go around and like my team of five,
oh, okay, you were 20% short, no problem, I'll pick up the extra work. Oh, you're 5% short,
I'll pick it up. And that worked fine because I'm a person that has a little bit more than
normal capacity. But once I had like a 30-person team, that thing was killing me. And I didn't
understand that it was killing me, but like I like had a stress behavior where I would come
into work every day, and I would fill up a 24 ounce cup with ice chips, and I would just chew
ice in the morning as I worked through, you know, my day plan and my early emails and
start working on items. And what was actually happening is the stress was basically completely
f-ing up my insides. And at age 29, I had an incident where there was a kind of acute disconnect
in my lower GI tract where I lost 40% of my blood in less than 30 minutes. I almost bled to death.
And I was, you know, I luckily got to the emergency room. In the emergency room,
like because it was internal bleeding, they couldn't tell what was happening right away,
but once they started taking my vitals, it instantly turned from like, I wonder what's
happening to, this person's about to die. And they went and in order to go, you know,
keep me from dying, they had to do, like a lot of times, oh, you're short on blood,
we're going to do a blood transfusion. I didn't have enough time for that. They did four simultaneous
blood transfusions, one in each limb, all at the same time. And then when that came through,
that was not enough too. They did another four simultaneously immediately after that. So I had
eight transfusions just to stabilize, and then two more over the night. And actually,
in those last moments, when I woke up the next morning, the doctor basically told me, it's like,
hey, glad you made it through because you were about, you know, one to two minutes away from
irreversible, you know, organ and brain damage, like you might have lived, but you'd be a vegetable.
So like, yeah, glad you pulled out of it. But like, what I was actually feeling in those last
minutes is my body was already in the process of dying. And I can have a, I could give you a whole
explanation on what it's like to die. But like, in the process of dying, I actually had a very
strong feeling of returning. And I was like, what the fuck is that? I mean, because I'm like, look,
my dad's an atheist, my mom's a Buddhist. So like, it's not that I have, and look, I grew up in
the east coast of the US, I was exposed to all the American religions and all that sort of thing.
I like, you know, like spent some time at Bible study or whatever, I know some things about like,
some of the spiritual traditions, you know, I'm no, no deep expert, but know a little bit about it.
But like my overall, like worldview was basically a scientific, you know, pragmatist. And what would
it even mean to be returning? And, and after I ended up living, because the next morning I like
woke up and I realized a couple different things, like, you know, most of you know, most of a human's
body is fluid, most of that fluid is blood. And I had most of my blood changed out over the night.
So I was actually more other people than myself, you know, that next morning, which is already a
head trip. But then the other part was that I had only lived because of the generosity of 10 people
I would never meet. And I think, you know, a bunch of those things plus that sense of returning
basically set me out on this, you know, quest to be like, what was that all about? What does it mean?
Now, number one, it did change my life philosophy quite a bit because when you, when you effectively
die once you, your fear of death changes quite a bit. I like, not that I had like a really terrifying
fear of death before, but afterwards it was kind of like none. Not to say that I'm trying to put
myself in really dangerous situations, but I know what it looks like, or feels like to die
all the way down to the last little bit, you know, minus the actual crossover point.
So I was like, no, guys, it's fine. Like the, my fear of it is, you know, and that helps a lot.
And it's almost like this life then is your second life. You get, it's like an extra one-up.
You're free rolling. Exactly. You like grab the green mushroom and you get an extra life
in the game. And it's like, okay, this is a freebie, man, free, free turn.
And so now you want to, you want to pay it forward to the three epochs.
Well, it's a longer process because I needed to go actually go and work out what it meant to return.
And I started to understand that actually everything that we are made of is basically
immortal stuff. And what I mean by that is if you look at the decay time of protons,
neutrons, electrons, then it's substantially longer than the age of the universe.
Right. You need to be like a billion, billion times the age of the universe so far for like an
electron, you know, before you hit an electron's half life and protons even more and neutron,
it can be a little bit less depending on the setting, but then the neutron just decays into
other things that also have super long longevity. So you look at this as like,
we're basically made out of immortal stuff. We're just, you know, specific pattern configurations
of immortal stuff. And like, then what then is the person? Because where did that pattern come
from? Well, those patterns aren't just in you for that one moment. Like the pattern, like the pattern
that like became DNA has had a multi-billion year run on planet Earth. And we're inheriting
all of that pattern intelligence. And like the pattern that is the shape of a human being
has got a couple hundred thousand year history on planet Earth. And we're inheriting all of that.
And like, and you start to understand that I am just a localized moment of pattern intelligence
intersected in a particular way on a immortal things. And even those patterns, even though
they may not be immortal are extremely long lived. And what it means is that when you die,
you're basically returning to the field that makes all things, including things like you.
So in some ways, it's like, okay, well, I mean, it'll emerge in different patterns.
Actually, the same atoms are going to go emerge in different patterns. And they're going to get
to do all kinds of things. They're going to be part of a blade of grass and a cat and a flower
and a cloud. They're going to be every kind of thing. And there'll also be a bunch of humans
in the future too. So I'm returning to the field that makes that over and over and over.
Powerful. I want to be respectful of your time, Tom. And I have a bunch of closing questions,
but I wanted to ask you this. It's kind of a non secular to what you just said, but I overheard
you when we were together a few weeks ago, telling people that we were talking about space exploration
and colonizing other planets. And you said, we may colonize other planets someday in the future,
but it won't be us. It won't be humans. Could you just spend a couple minutes unpacking
what you said or did I hear that correctly? Yeah, the thing I said is that, you know,
multi planetary species is an oxymoron already. Because species are at least species as we know
them are organisms that are forward propagating DNA. And DNA is the nature of DNA is to become of
place. So if we actually settle anywhere for, you know, 20 generations, we will speciate.
We already have, you know, you know, changes in the, in the genome that have happened in
shorter times than that. And we've definitely seen with, you know, fruit flies and other things,
we can get them to speciate in seven generations. So I'm kind of being generous with 20, right?
But if you want to a place like Mars, no matter what you do in terms of like, hey, let's say we
live in bubbles and we go and make the atmosphere exactly the same as the earth inside of that bubble.
And, and, and we try to grow earth food in particular ways. Well, we're trying to control
it and try not to speciate, but you're on a planet that has one third the gravity.
And species have speciated for way less of a environmental change than one third the gravity.
So like, given that like, look, you spend 20 generations on Mars, we will not be humans
exactly. Now that said, if what people mean is a, we're going to become multi planetary and
the seeds of our DNA are going to become the species of these other planets,
then that could be an accurate statement. But I don't think that people actually have that mental
model. They have the mental model of more like the manifest destiny, where it's like the same
people that we are are going to go out there and we're going to propagate everywhere. Well, I mean,
we would need to be insanely lucky to go find something that was
earth like enough that we wouldn't speciate. And this would be gravity and, and atmospheric
composition and availability of resources. Like a lot of things would need to be similar.
So in the, according to, to my worldview, the extremely unlikely event that we do colonize
other planets, it will be the descendants of humans. And in some other hominid form, it won't be
Homo sapiens, the way we are now because of the conditions in just the same way that look,
look 20 million years ago, there were no great apes, like our closest living relative back then
was a given. Now you look at that and it's like, and look to get to some of these stars,
it might take us on the order of millions of years when you think about the pace of, of space
travel, right? So like, yeah, the distance between a given to us is the distance that
these folks will go and they will probably have speciation on the trip. And then they would have
further speciation upon arrival for the setting that they ended being in. I'm worried about the
next 10 or 20 years. If we could segue to you giving advice to people watching this show who
were concerned about ecological overshoot, climate, oceans, energy depletion, poverty,
inequality, financial overshoot, all those things, you are a problem solver and have a different
mental outlook than a lot of people I've met in this space. What sort of personal advice would
you give to the people watching this program who want to play a role in our collective future,
but are, you know, have anxiety and worry about all these trends I just mentioned?
Yeah. So I will say that because I'm a physicist, then I'm intrinsically a realist because you just
need to look at the physical state of things. So I'm not, you know, like happy and excited about
the current physical state of things. I'm also very realistic about how long it would take to
repair it. I don't think that there's any venture firm or any group of people that like because of
Wham-Bam sort of actions goes and fix everything in 10 years. It's just literally the physics of it,
the mass energy, you know, the time it takes for that to propagate is just too long compared to,
you know, how ambitious that people are want. And actually I say that partially because
that's part of where the anxiety comes from. If you think you can solve it in 10 years and
you're failing at it, then you will go and, you know, you'll work yourself almost to the grave.
Like I almost work myself to death, like, you know, just working harder trying to make that
difference in a short amount of time. But like, if you start to understand that this is a two to
500 year arc, and that your generation is going to get to do the first five to 10% of it, and you're
going to hand on the next, you know, five to 10% or 10 to 15% to, you know, the next party and the
next party, and you get ready for something that might take five generations that already starts to
be a psychologically healthier place to come from because that is what it will physically take,
the time it'll physically take to solve the problem. So if your, if your expectations are
closer in line with what is physically possible, that's already helpful. The other thing I would
say that is a helpful thing is the other kind of anxiety that's happening is career, you know,
anxiety, stability, anxiety, because robotics and AI are coming to go take all the jobs and all
that sort of thing. And I worked on robotics and AI as part of my career path, as well as my
university research, you know, all the way back to my formal training. So I have a decent amount
of memory with it. And what I like to kind of communicate to people is there will be a bunch
of jobs in the 21st century, but those jobs will be built around what I call the four C's,
like the letter C. And the four C's are creativity, compassion, critical thinking, and community.
And these are things that, you know, AIs and robotics are not particularly good at. Now,
look, somebody will go throw a bunch of prompts at things, and they'll pick like the best one out of
a thousand, be like, Oh, it looks like the robot is critically thinking. And it's like, no, no,
look at all the other prompts. It was a bunch of garbage, right? Like the responses to all these
other prompts, it was a bunch of garbage, and you cherry picked it. Actually, you did a creative
act in curating that one out of a thousand that kind of sounds like the machine knows what it's
talking about. But hey, we'll put that aside for a second. But if people like understand that the
core of jobs in the future are those four things, then I think actually particularly things like
compassion and community are things that are going to be central to the repair of our civilization,
that like we got into a spot where everybody was told to hyper consume and their own individual
individualistic bubble, and it didn't lead to, you know, greater happiness for people. And it
led to a lot more material consumption, you know, compared to the marginal happiness that it might
have added. And you actually get to a point where it's so much material consumption, you realize
that the whole game doesn't actually do it for you. And some people fall into depression off of
that, in which case, you've done a lot of consumption and are even worse off. Now, if you start to
understand that the jobs in the future, things like community and compassion are really core to
them, that leads you more into connection into, you know, being with other human beings and making
meaning in the way that meaning was always made. And that sort of process with way less material
resource use, you know, actually leads to way bigger improvements in happiness, right? Like
there's the long, you know, the Harvard longevity study, where they basically nailed it down to,
well, the two big things that make people healthy is healthy life habits, like, you know, diet,
exercise, that kind of thing, and human relationship. And that's it. Those are the only two things.
Now, none of those things sound like the latest toaster oven for whatever, or what's in fashion
this, you know, this, you know, season. And the reason that people try to follow fashion in the
season is they hope to connect with other people, right? They're hoping that through that consumption
they get to connect with other people. But like, what if we skip those steps and just started to
understand those are the two main things? Let's go build an economy around doing those two things
really well. And then let's do that for the Keystone species as well. And if that's all we did, we'd
be in pretty good shape. I'm so glad I had you on the program, because I think your job description
as a venture capital tech investor, I usually don't talk to a lot of people like that. But
you're thinking so many steps ahead that your ethos and your life ethic and your foresees are
actually very aligned with my thinking. And that gives me this relational synergistic feeling
that is, was unexpected. I'm not surprised that a bunch of people would arrive at,
yes, this is kind of what we need more of because it's so, the lack of it is so glaringly painful.
And look, when you're in the din of what, you know, a capitalist or consumerist culture is
telling you to want, then it's a little bit hard to pay attention to it. But I'm actually almost
glad that we burned people out on social media and all these other things, because it like,
ended the dream that more digital consumption is the thing, because we had a whole arc around
physical consumption. And I think we learned, you know, the conspicuous consumption of the 80s,
maybe this is not everything. And, you know, like people push back and it's like, we're going to
wear grunge clothes now, though now they sell distressed jeans for 200 bucks now, but whatever,
who knows. But like, which is hilarious. But I think like we're understanding that digital
consumption doesn't drive that much happiness either, you know, beyond a certain point. And
between the two, like sometimes you need to typically people don't, don't change until they
have absolutely failed at their goal, or they have absolutely achieved their goal and realized
that it didn't do what they wanted. And I think we absolutely achieved a bunch of physical goals
and, and, you know, digital content goals and realized it didn't achieve what we wanted.
Door number three and door number two, we're kind of closed. And now we're switching our gaze to
door number one, which is the four C's. Well, the one other thing I'll toss out there, which I think
is a very important framing for, you know, the economic arc, you know, since the industrial
revolution is that we spent most of the 20th century figuring out how to strip mine the physical
resources of the planet. And now with these digital tools, we're spending most of the 21st
century figuring out how to strip mine the cognitive resources of the planet. And I think we
need to, if we understand that that's the basic arc of what's been happening, then we can get
enough distance to imagine a different way that this could go. If you get too involved in the
tiny thing, it's like, well, this person got banned off of Twitter and that person got pulled back on.
And now I'm going to go fight about that. No, no, no. At the higher level, we got multiple companies
that are doing cognitive strip mining that are basically your, the sanctity of your thought
processes is now intruded with ads and misinformation. And on a finite resources, which is how many
coherent thoughts can a person have in a lifetime? It's not infinite. Because it takes a certain
amount of time for neurons to go fight. Like the signals in your neurons at their fastest
pace only move 90 feet per second. There's a actual physical limit to how quickly one can
think and how many actual skilled coherent thoughts they can have in a lifetime. And
we're ruining that resource right now. That's profound. And I understand it. I think that met
a view of social media and technology is important to realize. A couple more questions, Tom. What
is your biggest fear or worry in the coming decade? And what is your biggest hope in the next decade
or so? You know, like the planet has recovered from other mass extinctions and given enough
millions of years, then it will get to some state of health. So I'm not so worried that the planet
will forever be, you know, torn asunder because look, we can do some real damage like we could,
we could do a, you know, a great dying type event and it could take 50 million years for
the planet to come back. And that would be a real loss in terms of all the amazing stuff that
could have happened in that 50 million years, even if we're long extinct, like we could still have
that kind of negative footprint in time. So I think that's a very bad outcome. But, you know,
but you give that 50 million years and the kind of planet is back. I think another bad outcome is
we don't extinct ourselves, but we basically make it so that, you know, we only find
11 organisms to be useful and we have a planet of 11 organisms, you know, that's kind of extreme,
but you get it, right? Yeah, well, dogs and cats would be two of them and then something else for
a food. Right, a bunch of algae and that and whatever for the food. But anyway, like I think
that would be a very sad outcome because that would be almost going back to the Archean, right?
It would just be down to a couple organisms again and all of the, you know, planetary resources
in the middle go to just a couple of different species that have like, you know, replicated to
no end. And look, I mean, we can come back from that too. Like obviously we went from the Archean
to a diverse ecosystem now, but man, that would take a real long time. So I think that's a real
bad outcome as well. And I think the other bad outcome is more of an intergame outcome
that like people buy into the types of things that because despair only helps the system continue
to propagate. Like the people that would be in despair are the people that want change.
If you, if you're already fine with the system as is, you're not in despair that the system
continues. But if you, if the system's not changing in the way that you hope, and it drives you into
despair, then the tiny subset of people that are like really wanted to change and might have the
ability to are now not in the intergame state that they could actually do it. And that's why,
like, you know, conversations like resetting to say, Hey, it might take two to 500 years as opposed
to extinction rebellion, we got to get it done by 2030. Otherwise we're all dead. No, no, that is a
set up for despair. Because it will not be done by 2030. There's no physics way for it to happen
by 2030. Now, could you elect better people by 2030? I hope so, right? Could you pass better
policies by 2030? I hope so. Could we already start to make some moves relative to how we do
agriculture industry? Yes, I hope so. So I'm not saying we should sit on our hands. But I think like
when you set up the psychological frame like that, you're setting up for a lot of very passionate
people to fall into despair. And I think that is also a waste of the cognitive resources of the
planet. Bio Kuma Lafe said the the world crisis is urgent, we must slow down or something.
Well, you need to connect with the the timetables that things actually do repair on. That's why I
mentioned that the cryosphere, the ice caps take some time to refreeze. Even if you've solved
everything, even if we could get the carbon down to pre industrial, you know, revolution level,
you know, like 280 to 300, you would still need over a generation for that to refreeze.
So, hey, that's just what it takes, guys. And the, you know, actually going to the very beginning
of the conversation, the reason that the, you know, the tagline for our firm is to help humanity
become a net positive nature is that's the type of goal construction, which is the world that you
want. As opposed to our goal construction so far has been thou shall not exceed 1.5 degree Ic.
And the reason I say that specifically is that a thou shall not goal is actually very common in
human, you know, society. Obviously, the Ten Commandments is the is the most well known collection
of thou shall not goals. But psychologically, the problem with thou shall not goals is nobody
reads the Ten Commandments and it's like, I'm so jazzed about, you know, going out and living life
that like the nature of thou shall not goal is you could literally fuck it up into the very last
day of your life. So, it's like, oh, everything was great. And I like coveted my neighbor like the
day before I had a heart attack. Oh, fuck, right. I messed it up. Like a thou shall not goal constantly
has you on anxiety's edge. That is not the cognitive frame that we can come from, because the thou
shall not goals always on the edge of being broken, and you failing, and you are anxious because of
that, as opposed to something that you're trying to actively build toward, like a society where
humanity is in that positive nature, where your day to day contributions can slowly build up to
something that really matters. You're not on the knife's edge all the time. Yeah. So, on that,
is that is that what you find most hopeful in the coming decade is more and more people come
into that realization and applying it in their lives? Well, that is definitely a hopeful thing,
because look, that was in the very first talk that I gave, that kicked off, you know, even raising
fundraising for the first fund. And I've had, and I gave that talk for the very first time in,
in 2018 in Quito, Ecuador. And, you know, I've had people come up like, all throughout the years,
as I speak at other events, it's like, oh, I saw you give that talk at, you know, in 2019, I saw
you give it in 20, it still is in my mind, like, that's what we need to be working for. And then
I changed this about how I did practice, changed that about how I do my practice. And I was like,
that's it, because we do need to solve these intergame problems. We can't be irresponsible about,
you know, our goals themselves, creating anxiety that's unsustainable. That's an instant fail.
And like, nobody's like pushing back on that right now, because the goal is still real,
we don't want to exceed 1.5 degrees C. But when you formulate it in that way, you're not
formulating people psychologically for the long run. And if it's going to be a long run
kind of situation, like a multi-generational baton race, and you've like situated your
psychology, so you're going to burn out in five years, we're never going to get there.
So the fact that these ideas are honestly so simple, and like a lot of what happens in the
world right now is like fighting around ideology, I think most of what I share in the world is just
either scientifically true, or it's one of the obvious ways that I think it should be done. Because
look, any civilization that is net negative to nature, even a little bit, like let's say
a civilization is only 0.1% net negative to nature per year, it still has a thousand years,
and that's its death date, right? Because nature runs out when you take away 0.1% per year,
in a thousand years, you got nothing left. So like, literally, the goal construction is
also something that obviously must be true at some point in human history,
otherwise we will not survive. Every civilization that has the opposite goal construction,
whereas even a little bit net negative, will have a death date on civilization.
So that's clearly a threshold filter for your investments and your firm and your
own personal ideology is net positive for the planet. That's the first pass.
Look, a lot of my talks, they definitely do point at a way of seeing the world, but like I said,
most of it is just scientific fact, because that's just how life in the universe works,
or that's just how histosols work, that's how bison work, whatever, right? Or at least,
as much as how we know they work. So like, there's honestly no ideology to have other than, well,
here's the data, you can read the papers, and this is our best scientific understanding.
And when I do assert something about the future, like working toward a world where
humanity is in that positive nature, you can have many other goal constructions,
but that one's kind of obvious that if you don't do it, that we're going to have some
problems at some point. I mean, we're experiencing them right now. The reason that everybody's so
stressed is that we're more than 0.1% net negative to nature per year. That's why people are more
like, oh, civilization is going to have a big reset when 100 years and 50 years and 200 years,
because it's way more than 0.1% right now. So I don't even consider the stuff that I'm
sharing like an ideology. It's almost like, well, we're going to end up there somehow,
because if we don't, then every civilization that doesn't, doesn't end up lasting.
It's a truism. It's a truism. There's lots of ways to go label the thing. I almost kind of flip
it around where you basically say, yeah, anybody that doesn't achieve that eventually
runs out of gas, right? So if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to
your family or your reputation or anything, what is one thing that you would do to change
human and planetary futures? I think it'd be useful for us to remember that the money system
was created to go and track value. It's not value itself. And that if we realized that,
we would start to recognize a lot of places where we were tracking value very inaccurately
in the monetary system. But like, you know, people have found like pockets where they can operate
like that. And, and if the goal is money itself, then they're doing great by that, by that standard.
But if they all remember that well, money is like meant to represent value and be able to exchange
things, you know, that represent value, then we would kind of remember, oh, we have this mismatch
right here in the economy mismatch right there in the economy mismatch some other place in the
economy. I think that would be a very helpful realization. And I, I don't see us quite getting
there yet. I think it's like there are some things that are culturally starting to move in that
direction. But I don't, it doesn't feel like a breaking the ice type moment yet. It feels kind
of like a looking around. It's like, it's real desolate up here. Something's wrong. But we're
not, we're not breaking the ice yet. This has been great. You are a multifaceted, wise and
intelligent human. Do you have any other closing words of wisdom for our viewers?
I don't think there's anything that's, you know, that special about the way that I'm thinking about
it or the way that I'm doing it. I think it's very easy to do work in the style that I do it.
But it, the way that one does it is you pay attention to the nuances of things as opposed
to generalizing them. Because when you generalize things, then actually shuts off your brain.
So like, don't generalize, like actually dig into, well, how does it work the way that works?
The other thing to go look at is to go understand rates, not states. So if you,
because the state of the world is the culmination of the rates, and you can actually tell what is
going to happen in the future by understanding which things are working at the highest rates.
And it's very simple, which is that like, you know, when the EPA successfully bans something,
it oftentimes takes five, seven years to go ban a thing. Even after they know it causes cancer or
creates this kind of problem in the environment or whatever, it takes them a while to actually get it
done. But when that substance gets banned, that, you know, a chemical engineer like will work around
it. Oh, I'll just take this out and replace it with a double with a hydroxyl group where I'll
double bond the nitrogen and that's a different molecule now, but they'll get that done in three
months. So like when you think about the rate of three months compared to the rate of seven years,
I can already tell you who wins that race. And a lot of things that are broken in society,
you actually need to go back to the rates. Like what are the rates that are outpacing the rates
that, you know, these other rates that is basically making this state. And actually,
what's nice about rates is instead of being overwhelmed by the size of the state, because
once it culminates to the state of the world, it feels overwhelming. And people like feel like they
can't make any change on the thing. But when you break it down to the tiny rate at the beginning,
it's like, Oh, yeah, that rate is very approachable. Because that's just one human being doing something
on a lab bench. Okay, I got it. No problem. And that could be different. I love that. That makes
sense to me. Please come back in six, 12 months and give me an update on the tiny rates that you
and your company have changed. And thanks so much for all the work you're doing to make our
species and our planet net positive. Yeah, it's going to take everybody and it's a multi-generational
project. That's also why the firm is not named after me, like who wants to go and
work at something named after someone who died like 500 years ago. That sounds dumb.
Like it's called out one ventures because I wanted it to be something that would still
mean something in 500 years. And I think being at one with ourselves, nature in the universe
will still mean something in 500 years. Thanks so much, Tom.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification, please follow us on
your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com for more information on future
releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No Troublemakers Media, and curated by
Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
