can, like you say, the inner development, can we mature as a culture, as individuals, but
ultimately a culture, and shift what we do with the resources that we have?
No, absolutely. I think that that is the big question. But perhaps even before we have such a
substantial cultural and inner shift, which I again think we do need, I think a first step
might just be to help ourselves get enough inner psychological resources to really be able to
face these global challenges. I think a lot of us, certainly I myself, are really daunted by
the size of these challenges that we are facing. And when we are overwhelmed by external challenges
and threat, then it's just so easy for us humans just to deploy psychological defenses,
like a plain denial of the problem's existence, or rationalizations like what can I as a single
individual do, and other psychological defenses. So a first step is really helping a lot of people
build the capacities, both emotional and cognitive capacities to take in the challenges,
and by they having the courage to try to be part of the solution.
I would add to that the defense mechanisms of self medicating and unhealthy behavior as a coping
mechanism where we don't have the social networks and the deep social capital that's necessary,
that I think you're trying to breathe life into at your conferences and workshops, etc.
And an important thing here to remember is that when we're talking about building these inner
resources or capacities, it's really the corporate world that is starting to wake up here. Because
we see in many of the global or the international tech companies, especially the tech companies that
are in this rapidly moving technological environment, where you really need to have organizations where
every person in the organization can take a responsibility for the totality. You cannot
any longer work with the old sort of modernistic corporate structure where you aggregate all
information up in the hierarchy and you have a small group, management group that takes the
important decision and then makes a five-year plan, three-year plan or a one-year plan or whatever,
that doesn't work any longer. So now as corporations are pushing more and more responsibility for
the complexity of the totality down in the organization and expect self-organizing group,
etc, etc, the corporations find that a lot of people thrive in that environment and say,
wonderful, finally I can take responsibility for a larger part of what is going on. But the flip side
is that many, many employees and in some organizations up to 50%, they cannot cope with that complexity
and that results in psychological suffering and even burnout. So the corporations are starting
to see a need to help build these psychological resources within their frontline employees.
And then the good news is that exactly those same inner capacities and skill that we have
documented in the Inner Development Goals project is what you need as an individual to be able to
live a better life as a family member but also as a citizen, responsible citizen and as part of
of the global humanity. So it's really the same psychological resources we need on the individual
level, the organizational level, the national governmental level and the planetary level and
that I find is good news. Can you give us a little bit of a brief overview of what the
individual development goals are? The Inner Development Goals and it is important to stress
when some people here in Inner, they immediately think individual but these Inner Development
Goals are to a very large extent also collective. So we can develop some of these capacities as
individuals but it's really important that we develop them as well as a collective. So
in this program that is really modeled on the SDGs, so we have identified 23 skills or capacities
and arranged them in five different dimensions and the five dimensions are starting with being
and that is your relationship to yourself, thinking, that is your cognitive capacity,
relating, it's very much about emotional capacities, collaborating and finally acting.
And just to mention a few skills in relating, it's of course empathy and compassion and
self-compassion and to take that as an example, again the good news is that science clearly showed
that we are not born with a certain amount of empathy. No, we can both extend our empathy
to include more and more people, even perhaps future generations and even all sentient beings
and we can also deepen our capacity for empathy. So that's the good news, that's what science shows.
The flip side is that you cannot teach empathy or compassion in a normal school setting like all
of these Inner Development Skills. Developing empathy involves deeper layers of your psychology
and involves what some might call transformative learning, immersive learning over a longer time.
Another capacity that is more cognitive might be perspective taking, both being able to take
more perspectives and other people's perspective on the subject, but also perspective seeking,
actively seeking to find more perspectives and finding out about your own blind spots in a
certain topic. And that's pretty rare, I would imagine. I mean, I think you can consciously
say, well, I wonder what that person feels like and walk in their shoes, but to actually
seek that out every day would take some practice, I imagine. Yeah, and of course it's also cultural
perspective and if we lift this example of the perspective taking to a more collective level,
you could say that we in the Western culture today, the Western civilization today,
we have privileged the scientific perspective, the rationalistic perspective.
And that was probably exactly the right thing to do during the Enlightenment when we went from
a religious, dogmatic worldview, and we discovered the power of science and reason.
And this perspective, Enlightenment perspective, the scientific rationalistic perspective,
have of course given us all these wonderful things like modern medicine, human rights,
and democracy that we would never want to be without. The whole technological
evolution comes from that perspective. And I am a scientist myself, as I mentioned,
I'm a physicist and I believe in the power of that perspective. But only using that perspective
as a single perspective on all aspects of our human world, that's where we go wrong.
So I think that today, it's also expanding the capacity of our civilization, of our culture's
ability to take more perspectives on the problems. And of course, the environmental
problem might be one of those where my organization, the Club of Rome, has very much
from the very beginning from our first computer modeling, 2072, that resulted in the report
Limits to Growth favored the scientific way of solving and defining and solving the problem.
But I think we are more and more coming to the conclusion that this is not just a scientific
problem. It is as much a cultural, structural, and also psychological problem.
