I'm not strong enough to completely unsubscribe from all that, and it is useful to me because
I need to pay attention to the information, but Facebook I have almost completely given
up on.
I do post pictures of my dogs and my chickens, but beyond that, I don't use it much.
But is that a reasonable analogy?
We know we should give it up, but we can't.
I'm going to push back a little bit, actually, because oftentimes this gets classed as an
addiction problem.
In fact, in Frances Haugen, when she came forward, she's the Facebook whistleblower
people remember, and she said that in Facebook's own research, they know that parents give
their kids bad advice.
Just put the phone down.
Just don't use it.
Just use it for less.
Just don't use it after 10 p.m.
What this misses in the picture is that Facebook or Instagram or TikTok or whatever have colonized
the basis of social participation in society.
It's not an individual choice for me to not use it.
If I'm a small, medium-sized business, do I have another place I can go to micro-target
my ads to get the COVID economy rebooted after COVID?
I don't have another place to go.
You don't have a choice.
If I'm a kid, and all 12 of my closest friends are on Instagram, they're not on some other
thing.
They're on Instagram.
It's not about whether I'm scrolling.
You have no choice.
I have no choice.
I have no politician.
All of my competitors are advertising on Facebook or Twitter or YouTube.
Do I have a choice about whether I try to match them in the arms race?
Just like to your point about the climate change thing and the oil companies, I'd say
the analogy is closer to, not just that, it's just closest in the sense that to participate
in society for me to get on that plane, to speak at the South by Southwest conference
last week, I had to use the fossil hydrocarbon economy to get myself there.
They're exactly linked.
We have downward causation caused by the financial markets that we are outsourcing our decisions
to the market, to the financial system, and we're part of this culture.
We can't live outside of it yet until there are options or a change.
It seems like that is another parallel with the social media infrastructure.
Just like we have been on one phase of the energy infrastructure that you can say that
hydrocarbons were a great way of bootloading our society, hopefully into a different energy
paradigm that would be more friendly to the environment.
The attention economy based on advertising generated a bunch of wealth based on extracting
human attention, treating us as the product, not the customer, and it got us to an era
of prosperity, but now we need to switch to a new paradigm, just like we have to do with
energy.
I think they're very similar.
In fact, of possible ways to talk about this issue, I've purposely tried to talk about
it this way because I think it does double work at seeing the connection between economics,
climate, and technology, and the social climate.
Just to say one last thing about the Paleolithic emotions and that I'm a magician by trade
as a background and as a kid.
I do know you're a magician.
I figured that out last week.
Well, so in seeing how these products are working, one of the things you have to realize
is that they're designed with an asymmetry of knowledge, just like a magician knows
something about your mind and how you're going to make meaning of the situation.
And they know they can manipulate that meaning making that you're doing.
Technologists also have an asymmetry of information.
They know something about what tends to be sticky for people, but they don't know about
themselves. So like if I walk into Las Vegas in a casino, one of the things they figured
out is if I remove the clock from the casino, people stay a lot longer because I'm essentially
removing the reasons that as your mind is scanning around using its perceptual apparatus,
it doesn't see clocks anywhere.
You kind of forget, you know, time just passes more in flow.
And it turned out, someone actually pointed this out to me.
I didn't realize it until a week ago.
TikTok, if you open the app on an iPhone or an Android that doesn't have the notch with the
uneven top, TikTok actually removes the clock as you're watching videos because they don't
want you thinking about what time it is, right?
And so these are the magician like tricks on the human mind.
And you know, my co-founder Aza Raskin from the Center for Humane Technology,
he actually invented the infinite scroll, which is that instead of hitting next for a video or
you know, clicking a button, that what if you just scroll and it just kept loading them at the
bottom over and over and over again. And he invented that feature and he deeply regrets it.
He estimates that it will waste several million lives per day in human time.
And it's because they're removing the stopping queue, which is that queue that your mind needs
in a conversation. Like if I stop talking right now and there's a space, we'll know that we can
kind of switch turns. But if I keep talking and you're trying to jump in, then you won't be able
to, right? So I'm doing the infinite scroll right now as I'm not letting you speak.
Well, in this particular case, I would probably eventually just butt in and speak.
Which is sometimes what our brains do when they catch up to realizing that we've been
spending too long. Right, right. Well, exactly. So a little bit on the magic, just to let you know,
you and I were together a couple of weeks ago. I can't remember exactly when it was. Yeah,
it was two weeks ago. And you did this magic trick on me where you had this quarter in my hand
and you set a story and my hand was closed and then the quarter was bent in half and it wasn't
before. And it was a real quarter and I still have it. It's in the other room on my shelf.
And I purposely don't believe that that was actually magic. I purposely did not look on the
internet to see an explanation for that. Because in the doing of that, I would have lost some of
the specialness of you cracking up at watching my reaction and me wondering how the hell did he
do that? There's a key thing there, right? Which is that the magician, when they use the asymmetry
of knowledge that they know something about your mind that you don't know about themself,
they're not using that to take all your money or to manipulate your psychology and make you
anorexic or to make you vote for a different candidate or to ruin a democracy that you're a
part of. They use the asymmetry of information to create a magical experience, to create entertainment
in a way they have a fiduciary obligation to you to be entertaining you. They're operating
with that asymmetry of information to help or to entertain. But contrast to that, technology
companies have way more knowledge about the vulnerabilities of your mind, way more privileged
information. They also know a lot more how the technology works, but they're not using it to the
best benefit of your children or to the democracy to function better.
So to use an obscure Dungeons and Dragons metaphor, the tech companies are lawful, evil,
and magicians are chaotic good. I actually haven't played that much Dungeons and Dragons,
so you'd be educating me. But no, but my point is you can use magic in the broader sense
to change people's perception of their reality. You do it all the time with your public talks
and you use word combinations for our prehistoric brain that change how people think and perhaps
behave. But you're not doing that to generate clicks or money, you're doing that to change
people's hearts and minds. So magic in the sense of changing people's perception of reality
can be a real thing and a good thing, yes? Yeah, well, I think there's this other trend that
if you think about a timeline of any intelligence species, if it gets to a sufficient level of
intelligence, it starts to use its intelligence to understand itself. A lion doesn't have a
capacity to point its own intelligence capacities to figure out how to lion brains work and then
become self-aware of, man, why do I like gazelles and why do I like gazelles that look like that
and not this? They can't interrogate their own mind. What's unique about humans in our intelligence
is that we can actually build tools and build instruments and then actually become self-aware.
Well, first, we don't need tools. We can actually just do like what the Buddhist did where we just
sit with our minds and we can study how we really work. We can notice that we have something called
loss aversion, that gaining 100 bucks doesn't hurt, doesn't feel as good as not losing 100
bucks feels bad. And that's for an evolutionary reason, but we can discover facts like that
about the human mind. And that's what magicians have done. They've discovered these ancient facts
about how minds make meaning and biases that we have. And you can think of a timeline that
from Edward Bernays and Sigmund Freud discovering some basic things about human minds to developing
marketing and focus groups to then the magicians coming along and figuring out how magic works
and then figuring out Frank Luntz and Drew Weston and people like this who know how language can
shape thoughts and minds. Then you can figure out the pickup artist community and then cults. And
then you can think about this increasing trajectory of self-knowledge about the predictability of
human social animals' behavior if you control the environment and the situation. And that is like
this sort of body of knowledge, which is how to turn the creativity and free will of human beings
into predictable dead slabs of human behavior because there is an asymmetry where you can
cause things to happen. This is why I lost sleep after I met you because I realized that
me just college professor reality 101 trying to do a wide boundary comprehensive
library treatment of the human predicament on energy, human behavior, climate, biodiversity,
money, economic growth, the future isn't what you just described. It's relevant, but it's boring
and dry and not going to be able to capture people with language, etc. So I really struggle with
should I just discard all the science other than what it informs in my head and use
PR and tricks to change people's behavior. And that's not who I am. So I'm doing these
educational videos and using some art and music and such, but it's really depressing to me that
unless we change how people get information and have a discourse together in society that these
larger issues aren't going to be solved. Right. I think that we can make some distinctions that
this knowledge about how human minds work doesn't mean we can inform the people who are
communicating the most important things to the world and then wrap around it this efficacy program,
this to communicate even more powerfully things that people need to know. But of course, this
ability to persuade minds, if you think about that sort of this is this ability to persuade
minds, that's what's going up on a curve. And you can use that for good and for bad.
