It is a chicken and an egg, right? If you believe we are selfish, we therefore create
institutions that draw out our selfishness. We are sharing and collective belief-sharing spaces.
If you find stuff which conflicts with your belief, you shut a blind, you turn a blind eye to it.
For essential resources, the less we produce, the more they contribute to GDP, which is about as
perverse a measure of welfare as you could possibly have.
If the biggest diagram that we're teaching students does not have energy
and materials from the living world, it does not have unpaid care of the household,
it does not have the commons through the most fundamental sources of our well-being,
they're absent, this does not serve us. Welcome to reality roundtable number three.
We don't think about it too much, but there are approximately 240 million
college students in the world. Many of them are exposed to economics 101.
It is my belief of study over the last 20 years that what is being taught in economics
is not commensurate with the biophysical world, the socioeconomic realities that we face,
with me to discuss conventional economics as it's being taught and heterodox economics
that is trying to apply human behavior, natural sciences, and reality to the field of economics.
Our four previous guests, all friends of mine, Josh Farley and John Erickson of the University of
Vermont, who were both on my PhD committee, Kate Rayworth of Donut Economics in London,
and renegade economist Steve Keane currently in Amsterdam, but traveling all over teaching
the reality of money, energy, and climate in economics. This was a fantastic conversation
that I hope can be shown in colleges around the world to get a glimpse into
the disparities from what is being taught and our current reality. Please welcome Kate, John, Josh,
and Steve.
Welcome to reality roundtable number three. With me today are four of my colleagues and friends,
John Erickson and Josh Farley were my PhD advisors, Steve Keane and Kate Rayworth,
heterodox economists, self-described both of them as renegade economists. They've all been on this
program before and have great episodes you should listen to. The framing of this conversation is
on economics and education. There are currently around 250 million young humans at universities
around the world who are learning about how our world works and their future and how things fit
together. It's education, but economic theory has been relatively unchanged in the last century
and may not be preparing these young humans for the reality that is our ecological systems
connected world. I have asked each of our four panelists today to highlight one area in economic
theory that is being taught in a way that doesn't represent our biophysical ecological systems reality
and how that might be rectified. We're going to have like six minutes each and then ask questions
and then open up to a broader conversation after all four have gone. I'll just briefly
introduce the topics so we know where we're going. John Erickson is going to talk about
homoeconomicus and the microeconomic treatment of human behavior and why that is relevant.
Steve Keane is going to talk about the importance of energy that is missed in macroeconomics
currently and also what that implies for the treatment of externalities, climate change,
etc. Josh Farley is going to explain the assumption that markets are the most efficient
mechanism for resource allocation and why that is a flawed view. Kate Rayworth is going to wrap
up talking about the big picture economy that goes beyond just GDP and measuring the monetary
representations of our system. I'm very excited to be here with you all and
I think let's just get right into it. John Erickson, professor at University of Vermont,
please kick us off. All right. Well, thank you, Nate. Thank you for organizing this and it's
so nice to see you all. I'll start with a morbid thought. I think it was Paul Samuelson who said
change does happen in economics, but one funeral at a time. So it's been slow. It's been very slow
going and economics has held on to some pretty core thoughts that emerged in this so-called
neoclassical era of economic theory. Really, it was born in the late 1800s, so it's been
along the hall and what you asked me to talk about really is the core model of behavior
that we find in economic theory. So what we did in economics is we took the tiniest slice of human
behavior, self-interest, and then we wrapped it with abstract mathematics in the late 1800s and
big chunks of our economic theory has been there ever since. This theory of the individual,
this theory of the self-interested individual wrapped in mathematics kind of
is built from the sanctity of the person, the personhood, and it's kind of all set up to guarantee
market equilibrium, which our colleagues will get into some more. It's also over the course of the
last 100-plus years a theory that has largely been walled off from other disciplines while
growing in influence and in stature and academia, infecting public policy, business administration,
infecting the other social sciences, and even in more recent years affecting the natural sciences.
When its assumptions, which I'll get into, are challenged or when the theory of the
rational actor, this self-interested individual, doesn't hold up against other theories or other
disciplines or when the scientific method gets in the way, economists have this very convenient
line. It's just a model, right, where they often quote George Box, the statistician.
All models are wrong, some are useful, but I would add one little more piece to that. All models
are wrong, some are useful. I agree. Useful for whom? And that's the big question that we need to ask
today. So let's unpack this rational actor model. It starts in such a simple, seemingly innocent
place, right? There's this intelligent human, this intelligent individual who makes logical decisions
for him or herself. Sounds like a laudable starting place. So intelligent, individual, logical,
it sort of implies that anything else is dumb or illogical or naive and ignoring, you know,
the instinct of self-interest. What economists for long times have called any challenges to
this starting point, behavioral anomalies, right? So this idea of a rational actor starts with the
actor, the individual, an isolated individual at a point in time. And that's the kind of first
divergence that we need to consider. And Nate, your work has really highlighted this. The person,
like when we start with the isolated individual at a point in time, we're ignoring the evolutionary
history of our primate species. We're turning Homo sapiens, right, Latin for wise man,
into Homo economicus, this hypothetical person that maximizes utility as a consumer
and maximizes profit as a producer. But anybody outside the constraints of an economics 101 class
will tell you that Homo sapiens is a member of multiple groups with evolved instincts for care,
compassion, empathy. Yes, we have an ability to compete, but we also have an ability to cooperate.
And that expression of those behaviors compete, cooperate, selfishness versus care
really depends on our environmental cues, depends on our culture, depends on our institutions.
It depends on who's designing the rules that brings out that expression of the human being
that ultimately answers useful for whom, right? All models are wrong, some are useful,
useful for whom. And if we set up this kind of caricature of the human so that it's useful
for only certain people or only certain classes, we can quickly sort of get to the conclusion why
this model, this very narrow model of humanity has hung on for 100 plus years.
Rational actor model, the actor, the rational part, okay, this is a, we need, this rational
agent needs a decision rule. And again, it starts in such a simple place, right? How we make decisions
is at the margin, right? This rational actor model to be rational, to be logical, we should
just consider the next choice. And if the next choice creates more benefits than costs, then do it.
Such a simple, simple decision rule, right? And Josh and I went and did our PhDs together
at Cornell University and I can't speak for you, Josh, but all I learned throughout my PhD was
marginal benefit equals marginal cost over and over and over and over and over. Any sort of decision
was framed as marginal benefit equals marginal cost, right? So all you got to do is consider the
next unit, count the benefits, the next unit, count the costs, and there's your decision rule.
And in fact, through economics education, we're sort of trained to think at the margin, right?
We're trained to think like an economist. One of my teachers at Cornell was Robert Frank
and he talked about economic naturalism, right? This idea that, you know, thinking at the margin is
sort of the highest logical rational way to think. But it turns out that people aren't so good at the
calculus of variations, right? People aren't so good at thinking at the margin. We use a lot of
cognitive shortcuts because we are, we have information overload. There's a great video by
this stand-up economist, this colleague from Washington State or Washington University of
Washington who sort of pokes fun at this idea of thinking at the margin. We have lots of tricks
to make meaning out of information overload, like what information we manage to absorb. We have sort
of lots of shortcuts and lots of tricks. For example, the normalcy bias, like we are terrible at
interpreting probability as human means. The illusion of asymmetric insights. We are terrible
at guessing what others are thinking. There's the hindsight bias. We are terrible at predicting
the future because we sort of think back in hindsight. All this kind of makes the rational actor model
a terrible predictor outside of the most simple decisions. And when you add other kinds of biases
like mental shortcuts to act fast in the face of uncertainty, there's overconfidence bias,
egocentric bias, optimism bias, novelty bias. There's all these biases that economists conveniently
call behavioral anomalies that we assume away and kind of come back to this core model. And it's
sort of the main reason why so much of our economic models are terrible at predicting
microeconomic behavior. And then when you add all those things together, they're terrible at predicting
macroeconomic phenomena. Maybe I'll just end there. The IMF did a study recently and looked at 153
recessions in 63 countries between 1992 and 2014 and found that the vast majority of economists
missed them all together. Why is this? Why is economic forecasting so bad? And maybe part of
it is that economic forecasters themselves are humans. So we have a difficulty in imagining
low probability high impact events. But it's also because this rational actor is built into
the very models that were used for these predictions. And then these rational agents and these models
assume that we absorb new information seamlessly, that we predict a bold response to price signals,
that we quickly move back to full equilibrium, full employment. The list goes on and on of why
these models don't add up and why we need what I call a more conciliant economics. And we'll get
into that perhaps as we unpack this some more. Thank you so much, John. It's interesting for
me to be running the committee of economists as opposed to you back 12 years ago. So I have a
question and then we'll kick it off to the panel. You talked about homo economicus and what is taught
with rational actor. Does what's being taught to young humans end up changing our behavior
during this period en masse? Yeah, I mean, well, when our institutions and our public policy are
informed by the self interest model, right, we craft institutions and cultures and public policy that
draw out that selfishness that draw out the greed is good behavior, right, that draw out this expression
of the human animal. So it is the chicken and an egg, right? If you believe we are selfish, we
therefore create institutions that draw out our selfishness. In the classroom, there's a lot of
evidence to show that, you know, with enough training, with enough brainwashing, with enough
kind of deprogramming the human animal to think at the margin to think rationally, think selfishly,
to think like what Thorsen Veblen called a homo genius, the lobbyal of desire, right,
that we start to behave that way. And given that economics, business, political science are the
most popular majors in at least in American universities. And given that economists, political
scientists, MBAs go on to lead our institutions, right, our political institutions, our private
institutions, even our for our nonprofit institutions, then you start to get into this kind of
self-fulfilling prophecy, which is what you're referring to. Steve, Josh, Kate, who would like to
ask John or interject on this topic? Josh, you first then Kate, then Steve. Yeah, I just want to
comment on one thing, you know, a lot of people in evolution used to say, well, nature is red and
tooth and claw, everything is competition. And yet, evolutionists are recognizing that
cooperation has been the secret of human success, but also one of the driving forces in
evolution. And based on readings and evolution, I asked all my students to name five characteristics
of a good person and five characteristics of an evil person. And inevitably, a good person
puts the group ahead of the individual. And some anthropologists actually did a study, a global
study of what are the, what elements of morality are the most universal. And it is first of all
cooperation and putting the group ahead of the individual. So these are actually universal
phenomena. And it seems really weird that economists define humans as basically evil.
But it is true. And Robert Frank, you know, your advisor has done a lot of research on this,
showing that, you know, just being exposed to mainstream theory does make economists think
far more like, you know, home economics. And the only time when I ever had, I always ask these
students, you know, five characteristics of a good person, I presented to the University of
Vermont Econ Club, handshoots up and says selfishness. That was a good person.
Yeah. And I mean, as you know, Josh and others that, you know, Charles Darwin was writing at a
time of the classical economists, and they were actually trading a lot of ideas back and forth.
The big difference is economics got stuck. It got mathematicized. It got marginal. It kind of,
this marginal revolution took over. And economics sort of stayed rather static throughout the 1900s
while Bushinger biology, the natural sciences more generally became more
resilient, became more connected, became more interdependent, right? Became more about seeking
truth through collaboration instead of through isolation. And so it evolved while economics
got stuck. I'll jump in with a devil's advocate. So, so please. Okay, you say, you know, this model
is wrong. It's not good enough. Then then what? Right. And I think this is one of the big push
backs. Well, then what? I mean, of course, we know this model is a simplification. And so we
can relax each of these assumptions and see how this might change. So then what kind of modeling,
right? If it's, if it's supposed to not be derived by putting together a set of assumptions that
work for maths, then where are you going to get your model or your representation of humanity
from? And how will that change economic modeling? Well, I'd start by aligning economics with science.
And ethics. And that's where economics started. I mean, economics was a moral philosophy. It's
roots were in moral philosophy. And, and creating what I like to call more conciliant to economics
and economic theory in particular, that is test itself against theory of other fields.
And I think that's where, you know, economics has gone astray. You know, this litmus test that
in my mind comes from the work of Yo Wilson and his book, Consolence in 1998, is, you know, the
test of a good theory is how well does it hold up against a lot of theory. And his advice to
economists was to look at the borderlands, right? Look at the borderlands between economics and
other fields. And so here in the borderlands, I think you find a richness, a tapestry to
rebuild a study of economics that is scientifically credible and ethically virtuous.
So the borderlands between economics and neuroscience, you know, some some called neural
economics, you know, where we're sort of almost on a daily basis, overturning the assumptions
of economics, based on empirical database science, the borderland of behavioral economics,
it really at the individual level, the borderhand upland of experimental economics, like testing
our ideas with groups of humans interacting with one another, the borderland of institutional
economics, groups of groups working together, right, and sort of testing ideas of competition
versus cooperation. And what are the institutional characteristics that draw out those expressions
of human behavior, and the borderlands of evolutionary economics, the kind of long view
of why is it the humans think and act the way they do, to really build a true decision science,
right? I mean, economics builds itself as a decision science. And in my view, it has become
anything, anything but yeah, I actually have a bit like Kate, I'm a bit of devil's advocate here,
but a different direction. John, the critique you've given a neoclassical economic is the one
happy with. I've seen plenty of neoclassical economists sit through a presentation by some
way, the behavioral economics and say, Oh, there's this bias on that bias, but I'm just going to
assume rational behavior. Okay. The real weakness for that theory is that it doesn't work in
internally anyway. If you look at the theory of how they try to derive an individual demand curve,
that's quite straightforward. Students will be drawn to dividing what they call a Hixian
compensated demand curve, which necessarily slopes down sometime in their first year,
the poor bastards. And they will then gloss over, how do you convert that to a market demand curve?
Now, the mathematics has been done by decent mathematical economists, Son and Shine Schaefer,
quite a few others. And they proved not that they wanted to prove that if you have an entire
community of individuals, the downward slope, the Hixian compensated demand curves derived from
the assumption of rational behavior, utility maximizing behavior, the resulting market demand
curve can have any shape at all that it can be represented by a polynomial. It doesn't have
to slope down. Now they don't teach that they end up assuming that the representative agent,
the representative agent is a single individual consuming a single commodity.
Okay. Most people know it's a single, they don't realize it's a single commodity.
If you allow either more than one individual with different preferences,
or more than one good with different characteristics, you cannot longer derive
a downward-slaping market demand curve. That's the real flaw of the theory.
That's the critique the students need to realize. They can go back, I'd actually recommend that
go and read a paper by Samuelson. And by the way, it wasn't Samuelson that said,
science advances one funeral at a time. It was Max Planck. He was quite right about science.
Science does advance one funeral at a time because ultimately you have generational change.
New groups come along knowing the anomaly that the previous physics didn't cope with.
They replace the professors who can't admit the anomaly, bang, you get change. In economics,
you can always find a couple of zealots who love the anarcho-syndicalists,
libertarian nature of neoclassical theory. We all got, we deserve, we reach materiality maximizing
where in equilibrium, what a wonderful society. That's even better than Scientology. I'm going
to convert everybody to join my religion. So you don't get generational change in economics,
and that's what we desperately need, which is why we're talking to students today.
Yeah, yeah. No, absolutely. I mean, yeah, Samuelson admits that he'd stole that from
Planck, but he was applying it to economics. I mean, Planck was talking about science more
generally. And then the idea, another idea of interpersonal utility comparison, like, you know,
comparing my utility with yours is not allowed in economics because if it was, the whole edifice
of welfare theory falls apart. And so, I mean, there's some real challenges to the core assumptions
of economic theory at micro and macro levels. And then your idea, I mean, your thought on the
representative agent, Ami, so much of our growth models are built on a representative agent.
So many of our climate economy models, this is where it gets really dangerous, are built on a
representative agent, right, the entire climate system from the perspective of one individual
who's trying to maximize utility. That's the edifice of the entire William Norhouse framework
that won a Nobel Prize that really informed, particularly the US position
way back in the early 90s under Bush one of wait and see, right, because we shouldn't rationally
do anything now in order to incur near term costs with the potential for long term benefits.
This philosophical view of economics builds the whole edifice. And this is where I have a challenge
as an economist with I'm okay as with economists in the role of tinkerers as mechanics as janitors,
you know, applied economics like twiddling at the economy to make it work better.
What I'm not okay with is economists and economic theory as it currently stands as master planners,
right, as the master narrative. And that's where I come at this.
Excellent. That was a great 20 minute overview of microeconomics and Homo economicus.
Granted, each of these topics we could spend two hours on, but I just want to have a real bird's
eye view of some core things that we're teaching young people around the world right now that
really don't hold water. Next up, I would like to switch to Steve Keen. Steve, what aspect of
modern economic theory would you like to debunk today?
Mine is going to be energy, the role of energy. So the chart you can see on the left hand side
is using it's a new software I've developed called Ravel. And if you wanted to find a tighter pair
of items that are correlated with each other, you'd be having a pretty hard time to find it.
That the black line there is GDP and the red, the colored line is energy and the fit between the two
is ridiculous. There's obviously some correlation of two factors going in the same direction that
it reached a correlation coefficient of 0.997. But if you take a look at the one below, which is
looking at change in energy and change in GDP, so no longer any problem about spurious correlation
from both going in the same direction. The correlation there is 0.86 and energy goes up,
GDP goes up when GDP goes down, energy goes down. And if you're trying to derive an empirical model
production from this data, your first pass would be that at a first level of approximation,
GDP is energy converted into useful work. That's what you draw from looking at the data like that.
Now, if you then would say, well, what economic theory currently suits that,
it's actually what's called the Lyonte of model, shown in a different fashion, showing a
fixed numerical relationship between capital, however it's defined in GDP, however it's defined,
using what's called a capital output ratio. But I've actually shown in my research that is,
in fact, the efficiency with which machine returns energy into useful work. So that's the
post-Kanzian theory, and it fits the data like a glove, and you wouldn't bother doing anything else.
So that's what you know. Now, neoclassicals reject this empirical fact because it conflicts with
neoclassical theory. And there's a recent paper that I'm going to have a bit of fun with here,
which said, if the elasticity of substitution between drown in energy and other inputs is
literally zero, then production falls one for one when the energy supply, and as you can see
from the previous data that I showed, that's the truth. That's what actually happens.
Now, they then continue to trash the model that post-Kanzians use to model production called
Lyonte of production, and they say it makes nonsensical predictions with regard to the evolution
of marginal products, prices and expenditures. Yeah, but it's true. So there's got to be
something with the wrong with the idea of marginal products, prices and expenditure shares,
and that's what turns up. So this paper, they go on to say that if factor prices equal marginal
products, and that's the neoclassical theory of income distribution, the wage equals the
marginal product of labor, the rate of profit equals the marginal product of capital. Therefore,
in both cases, you get what you deserve, which is why there's this meritocratic side to neoclassical
theory that I think is a major reason why people get seduced by it. Now, it says that that's the
case. If the substitution is one-for-one, which it is, then you get nonsensical predictions
about these ideas. What that implies is that it's not the predictions that are nonsensical,
because the prediction is actually true, a one-for-one match between NSE and GDP. It's the
theory that's nonsensical. So this is actually a classic own goal. They used it to trash the idea
that there was a one-for-one relationship between energy and GDP. But you find there actually is
a one-for-one relationship between energy and GDP. So the only way to make sense of this is that this
is a disproof of the neoclassical theories of both production and distribution. And that's one of the
danger that John alluded to a moment ago, that those models are then blinded us to the dangers
and the importance of climate change. So if you take a look at how they model, the name of the
model, you'll learn it's in enough you poor victims of a neoclassical education, the Cobb-Douglas
production function. And that shows production is involving technology, which they label A, L for
labor and K for capital. But there's exponents of labor and capital, which I've already shown in
the previous slide, must be wrong empirically. But that's what they use, and they have no energy
input. Now that's one reason why Nordhaus, back in 1991, could write a sentence like this and not
realize that he was being a blithering idiot, which is what unfortunately an economics degree
turns you into. He says, for the bulk of the economy, manufacturing, mining, utilities, finance,
trade, by which he means wholesale and retail trade, and most of his industries, it is difficult
to find major direct impacts of the projected climate changes over the next 50 to 75 years.
And that ignorance is what's set our climate policy ever since. And you got the Nobel Prize,
which I hope you'll soon check and see why I've got Nobel Prize in inverted commas there. It's
not a Nobel Prize. So when you look at the neoclassical consensus that's been formed starting
from ideas like Nordhaus's 30 years ago, here's a paper that surveyed over 2,000 economists who
work on climate change. By the way, it's about 2 to 3% of the total population of economists. So
it's not the entire body of economists who produced this nonsense. But of that group,
they surveyed 2,200 roughly, 750 roughly replied, and they answered that they thought if you're
going to head towards five degrees warming by 2130, so another four degrees in the next century,
and another six degrees in the next two centuries, a seven degrees Celsius by 2220,
that would reduce economic growth by 0.002% per annum. That's less than one fifth the current
measurement level for recorded GDP growth today. We'd never report GDP growth as anything other
than x.y%. We're point wise, the units of 0.1%. And here with this lot, trying to predict that
global warming would have an impact on GDP growth, which was one fifth the level of measurement error
for recorded GDP to go. In other words, it doesn't matter. Now, the reality of energy is something
that I realized when working with Bob Ayers some time ago, and that is that labor, whether that
energy is a corpse, capital, whether that energy is a sculpture, neither labor nor capital can do
anything unless you put energy inputs into them. And when you do, energy is by far the dominant
factor of production. And the ignorance about this is critical in the case of global warming,
because this is what causes the belief that damages from global warming are going to be
so minor. Now, you talk to scientists, if you tell them the levels of economists
are blightly discussing, seven degrees by 2220. This is from a paper in 2017,
the range of economic science papers you can find like this, describing more than five degrees of
warming is unknown, implying beyond catastrophic, including existential threats. And here are
economists saying it's going to cause a 0.02% fall in the rate of economic growth. This nonsense
has dominated how a form falling policy on climate change. This is closer to reality.
Reality is about to trump theory at our monumental expense.
Thanks so much, Steve. So if there was a standard economist watching this program,
what do you imagine their rebuttal to what you just said would be?
They're most likely to throw that there are national exceptions to that data I showed you
a moment ago. And you can find them. So if I actually share my software this time,
I can actually illustrate that. Let's see if I can just do that. Hang on a second,
go back to share again. And I'll share the screen. Okay. So can you see my ravelled data there?
Okay. Okay. There's the world. If I move to United States, you find the GDP is increasing energy
consumption has been going down since 2000. You find the same. India, on the other hand,
accelerating use of both energy and GDP growth. Great Britain, dramatic de-linking. Look at that
decline there. China rising in use of both. So what they focus on is country exceptions. But
the thing is that's using globalization to obscure reality. When you look at the overall
globalized economy, you get the result I can show you there. Virtually a one for one fit between
the two. So I'm sorry, there's something wrong with your theory. And there really is no comeback
to that. Staying with that picture, I just want to double check. So I'm going to do the push back
from the economists. But were you showing us national production, energy consumed within the
nation? Or are you showing consumption based energy? It's primary energy. The data source is
the OECD. So it's primary data source using the OECD. So it's not consumption. It's the overall
use of energy to produce GDP globally. If you did those calculations on a consumption basis,
then you would see anything like that scale of decoupling. You might still see, in fact,
there are some countries that appear to have decoupled on a consumption basis, but you wouldn't
see that. That's right. And so what you've really got is that, again, the theory is rather than
illuminating reality, it's obscuring reality. And that's the real danger of a neoclassical
education. Can I ask a question, though? And I don't know if it's of Steve and I'm going to
ask you to lean into your least cynical of the economists who you've spent your career surrounded
by. How is it that economists could conclude that up to five degrees of global heating
over a century could have a minimal disruption? I mean, where is the disconnect in the science,
in the respect for other science, the lack of conciliance, as John would say? How do you believe
they've actually come to that conclusion? If you get inculcated in neoclassical way of thinking,
and I can say from my own experience up to the halfway through first year of microeconomics at
Sydney University when I was 18, I swallowed all this stuff. And what it gives you was a paradigm,
as Kern put it, that lets you see the world. And a paradigm doesn't just, paradigm does several
things. It tells you what's worth looking at. It also tells you what's worth ignoring. So when
you're wearing that paradigm, you get a very coherent view of the world because it's the
paradigm you're seeing, not the real world. Now, if any elements of the real world conflict with
that paradigm, and I'm not blaming economists for this, this is very much human nature. And it comes
back to the facts that John was talking about earlier, and Josh as well, that we are a sharing
and collective belief sharing species. If you find stuff which conflicts with your beliefs,
you shut a blind, you turn a blind eye to it. And the classic there comes from Galileo.
Galileo wrote to Kepler, one of my favorite pieces of correspondence ever, saying,
what are we to say, my dear Kepler, about these learned gentlemen at the university,
who were the perspective and asked, refused to look through the telescope.
Now, what Galileo had done is invent the device that enabled us to see objects
a great distance as much closer up. You would think that scientists would like to see the spheres.
You could finally see the spheres. Only they knew that if they looked for that telescope,
they wouldn't see the spheres. They would instead see birds orbiting Jupiter and Saturn,
which completely destroyed their paradigm. They refused to look down at neoclassical
economists and no better than ptolemaic astronomers at the time of Galileo, refusing to look through
the telescope. So if, I mean, anyone in five minutes can on the internet look and see that a
barrel of oil has 1700 kilowatt hours of work potential, which is years of human labor. So
an economist is not going to want to look through that telescope because obviously that
implies a much larger value addition than its cost share to the economic function.
Yeah. I've had a lifetime of experiencing this in the sense that, like since I predicted the
global financial crisis, one of about a dozen economists who did. And of course, many more
people who hadn't been blinded by economics did see it coming. So it's a peculiar economic
failing not to be able to see that a financial crisis is coming away in 2008. But I've been
showing ever since then data showing credit to change an annual, annual change in private debt
against unemployment with outrageously high correlation coefficients, again, about the
0.9 minus 0.9 level between change in credit and change in unemployment or the level of unemployment.
And I'm just giving up. They will not look at it. It's outrageously different to what their theory
predicts. I've shown it at numerous conferences. It's on thousands of websites and not a single
economist has attempted to fit that data and see what's gone wrong with their theory.
So the classic, this is the paradigm blindness of humanity. And on that front,
if you want to choose any rationality, John, that's the ultimate of all time, economists are
irrational. I'm just going to make a couple of quick comments, really kind of adding to what
Steve said, you know, and answering Kate's question a little bit too, like, why are the
economists blind to these things? How can they not see the problems of climate change? So Shelling,
another Nobel laureate, and Nordhaus has actually said the same thing. Shelling was more explicit.
He said, climate change will only affect GDP. GDP is only like one person. I'm sorry, climate
change will only affect agriculture. Agriculture is only about 1% of GDP. So if we lose 30% of
agricultural output, no harm done, which is completely insane. And then this idea about
the importance of energy, you know, I challenge anybody in this audience that what have they
interacted with today that any, you know, anything they purchased or any human made product that
did not require oil, everything we interact with require oil. And to give it an idea of how valuable
oil is relative to what we pay for it, think about how far you could push your how much how
long would take you to push your car as far as you can drive it on a dollars worth of gasoline.
And right now, you have to multiply our that that work by 16 billion per day to see how much work
we do with gasoline. And then so we treat it is even these models, we get rid of oil, no harm done,
the economy will continue to grow at 2% forever. So these are just kind of crazy ideas and very
easy in our to visualize the issues. I spent some time thinking in the first section about
marginal, marginal change, right? And I think economists who are trained in marginal benefits,
marginal costs over and over and over and over again. I mean, that's how we've built our climate
economy models. And we take the future and bring it into sort of near term marginal calculus
through the discount rate. So all future costs all future benefits brought back to a near term
decision at the margin. What's the marginal benefit? What's the marginal cost? And that's what
that's what's infected these kinds of models. But Steve, I would add it's infected the scientific
understanding and modeling of climate change, the intergovernmental panel on climate change, right?
100 and something like 113 of the 116 scenarios that give us a 50 50% chance of staying within
two degrees Celsius, assume two to 3% annual GDP growth, right at 3%. That's a doubling of the
world economy in 27 years. So and they do this through magical thinking, right through efficiency,
through decoupling, through all of the stuff that empirically we can't show has happened
or empirically will happen. So my biggest fear is that economic thinking really has
is infected other social sciences like business and psychology and political science, but it's
really starting to infect climate science. We're to be a climate scientist, you have to show the
economic costs and benefits of your models. The IPCC is just too big to read as a consortium,
but I've read over 1000 papers, I'd say, behind the research about the science and the economics.
And I've read the economic sections of the IPCC in great detail. And they will say things like this
is the 2022 report saying that a four degree increase in temperature by 2100 will cause a 10 to 23,
23% fall in GDP relative to what it would have been in the complete absence of climate change.
And what that means is rather than being five times bigger, it'll be four times bigger.
Okay, it's still positive growth. And if you look at how they do what they could, they call the
shared social economic pathways, they are made using the components of the Cobb-Douglas production
function, technology is going to improve, there'll be only more people, there'll be more machines,
therefore GDP is going to continue growing. So every one of the SSP scenarios, whether that's
from the 2.5 to the 8.5 or whatever they call them, they all not one of them predicts any
period of negative growth anywhere in the world for the next century. Now, they are completely
and absolutely wrong. And we're going to find that out very, very quickly. This all makes complete
sense to me, because I've studied this, and I know the four of you, and we've talked about these
things and, you know, been dismayed and shocked about it. I wonder though, what people who haven't
spent this amount of time on these issues, it thinks of this conversation, like it is so apparent
to me, these deep, dangerous chasms in the logic of economic theory, which is leading our culture
forward. I just wonder what the general person listening to this would think, maybe we'll find
out, but... Yeah, I think that's what I remember. When I first read the Neoclassical stuff, I was
in shock. My wife actually came in, I was looking at some of it, and shocked and broke me out of it
with very Thai Buddhist comments upon whether we can survive or not. And I was in shock. I mean,
it was so bad, because they are literally assuming that you're going to only have the cultures exposed
to climate change, the rest of us working carefully controlled environments, that will be negligibly
affected by climate change. It's 87% of the economy won't be affected because it's under a roof.
And there's such ludicrous assumptions like this, I was just in total shock. And it took me,
even though I know that anybody who believes that can't understand climate change,
it took me a while to realize that's actually the way that economists think about it. So once they
think they only stuff exposed to the weather is going to be affected, they're going to get
fertiliser effect offsetting some of the bad weather. So overall, ACD is whether it increases
or decreases GDP. And that's what the 2,000 of them continue bullshitting each other about.
And in that climate controlled future that air conditioning is going to need things to power
it for more people, etc. Josh, you had a comment, then John, and then we're going to move on to
the next piece. Yeah, and just super quickly, what are the scariest things I think about this
assumption of exponential growth going on forever? You know, as John pointed out, the economy doubles
in size every 24 years at 3% growth, that means anything we do today to mitigate climate change
in the future is sacrificing our well being for a richer future. And that would be stupid.
Why should we sacrifice for people who'll be richer and better off than us? We should do nothing.
I would just add briefly that economics has become the language of the ruling class.
So your question, Nate, about the everyday person, right? If you're not part of the ruling class,
then you're not speaking the language. It's become, I mean, as the language of the ruling class,
it really has been written in such a way to align with the ruling class for 100 plus years,
and that's why we continue to hang on to these kind of myths of economics. And that's why economics
of all disciplines on most campuses has become the most amoral and ascientific and ahistorical.
So it's our job to kind of abandon these beliefs, rebuild an economics,
and lean into other values. And I really think that's where, I think that's where the vast
majority of the public is at, to take back things, words like rational. What does it mean to be
rational? Think of the margin or to think about the health of the planet, for example.
Thank you. Let's move on to our next panelist, Josh Farley. Take it away, sir.
All right. So, you know, what they always teach in economics classes is that markets are this
amazingly efficient mechanism for generating these optimal utility maximizing equilibriums.
So it's really, you know, we'd be idiots to challenge this. And I want to make the case,
so first to explain what they, why they believe this. So they say on the production side,
markets are allocating labor, energy, raw materials, all those factors of production.
They allocate them to the sectors that can add the most value. And because those sectors can
add the most value, they can pay the most. So they, you know, the market allocates the resources to
them. So this maximizes value on the production side. Then on the consumption side, markets allocate
all the commodities to those who value them the most is measured by how much they're willing to pay.
So it's maximizing value on the consumption side. And then in terms of equilibrium,
let's say there's, you know, a war on Ukraine or that disrupts oil supplies or food supplies.
So economists say if a resource or commodity becomes scarce, prices increase. So producers supply
more and consumers consume less. So we get the self-regulating equilibrium. And then we measure
our success using GDP. So, you know, GDP grows, shows we're doing better. And what I would argue is
that as economists, what we should pay most attention to is those essential resources, the
things that we're dead if we don't have. And these are things like, you know, energy and food and
healthy ecosystems. So this is what economists have to get right is how we allocate essential
resources. And I want to just show very quickly that markets are actually terrible at achieving any
of these goals with essential resources. So I'm going to use the example of the market at essential
resources of food and energy. And the idea is that, you know, if there's a food becomes scarce,
price goes up. So we demand less. But my physiological requirements, my nutritional needs
are completely unaffected by the price of food. And so I don't demand less when the price goes up.
So what happens if a resource becomes scarcer, we all compete to get it because we need it,
which sends prices skyrocketing upwards. And this is why we just saw the food companies getting
record profits last year. So the big problem with this demand is demand is actually preferences
weighted by purchasing power. I don't have demand if I don't have money to back it up.
So the only people when prices rise, when food becomes scarce or energy comes scarce and prices
rise, the only people who reduce consumption are those who don't have enough money. So I did an
empirical study looking at all the countries in the world, how they responded to food price shocks.
And what actually happens is in rich countries, the price of food goes up, we don't notice at all.
The price of wheat triples, we don't eat a single slice of bread less, we continue to throw 40%
of our food into the garbage. Whereas in poor countries, they're slashing consumption because
it's such a large share of their budget, they can't afford it. So markets are actually allocating the
most important resources to those who need them least. So rather than utility maximizing,
in some ways, in an unequal economy where we have huge differences in purchasing power,
we allocate resources to those who need them least. On the supply side, we tell this story
that is the price of oil goes up, suppliers will produce more. But they forget to point out that
for producing oil, there's about a two year time lag between the time it takes to decide to produce
more oil, and then to find the fields, drill the wells, start producing oil. And for food,
it's at least a year. So when prices go up, we'll get these huge investments. So when prices were
very high for oil, there was hundreds of billions of dollars flowing into the fracking sector,
which actually when output came online, it crashed prices. So it generated less revenue than was
invested, which meant that the financial sector was essentially subsidizing the production of
oil at the stupidest possible time. And what you have then is this prices today are or supply
today is really determined by prices in previous periods, which leads to this wild disequilibrium
up and down of, you know, ups and downs of prices, which destabilized the economy,
really, you know, a problematic thing. We then measure our success based on GDP. And GDP is the
price times quantity of final goods and services. But when there was a small decrease in oil supply,
you know, in the 70s, this happened, and with the Ukraine war, we saw prices skyrocket, small
decent decrease in food prices leads prices to skyrocket, meaning for essential resources,
the less we produce, the more they contribute to GDP, which is about as perverse a measure of
welfare as you could possibly have. So mainstream economists claim there's this trade off between
efficiency and equity, that if we try for greater equity, we remove the incentives, the selfish
incentives to produce more, and we produce therefore we end up producing less, and that's
inefficient. But it's great, it's total nonsense, the more unequivocably distributed resources are,
the less efficient our economy becomes inequality is probably the worst market failure out there.
Systematically allocating resources to those who need them least. And I haven't talked about,
you know, the other obvious, really essential resources are nature's life support functions,
which we are watching in real time being disrupted every day. I'm in Vermont, we've just had massive
floods, we're having massive heat waves, breaking all sorts of records around the world. And markets
either entirely ignore, you know, ecological impacts of our activities, or treat it as
questions of efficiency. You know, what's the cost benefit analysis, all these things John talked
about, discounting values to present, and you know, assuming this growth. So we mostly ignore or
miscategorize loss of ecological functions as questions of efficiency, when it really should
be treated purely as moral obligations to future generations and other species. So those are just
my main points that for essential resources, markets absolutely fail in all of, you know, in
this welfare maximizing equilibrium system. And that is what we have to get right is essential
resources. How could we get it right? And then we'll go to Kate. So some of these things, what we
do is every, you know, when there's a war, we actually decide, you know, essential resources
have to be rationed. And I can give a really quick example. When California, we had Enron and these
other big players. So this is the other huge thing I forgot to mention, that when you have essential
resources, the amount of money you can make you going more money by producing less, leading to
huge amounts of collusion. So we have OPEC, we have the food sectors, we had record profits in
energy and food last year, because the producers can huge incentive to keep supply down to keep
prices up. But Enron, some years back, colluded with a bunch of other producers to withdraw
power from the California system, leading to a 10 fold increase in prices, massive economic
disruption, political disruption led to overthrow of the governor and the election of Arnold
Schwarzenegger, and, you know, brownouts, terrible outcomes. At the same time, Brazil had a larger
energy shortage caused by drought in a hydroelectric powered economy. And Brazil said, you know what,
we are going to charge you the same price for energy as last year, but we have a 10%
shortfall, you're going to consume 10% less. We have your energy bills, we know how much you
consume. Everybody had to make this kind of minor effort to be a little bit more efficient,
totally non disrupting. Nobody even knows about this because it was such a non event. When we
rely on markets, we're going to allocate resources to those who can afford them, leaving the poor to
suffer miserably. When we rely on rationing as we do in World War Two, or other war, war time,
we ensure that people get what they need and it keeps prices stable and it keeps insurers that
people get enough. So, but rationing is a taboo subject in economics. We rely on price rationing
without ever saying so. Instead, if we ration based on physiological need for essential resources,
I think it would be a far more efficient system in terms of creating human welfare.
That's a great point. Rationing is a bad word, but we use rationing when we say the word price.
It's just not said out loud. Kate, did you have a comment or question?
I am going to play devil's advocate. Please do.
Look, Josh, markets are clearly the worst way of running an economy other than every other
way that's ever been tried. You want rationing? Look at the black markets that develop around
rationing, right? Rationing doesn't match what people actually want. It squashes people's different
preferences and so you get black markets, you get all sorts of people cheating, looking at the
Second World War. Yes, you had rationing in the US, we had it in the UK, but there's only so long
that people will tolerate it because there's Mr. Hitler over there and people actually can't wait
to get back out of rationing. So, rationing has all sorts of problems. Look at the Soviet Union
and the central planning that went into people believing they could determine what that rationing
should be. Surely we need to use the feedback mechanisms of markets, right? Adam Smith was
onto something. There's something amazing about the market mechanism, the price mechanism.
It conveys signals between billions of people demanding and supplying. It conveys a signal
that actually means they can supply and demand, exchange without ever meeting. So, surely we need
a system that does use the feedback loops of the price signal. So, surely instead of rations, what
we actually need is tax and redistribution. I totally agree with you, by the way, that wasn't me
talking, but I'm playing devil's advocate. But yes, we need a far more equitable society because
in a deeply inequitable society, prices won't work, right? You try and change the price,
the rich don't notice the poor can't cope. So, you need a relative balance, but let's use markets,
let's bring in a more equitable tax distribution. And why not introduce a universal basic income?
So, if everybody has the right of access to the market, let's fix this with a universal basic
income. Wouldn't that be better than rationing? Great question. It's great points. First of all,
I would like to say that I'm not opposed to markets in all cases. I think they work particularly
poorly for essential resources. And that's where I think rationing should take place. Let's say we
do a universal agreed upon income, but we have this problem with essential resources when the
supply of food falls by a little bit, or the supply of energy falls by a little bit, the prices
skyrocket. So, they're assuming a huge amount more of the universal basic income. So, we would need
the incomes to fluctuate up and down all the time with the prices of essential resources.
Wouldn't it be much simpler to have, you know, and already in most of the civilized world,
we've agreed that healthcare should not be in the hands of the market. So, we have like, you
know, universal healthcare, you know, the U.S. is an outlier, we're doing a terrible job on this,
but we've decided that in the U.S., it's almost 20% of our GDP goes to healthcare.
So, I look at things instead of having universal basic income, why don't we have universal access
to basic needs, decommodify survival. So, right now in the U.S., we spend 6.7% of our income on
food for home consumption. We could have, you know, we have the supplemental nutrition program,
which is food stamps typically. We could have food stamps for all, SNAP for all, and it would be
guarantee everybody an ecologically and physiologically healthy diet, which we mostly
plant-based. And 6.7% of our income is spent on food for home consumption for all food,
take out the expensive animal-based products. I'm guessing you could feed all Americans an
ecologically, physiologically healthy diet for say 2% of GDP, probably would reduce our
healthcare costs by about 2% of GDP, so essentially be free. And what it would then mean is the biggest
threat to global ecosystems actually is agriculture. It's, you know, it's the source of the nitrogen,
the phosphorus, you know, the toxic chemicals. If you look at the planetary boundaries and your work,
agriculture is the biggest threat to all of those. So, super important to have physiologically,
ecologically healthy food, and as soon as you make sure people can meet their basic needs,
then you can start saying, incorporating all the ecological costs into the price of meat,
150 bucks a pound, or, you know, without any concern of the poor not being able to get enough.
So, I'm, that's why, you know, I think rather than a universal basic income, I'm in favor of
guaranteed access to the essential resources. I mean, my favorite approach actually to rationing
would be to give everybody in the world or everybody in the US the same right to emit CO2,
in which case, Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos could not really consume much more than me.
What you could do then is make those rates tradable. Many people think this is too free
market, but what would happen is what we need is something everybody will buy into that is going
to ratchet down the amount of energy we consume every year. And it's the nature of these essential
resources that the less you have, the more revenue they generate. So as we ratchet down the equally
distributed rate to emit, the value of that will go up, meaning that everybody will be clamoring
to ratchet that down, and that will be a massive redistribution of wealth from the billionaires
to everybody else. And it will, one, it's one of the few things I can think of that has political
support. So rationing, I think, especially for a central resource, and I'm not opposed to markets
in general, I am opposed to individual choice, when it's things like climate change or private
property rights, you know, can I privately own my share of the climate? There's all sorts of things
that don't fit into the market model at all. So let's leave them the hell out. So that's not
saying let's try to force everything into the market model. No, let's use markets where they work,
and let's use other economic institutions where markets don't work. Can I jump in with a quick
follow up question? Great answer. With education, public provision, and we see it's provided in a
public institution because it is in some way a collectively provided good health care, it's
provided in a public institution. If you're saying let's just stick with food, and you're saying food
stamps, I'm just curious, would having food stamps as a form of rationing of that ecologically healthy
availability, does that change the provision on the other side of the equation? So do we still
have private producers? Who determines the price? I'm just curious what it looks like on the other
side of that exchange. Great question. So I'm actually an advocate, I mean, what I would argue
is that we need to invest huge amounts of money in sustainable food production, and it has to be
like a national initiative like, you know, the Manhattan Project or the Moon thing, and I actually
so this gets a little perhaps slightly off topic, but I really think we need a civilian core where
you need two years where you have to actually work to address these big problems we face. And one of
those would be agriculture, and we would produce, we'd have young people learning the techniques
to produce food sustainably. And one thing about this, it would actually do a intermixing of our
populations, people from the big cities and their base, they'd be going to Kansas, they'd be going,
so you'd be intermixing blue and red, and, you know, right and left. And what you find is as soon
as you start interacting with the people who you think are your enemies, you realize, oh gosh,
we're all remarkably similar. So I think that could actually help, help with reducing our,
our polar, political polarization. But I also firmly believe that all knowledge in general,
but especially knowledge for sustainable food production should be freely available to all.
Instead, we have these corporations, you know, Mexico, 3,500 years transforming Teo Sinti into
corn. Monsanto steps in, spend six months making a new genetically modified type, and then they
say this is ours, you can't use it. I mean, that's just insane. That's, and the idea with knowledge.
And so they say that when you have public investment in agricultural R&D, which can be
freely used by everybody, you get like an 80% return on your investment. When is the private
sector doing it? In the restricting access, you get much lower returns to your investment because
you're not letting people use it. And so all the knowledge for food production should be absolutely
open access, totally non-market. And then I think a lot of the actual production itself could be
done collectively. But also, it's, it's less harmful in my view to have, okay, we'll pay the
producers for the food, and, and have things like when there's too much food we stockpile,
so that we can control, then we can put it out when there's too little food, so we keep prices
stable. There's a bunch of different things we can do. I think long-term viewers of this program
can now visualize what, what my five years of PhD conversations were kind of like
with some of these guys. Steve, did you, did you have something to follow up with, with Josh?
Okay, two things. Is that the, is that the right way around? Can you read the checks there?
Good. Okay. This is a friend of mine and a supporter of Avner author, just a few weeks ago,
actually at a conference with Richard Vague, another close friend of mine working on Pran Det.
And what Avner has done here is to answer one of the questions that have been posed by Josh's
comments. How do you make the divide between public and private provision? And the answer
that Avner came up with, and I'm very pleased by this, is it's the payback period. If the
investment needed to sustain a particular productive system is outside the payback period
that is conventional for capitalists, that's the sort of thing you need the state for.
And the idea there, since we're doing this for students, I'd highly recommend students to get a
copy of a book by a man called John Blatt, BLA Double T, called Dynamic Economic Systems.
And he actually makes the case about the payback period that Avner is using there,
as well as a lot of very, other very sensible stuff based on energy and decent mathematics,
rather than the nonsense they'll learn from their classical students. So that's number one.
Number two, the idea of having tradable carbon credits is something I've been working on for
about four or five years. Badly, because I've had so many other, there's so much neoclassical
nonsense that we haven't had a chance to do it properly. But there's a website called ecocore.org.
So www.ecocore.org, that's promoting that idea developed by another friend of mine, Adam Hardy.
And the idea would be that every day you would get issued a carbon credit equivalent to the
average for the country you're in. And then you would be, you have to pay two prices,
not just one, a money price and a carbon credit price. Given the inequality of distribution
of income we have, 95% of the population would probably not exhaust the average,
but the top 5% would, and they'd be needing to buy off us straight away. So the idea is there'd
be an income and wealth redistribution from the rich to the poor and immense pressure on
everybody to reduce carbon consumption, except the poor actually, they'd be doing pretty good
out of it for a short while. So it's probably be politically popular as well. Now that's the sort
of thing economists would resist to the health of the cows come home, of course, but it's what we need.
And equally on rationing, the point about Germany and the Second World War that Kate made earlier
is completely valid. And I think we'll need rationing to get through the catastrophic consequences
of climate change that the economists have persuaded aren't going to happen. When they do
start happening, rationing would be about the honor way to hold together a cohesive society.
And, you know, they'll be seen as global conspiracy nonsense by the, by the world of
economic forum twerps who believe that those idiots are actually in control and know what
they're doing. Having met a fair few of them, I know that they would, they can't even order lunch,
let alone the global economy. So that sort of stuff is going to be necessary. But of course,
it has to be transitory. John has a comment, and then we're going to move on to our final panelist.
Yeah, just some closing thoughts here before Kate takes it home for us.
Well, first, Steve, the very first paper I ever published was a master's student, 1992, I think,
was called the inefficiency and unfairness of carbon permits. I won't go there, but there's
a lot to unpack there. And one of the things I was reflecting on as Josh was talking was
as a graduate student sitting in the office of Henry Shoe, who was a, who was a ethicist,
myself coming from an econ theory class and trying to defend the sacred organizing concept
of economics of Pareto optimality to an ethicist, right? And Pareto optimality is this idea that,
you know, you can't make any moves. You know, the only Pareto optimal moves allowed is when you
can make someone better off without making someone worse off. And he just, he just sat there and
said, okay, you're doing climate economics for your thesis, right? I'm like, yeah. So tell me
the difference between necessity emissions and luxury emissions. And immediately kind of
burst my bubble on the whole idea of Pareto optimality, right? And in fact, early economists
like Pago talked about, you know, the other sort of sacred principle of economics is the law of
diminishing returns, right? That kind of more you have of something the less is worth to you. And
he made the case through the law of mission, of marginal returns, diminishing marginal returns,
that, you know, we should be reallocating from the wealthy to the rich, or to the poor, or from
the luxury emissions to the necessity emissions, right? Because it's welfare improving. It's
welfare improving. And so I'm not convinced that tradable permits would actually do that.
But that's, that's, that's for a whole another podcast, perhaps. So at the end, rationing has
become taboo in economics, but so has human rights. So has sufficiency instead of efficiency,
right? So has the idea of necessity over luxury. And it all comes back to an economics we're not
allowed to compare utility, we're not allowed to compare consumption, we're not allowed to compare
what gives us pleasure and pain. As long as you keep the individual isolated from everybody else,
then none of this nonsense that you all are talking about matters in economic theory.
Josh, did you have a closing comment there?
Yeah, and I'll make a closing comment, kind of a response to what John just said,
too, and that I went and looked through a whole bunch of introductory textbooks,
and they all say there is no difference between luxuries and necessities, or between needs and
wants. They said there's no difference. So right away, they just sweep that under the table.
And then the other idea about Pareto efficiency, you can't do, you know, everything should be,
we only do things that make somebody better off without making anybody else worse off,
in a fossil fuel powered economy, everything you do makes somebody worse off. Right away,
we should say, if there is such thing as climate change, then Pareto efficiency is the stupidest
measure you can come up with. Let's not even mention that.
All the stuff neoclassical economics has done has proved ways in which the classical
and the physiocratic school, let's see if the classicals were correct.
So I think for one thing, those daily work at the level of the isolated individual,
they can't even derive demand curve. Okay, market, they bullshit over that. Okay, they do not do it.
Checkie textbook kids, you'll see they do not show how you go from an individual curve to a
demand curve without making some sort of bullshit assumption. So they can't even do that. And what
that actually proves, and this is the case that Alan Kerman made in the emperor's new clothes,
I said, that forces us to we have to work at the aggregation substantially higher than the
individual. That's to meet the failings of neoclassical economics, which means class-based
analysis is correct. We're back in a classical world, we look at workers, capitalist income
distribution, et cetera, et cetera. Taboo topics in mainstream economics, which mainstream economics
has proved unnecessary. Professor Rayworth, please tell us about the big picture that is being
taught in economic theory and what some changes to that might be required.
Okay, so I want to talk about the biggest picture of the economy that we ever encounter,
right? If you say, show me everything you've got, show me the whole cabool. What shows up?
And I'm going to talk about econ 101, because I think it's the most important course. It's
where we begin. Paul Samuelson knew it, right? The first textbook you pick up, the first diagrams
we see, they shape what we forever see and don't see afterwards. So in mainstream economics,
the biggest picture is going to look something like this. It's called the circular flow of goods
and money. And what we've got is households and businesses in the essential market relationship.
Households provide labor and they can provide capital. In return, they get wages. Some get wages
and some get profit, depends whether you gave that labor or capital. And they can use that for
consumer spending. And in return, they get goods and services. So you've got the goods going round
and round, the resources going round and round, and the money going round and round. And yes,
not everything goes on consumer spending. There can be some leakages. The diagram shows that some
of it goes into savings, which get put into banks and get turned into investment. Keep your
heat on, keep your shirts on Steve Keane. I know that's not true. That's right. That's not the way
banks actually work, but it's very nice for fundamental 101 diagram. We've got some of the money
goes into taxes for government and they can turn that into spending actually in countries with
the sovereign currency. That's not how governments work either, but it's very handy for 101 diagram.
And some of the money goes on imports, but other money comes back in through exports.
The point here is, everything is circular, it's contained, it's enclosed. And these arrows
tracking money to eat flows. So I want to start by recognizing what's useful, right? Because all
models are wrong and some are useful. Why was this ever seen as useful? And I really like
leaning into what could have been useful about it. It's really useful for measuring GDP and showing
that it can be picked up in different places. It's useful for tracking flows of money,
even though some of them are completely fictionalized. But what it misses
is really what matters, because it's never even pointed out and it never comes in anywhere.
So one, it has labor getting fresh and ready for work every day. It completely misses the
unpaid caring economy of the household, the cooking, washing, cleaning, sweeping. Just labor
is just ready to go to work every day. It misses the commons. It misses all of goods and services
that are produced without money changing hands, because it's only showing us market-based.
And it misses, of course, the living world. There is nothing coming in and there's nothing going
out. It's missing energy and it's missing resources. They're somehow within circulating in some sort of,
you know, perpetual motion machine. These are fatal flaws. If the biggest diagram that we're
teaching students does not have energy and materials from the living world, it does not have
unpaid care of the household. It does not have the commons through the most fundamental sources
of our well-being. They're absent. This does not serve us. So I want to replace it, because I always
love to reproposition and replace. So here we are in Technicolor. I call this the embedded economy
diagram. It draws on ecological economics, feminist theory and comments theory. So what have we got?
We've got the economy is a subset of society, which is a subset of the living world. That's the
first move of ecological economics. It means that we recognize that the economy is drawing on
materials and matter. It's putting out waste and pollution. And it's bathed in a river of solar
energy. Welcome to the second law of thermodynamics. So we're always asking, is our economy compatible?
Is it through flow compatible with conditions conducive to life? But then let's look inside
the economy. Yes, we've got the market, which is where 101 always begins. And we've got the state.
And these two, of course, are what show up in GDP. This is what's measured monetary output.
But what's missing is on this vertical, which is the household of unpaid caring work. That's the
feminist economics coming in. And then here's Eleanor Ostrom saying, don't forget the commons.
They may well not be tragic. They're a triumph. When they're organized according to principles
that she revealed, the commons can actually be a fantastic source of providing for our needs and
wants, which are different from each other. So that's the second move. The third one is that this
is like a pop-up book, isn't it? Third one is the different roles that we play within the economy.
And I'm going right back to where John Erickson, how does begin? Because mainstream economics
depicts us as that rational economic man. Are you consumer or producer? Karl Marx reminded us to
always ask, in the sphere of production, are you labor or capital? It's going to make a difference,
guys. We may be in that market space, but we're also in the state relation. We may be a resident
or a public servant, a protestor or a voter, all essential roles we play in relation to the state.
In the household, parent, child, guardian, carer, in the commons, a co-creator, sharer,
repairer and steward, what kinds of values and collaborations and skills and behaviors are
required of humanity to operate well across all of these ways of provisioning for our needs and
wants? Because I know I don't want to live in a society that lacks any one of them. I think
markets and states and households and commons all bring really interesting, unique, different
qualities that can work for providing different kinds of goods and services, just as Josh was
describing. So we need to be able to recognize we move between these every day and we need the
skills to collaborate in them. And it turns out that even rational economic man isn't the useful
guy we want for the market space. We actually want cooperation and use the best of human intelligence
and pro-social skills in the market spaces too. So for me, this is a fundamental move and should be
a diagram that we begin with. Of course, it doesn't give you the flows, right? It's not about flows,
it's about relations. So it's focusing on relation, economy contained within society, within the
living world, looking at the relation between markets, state, household and commons, inviting
us to explore the power relationships that exist between them. In fact, across every line in this
diagram, there's a power relationship between humanity and the rest of the living world, between
the market and the state, between the market and society. So we should bring that power conversation
into the first economics class. So I'll stop here and then also invite any of you to say,
is there something you change in this diagram? Is there something else you think should be added
to it that really should be there on day one? Thank you, Kate. I'm going to ask a clarifying
question and then, John, you have your hand up. Could you show me the first graph that you had
of the other one? So there are 240 million college students in the world and John just told us
earlier that economics and political science are among the most popular majors in the United
States at least. Is that diagram that you're holding, is that actually taught worldwide today
in economics 101 classes? I'm going to say a variant of it, right? So if you look through
the textbooks, they'll all have a diagram that's called something like circle flow of goods and
income and it'll all be some version of this. Wow, wow. Maybe only 99%.
Well, you're talking about your textbook, Josh. Okay, thank you. Comments?
Well, even that diagram is in our ecological economics textbooks because we're always sort of
in this defensive posture. So we just have to throw it out and start anew.
Just more of a comment, Kate. Thank you for bringing it full circle because
that first model, asking the question, what is useful and what is it missing? I think
answers my question, which George Box didn't ask, useful for whom. We've built a model that has been
very useful for white male capitalists. And if you look at the stats on who were
graduating as PhD in economics, economics continues to be woefully behind in terms of
gender diversity, ethnic diversity, diversity of thought from around the world. And it's another
one of these sort of reinforcing feedbacks. And then if you look at the new model and again,
ask the question, useful for whom? Because it's a model, right? You see that it empowers a whole new
class of people. It empowers anyone who doesn't probably identify as a white male capitalist.
And so this is our challenge to build a new model that empowers the status quo and rebuild
something that is truly built for humans and for resilience and for long-term viability of
our place on planet earth. So I was going to say, I actually started out my class,
you know, very, very similar to what Kate's saying, but I asked my students, I said,
what kind of economy were you raised in? And they all say capitalism. And I say, oh,
your parents charge you Roman board. And I said, you were actually raised in a reciprocity-based
economy where, you know, people, you get things, you know, you get things because people love you,
you're expected to return those things. And I actually think that when right now, when we're
looking at solving all these, you know, global climate change, we're always drawing from the
market, the market. Why don't we draw from the reciprocity and gifting part of the economy?
Why don't we look at everything from we receive from nature as a gift for which we are morally
obliged to reciprocate, meaning we have to see our species as part of the collective species that
sustains all the life support functions. And right now, we're total freeloaders, you know,
we're getting, getting, getting, giving nothing in return. So we're the worst case. And
one other comment I wanted to make is that, and another way you, you really draw, you connect
back to John, John was talking about homework and amicus, the a lot of evolutionists are now
recognizing that humans evolved to be so successful based on our ability to cooperate.
And Eleanor Ostrom's work on the common, she has these eight, you know, principles for successful
management of the Commons, the evolutionists have come up with eight principles for successful
cooperation, arguing that these are the principles that drove humans to our current success or
risk of catastrophic failure. But that, you know, that human nature was actually, we were
capable of solving these social dilemmas, things where if I act in my self interest, it's better
for me, but worse for society. And we figured out ways to solve that through cooperation.
And that I think is still the basis of the core economy, the household. And that story should
be looking for solutions to the bigger challenges we now face. So I do like the connection between
the start and finish in this. Yeah. And actually, can I jump in there? So,
Eleanor Ostrom's core design principles that she, she, as you say, she drew them out through
studying the Commons. But actually, as you just said, I mean, they're, they're, every, every,
every one, each one of these markets, their household and Commons is about human relations.
And these are different forms of relations. And I love your saying to your students, oh,
race and capitalism really say you paid room and board to remind us that actually we move every day,
almost without noticing it, between different forms of relation. You know, if, if, I don't know,
if you, if you came over to my house for dinner, we had a lovely meal and then, and then you offered
to pay me at the end, I would be offended because you would have placed that interaction in the
market. And I'm like, no, Josh, this is gift. So we, you know, there's a lot of taboo around
getting it wrong. Should I pay or not? So what if, what Eleanor Ostrom tapped into there about
the print, the core design principles for the Commons? What if they're actually valuable,
also in the state? Can we redesign state services to be much more like forms of cooperation? And
there's, there's a nursing cooperative in the Netherlands where they work in groups of everything
around 12 nurses. It's totally distributed. It's much, much more efficient and much lower cost
than a very centralized bureaucratically run nursing system. So I'm just fascinated of what
happens if we take these core design principles into our homes and actually think about, well,
who does all the washing up around here? Can we redistribute household work, right? That's a,
there's a gender politics to that. And what happens if we do take it into business? Well,
that might be a cooperative. That's a business. It might be an employee owned company, a steward
run company. So we can bring these design principles and say they don't just belong in
the Commons. We may have discovered them through the Commons, but maybe they infuse the way we
relate through all of these different forms of organizing. I like the fact that Kate's
diagram is takes us actually back to where we should have started, which is the physiocrats.
Because if you look at the, the Tableau economic and the arguments, the physiocrats,
they said all wealth comes from nature. They didn't realize it because they were saying it
before we invented the word energy, but fundamentally saying we have benefit from
the free gift of nature, which is energy. So that's, that gives you the whole external to
internal waste is inevitable. So we end up with a framework which is, which is correct with the
second law of thermodynamics. And as, as I've forgotten the actual law, Eddington said almost
a century ago, if your theory is conflicted with the second law of thermodynamics, there is nothing
for you to do but collect an absolute humiliation. That's economic theory as it stands at the moment.
So bring us back in there. And then a huge part of what neoclassical is saying,
we've got this perfect system, getting marginal cost and marginal benefits, right?
Let's infuse that in the rest of society. You're making the opposite case and say,
maybe we should infuse concepts from other forms of interpersonal and physical relations,
which occur inside the family as well, to the rest and see how that benefits. And if you look
at the foundations, the argument that marginal cost and marginal benefit, they're all shot full
of holes, including empirical ones, because the 95% of firms, they have constant or falling
marginal cost. So the whole idea that you have rising marginal cost, cutting off the rising
marginal benefits is simply empirically false. If you don't believe me, students, go and have a
go copy of Alan Blinder's textbook, in which you will not find anything about this whatsoever,
and go and find a paper by Alan Blinder in 1998, a book called asking about prices,
where you found he found that's what happens, and he doesn't teach it to his own students.
He's literally lying to you because he couldn't cope with the truth. We're back in the
honorable, mean whatever that Tom Hanks, that movie is called Not Tom Hanks, obviously.
But yeah, you can't handle the truth. That defines neoclassical economics. That's what
we're trying to bring into you here, is the truth. So this has been fantastic. I'm going to
ask a question for each of you to opine on, can reality of the sorts that we've been discussing
these last 90 minutes actually start to be taught in modern universities around the world
at scale, or as inferred in the early part of this conversation, does economic theory
just mirror the stage of our cultural moment in time based on energy surplus and
large gaps in inequality? And it's the people at the top that are using economic theory as
kind of a crutch to rationalize and describe our economic system. Can these things really,
at scale, be taught at our university? What do you guys think?
I don't think they can, because the neoclassical hegemony is so complete.
We can't rely upon funerals. That works in physics. It doesn't work in economics because
the crises in economics are transient. So you have the Great Depression. Who talks about the
Great Depression today? Iman Minsky got created by it in a sense, but mainstream ignores it. The
Great Recession, even that's disappeared. Now we're talking about the Great Inflation.
Now that's disappeared. The crises aren't permanent. Therefore you don't have a permanent
confrontation between a failed paradigm and the anomaly that proves that it failed. So they
can accumulate all these failed elements over centuries and do nothing about it. They don't
change. That's one reason there's two potential non-mainstream universities teaching on orthodox
economics. Stephen Hale has started a program down in Australia in Adelaide with a private
university. And as much as I think in education should be public, because it's public, the neoclassicals
dominate the quality control because they don't have any quality. We get shit economics taught.
Pardon me, kids. That's what you're going to face, which convincing is plausible, convincing and wrong.
So the only revolutions are being done outside the mainstream with Stephen Hale's course,
and I'm now teaching the commercial course as well, distributed by some absolutely appalling
marketing on occasions. But it's at least a way to get Vietnam orthodox economics in,
and I'm hoping to get a discounted version for students soon out through the marketing company.
But yeah, the mainstream will dominate economics and they'll kill it. And that's because we're
treated as a public resource and they've got control of it. Sadly, I agree a little bit with
Stephen that it's so hard to change the neoclassical. When I first studied ecological economics, I
thought, oh, this is the future, neoclassical economics will be gone within a decade. Interestingly,
here, one of the professors in environmental economics at my university actually told his
students that he would give extra credit to anybody who beat up my TAs because he was so sick
of their questions. And it was obviously tongue in cheek. But the students in the econ department
are clamoring for alternative views. And they have tried repeatedly to get ecological economics
courses crosslisted. And at one point, they got kind of close to doing it. And the professor who
said he would get them crosslisted actually died. The students then said, I had promised I would
submit my courses for cross listing again. And I said, it's going to be pointless, they're not
going to do it, but I'll do it. And their answer was they said, well, we're not going to crosslist
your introductory course because we already teach that, which is totally wrong. And they said,
we're not going to crosslist your upper level course because we don't teach that. So if you're
not going to crosslist what is or isn't taught, that's pretty all inclusive. But I do see enormous,
you know, every few years, students in econ programs are, you know, writing these manifestos,
complaining what they are taught doesn't make any sense. And so the way I have to say, every class
I teach, I tell the students, if what I teach you doesn't help you understand reality, it's useless.
And if it's contradicted by reality, it's wrong. And it's your job to test what I teach
against reality. And I do think students respond very positively to that approach. And they tell
me in the econ program, it's, you know, they're basically told, if you disagree with anything
we teach, you're wrong. You know, there's, so I think if change is going to come, it's going to
come from the student body, forcing the other professors to, you know, to change their views.
But to get back, I started this before we started. I mentioned that one of my colleagues had sent me
a podcast by Steve on your, you know, on the great simplification. And that professor was fired
for teaching heterodox economics. And literally at his trial, they had a thing that one of his
lecture notes that showed general equilibrium in quotes, is though it was not, you know, robust
scientific foundations. So they, it's very, very difficult to change the system. They have a lot
of control over what is taught. Wow. Kate and then John. Well, I really like your question at the
beginning, actually, Nate, just saying, is it while we're in this carbon bubble, we just, you
know, that's the water we swim in, and we just, we have no capacity to see beyond that. And if
that's the case, what will it look like? What, what will the sudden swing be? And what will,
will economics, as we know it, change and suddenly energy will suddenly be discovered? And how will
it enter? And it probably won't enter in the ways that any of us are wanting it to, right? When,
when an issue is neglected until there's a crisis, the real risk is it won't get picked up in the way
you hoped. It'll get picked up in frames of models that work for those who want it to continue to
work for them. How will that go? That, so that's a new question for me. But I am going to lean
into possibility. If economics only changes one funeral at a time, it also changes one eighth
grader at a time, right? It changes the way we teach it anew. So I'm thrilled that this
international baccalaureate addition of economics, without my knowing it or anything,
they decided to stick the doughnut in right up front. Now, it does immediately next
chapter switch into supply and demand. So there's some way to go yet, right? But it's
starting to get into the textbooks. And what I hear back from high school teachers is,
now that it's in the textbook, I can teach it. It's in the curriculum. It's legitimate. And it's,
and we're working with a group of teachers who want to write, rather than trying to reform
economics. And I think this is where this question comes down. Do we try and reform economics,
or do we just say, will this leave you sitting there? We're going to go and do something new.
So I'm working with a group of teachers writing a GCSE, which is around for 15, 16 year olds,
in regenerative economics. What would it look like if you started economics? Just like,
it's going to be regenerative economics, working with the lovely principal Josh just
offered, tested against the real world. And we are putting this diagram as the first diagram,
and you can imagine lots of chapters from regenerative economics. Now, we've seen the whole,
now let's talk about markets and let's talk about the very different ways. Let's talk about
markets and states and what necessary goods and what luxury goods and how they should be provided
and the relations between. So I'm leaning into possibility. I'm not, certainly not going to give
up. Yeah, there's movement. Yeah, I mean, I take your question. The answer to it is larger than
reforming just economics education. It's really reforming education, reforming higher education
particular. I start most of my classes with that question, what's the purpose of a university
education? And, you know, I often get the answer as well, you know, get me a job to train me in
skills to teach me something useful that where I can, you know, build an income. And I say,
none of that is in our university charter. Let's read it. Right. I mean, it really is, you know,
education is foundational to a democratic society. Education is foundational to hire
human aspirations. Educational is foundational to a long term viability of the human animal.
And my greatest fear is that we've designed our education systems to inoculate consumers
instead of trained citizens. And citizens at scale, right, citizens who can make impact in their
local communities are right up through the global community. So I'm increasingly drawn
to next systems thinking. I usually I recently used a book in my class called the next systems
reader that was edited by Gus, Gus, Beth and colleagues to really open up the conversation
of alternative systems, alternative ways of organizing the economy, alternative ways of
organizing human assets and knowledge and ways of ways of thinking. And the students were just
blown away because it challenged their basic idea of living in a capitalist society.
What's what's there's that parable, right, of, you know, a fish, someone asked a fish, like,
you know, do you like swimming in water? I'm getting this all wrong. And the fish was like,
what's what is water, right? Like, we are inside the system, we're trying to change. And we don't
even know the right questions to ask. And so I'm part of initiatives, initiative, building a
next system studies program across the US, to really kind of think of this at the sort of deep
root causes of the problems of the current system, into imagine the next system. And I'm finding,
actually, that the next systems ideas are all around us. They just don't often exist in national
governance. They're a community scale, they're local skills, they're they're in farmers markets,
they're in reciprocal economies, they're in gift economies, they're in neighbors backyards,
the next system is everywhere. And so I'm increasingly working with my students to really
elevate those stories and to scale them up and out.
This has been really, really great. And information and insight packed. Since we're all friends, I
hope I can count on you either as individuals or as a group to come back, because we've really just
scratched the surface here. This is our world, this is our future. And I think, especially for
young humans, I wish I would have been 1821, learning what I learned today. Should we go
around with any 30 seconds, 60 second closing thoughts by everyone? Okay, I'll quickly say
one thing in our class would like to say, oh, if you take all that stuff seriously,
can't do modeling anymore. Garbage has been an alternative technology for 50 or 60 years
called system dynamics. If you want to give a trial of that, download search for Minsky on
SourceForge, which is my open source contribution to system dynamics modeling, you can do much
better modeling if you throw away the near classical handicaps. We'll put that in the show notes.
Josh? Yeah, I just would be remiss to say that John actually started a big effort to change the way
we teach economics was economics to Anthropocene, which has now become leadership for the Echozoic.
I've now taken over from him here, although he's still obviously contributing. So we really do
have a concerted effort. We have a very good PhD program where we're producing a new generation
of whom we believe will be the leaders in economics, and they are getting good university
jobs, and they are making an impact. And so, despite my pessimism at changing econ departments,
I think we can step around econ departments and really introduce these ideas. And our program
is with McGill. So if there's any, you know, potential ecological PhDs in ecological economics
are interested in these ideas, you can find us under leadership for the Echozoic.
And one of your former students has a system synthesis podcast as well.
Yes, yes, one of my former students, prior to these things, Nate is exactly what we aspire to
is to get people who'll be more influential and effective than we are.
So thanks, Josh. John. Yeah, I mean, I started this by saying that economic
starts with a really simple, simple starting point. And I think the reform starts in equally
simple starting points. We need to re-embed the person in family and community and re-embed
the economy and society and the earth. I think Kate's image of the donor economy is a great
place to start. Sorry, Kate. This is not an insult. It's not rocket science. It's really
simple and it's really intuitive. And when we start there and treat people as humans and not,
you know, these kind of foreign things that we try to shape them into like homo economicus,
it's quite easy and quite intuitive. Then I'll follow on. I'm so thrilled that you think the
donut is not rocket science because that means it re-politicizes the economic conversation.
I never intended to call donut economics donut. I didn't make that word up. Somebody
else said, oh, that diagram you've drawn, it's a donut. And it was given that name. And it's
playful and often silly and people say, why did you call it that? But what I've learned is that,
and as we all know, many people are intimidated by economics, right? It's expert, it's technical,
it's fast, it's alienating to many, many people. But if you stick donut in front of it,
people already know this. Bring your humor, bring your mischief. And that's what I think what we
need to do with so much of the economics we're talking about, bringing, you know, the way you're
talking about teaching it, bring it into the classroom. Does this fit with your experience?
Does this fit with what you know of reality? So let's bring it back to something that people
connect with. The route I've taken is to step away from academic economics and say, I think a lot
of 21st century economics is going to get practiced first and theorized later because
the vast majority of the economists are still working on the old style. So let's work with
the practitioners. And that's what I did in setting up the donut economic action lab. Okay,
let's start working with the cities that want to do this. How then will they make decisions,
if not through cost benefit analysis? Let's work with the companies that want to be purpose led
and actually design themselves to become regenerative and distributed by design. How then will
they marry the requirement of making a profit in order to stay in business with actually putting
value of ecology and society first? So we're working with the practitioners. And as you just
said, you know, it's all around anyway, it's already popping up. And if only we find ourselves
and put it in our models and make it visible and we see it. Thank you. Thank all of you for
your insights and time today. And for your dedication to this work, this story, which is
the story of our of our times to be continued. And thank you all very much.
