Vandana Shiva is a well-known activist, author of many books and is a global
champion on regenerative agriculture, biodiversity, and nutritious food. She
has a PhD in physics and 40 years ago founded the Research Foundation for
Science, Technology, and Ecology, an independent research institute that works
on the most significant ecological problems of our time. I have known of
Vandana Shiva for over 20 years, we have many mutual friends, but the moment I hit
record on this podcast was the very first time I've ever spoken with her and
what turned out to be a delightful first interview on the central topics of our
unsustainable world and where we go from here. I'm very pleased to welcome
Vandana Shiva.
Hello Vandana.
Hello.
Thank you so much for your time. We are 11 and a half hours difference and I'm
just having coffee and you've not yet had your dinner, but I really am honored
to have you on the program. There's so many things I want to ask you. What an
amazing time to be alive. You've been working on the core issues of our time
for your entire life. I don't even know where to start, but you were one of the
original tree huggers. Could you tell us about the Chipco movement and your
experience? Let's start there.
Yeah, I was a volunteer for that wonderful movement and I was doing my PhD in
Canada and before leaving I just visited a favorite forest and the forest was gone.
And that's when I was feeling despair. Part of me had been chopped off and then
a chaiwala on the roadside informed me about Chipco. So I, you know, just like
you're asking me, I didn't know what Chipco was, but I said I'm going to come
back every vacation and volunteer for this amazing courageous movement of
women declaring that they would hug the trees and the axe would have to first
fall on them before it fell on a tree. And the movement started in 72, continued
until 81, until everything they were saying was recognized by government
with a decade of disasters, landslides, floods, and the women had been saying
these forests are what manage soil and water. They are not timber mines because
the deforestation was leading to huge landslides and disasters of the kind we
see now aggravated. But at that point it was all about logging was the biggest
industry at that time. And Chipco was the necological movement. It was a
grassroots movement. It was led primarily by women. And they became my
professors in ecology, you know, I did my quantum theory at the University of
Western Ontario, but I learned my biodiversity and ecology from women who'd
never been to school, but they knew everything about a forest function,
rivers function, you know, soil functions, and they taught me.
Have we missed a generation of ecological teaching of young people? Because
it seems like you have to get to college to have deep ecological coursework.
What's been your experience of that globally?
Well, I think the, you know, the 70s were really when the early ecological
movement, you know, you had Rachel Carson, we had Chipco, the Stockholm Summit,
only our prime minister bothered to go and she cited from the Atharvave, you
know, let us not hurt the earth. Let us just take enough for our sustenance.
And I think the 70s then were worked on getting the message. And it was much
more movement building at that time. And I think later than the big
organizations got created. And I always feel, you know, to me, Chipco was
important because it was so self sustaining, you know, fistfuls of
rice used to support the movement. And I think what happened was
through the 90s, at the time when globalization was rushing ahead and we
had created the International Forum on Globalization, recognizing that the
disasters will start now, that the emissions will grow.
When Walmart outsources all its procurement from China, it's not that the
emissions come down, they just increase, but they are outsourced. And so they're
not counted in the Walmart budget or in the US budget.
And I think the big organization environment movement was not very
present on seeing how the dominant economy, the economy, what I call the 1%,
you know, there's a book called Oneness versus 1%. And I think, yes, a
generation missed out on the kind of everyday knowledge that is absolutely
vital for life and art and for hope for the future.
Yeah, I agree. I didn't take ecology really until my PhD studies when I took
a lot of it. So you've written so many books and have been working on so many
projects. You wrote a book called The Violence of the Green Revolution. What
has the so-called Green Revolution done to communities and to real sustainable
agriculture?
Well, the first is it totally destroyed our ontology, our understanding of the
living world. The soil was declared empty, an empty container for holding the
nitrogen fertilizers. A wonderful essay has just been written on death in the
garden, picking up from my book on the Green Revolution, but going deep into
Harbour Bosch, Hitler's Germany, the gases that killed people, but also the
same process that made ammunitions, made synthetic fertilizers. And basically,
the Green Revolution was driven for selling these leftover chemicals. Rachel
Carson has written about it. Albert Howard wrote about it. Industrial
agriculture was named green when it was introduced to countries like India. It
wasn't that there was a green movement there. You know, the green movement came
in the much later in the 70s, but there was a red revolution in China, and that
struck fear in the United States. So they just gave the word green to pushing
fertilizers and changing the plants to adapt to fertilizers, because the native
seeds were totally rejecting the synthetic fertilizers. So Bolog had to make
the dwarf varieties adapted to chemicals, but the chemicals required more water.
That's why so much water used in industrial agriculture. You know, lakes are
drying up, aquifers are drying up, all to feed the chemicals, not to feed the
planet, not to feed the plants, to just dissolve the chemicals. And then we have
in this short period, I did the book in 84 when the Punjab farmers rose in revolt,
and they said, we are living under slavery because we don't choose what we'll
grow. We don't choose the methods of growing, and we don't choose the price
at which we sell it, which is a freedom we've always had. And today, but job
soils are desertified, the groundwater is disappearing, there's water mining of a
very high level. The pesticide use has created a cancer epidemic, and there's a
train that leaves Punjab called the cancer train. Its name is the cancer train. And
the fact that we keep having these protests of farmers is because even
though the images that the farmers did well, well, we wouldn't have had protests
in the 80s, in the 90s, and in two years ago, 14 months of protests, if farmers
were doing so well. Indian agriculture before that was what Albert Howard
wrote about. He was sent by the British to improve. We are always being
improved. I smile at that. The South is always being improved. Plants are always
being improved. Trees are always being improved. And he found the soils fertile
when he arrived in 1905. And he found there were lots of insects, but no pest
damage. And he said, I'm going to make the pest and the peasant my professor. And
he studied literally under the peasants and watching how insects control pests
and wrote the book, The Agricultural Testament. And that was the agriculture
that was destroyed. And, you know, Howard then became the inspiration for the
organic movement. Well, why Rodeal Institute was created by because of his
book. Soil Association in England was created because of his book. But the
interesting thing is the attack on organic continues, you know, organic
starts the world. I've just had a compliment because the United Nations
visited women being greeted me for my birthday, which was a few days ago. And,
you know, the trolls are hyper. And they're telling me I'm responsible for
exactly 50% of hunger deaths of the world. So, you know, the ecological
alternative to the Green Revolution is what flourishes. That's the work I do
in Nandanya. That's what I've done since 84. And yet the propaganda machine keeps
letting people feel that it doesn't work. So the myth of the empty plant, the
empty soil, the plant is just a machine for using the fertilizers. It has no other
purpose. Plants don't have a being. Plants don't have intelligence. Plants are
not self-organized entities. Plants are just, you know, delivery for the
fertilizers. And I remember when we were defending our, you know, I worked very
hard to ensure that the myth that the seed is an invention of Monsanto did not
enter our legal framework. And because I used to work with parliament, work with
our government, our parliament wrote a clause that plants, animals, and seeds,
and their parts are not human inventions. Therefore, they cannot be patented.
And of course, Monsanto tried to challenge this. And I remember the lawyers saying
in the courts, the seed is an empty container. It's only the chemicals that
we put into it that make it work. So this idea of, you know, the empty earth,
the empty soil, terra nullius, this is what colonialism constructed. So it's
still carrying on. You know, we are now empty heads. We can't think. We need
behavior modification. Let's expand on that on your comment about the UN
and pesticides. So what is your take on happenings in Sri Lanka? I understand
you were an advisor last year on the ban of imports to synthetic pesticides and
fertilizers, which was revoked seven months later amid the economic turmoil
and popular uprising. What have you learned about moving away from fossil
field based agriculture? And what's your take on the Sri Lanka situation?
Well, I was never an advisor to that president. Oh, really? Okay. And I wouldn't be so naive as to say
overnight stop fertilizers. If I was advising him, I would say spend five years
building up the ecological capacity. So he announced, you know, already Sri Lanka
was in deep debt, independent, totally independent of the ban on fertilizers.
And the debt was because like every other country that's driven into debt
and pushed into the debt trap, you know, they were building highways, resorts,
ports, all of which needed huge money. And they weren't able to pay. A lot of
focus is put on China, but BlackRock was also creditor to Sri Lanka. And because
they could not afford anymore to pay the debt. And, you know, and the debt crisis was
aggravated by the COVID crisis. COVID meant the exports collapsed, supply chains were
collapsing. They were depending a lot on exports of spices and tea. That collapsed.
They depended a lot on tourism. Tourism collapsed during COVID. And all their,
the transfer of foreign exchange from workers who were overseas, that too collapsed.
So the foreign exchange earning collapsed and the debt was huge. 300 million was what
Sri Lanka was spending on synthetic fertilizer. And it is not the case that there isn't an
organic movement, very, very strong organic movement to, you know, for 30 years, I've
been visiting the farmers of Sri Lanka. And when the president announced overnight
that they would stop importing synthetic fertilizers, it was nothing to do with me.
It was to do with that, a lot to do with the debt. What happened was his agriculture.
Scientists got in touch with me. He said, we've been told to stop using agriculture and
the import has been banned. And we really don't know how to do organic. And will you train us?
So I did a Zoom training, you know, like I'm talking to you. I talked to the hundreds of
scientists of Sri Lanka. And they were also particularly keen to learn about ecological
agriculture, just something I've done now since 1984, because crop life, which is the coalition
of the group I call the poison cartel, people who make poisons, their names keep changing.
You know, it was Monsanto, now it's bio. It was Singenta, now it's Singenta,
Camp China. It was Dow and Wersh with Dupont and now it's Corteva. So no one could keep up with
these changing names. And these concentrations and convergences for, you know, 60% of the seeds of
the world are controlled by them. And they call themselves crop life. They have nothing to do
with crops. They basically pesticide and herbicide makers. And they hijacked the UN food summit last
year and took it to New York. And, you know, crop life, the UN, Mr. Gates worked together
to destroy the international system. The crop life was attacking in a vigorous way. And,
of course, you know, they've already made, you know, everyone will stop, everyone will stop,
everyone will stop. And the scientists were very keen, you know, to find a way. And, you know,
we've done ecological agriculture. Our productivity is huge. The nutrition per acres much more,
soils are much more fertile. So, you know, that's what I did. You know, the president I've never
met, I've never known. And I think preparing the science and the transition comes first.
A ban doesn't make any sense, you know, in an ad hoc way. Take another case, another island,
Cuba. The sanctions stopped any import of synthetic fertilizers,
stopped all oil. Overnight on their own, the Cuban scientists shifted to an agriculture that
doesn't need fossil fuels. The tractors disappeared, the horses came on the farms.
Gardens were created all over Havana. I've been, therefore, two, three times to inaugurate the
big sustainable agriculture movement, the organic movement. And because the country
did it themselves, with the top, it's the only country where the organic movement has been
led by scientists. Everywhere else, it has been led by farmers. But the scientists and the farmers
joined hands. And amazing transition took place. So, it is not the case, well, you know, we were
growing food without chemicals until 1966 in this country. If we starved before that, it wasn't
because of ecological agriculture that Halbert Howard has described. It was because of the British
Empire taking half of the food in cash as a tax payment from the Indian peasants. Having declared
the whole land of India their private property, 45 trillion dollars was transferred, 60 million.
Some people say 40, some say 60. But between 40 to 60 million people died of famine. Farmers who
were growing the food couldn't eat it. The last big famine we had was 1942. We haven't had a famine
since then. And the Green Revolution story always has a narrative. India was brought out of famine.
No, there's a big gap between 1942 and 1966. And there was no famine in that time. But, you know,
for me, the saddest part about the way industrial agriculture writes its negatives,
whether it's about Sri Lanka or the Green Revolution or the GM question, is that they can
totally fabricate facts. You know, in this troll attack on me right now, they're accusing me of
having gone to Kansas. No, in 2021. No, I wasn't traveling. No one was traveling. They've cooked
up a visit of mine and then they've cooked up a letter to the president of a university I never
visited. Fascinating, you know. I just look at it and I said, you know, what kind of world are we
living in? Anything can be cooked up. Yeah, I'm, I'm well aware of those sorts of things and our
social media and algorithms don't help either. Because they, they turn things that are angry
and divisive into viral things, things that we would never say in a town meeting or a meeting
on people. But online, this, the more extreme stuff gets, gets spread. So every, every time you
talk, I come up with more questions I want to ask you. But at the heart of what you're saying just
now, the soil and the population of countries like India are also casualties of the economic
super organism, which is my work looking at how we have created this growth based metabolic
structure globally, and it's out competing, more sustainable, slower, more ecology based
movements. And so what is your real belief on the link between fossil fuel, agriculture,
and population? You mentioned Haber Basch and nitrogen fertilizers on a global level. What,
what do you think is the human global population situation? How many people can the earth support
at a reasonable lifestyle in the future? Well, I think different ecosystems support
different numbers. You know, the very arid ecosystems have pastoralism,
which distributes the population. So per acre, the population is very, very thin.
The rice growing regions of Asia have a much higher population. And this tremendous work done
on how, for example, the farming systems in Bali were evolved in order to turn larger numbers into
an advantage by creating what scientists have called involution, you know, that that people
did more work in the rice paddies, created the terraces, and more people could be supported.
So there was an intensification of the carrying capacity of the ecosystem, huge management of
water distribution, which still carries on to this day. You know, in my book, Democracy, which I
wrote after we stopped the World Trade Organization in Seattle, and we were always being told, oh,
the anti-globalizers know what they're against, they don't know what they're for. And I would always
say we are not anti-globalizers, you know, we are pro-Earth, we are pro-humanity. And we are
basically seeing how your model of corporate control based on growth is destroying the world.
Most people don't know that growth is a very recent indicator. You know, it's during the war
that extracting surplus from society, you know, societies run their wealth in circular economies,
they constantly give back. So there's nothing like extra extraction. But if you've got to buy more
missiles, you've got to buy more jet planes, you've got to buy more ships, have larger armies,
navies, air force, you've got to finance it. So what was done was the gross domestic product,
gross national product indicator was created, and then the UN system accounts or new system
of accounting was created, which basically says if you produce what you consume, you don't produce.
So sustainable production with sustained consumption was turned into zero,
and that's why the growth indicator only counted extractivism. But every bit of extractivism is
a disruption of a social system or of an ecological system. And it is not just a disruption of the
capacity of social ecological systems to support nature and society. Worse, this extraction has
huge amounts of pollution and externalities. So the fossil fuel age has created the externality
of climate change. But it has also created all the distortions in our thinking. You know, you
talk about simplification, I talk about simplicity. And the reason we don't see the huge footprint
is because it's always invisible. It's either far away in another country, another culture, or it is
in, you know, in invisible energy slaves. So, you know, Emery Lovins had done this amazing work
on energy slaves. And he had talked about how, you know, I think he talked about 250 times more
energy slaves in America than Nigeria. In terms of workforce, therefore, the population of the
earth is not 4 billion, but 200 billion. So if you add that to today, and of course, you know, even
our computers are working on energy slaves, you know, everything is working on it. And the more
invisible it becomes, the heavier the energy slaves. So if I work it out with the current
population of 7.7 billion, people living under forced industrialization and energy intensive
digitalization, the population of energy slaves is more than 3.353. Every step in displacing real
people and substituting them with 250 energy slaves is additional burden. And you know,
they're talking about making every car electric. Well, you need lithium 600 times more lithium
days than there is in the world. So, you know, you always project this growth into a fictitious realm.
And its main justification is to destroy what exists. You'll never get where you want to get.
But your main objective is to destroy what exists in a sustainable way.
Well, by your you mean the Western culture, it's certainly not my objective. My objective is to
save as many species and things of value through the bottlenecks coming up. But I know what you
mean. And I think what's happening now in Egypt in the COP 27 is going to fail, like they always
fail, because they're trying to manage three objectives, climate, growth, and equity. And
you can't solve for three things in one conference. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, you know, you can't have equity of a race towards non-sustainability,
you know. It's just the wrong place to go. And I remember a cartoon that was made when I talked
about, you know, everyone sitting on the branch and saying, I'm going to chop it up faster. And,
you know, that model of equity is basically a race towards the same destination of death
and extinction. And that cannot possibly be a true meaning of equity. Equity has to be rooted
both in the ecological fabric and the web of life and the Earth family. And it has to be rooted in
in not the consumerism that has become the model of being human, but living within the limits
that the Earth provides for us and living a good life within those limits. Because, you know, I've
lived in a pre-industrial India. I have lived in a pre-fossil fuel India. I've lived in a
pre, you know, we were called backward because we didn't have plastic. And the World Bank gave
money, bring plastics. Now we've got plastic pollution. Then they said they don't have pesticides.
They're backward. They brought us pesticides. Now we've got cancer deaths. You know, and I can tell
you when you measure the true quality of life, you know, how happy are people? How much is the
twinkle in their eye? How much do they smile at each other? You know, those are the true human
indicators. How much are they able to cooperate? You know, we see climate disasters. In a village
community, they'll get displaced. The hut will be washed off. Cyclone is gone. They come right back
and help each other build each other's huts. So do you see a twinkle in people's eyes and
smiling in your city and community in India now relative to the past? No, it's gone down. You
know, when I went to do my PhD in Canada, and you know, everyone, oh, you poor things, you from
poor countries, and they give me these long lectures. And my basic argument was, you know,
even on the street, people have community. And even on the street, people have a twinkle in their
eye. If there's one thing greed has taken away from human beings, it's the twinkle in the eye.
So you also wrote a book called Soil Not Oil. I don't think we're going to be able to cover
all your books on this call. But in the book, you championed the potential of self-organizing
community propelled by human energy, in other words, work, in contrast to the energy slaves
from fossil fuels that you just mentioned, and the creativity by this community, in contrast
to top-down solutions by policy and growth. Can you summarize this? And what is the potential?
My work, which is just superficial compared to yours on this topic, is Haber-Basch and
nitrogen fertilizers have increased the amount of food globally. We could replace a good part of
that, but it would take a lot more time and human labor of taking them away from other jobs. So
can you explain this and expand on it? Yeah. You know, I don't really agree that Haber-Basch
increased the availability of food. They increased the production of commodities. It's a very
different issue. The minute you get synthetic fertilizers, you have to turn a biodiverse system
with 12 crops and 9 crops and 7 crops into a monoculture to match the chemical inputs.
Not only is the plant changed into a dwarf plant, but diversity is replaced for monocultures to fit
into the chemical package. So my work all these years has now shown me, one, when you measure
biodiversity in terms of nutrition and the biodiversity itself, you actually produce much
more nutrition per acre. So we indicated, we worked out an indicator, we said yield per acre
measures commodities, monocultures leaving for the ships. Whereas nutrition per acre measures
how much nourishment there is in the plants. So far we've done it with the soil, the soil is richer,
the nutrition in the plants is richer. And now new research is showing that the Haber-Basch
commodity is nutritionally empty commodity. It has absolutely no phytochemicals, it has no zinc,
and that's why the zinc deficiencies, magnesium deficiencies, all kinds of deficiencies are growing.
So if you treat food as that which nourishes us, then we haven't grown more food. We have definitely
grown more trade and more movement of commodities. But commodities are not food.
So Haber-Basch did not, I mean that to me, as a scientist the wrong measure, like growth is a
wrong measure of how well the economy is doing and how well people are doing. Yield is a wrong
measure how well farming is doing and all how healthy the food is. So using GDP to measure
our well-being, the analog in agriculture is using calories to represent biodiversity and
nutrition is also the wrong label. It's the wrong measure. Yeah. It's the wrong measure. That makes
sense to me. So in the United States approximately 3% of the population works in energy and
agriculture and in India it's something like 70% or more than that. So is it possible to
generate nutritional food without fossil fuels but getting rid of some of the extraneous jobs
and having more people working on the land intensively, I believe you think that's true.
Well, you know our book on health per acre we worked out if we extrapolated every acre of land
today to grow biodiversity, we would feed two times India's population. In the land of India
itself, just in the land of India? In the land of India, but if we do that all over the world,
it would be the same. Commodities are not feeding people. That's why a billion people are hungry
and the remaining are having all kinds of deficiencies and all kinds of chronic diseases.
You know in the lead up to GATT, there wasn't even a WTO then, I organized the biggest ever rally
of farmers internationally and called them to India and I called environment ministers like
Jose Lutzenberger from Brazil who were defending the Amazon and to hold the exhibit, the environment
minister of Ethiopia and these people here were the 500,000 farmers at this gathering
and we were sitting on the stage and I remember Lutzenberger said,
I know why they are scared of small farmers because a small farmer is the only producer
who needs the earth and their body. We can do without external inputs. That farming is possible.
So it is really the last free labor, free production and then when globalization kept pushing,
our government signed, the WTO, agriculture was brought in, seeds were brought in
and our government started to say we must be like the United States. They have only 3% on land and
they are advanced so we must remove our farmers from the land and reduce it to 3%. So I said,
you all can TV debates, those days there were TV debates. I said, I want to put them into the Arabian
Sea. How do you get rid of 70% of the population? And then because I worked with the then prime
minister who had been a former prime minister, the GATT ambassador who had negotiated the treaty
and we created a whole WTO campaign and we did a calculation. We said, okay, if they were to
displace all these millions from the land and put them into the cities, what's the rate of
growth of employment in the cities? And if that rate of growth had to absorb all of these people,
how many years will it take for them to be absorbed? 350 years,
350 years. Now this is the reason that strange economies are getting created. I did a lot of
public tribunals in Mexico and Mexico has said they'll phase out by 2024, Glyphosate and not
allowed GMOs. I have done many public tribunals and I remember one particular one I'll never
forget. An economist said ever since NAFTA, when land was taken away, the peasant economy was
destroyed, work was destroyed, one third of Mexico's economy became an economy of crime, drug trade,
stealing people, trade in women, sex trafficking, because when all productive work is robbed from
you and denied from you, this afternoon I was working with the UN in Afghanistan and they,
of course, because it's so fashionable these days here, everything is climate, everything's
climate. I said those poor Afghanis since 1840 have been invaded and invaded and invaded and if
today they're in the kind of shape where they're having to grow opium to survive, it is not purely
climate change, it is the walls that were imposed on them. So I think we conflate too many and the
reason I wrote soil not oil was because at that point agriculture was totally not in the discussion
on climate change and my simple analysis was showing well if you're processing more food,
you're using more energies. If you're transporting it with food miles, you're using more energy
and you're having more emissions and of course I'd done the work on the synthetic fertilizers
as fossil fertilizers. So basically industrial agriculture is a fossil fuel food system and
people were not even looking at it, but I'd also worked on the alternatives. How in a disaster
do you deal with climate disasters? Biodiversity, biodiversity for seeds that can tolerate salt,
that can tolerate floods, just the field of biodiversity, three crops will be destroyed
but six others will keep standing. So diversity is the answer and the biodiversity destruction
is the beginning of the climate habit. The fossil fuel substitution of living energies is the second
and I think the entry of fossil fuels into the food system, of course now we know if you add every
bit, the processing, the transport, the destruction of the Amazon for GMO soya and animal feed,
the fertilizers, the waste 50% of the US food is wasted either on the farm or then thrown away.
50% of the emissions come from a bad food system that's also making us sick
and we have a solution. Like if we stop the fossil fuels and went to ecological agriculture,
we could in 10 years pull down the excess CO2 and grow more food, have more fertile foods,
that's the issue of regeneration. The miracle of the green leaf, it took the climate temperatures
down from 290 degrees with a 98% CO2 on this planet when we couldn't have lived and brought it to
the temperatures which allowed human beings to evolve and it was all done by photosynthesis,
absorbing the carbon dioxide and I feel we've ignored too much of the living energies of the
universe including the energy that we have as creative bodies. Just using our energy was
turned into drudgery. I've asked so many people say oh the poor peasants and drudgery, I said I
don't know a single peasant who on their own say oh this is drudgery, well they're the happiest people.
They sing and dance and they have community and you want to take away their land and you want to
take away their well-being and who are you to decide what's drudgery, the person who's suffering
drudgery will decide what's drudgery. But there's always someone else trying to save you and it's
the civilizing mission, goes on and on and on, improving us, civilizing us, liberating us,
leaving the liberation to us. On the India situation, you have been a champion for impoverished
regions and trying to do regenerative agriculture and replace industrial corporate agriculture
with community scale examples, seed variety. What are some key projects, Vandana, that you are aware
of or our work are associated with now that you're excited about and hopeful on this topic of
replacing industrial agriculture? So you know once I did the work of the Green Revolution
and just rice and wheat displaced our diversity and then the Monsanto's wanted to own and patent
seed through GMOs, that's when I said I'm going to save seeds. I had no idea how you save seeds
and we've now created 150 community seed banks. We've defended the seed as a commons but we have
recovered by diversity, you know, the mind that is just rice and wheat, rice and wheat,
like GM corn, GMO soya, you know there's so much diversity in the world. So the first really exciting
part has been that we saved every seed which we could find and in our seed banks were seeds that
could tolerate salt. So when the super cyclone hit in 1999 in Orissa, we distributed those salt
tolerant seeds. Then the tsunami hit in 2014 I think and the Orissa farmers gave truckloads of
salt tolerant seeds to the Tamil Nadu farmers and the government had said they'll never be able to
farm for five years because there's too much salt on the land and we said we have salt tolerant seeds
and we shared it. Second, you know, the millets which are the most nutritious foods, the most
climate resilient foods used next to no water, don't need irrigation, are full of nourishment.
They were called primitive grains and driven out by the green revolution.
We said we're going to make these forgotten foods the future foods.
2030, 2023 is now announced as the year of millets. We prevented there being banished from the human
diet. And third, you know, I was focusing on food grains but the suicides in India started in the
cotton area because cotton was overtaken very fast by Monsanto. 95% of the cotton is Monsanto
BT cotton. They came illegally. I sued them. I fought them in the courts. The cases are still
going on. 2002, they were allowed to sell commercially. In no time, the farmer's debt
in the roof, it's not working for pest control. Farmers are using more pesticides.
You're using more fertilizer. They're using more irrigation. And the farmer's debt is what is
leading to suicides. We've lost 400,000 farmers to suicide since globalization. And 85% of this
is in the cotton belt. The government releases statistics so you can put exactly where the
suicides are. And it overlaps with the BT cotton belt. So when I did a journey, I did a pilgrimage.
When I don't understand, I do a pilgrimage. I say I will go and figure out why a farmer is using
the seed. And I found out their seeds had been finished off through seed replacement. The government
seeds weren't being bred. And all the Indian companies had been locked into licensing arrangement
through a false claim that Monsanto had a patent. They didn't have a patent in India. They had it
in the United States. So literally Monsanto took over the entire seed economy of India.
That's when I started to look for organic cotton seeds. And now we've distributed organic
cotton seeds. We've trained farmers in the suicide belt in organic farming. We've linked back
to Gandhi's ashrams. You know, Gandhi fought the British Empire by pulling out the spinning wheel.
And I learned from there, for me, the seed is the spinning wheel. And he said, if we make our own
cloth, we will never be slaves. For him, economic freedom was the basis of political freedom.
So the Gandhi ashrams are still there, hand spun, hand woven cloth. So we give the organic cotton
to them and they make beautiful fabrics, printed with natural dyes, from vegetables and plants.
So you know, hand printed. So when you talk about the bodily labor, you know, hand spinning and
hand weaving and beautiful printing is all the creativity of a hand. I think what fossil fuel
banished was the ability to pink, our ability to fail and ability to use our hands. It fossilized
our minds, our hearts and our hands. And what we need to regenerate is of course the earth through
our minds and our hearts and our hands. You're older than me and have been working on these
things your entire life. I am already tired and overwhelmed at times with the challenge ahead
of us. It's now 830 p.m. your time. You've had a full day and you're still full of energy and
poetry and wisdom on this podcast. You haven't even had dinner yet. How do you manage with this
much energy given the scale of the task? How do you not lose hope and vitality? I'm just curious.
Well, you know, energy in the universe is not the coal and the oil underground.
You know, the world is energy. The universe is energy. Nature is energy. The fact that a seed
can become a tree, that amazing autopoietic energy and, you know, Schrodinger,
who did the Schrodinger equation and, you know, the Schrodinger's cat,
he's done a brilliant book called What is Life? And he's asked in that book and says,
well, unlike machines and physical processes, living systems have the power to reverse entropy.
Fossil fuels and mechanical systems create entropy and waste.
Living systems take the energy and turn it into more creative energy. Yeah, every leaf comes out.
Now, if it can happen to the seed and can happen to the soil organisms and all of this amazing
self-organized capacity of the soil web of life, you know, I think we just have to A,
be conscious of that tremendous energy and participate in it.
And at the same time, not participate in that which degrades, depletes, destroys.
So, to mention another of your many books, you wrote a book called Staying Alive, Women,
Ecology and Development in India. And in your public speaking, now you often connect the
colonization of Earth with the historic treatment of women. How do you see the current opportunity
for both women and ecology in this, I call, great simplification in the coming cultural transition?
Yeah, I think part of the great simplification is shedding the baggage that the Earth is dead and
inert, which is terrenalious. And women are a second sex, they're passive, they're objects,
they're property. Because neither are, you know, women are creative, they're productive. In fact,
most of the production when you measure it in terms of time spent in the world is women's work.
It's just that it's not counted as work, because just like GDP only counts that which
can, you can exchange in the market, work too is counted in terms of what you can sell as labor
power in the market. Your work in terms of regenerating the soil, your work in taking care of
children and the family or old people, it's not counted as work, it's care work. It's the biggest,
the care economy is the biggest economy because the Earth works in the care economy,
women work in the care economy. So the opportunity in this moment of crisis is
stopping the blindness towards the tremendous creativity of the Earth. You know, we have to
stop trying to be masters and conquerors and engineers like Bacon tried to think we should be,
you know, supermen. The nature had to be subjugated and conquered. I mean, that's what
his book and he wrote about the masculine birth of time. Yeah, he literally defined the time of
conquest as the masculine time. And, you know, before the Papal Bull supporting Columbus was a
Papal Bull unleashing the witch hunts and the inquisitions. Most of the people who were killed
were witches. And who were they? They were the knowledgeable women of society. You couldn't know
with nature. You had to know to conquer nature. And what's the opportunity today?
I don't think, you know, if we keep having the engineering mentality like Mr. Gates has,
geoengineering is a solution. Further engineering of food in labs is a solution. The engineering
and mastering mentality is still there, but we will not have a future on that part. That's the
part that's leading to collapse. That's the world that's collapsing. So just celebrating the creativity
of nature and the invisible creativity that has been made to look like it's not there for women.
And, you know, Gandhi had a beautiful prayer, very beautiful prayer. Every day he used to say,
make me more womanly, which meant make me more caring. Now, here's a man
and he could see that as the world had colonized and industrialized, care had been left
in the background. And, you know, men, men were the ones being wars. Men were the ones who were
in factories. Men were the ones in plantations. And in a way, men and women have to participate in a
new revolution of care. And that new revolution of care is what life is all about.
I've never heard that quote from Gandhi, but I agree we need to make men more womanly,
because the current system is headed for a cliff. So Herman Daly, I don't know if you knew him.
He was a friend. I knew him. He passed away unexpectedly last week. I talked to him last
week a couple days before he died. And he's just so bright and such a wonderful human being.
But he was an initial thinker in the ecological economics movement. So what economic theory
for the future do you support and propose? What economic system could potentially
reflect the ecological values, support food security, the caring, the localization that
you've been discussing? Is such a thing possible? It's necessary. It's not just possible.
It's necessary. And those economies have been the economies of indigenous people.
Those have been the economies, pre-colonialism, pre-industrialism.
I've just done a book in Italian. It's called Read to Care. And I went into the roots of the word
economy. And Aristotle's time, he talked about economia. And he called it the art of living.
And he made a clear distinction between economia as the art of living and
chromatistics, the art of money making. So GDP measures chromatistics.
The billionaires are winning the race on chromatistics. But the art of living is the true
economy. And to practice the art of living, of course, you could learn from life. And therefore,
the art of living is about protecting and regenerating nature's economy.
Again, creating, because since colonialism, killing every local economy with its diversity
of occupations has been the work, we will have to learn again all the diversity of occupations.
They're teaching six-year-old kids coding. As if coding will save the world, we need
the ability to know how to put a seed into the soil and grow food. We need to go into the kitchen
and actually cook food. We need to be able to stitch a torn garment. So I think we could
put it this way. Either we will keep getting trashed by the 1% who have already said there's no
place for the 99%. Kloppelberg said, what's his name? The Facebook met a guy. What's his name?
Mark Zuckerberg? Zuckerberg, Zuckerberg. He said in his Harvard address, 99% people won't have a
place in the future economy. And for me, 100% people will have a place in the future economy.
And the 1% won't be able to trash the world that they like they're doing. And I take a lot of
learning from nature. And I see the leaves fall. The green leaf doesn't always stay green.
Conifers maybe, but in the desert this forest is no. And I think the more we grow the economy of
art of living, art of loving, art of caring, the more the marginalization
of the narrative that without destroying the earth we cannot live.
So let me ask you a paradoxical question. My work is about energy depletion globally and
the implications that we'll have for societies and the complexity that's been built up
inevitably will turn into a simplification. In the global north, that means we're going to
have to use less or significantly less energy inputs to power our current lifestyles.
With respect to these lower energy per capita futures, what can the global north learn from
the global south in this regard? What are models in India, for example, that are working now on a
lower energy per capita basis? Do you have any thoughts on this?
Yeah, lower external energy, lower fossil energy. Yes, lower. But high energy of all other kinds.
You know, the work we do in agriculture, no fossil fuel use at all.
The soils are fertile. I would love to organize a trip. You know, bring a group to see
how you can simplify and have a good life. Be with communities that are able to sustain themselves.
But of course, the one thing that we will have to stop is the alienation of resources. Because
without co-creating with nature, without co-creating with nature's energies, we will never be able to
to simplify in terms of the fossil infrastructure. And the challenge before us is everything,
all the money is being poured into expanding the infrastructure for fossil fuels. More highways,
you know, they just said a whole new train station in Kenya, 2 billion, 3 billion was
given by the UK. All of this infrastructure is an infrastructure of destruction, not only because
every highway destroys a forest or a farm, but every highway is making the, you know, the fossil
fuel empire last a little longer. But, you know, what economy, true economy is creating and co-creating
the infrastructure of life. And it's just that we have been made blind to these processes.
And we have not just been made blind to the processes, we've always been, if they are seen,
then they are backward, they are primitive, you know, they must be improved. So, you know,
I would love for a northern group to come and see, come in the villages, how much diversity of food
they can grow, how, with their bodies working, you know, we call it the yoga of the earth.
And, you know, we say, oh, it's so hard, it's so hard, it's so hard. I say, you do yoga, don't you?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's wonderful. I said, this is yoga of the earth. We actually offer a course
called yoga of the earth. Has this not happened? Has there not been a documentary made about these
practices, the yoga of the earth in India? Wouldn't it be nice? Think of it. You should do it.
I might be able to help you do that. And I think it's really important, because we're going to have
to be more reconnected with regenerative agriculture, not because it's the right thing to do, but
we're going to have to do it. It's also the right thing to do. Yeah.
So, I know that you have delayed your dinner because of this interview. And I have some
questions that I ask all my guests. Let me ask you this, just out of curiosity,
personal curiosity, what will you be having for dinner tonight?
From what I saw is a capsicum and potato curry and a chapati.
What's that?
Simple, simplification.
What's a chapati?
A chapati is our bread.
Okay, that sounds...
Now, I must tell you this. 1857, the Indian peasants rose against the East India Company,
which was just extractive. And people were losing their land. And it's called the Sepoy Mutiny,
but it was a societal revolution. And that's when the East India Company ended, and then the British
Crown took over. But they would kill people if they heard them talking. People would be hung on the
trees. And the people found a brilliant way to communicate. They would take a chapati, a bread,
and pass it on. And if you received the bread, you were part of the revolution.
So, that was a bread revolution. So, I always say our bread is our freedom.
Thank you. So, Vandana, given your lifetime of activism and reflection and scholarship on these
issues, do you have any personal advice to the global listeners of this show at this time of
global poly crisis? First, don't despair. Understand that there are actions that are bringing
earth to the brink, but you can be part of other actions. Don't underestimate your contributions.
I've worked with seed, and seed is so small. Can't he work with the spinning wheel? And the
spinning wheel is so small. The smallness is what allows it to multiply on its own.
The seed multiplies on its own, but as it passes through society, society is able to
exchange seeds, grow the food. So, appreciate your smallness because it gives you new flexibility.
And the third is keep good company. Hang out with people you love and give them energy and take
energy from them. I love that. I've long advised people to do the same. Don't hang around with
people that are counter to what you believe in. So, a follow-up to that. What specific
recommendations do you have for young humans, both in India and listening to this show,
who become aware of the energy, climate, ecology situation of the human situation?
Well, I would like every young Indian to understand the ecological roots of this civilization that
lasted 10,000 years. It's respect for soil, it's respect for biodiversity. Why did it make every
river and every tree sacred? Because sacredness was protection and reverence. The second thing I
would really like young Indians to do is wherever you are in privilege, I've always felt that whatever
you have, it creates an obligation. And the more you have, the obligation is higher. You can either
consume it away and fritter it away and blow it up with the next dress and the next car. Or you can
say, what can I do to give strength where creative alternatives are being created? And the more people
join in this solidarity, the more we'll be able to grow well-being by using less.
What do you care most about in the world, Vandana?
Life, life and love. And because I care for life and the forest life is threatened, I go to the
forest when the soil life is threatened, I turn to the soil with life. Because life was what was
banished in the fossil thinking. There's no life. Where do you live in India, like roughly, which
region? Well, my home, where I am right now, is the Himalaya. And the place where the two big
rivers enter the plains, the Ganges and the Yamuna, the valley between those two rivers
at the foothills of the Himalaya. I look out and I see Masuri on the other side of Shivali.
So you have lots of natural beauty, right, where you live?
A lot more than, you know, till globalization, you know, a lot more beauty. In fact, all the
Britishers used to say there's no place like this in Europe. It's very beautiful. The little parts,
you know, our farm, you know, we've allowed the land to regenerate. We have a lot of biodiversity.
We have seven times more pollinators than in the forest next door, just because we grew biodiversity.
And our water level has come up 70 feet from the time we started farming. So it's not the case
that farming will always deplete water. Farming can regenerate water. How does that work?
It is a beautiful part. Do come, do come. I've never, I've never been to India.
How does farming really? You must, you must. Well, maybe we'll make that documentary about the
yoga of the earth. Yeah. How does regenerative agriculture replenish the water table? I don't
understand that. Okay, chemical agriculture just sucks out. It only takes and it doesn't give back
both because it has destroys the soil capacity to hold water and especially
where the big machinery is used, it packs it up. So when the water comes, it just runs away.
Nothing infiltrates into the ground. When you do regenerative agriculture, the first thing you're
doing is giving back organic matter to the soil. To me, it's thank you earth. You know, when people,
you know, there's a tax on organic and all I say, you know, this is just thank you mother earth.
Yeah, you've given us so much. Here's a little portion for your regeneration. When the organic
matter is there, you know, 1% organic matter can hold at 1600 meters of water per hectare.
So the soil itself is all water, but now the soil is porous. The earthworms are creating channels
and through those channels when the water comes, it's going in and recharging the ground water.
So there's more water in the soil and there's more water in the ground and there's less water
running away. As a podcast host, I just have to tell you that I would like this conversation to
go on for like three hours because I have so much to ask you. I just want to be really respectful
of your time and your family and your evening. So a couple more questions, but I'm hoping that
we can talk again. Of all the issues in the world and some you've discussed, what is the thing that
worries you most in the coming 10 years? Geoengineering and weather modification,
you know, climate change already uncertain, but the intentional disruption of the system,
you know, Mr. Gates is funding huge amounts of geoengineering and the US Air Force, you know,
they've got a whole report called owning the weather that we will now use weather modification
as a weapon of war. And I have watched the last few years, you know, every time
it's ready for harvest, untimely rains come. That's something, you know,
that's so beyond your control. And even though there's a treaty, there's a UN treaty and not,
which is supposed to prevent any environmental modification. It's kind of sleeping.
And I think we do need much more public consciousness about the fact that, yes,
we've had fossil pollution, which has given us climate havoc. But now we are having intentional
pollution and putting aerosols into the sky to actually change the weather, change the climate.
And, you know, the excuse is we'll cool the planet. You don't disrupt ecosystems and lies.
Yeah. And there's nothing like cool the planet in one part of the world and destroy the sun's
ability to support life on this planet, because all pollution is about blocking the sun and to
have more activity to block the sun is actually preventing photosynthesis. And it's, you know,
then there'll be no food production. And there may be one or two groups that work on geoengineering,
but it is very, it's not in the consciousness of people.
It's not thanking the earth. It's changing the earth. And, you know, the more I interview people
like you, it seems that there are really two lenses to view the future. There's a technology lens,
and there's an ecology lens, and they give vastly different prescriptions for the direction we need
to head. So in contrast, Vandana, in the next 10 years, what gives you the most hope?
The place where I get the most hope is from the earth. You know, I've never seen the earth as
dead. The earth is very living. And you can also see climate havoc as one way the earth is trying
to shake you up. And the earth's potential to regenerate is huge. You've just got to stop the
harm and work in humility with the earth. That's what gives me hope. In any case, it's what we have
to do. So if you were benevolent dictator, or had the ability to be in such a position, and there
was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you would do now to improve human
and planetary futures? I would basically stop all activities, all thinking that is denying
the earth is living, and all activities, technologies, scientific paradigms that push
that denial further causing more harm. Is there anything else you'd like to
share with those listening? You cultivate hope.
Thank you. And I am so honored to have shared this time with you. And I hope we can continue
this conversation. You come to India. Let's have that conversation. I hope you enjoy your
capskism and potatoes. Capsicum, potato, and the chapati. Excellent. Thank you. Thank you.
you
