Just out of curiosity, personal curiosity, what will you be having for dinner tonight?
From what I saw is a capsicum and potato curry and a chipati.
What's that?
Simple, simplification.
What's a chipati?
A chipati is our bread.
Okay, that sounds...
Now, I must tell you this.
You know, 1857, the Indian peasants rose against the East India Company, which was just extracting
and people were losing their land, you know.
And it's called the Sepoy Mutiny, but it was a societal revolution.
And that's when the East India Company ended and then the British Crown took over.
But they would kill people if they heard them talking.
The people would be hung on the trees and the people found a brilliant way to communicate.
They would take a chipati, a bread, and pass it on.
And if you received the bread, you were part of the revolution.
So that was a bread revolution.
So I always say our bread is our freedom.
Thank you.
So, Vandana, given your lifetime of activism and reflection and scholarship on these issues,
do you have any personal advice to the global listeners of this show at this time of global
poly crisis?
First, don't despair.
You know, understand that there are actions that are bringing earth to the brink,
but you can be part of other actions.
Don't underestimate your contributions.
You know, I've worked with seed and seed is so small.
Can't he work with the spinning wheel?
And the spinning wheel is so small.
The smallness is what allows it to multiply on its own.
The seed multiplies on its own, but as it passes through society,
society is able to exchange seeds, grow the food.
So appreciate your smallness because it gives you new flexibility.
And the third is keep good company, hang out with people you love,
and give them energy and take energy from them.
I love that.
I've long advised people to do the same.
Don't hang around with people that are counter to what you believe in.
So a follow up to that.
What specific recommendations do you have for young humans,
both in India and listening to this show,
who become aware of the energy, climate, ecology situation of the human situation?
Well, I would like every young Indian to understand the ecological roots
of this civilization that lasted 10,000 years.
It's respect for soil, it's respect for biodiversity.
Why did it make every river and every tree sacred?
Because sacredness was protection and rivers.
The second thing I would really like young Indians to do
is whatever, wherever you are in privilege,
I've always felt that whatever you have, it creates an obligation.
And the more you have, the obligation is higher.
You can either consume it away and fritter it away
and blow it up with the next dress and the next car.
Or you can say, what can I do to give strength
where creative alternatives are being created?
And the more people join in this solidarity,
the more we'll be able to grow well-being by using less.
What do you care most about in the world, Vandana?
Life, life and love.
And because I care for life and the forest life is threatened,
I go to the forest when the soil life is threatened,
I turn to the soil with life.
Because life was what was banished in the fossil thinking.
There's no life.
Where do you live in India, like roughly which region?
Well, my home, where I am right now, is, you know the Himalaya?
Yeah.
And the place where the two big rivers enter the plains,
the Ganges and the Yamuna.
The valley between those two rivers at the foothills of the Himalaya.
I look out and I see Masuri on the other side of Shivali.
So you have lots of natural beauty, right, where you live?
A lot more when, you know, till globalization, you know, a lot more beauty.
In fact, all the Britishers used to say there's no place like this in Europe.
Very beautiful.
The little parts, you know, our farm, you know,
we've allowed the land to regenerate.
We have a lot of biodiversity.
We have seven times more pollinators than in the forest next door,
just because we grew biodiversity.
And our water level has come up 70 feet from the time we started farming.
So it's not the case that farming will always deplete water.
Farming can regenerate water.
How does that work?
It is a beautiful part.
Do come, do come.
I've never, I've never been to India.
How does farming really?
You must, you must.
Well, maybe we'll make that documentary about the yoga of the earth.
Yeah.
How does regenerative agriculture replenish the water table?
I don't understand that.
Okay, chemical agriculture just sucks out.
It only takes.
And it doesn't give back both because it has destroys the soil capacity to hold water.
And especially where the big machinery is used, it packs it up.
So when the water comes, it just runs away.
Nothing infiltrates into the ground.
When you do regenerative agriculture, the first thing you're doing is giving back
organic matter to the soil.
To me, it's thank you earth.
You know, when people, you know, there's a tax on organic and all I say,
you know, this is just thank you mother earth.
Yeah, you've given us so much.
Here's a little portion for your regeneration.
When the organic matter is there, you know, one percent organic matter can hold a thousand
six hundred meters of water per hectare.
So the soil itself is all water, but now the soil is porous.
The earthworms are creating channels and through those channels when the water comes,
it's going in and recharging the ground water.
So there's most water in the soil and there's more water in the ground.
And there's less water running away.
