I think what's happening now in Egypt in the COP27 is going to fail like they always fail
because they're trying to manage three objectives, climate, growth, and equity.
You can't solve for three things in one conference.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
You can't have equity of a race towards non-sustainability.
It's just the wrong place to go.
And I remember a cartoon that was made when I talked about everyone sitting on the branch
and saying, I'm going to chop it up faster.
And that model of equity is basically a race towards the same destination of death and extinction.
And that cannot possibly be a true meaning of equity.
Equity has to be rooted both in the ecological fabric and the web of life
and the Earth family.
And it has to be rooted in not the consumerism that has become the model of being human,
but living within the limits that the Earth provides for us
and living a good life within those limits.
Because I've lived in a pre-industrial India.
I have lived in a pre-fossil fuel India.
We were called backward because we didn't have plastic.
And the World Bank gave money, bring plastics.
Now we've got plastic pollution.
Then they said they don't have pesticides.
They're backward.
They brought us pesticides.
Now we've got cancer deaths.
And I can tell you when you measure the true quality of life, how happy are people?
How much is the twinkle in their eye?
How much do they smile at each other?
Those are the true human indicators.
How much are they able to cooperate?
You know, we see climate disasters.
In a village community, they'll get displaced.
The hut will be washed off.
Cyclone is gone.
They come right back and help each other build each other's huts.
So do you see twinkle in people's eyes and smiling in your city and community in India
now relative to the past?
No, it's gone down.
You know, when I went to do my PhD in Canada and, you know, everyone,
you know you put things from poor countries and they'd give me these long lectures.
And my basic argument was, you know, even on the street, people have community.
And even on the street, people have a twinkle in their eye.
If there's one thing greed has taken away from human beings, it's the twinkle in their eye.
So you also wrote a book called Soil Not Oil.
I don't think we're going to be able to cover all your books on this call.
But in the book, you championed the potential of self-organizing community propelled by
human energy, in other words, work, in contrast to the energy slaves from fossil fuels that
you just mentioned.
And the creativity by this community, in contrast to top-down solutions by policy and growth.
Can you summarize this?
And what is the potential?
My work, which is just superficial compared to yours on this topic, is Haber-Bosch and
nitrogen fertilizers have increased the amount of food globally.
We could replace a good part of that, but it would take a lot more time and human labor
of taking them away from other jobs.
So can you explain this and expand on it?
You know, I don't really agree that Haber-Bosch increased the availability of food.
They increased the production of commodities.
It's a very different issue.
The minute you get synthetic fertilizers, you have to turn a biodiverse system with
12 crops and nine crops and seven crops into a monoculture to match the chemical inputs.
You know, not only is the plant changed into a dwarf plant, but diversity is replaced for
monocultures to fit into the chemical package.
So my work all these years has now shown me, one, when you measure biodiversity in terms
of nutrition and the biodiversity itself, you actually produce much more nutrition per
acre.
So we indicated, we worked out an indicator, we said yield per acre measures commodities,
we were leaving for the ships, whereas nutrition per acre measures how much nourishment there
is in the plants.
So far we've done it with the soil, the soil is richer, the nutrition in the plants is
richer and now new research is showing that the Haber-Bosch commodity is nutritionally
empty commodity.
It has absolutely no phytochemicals.
It has no zinc and that's why the zinc deficiencies, magnesium deficiencies, all kinds of deficiencies
are growing.
So if you treat food as that which nourishes us, then we haven't grown more food.
We have definitely grown more trade and more movement of commodities, but commodities are
not food.
So Haber-Bosch did not, that to me, as a scientist, the wrong measure, growth is a wrong measure
of how well the economy is doing and how well people are doing.
