You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins. That's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy, the environment, and our society.
Together with scientists, experts, and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's-eye view of how everything fits together,
where we go from here and what we can do about it as a society and as individuals.
Vicky Robin is an advocate for social change and innovation. She has her own podcast, What Could Possibly Go Right,
and is authored two books, Your Money or Your Life and Blessing the Hands that Feed Us.
She works to inspire others to be financially independent and to take control of their own lives to create more meaningful and fulfilling experiences.
She also promotes eating local, being the creator and first participant in the 10-mile diet challenge in her community,
where she spent 30 days eating only food produced within 10 miles of her home.
These are the types of practices that are currently against the grain of conventional society,
and I think are going to become more and more important in the future that's arriving, The Great Simplification.
Vicky's experience and voice are a powerful force for spreading these ideas.
I hope you enjoy this week's conversation with Vicky Robin.
Vicky, good to see you.
Good to see you too, Nate.
We have one thing in common in the pre-episode chatter. We both have snow coming our way today.
You and Washington, me and Wisconsin.
Right. We had snow last night. It's melting very fast right now in the sun.
We have a lot more in common.
I think we've been barking up the same tree for 20 or 30 years.
And no one is listening, or very few are listening.
Although more people are listening now.
No, actually, you're right. You have millions of followers.
Your book, Your Money or Your Life, is a classic.
It is.
It helps spawn a movement towards financial independence.
Even the acronym FIRE, Financial Independence, retire early.
So let's start there. Let's talk about that.
What did you hope that that book would accomplish?
Why did you write it? What were your hopes for that, and what ended up happening?
So, it's sort of like a self-help systems thinking book that teaches a nine-step program
that was developed by my co-author, Joe Dominguez.
And we taught it for quite a number of years, basically to people who had a yen for a higher purpose,
but were completely clueless about money.
So we were trying to empower that subculture.
And then in 1989, I went to a conference on the first conference in the United States
on sustainable development.
And that's where I realized that lowering consumption in North America
was probably the most important thing we could do in order to avert disasters.
I often tell the story of all of the...
There was the World Commission on Environmental Development.
They traveled the world. They got testimony.
We're on a collision course between the economy and the natural world.
What do we do about it?
And every commissioner who spoke at that conference sort of said,
the biggest problem is the level and pattern of consumption in North America.
And then they would shrug like nobody could do anything about that.
And we taught that program as a seminar and then as a tape course.
And we taught it to probably about 10,000 people, and I'd surveyed them
because I was very interested in the impact.
And we found that people, on average, if they followed this program
within six months, they'd lowered their consumption by 20%.
And we're happier.
And that was my data point.
I'm not like a big social scientist.
I'm sort of an intuitive person.
So all I needed was one data point, two data points.
Consumerism is ruining the world and your money or life.
Well, the program, the Ninth Step Program could change that.
And because of that, I got a passion I had never experienced in my life.
Like we're sitting on the solution to the biggest problem on the planet.
And so pretty soon we had a contract to write the book.
And the publicist and Viking somehow got us on Oprah.
And then right after we were on Oprah, we were New York Times bestseller.
Because she held up the book and she said, this is a fabulous book.
It will change your life.
You know, she has many authors she doesn't say that about.
So, I mean, that was the launch.
And so I was on a mission for a decade.
Because we decided we're going to lower consumption in North America
by we're going to live within the planetary means by the year 2000.
That was the goal.
We were, you know, positively insane and dedicated.
And so that launch and also, you know, we were arrogant, but we were great.
We decided we're going to write a bestseller.
Why, you know, why do this?
We want this book to be everywhere because we have to change everyone.
And so, you know, we just said it's going to be a bestseller.
And it was.
And it still is.
Oh my God.
Last week, I checked sales.
It was almost 1500 books last week.
Wow.
It's just a phenomenon.
Well, this is one of the reasons, one of the many reasons I wanted to have you on the show
because your money or your life is really an anecdote.
Not just for individuals looking for financial independence,
but for our entire economic system is your money or your life.
And so what are some of the core precepts in the book and your teachings
that could be applicable to people today?
Which is when was the book written?
It came out in 92.
Okay.
So 30 years ago.
I know.
But I did an update and I, wait, just say, I did an update in 2008 and that just,
that's sort because that's when I discovered the fire community.
And back to your original question.
My intention was to lower consumption in North America.
And when I discovered the fire, and you know, we didn't do that.
You ran smack into the super organism and central banks is what happened.
Exactly.
Exactly.
We did not take into account.
I call them the overlords.
That's not a nice name, but you know, I call, you know, the system that is completely
resistant to change because anyway, yeah.
So I think that one of the core ideas in your money or life that really flips it for people
is, is we say that, you know, we think of money as, as scarce in somebody else's control,
somebody that eat something that eats up our lives, something that, you know, defines our
success and our status, you know, we, we've sort of hooked money to all human needs.
You know, I have a need.
And it used to be before money, there's, I have a need and I have a, have competencies
to meet my needs.
And I have a relationship with the world around me and I have the capacity to do that.
And then in the money economy, we have completely hooked people.
I say we're drinking milk from a poison sow, but it's the only sow in town.
So one of the basic teachings is that money isn't what everybody says it is.
It isn't status.
It isn't control because you can have those things without money.
So it's not an absolute definition, but our definition is that money is something that
you trade the hours of your life for, for whatever reason.
And so that gives you a personal understanding, not a social and comparative understanding.
I was looking at your website, your money or your life last night.
It has a parallel to my recent work, which is that energy, all of our money is a claim
on energy and materials.
No matter what we spend money on, it's a call on energy and resources.
And so I say money is a claim on energy and you say that money is a claim on life energy.
Your personal life energy and the life energy of the planet.
It's a lean on the resources of the earth.
So what is debt then?
What are we doing with your nomenclature there when we issue debt?
It's a claim on your future resources.
Yeah, it's a claim on your future.
And conveniently, we don't understand that.
We just think, oh, we'll just pay the minimum.
And it's also, I think, a strategy to continue to expand the economy, if you will, because
if people only lived within their means, the game would be over, especially in this incredible
wealth gap we have now, where people on the bottom, they're struggling.
Right.
So your money or your life would take on much different connotations depending on who was
reading it.
People in the lower 40, 50% of our society are just massively strapped and the top 1%
have digits coming out of their ears in their bank accounts.
So how do you address that at all?
Can people that have a very tight financial situation still benefit from your book and
your advice?
I mean, I think I've always said that it is not a book for the bottom 20%, the people
who are really hand to mouth.
Although there can be benefit because some of the desperation and low status of being
in the bottom 20% drives people to spend money on things that will give them the appearance
of status, because just to hold your head up, because one of the quotes that I found
early on was men, sick, men and women, do not desire to be rich.
They want to be richer than other men and that people are satisfied with their lot.
If they feel it is fair in comparison with their reference group and that could be the
people in their neighborhood, it could be people in their profession.
So the level of unfairness is a big driver and it continues to be a driver of consumption
of the wrong things.
And also, if you don't have public transportation and the only place you can get to is the
Jiffy Mart, the system is rigged against us.
And I think in the period of your money, I wrote your money or life on an IBM 286, like
a really early pin drive.
And so back when we wrote the book and when we experienced, had the experience that led
us to the book, there was no internet.
There was no cell phone.
We were addressing consumerism in an environment where there was still a great deal of choice
and the wealth gap was not like it is today.
So the bottom 20%, yeah, you can learn something from the book, but you may not even have time
to read it.
And then I realized that the top 20% don't care.
They can waste money and it doesn't matter.
So I would always say that we're this middle 60%.
That's who we're addressing and helping people in that demographic to break the spell of
the consumer society and to reauthorize themselves in their own lives.
I used to say I'm a green libertarian.
It's really about personal responsibility, but it's not like we're going to make problems
for you and then you individuals can solve the problems that the wealthy or the industrial
system has created, but it is grabbing your situation by the horns.
And this idea of money is life energy and then we do a calculation and we had people
calculate what are their trading an hour of their life for.
And they never think about this.
It's not just your nominal salary, but it's all the extra expenses of your job, all your
commuting, etc.
Of course, now we're not commuting as much, but there's expenses to be able to work and
then there's extra time that you spend.
It's so interesting to talk about this at this time when people are not going back to
the workplace.
But anyway, the calculation was for people to see that the cost in time and money of
having a job reduces their hourly wage to a real hourly wage that is often a third to
a quarter of your nominal wage.
And so once you see that, you start to realize that you're saving your life by being frugal
and conscious rather than you're rewarding yourself for hard work by being a consumer.
And that transformation is sort of the biggest thing.
And so I think there is an aspect to this whole system where if you can wake up to the
game is not worth the candle, to me, that's the linchpin.
And then the other thing, the other question we have people ask, because we say all your
expenses translate them into hours.
So you see what it's costing you in the flesh of your life, you know, the new boat boots
that you've got, you know, for $120.
If you realize that your real hourly wage is $10 an hour, that's 12 hours of your life.
And once you see that, you're defending yourself against a system that is trying to pull you
into it.
Is that because when you translate your life energy, your consumptive choices into life
energy, that all of a sudden that dollar sign or those little digits or those little pieces
of paper have an emotional attachment to them suddenly in your brain instead of just a digit,
which is why Las Vegas makes these nice little color chips worth $500 or $100 because we
have no like emotional attachment to what that is.
Is that what you tried to do?
And that's how it helps people realize, oh my gosh, do I really want to spend 36 hours
of my work on this thing that's not going to give me that much happiness or fulfillment?
We're trying to give people, if you will, an emotional attachment to their lives.
It's sort of, we're sort of reduced to a nub of nothing.
Like I am not worth anything unless I have this toothpaste, those boots, you know, our
self-worth in this society doesn't really come from our work because for most people,
not all people, not all people, you know, there's a lot of people who have tremendous
pride in their capacities and their integrity in their work and stuff like that.
My life would be happier if I had these things.
And so it's basically, it also reassigns happiness, you know, so that I'm not doing
anything to people, we're just giving them a system of analysis.
It's like a whole system, you know, like just track your money and then ask yourself the
question, is the money I'm spending bringing me happiness in commensurate with the life
energy I invested, it's all in service to liberation from the thrall of consumerism.
It's like waking up, that's been, that's the spiritual purpose.
And then the material purpose of the book was to lower consumption in North America
and consequently the world to stop the machine.
Well, you might be able to infer why I was so interested to talk with you because this
podcast is called The Great Simplification and you and I, you currently, me historically
were on the board of Post-Carbon Institute where we're looking at post-carbon growth
as sort of economy transition and I believe that we have kicked the can for two generations
at least and there's a financial, economic, material bill coming due and that we are,
as a culture, probably going to have to do with 30% less across the board in the coming
decade eventually not going to be able to issue credit in this amount to continue to
play this expanding game of musical chairs.
So I think we're going to have to look around in your community in Washington where I live
here in Wisconsin, Minnesota, everyone's going to on average have 30% less, give or take.
That's by the way, exactly the number from 1929 to 1934 is how much our GDP dropped in
the United States.
I think something like that is coming again and one of the reasons for this podcast is
we're going to have to figure out ways as individuals and as a culture to navigate that
and so I think some of the recommendations you had 30 years ago and today will apply because
most of our culture is, I mean, we are richer than kings and queens of old and our material
throughput, but we're not happier and a lot of people that have a lot of wealth and believe
me, I know this because I used to manage money for high net worth families are miserable.
Not all of them, but this is at the key is how do we individually move outside of the
consumer culture, the super organism, the marketing driven media that says you suck,
but if you buy this product, you'll be better.
I mean, what are like two or three of the core tenets that you wrote in your book and
you still espouse that would be applicable to this culture wide transition, if you will.
Yeah.
One of the reasons that I updated your Money Your Life in 2018 was to be able to challenge
the conflating of money with wealth.
Wealth comes from the same source as well-being and I'm sure you're familiar with the idea
of multiple forms of wealth, your skills and capacities.
If you are constrained financially and you have a spirit of adventure, which is one important
thing, rather than going like I'm a victim, which you are, you're a victim of a system
that does not really take your well-being to heart, but you just develop a ferocity,
like they're not going to get me, I'm going to figure this out and so I have found that
living in a limited income forced me to be more competent and I learned all sorts of
things that I wouldn't have as the daughter of a doctor.
I built a motorcycle from a box of parts, I rebuilt the engine in my Toyota Land Cruiser.
I've learned to grow a garden and build and I love my competencies.
I'm not arrogant like ha ha ha because you have to keep updating things, but I used to
say don't throw money at it, throw competency at it, so your competencies and also your
networks.
One of the dynamics of the consumer culture is every time they can create, break a bond
between humans, they can insert a product, like a divorce equals two refrigerators and
two stoves and two houses.
The bonds of the human community, which is our essential wealth, it's not just family,
but it's place, it's not just humans, it's the trees, that's wealth.
And your emotional maturity, the work that you do, the inner work you do is wealth because
you have a sovereignty, a sort of emotional and intellectual sovereignty that extricates
you from what I would say is a bamboozle.
So your relational capacities, your capacity to not fly off the handle when somebody upsets
you.
These are all forms of wealth.
It's like the old Siddhartha, they shouldn't have let us read Siddhartha when we were in
high school because I can think, I can wait and I can fast.
Those were his three powers.
So if we can think and we can wait and we can fast as in do without for a period of time.
And doing without for a period of time is not just your networks and your capacities,
but it's also your prudence.
I mean, I'm sort of overly prudent, so I have a shed full of tools and all the nails
that I pulled out if they're not rusty, I have beans and rice.
I could live for a month without leaving my house and even I have enough wood to run my
wood stove, which they don't like you to do anymore.
So the Mormons ask their members to store food.
And so not living on current income, but always stashing a bit, whether you stashed
it in money, like dollars and cents, whether you stashed it in the market, whether you
stashed it under your mattress, whether you stashed it in things, these are all competencies.
These are all forms of wealth.
And I would hope, and I'm not sure I'm really stepping up to this, but I would hope that
people will learn this.
And I think it's like you and I are part of a conversation about where the trucker's
wrong, when we're talking about the truckers in Ottawa, what was right about it, what was
wrong about it?
Were they like January 6th, were they like Black Lives Matter, were they like XR?
How do you interpret this?
But some of the stories coming out of that experience were stories of people around
campfires, people having potlucks, people helping and supporting one another.
Just like with Occupy Wall Street, it was like a blossoming of an experience that humans
long for, which is this giving and receiving, mutuality, reciprocity, it's just being part
of something that has your best interest at heart and recognizes you as part of it.
So I have a lot of thoughts that came to mind based on that.
First is that in high school in Wisconsin, Vicki, we did not read Siddhartha, FYI.
Did you read Thoreau?
I read Thoreau, but I don't think that was assigned by the high school.
So H. L. Menken once famously said that to be wealthier, to be rich is any income that
is at least $100 more than the income of your wife's sister's husband, which is kind of
a funny way of saying that we compare ourselves to others and how much of our wanting and
feeling of lack is because we're comparing ourselves to the wrong demographic or surrounding
ourselves by people who are living by a different system of values.
And to be honest, in the age of energy surplus, massive energy surplus, our values are kind
of defined by how we make our living.
And so that's why I think your ideas are so important is one of the antidotes that you
suggest is changing your group of people that you hang around with.
And part two question is did the millions of readers and what happened after Oprah and
the movement that you built, did people then find others who were trying for this financial
independence, retire early, find meaning in other things, and then that give them an impetus
and a shot in the arm and some motivation because they were surrounded by other people
that were searching the same thing.
Yeah, that was true back then. And very much it was people who already valued frugality,
people who already wanted to do sort of the communitarian stuff, the back to the land.
You know, that was the demographic we were serving. Like when I traveled and gave talks
and I did a lot of that, audiences will always come up to me. People would always come up
to me and they would sort of like whisper like, you know, I'm really frugal too.
You know, it's sort of like I could see that people were trying to keep up with the Joneses
to kind of keep their public face respectable, but they really valued frugality because
at that time they were the sons and daughters of parents who lived through the depression.
What I see now in the fire community is you would not believe the number of blogs. There's
a million people on the financial independence reddit, a million.
How many of those people are self-motivated to just be more frugal?
Usually 1%. They're motivated to be frugal, but not for the reasons that I'm motivated.
They're motivated to be frugal because they have a character called retire early and it
actually I think is, you know, I think it diminishes their humanity because they're on such a race.
To retire early?
Yeah, and they're very influenced, a lot of them by stoicism, you know, like sort of a hyper
rationality and I've discovered like a subculture in the fire community that's really into social
responsibility and I adore them and I'm organizing over there, you know, like what could we do
together? You know, like we're, you know, like the fire community, I'll bet you because they're
savers that if the fire community organized, they could do shareholder activism. There's
possibly like a billion dollars in this community. If they decided to organize, they could influence.
I'm not sure they're really organizable because they're very individualistic, but you know,
it's, there's power there.
So here's a tough question.
Okay.
How much of the financial independence retire early formula is based on the markets and growth
continuing as it has and will be that apple cart will get upset if there is some sort of a
financial recalibration sort of thing?
Their theory, and I say they because that arm of this movement does not resonate with me, their
theory is that the market always goes up because they've lived through a period of time when the
market has and even with corrections, they've trained themselves to buy index funds and buy and
hold because it'll always go up. And they do, you know, the classic retirement, you know, a 4% or
3.5% withdrawal rate. And, you know, in good times, you know, in the markets going up, they're
just steadily buy, you know, their holdings increase when the market goes down, they decrease,
but that steady 3.5 to 4% is available because of the past.
And they believe that will continue for the next century or whatever.
I don't think, yeah, for me, I'm into deep adaptation. I'm just watching this system
teetering. This cannot last. We are so leveraged. And, you know, people don't understand that, that
no bugs on their windshields means that the planet is dying. They don't understand that the
plastics in the ocean, that there's more plastic than fish, means that the one of our great
sources, one of our great sinks of carbon, one of our great sources of food is dying. They don't
realize they don't identify with the coral dying. They just think, oh, maybe over in Cancun, I can
go see it. So, you know, and I don't mean they, they, they, because I have an American mind, you
know, I'm subject to it too. But it's not a tough question for me. I've thought about this. I
know, I think my whole investment strategy, you know, yes, you know, one of the conversations in
the fire community is, you know what, there's no social responsibility in this. We're just
capitalists, you know, we're, and we're living on passive income. Is it correct to buy up property
and flip it? You know, is it correct to be a landlord? Is it correct to buy index funds? What
the hell can we invest in that can throw off a passive income? So that question is very alive.
Well, here's, here's a part two to that. This is my worry. And by the way, irrespective of what they
do with their money or if they buy index funds or whatever, a core part of what you're trying to do
is what I'm trying to do with my students is advise waking up to our reality and making behavior
change. And when you do that, you will find that most of the best things in life don't cost money
or energy once your basic needs are met. And I have to acknowledge, and you're well aware that for a
lot of people in our country and around the world, basic needs are not met. But to start having a
conversation of what is wealth to you and income, and a lot of my students, that is probably the most
important thing they learn. But getting back to the tough question, I think as our world becomes
more obviously fractured and more obvious thunderheads on the horizon for dystopian events, that
paradoxically, because our culture has parsed all of the benefits of our ancestral tribal life
into one denominator, the dollar or the euro or the renminbi, that as these stresses become more
obvious, people will try to amass more dollars as an option on the future, because dollars can be
immediately transferred into something else. And so if someone has a million dollars, they'll want a
million and a half for more security. If someone has 10 million, they'll want 15 million. If someone
has 10 grand, they'll want 50 grand or whatever it is. So I'm wondering what you think, as society
gets more dicey, and some of the things that you and I and our colleagues have been warning about and
discussing become more widely known, won't there paradoxically be a rush to make more dollars to
protect against what's coming? Yes. And I noticed that in myself, I, you know, I trained myself to
hoard, and I'm not done hoarding. Me too, to my girlfriend's chagrin, but go on. Yeah, exactly. But
in part, I believe two things. Number one is the social safety net is so shattered, that money is
going to be the only way you see yourself through to the end. This is a very big concern, because I'm
76. I'm like Hale and Hardy, but I am sure that that's not going to last. I don't know how long it
lasts. I hope it lasts 10, 15 years. But there'll come a point when my physicality and my intellect
can no longer operate in such a way that I can care for myself. And so that's what the retirement
savings are for. And if you don't have a system that you can rely on, that if you have a system that
throws you into poverty, if you have a system that says you're on your own, so it's not just the fear
of a diminished, that's not just the hoarding from fear of the future, it's sort of the reasonable
hoarding, realizing that the social safety net is not working, and it's working less and less. I just
feel like, you know, it's like the system that we're in is expressing a lack of care for the
multitudes who are falling off the bottom. So I think it's both things. And I think we're in a fear
state. I've been most impressed with the news that's coming out of Ukraine, that the people are
determinately not falling into fear. These are the reports that I get. So learning to be present to
your fear and learning that fear is maybe an ancient and correct response to threat, but it is to let
that disable you so that you have none of your other faculties are available to you. I think that's
that's where the problem comes in. I have a friend, Mati Swakarnagal, who did the ecological footprint,
you know, and I have been talking for years about like, we've just been waiting for this balloon to
burst. And I think that one of the reasons it hasn't burst is because we're so leveraged. It should
have burst a long time ago, but we're using debt to keep the game going.
Yep, we did it in 2009. And again, in 2020, and how many more options are there down the road?
Another thing I've seen in the fire community, which just astonished me is that as interest rates
were super low, where they realized they could get a seven to 10 to 14% return in the market, a lot of
people just borrowed at 1% or 2% and invested. I mean, they just borrowed to invest.
Including state pension funds did the same. But go on.
What I have done with my surplus is I have stored it in things. I've stored it in my house that I
own. I stored it in a rental house that I own. I'm now I store it in a sprinter camper. You know, I
have stored it in things that are pro survival. I've stored it in my community. I do a lot of
community lending. I am storing it in places that will create a benefit now and in the future, a
non monetary benefit now in the future.
Well, that was my question is if our social safety net is fraying, paradoxically, the impulse to
maximize your financial hoarding would be better off by hoarding relationships and well, hoarding
or building them in your community. So one of the things that you also, in addition to your book,
you've done many things, you explored a hyper local and relational eating, where you ate things
only within a 10 mile radius of your house for something like 30 days. What was that? Like what
were the biggest challenges? What I mean, I've done, I mean, we grow a lot of our own food, but
there's no way I've ever done that. So what were the benefits? What did you learn? What were the
challenges? Do you think that's kind of like lifting weights? You build your muscles eating
locally, you're getting ahead of the curve on some of the things we're talking about?
It really came out of my work with the transition would be inspired by the transition
to movement. And we had a speaker who's a farmer. And I asked her to do a calculation, because
we're we're dependent on a on a bridge that's over a huge chasm. And fairies, I live on an
island. So I said, like the bridge goes down, the fairies stop running. You know, could the people
who live here eat from here? And, and what she said, she did a calculation, blah, blah. And what
she said is yet probably we we might be able to do it for two weeks in August. And so that to me
was like this like gasp, you know, like, Oh, my God, we are so fragile here, we are so fragile, and
nobody knows it. So my my 10 mile diet also came from a friend of mine who's a farmer, and she was
watching a more Morgan Spurlock, you know, 30 day experiments. And so she wanted to see she wanted to
find somebody who was willing to just be fed by her, you know, for 30 days, you know, just do the
experiment. So those two things combined, I was primed to do the experiment. And then I realized
that there's plenty of things I couldn't live, you know, she couldn't provide that I might want. And so I
gave myself four exotics, foods from afar, I couldn't live without, which is oil, salt, caffeine, and
lemons. And but I, you know, now I'm planning to grow a Meyer lemon. So that might be handled if I can
be successful. And I live by the ocean. And so I've learned how to make salt from the ocean. So but I
gave myself exotics. And then I wanted to because I'm a meat eater, I found people who could source
meat within 10, you know, so I said this 10 mile radius was
defined by perpetual fish there if you wanted it, but it's not 10 mile. Oh, what aren't you on the
ocean? I might have been able to fish off the pier and Langley, but 10 miles is not a very, so
basically, but the so it was simply in service to discovering what it would take for us to be food
resilient. It was an experiment in service to something. And then I in doing so, I realized that
local food is not a local food system, that we don't have a local food system that that is broken.
We have a farmers market, but the farmers market, what we have now cannot feed us. And part of it, so
now I'm working with a food resiliency group that is working to change the regulations. I mean, I
have stories galore about what the regulatory environment developed in service to the people had
no relationship with their food, you know, you have to be able to go to the market and be able to
trust the food you get. And so all of the regulations are in service to the industrial system.
Plus, the industrial system has one of the biggest lobbies. So doing scale appropriate
regulations, getting even people who raise, you know, pastured beef here, pastured hogs, pastured
chickens, you know, the chickens we can do, they cannot process their own meat, it has to go to
USDA facility. Same here. Even so, they have to sell it by the quarter of an animal. And I cannot
eat a quarter of a hog in two years, you know, five years. And so they can't sell cuts of meat,
they can't sell homemade cheese, they can't sell anything that's made in their kitchen. So the
things that we need to do to make food systems more resilient and more reliant on local things are
not advocated because of the system above it. So we can't even if we wanted to do some of these
things, there are giant speed bumps in the way, yes?
Not only that, but we have really honestly been trained to fear our neighbors. We've been trained
to fear anything other than that which is produced by the industrial system. If it's a
widget that comes from Amazon, we can trust it. If somebody has a lathe, if our neighbor has a
lathe and they can turn something, you know, that, you know, like a farmer has so many skills, but
we no longer trust and respect that. My opinion is that any producer, local producer, cannot
poison his neighbors because he would be out of business. You know, the care that's taken in
growing and producing the food is done out of, you know, real love and integrity pretty much,
you know, not everybody all the time. And so I think we should be able to have, hold harmless
clauses, we should be able to buy from our neighbors. You know, just like they have egg
stands out and you buy the eggs, that's permitted.
There's so many aspects of our human repertoire like shame and love and pride and trust that have
atrophied. Why? Because we're so rich as metaphorically as a nation that we can just live
in our house and order stuff. Like you said, the widgets from Amazon. And so in order to feel
shame, I have to be part of a group where I have daily interactions with them. In order to have
trust, I have to have daily interactions with my neighbor and sharing eggs and things like that.
So it's our lack of social interactions that's caused a lot of these dynamics to atrophy. How
can we change that? Is there things in your book and your work that how can we start first with
rebuilding social connection and community? Because I think we're going to need that in spades
coming soon.
I think participation, you know, it's like if you join a movement, if you volunteer for the food
bank, if you, you know, whether it's volunteering or, you know, taking local positions every time
you're part of a group or you're accountable, that builds social capital. And so participation is
super important. Whether, you know, whether it's with indivisible or even if it's with the
truckers. I mean, I'm not like there's no political signature on this. The participation with other
people, barbecues, you know, street dances. That's really how I have been accepted in my
community. I used to say, I may be the village idiot, but I'm their village idiot. You know,
it's like I am part of how other people define the community is like, Oh, Vicki's part of us. You
know, so being, and I, you know, really the values on the left are very, you know, unless you go to
the extreme left, you know, they're sort of like the liberal values are very individualistic. But
you go to the extremes and people understand the communitarian values. We have a buy nothing
group. And I tell you, I bonded with all the people in that group, you know, I put little things
out on my porch, you know, and it's like everybody's like, Oh, thank you, thank you. You know, it's,
it's an amazing community. Just today, I borrowed a snow shovel from my neighbor and she thanked me. So
I think there has to be an intention. And there's an embarrassment because we're trained that we
have to have everything in our own house. If we ask for things, it's like I used to, we used to have
these big potlucks with transition would be and we would have a period of time when people did
offers and asks. And we also had a local currency. And I realized that asking is how the machine of
community starts, you can't all sit in your home and say, I have a lot to give, but nobody will
take it. You have to, you know, vulnerability, need shared, allowing your neighbors to give to
you, allowing and appreciating what you've been given. These are all the ways traditionally,
societies, you know, we talk about money as like a, you know, we think of it as just a substitute
for barter. But in intact societies, it wasn't exactly barter. It was like to be obligated. It's
a funny thing to be obligated to other people is a way in which you are allowing yourself to become
part of a community to say, I have no obligations to other people. I am self sufficient actually is
not allowing others to contribute to you. And that's extremely hard for an individualistic
American. So for the people listening to this, that might be in Topeka, Kansas, or a town in
California, or in Massachusetts, who kind of understand the logic behind the energy, debt,
technology, great simplification that we discuss, but are really hungry to start these
conversations and local food or developing discussion groups in their community. You've been
trying and doing this for a long time. What sort of advice would you have to someone listening?
That wants to broaden the social capital in their community on these issues? How would you start?
You know, I think there's so much risk in asking somebody to join you in something. There's it's
like a big risk because you could be told no, or that's a stupid idea. And so I think there's a
part of it to just accept that it's a risk and you might get to know. That's what I notice in
myself that every time I organize anything, there's always a risk of making a fool of myself, of
losing credibility, of being rejected, and of reputational, you know, impoverishment. There's
so many risks anymore in changing the valence of social connection. And so when we were doing the
conversation cafes, I was like for three years every week, I would show up in a cafe, and I would
just like put up a little tent, you know, conversation cafe, join me. You know, topic for
today is love. And it's just, you know, and you're sitting there and you feel like an idiot, and
then two people show up, and you go like, okay, fine, fine, and then six people show up, or maybe
nobody shows up. It's, I think it's a skill anybody can develop. I'm a pretty social person, so
it's easier for me. And the thing is with Facebook, you know, and I've gone off Facebook and
serviced to like thinking more deeply about things. And I miss it a bit. But I think you
gain credibility through, you know, not only cat pictures, but, but you know, through these by
nothing groups, or through being a good participant in communities that are already formed. Now it's
Facebook, so it's not face to face. But I have Facebook friends, especially in these last two
years with the pandemic, who've just been, we've all been so affirming with each other that when
we see each other, the relationship is deepened. You know, Nate, it's a, it's a difficult, it's
not a formulaic question, because I think it takes risk.
I've failed trying that here many times in my county. I've got a podcast, people around the
world listen to it, which is different than getting people in my own community to listen and to
share and to participate because there's wildly different assumptions about the future. You know,
George Jetson technology, colonized outer space, economic growth for centuries are the dominant
narrative. So the narrative that you and I ascribe to is becoming more accepted because we're
seeing it unfold in real time, but it's still cognitively quite a large barrier between
people's actual behaviors and what they'll talk about and discuss. So one of the other things
that you've written about, you call it a hero's journey, which is finding one's purpose in life.
So what, what is it? How do people do it? And how does the hero's journey fit into someone
listening to this program?
Yeah, so for me, it's not the hero's journey in general. That is a metaphor that I have used in
the fire community to talk to people about that there is life after financial independence.
Retire early. You know, there's light, you retire early and you have a bigger problem, which is that
you have to design your whole life. You know, there's no, you know, bus you have to get. There's no
boss you have to please. There's no, you know, cafeteria where you get your lunch every day.
You have to do the whole thing. So I use that metaphor for talking about what it, what it's
like to be responsible for filling your time in a way that gives you a feeling of happiness and
also a feeling of purpose. And so I said, you know, like the, like, you know, retiring early is
like just the first quarter of a journey of the journey. And then I've noticed that the next
quarter of the journey you get out and, you know, you're disoriented. What I noticed people do is
they spend time with family, they go on the road, they take up an instrument, if that's what you
know, or learn a language, you know, the things that they've delayed that they thought would
bring them happiness, but they didn't have any time. And then I think, you know, they start to
discover that they have something that other people admire. And so I've seen a lot of people
coaching others. When I wrote your money or life and I looked at the fire community, they were
like over a thousand blogs, you know, there were maybe 50 that were popular. But people start a
blog, you know, I'm going to help people. And then I see that there's sort of an awareness that
grows that there are, you know, bigger problems. So it's, you could just say that the next quarter,
the third quarter is like community service, you know, it's participating in movements,
participating in community service, you know, trying to help out solve the problems of the
world. And then I think the fourth quadrant, and I think I'm there mostly, is, is sort of a
systems thinking the realization that there's a paradigm that's off, and it's being willing to
tolerate the complexity and the confusion of having a mind and life that were formed in a
paradigm that is no longer appropriate to our condition. And so I think it's quite a bit of
spiritual journey. It's like, it's like a remaking of the assumptions of your life, your
identity, your beliefs, your circles, your, your loneliness, you know, because that is not
where everybody is. So that's what I used the hero's journey to talk about, about what is,
you know, life designed with a world in mind, you know, how do you design a life in a bigger
context than financial retirement early? Yeah, I mean, that's what I'm trying to tell people now,
instead of what to do, it's how to be, how to be alive, how to be a human during these times.
And I'm fully in that fourth quadrant, I don't have financial independence, or those other
quadrants, but I'm in that paradigm shift that, that our system is on fumes, and we're going to
have to live differently. What kind of advice would you give to teenagers, to young people who
are putting together the knowledge and awareness of this whole great simplification resource
limits, our social and environmental circumstances? Yeah, so it sounds weird coming from a boomer,
but I would say to the degree possible, waste no time blaming any, you know, the generations that
came before you, you know, just to the degree possible, just forgive us that we did our best
within a, within a set of expectations and rules that we accepted because every generation just
accepts the world that they're born into. And some of us like you and me, you know, have like worked
hard to, to address that, but we, you know, it's, it's rolled on, you know, and so that would be
one thing. The second thing I would say is, and I think young people understand that is to work
in groups, do not let yourself get isolated, whether it's, you know, Fridays for the future,
you know, inspired by Greta, whether it's a, you know, communal household, you know, it's like to
accept that the group is not a step down in status. The group is your pod for moving forward. And
don't necessarily, I mean, couple up if you, you know, and have kids if you want to, you know,
but, but don't be convinced that it's low status or to not have the things, you know, it sort of
looks like a big chip, you know, it sort of looks like a deprivation. Wait a second, I was supposed
to be better, but it's not. No, I mean, you're going to find new things. They're going to be
niches. That's the other thing is the dominant system always because it's so big, and it assumes
that it's persistent. It always has blind spots. You know, it always has places it cannot see. And
so there's always niches that are open. But anger and fear will diminish your capacity to see the
possibilities. And it may be that, you know, you settle in someplace that if you look at the climate
mass, you know, you can see where to settle. But you settle someplace with other people that's,
you know, that where you can grow some food, I mean, the, the sort of, now it's called permaculture
used to call it back to the land, or you may operate in cities or small cities, or you may,
you know, the kids who can't stand to inherit the farm because they want to go to the city, you
know, there's opportunities, even as things are crashing, there's opportunities. And whether it's,
it's apocryphal or not, I heard that Helen Keller said, life is either a great adventure or it's
nothing. So I have lived my life like a great adventure. And these are tough times. But it's
also what we talked about earlier about multiple forms of wealth. These are tough times. But you
know, the other thing to know is that humanity has gone through really tough times. This seems
like the biggest existential crisis that you could ever imagine, because it's planetary. And so,
but, but the old world has died to many generations. You know, the people at the end of the Roman Empire,
the people at the end of the Inca Empire, the Mayan Empire, it's not to reify struggle, you know,
and the kind of struggle that indigenous people went through. It's not to reify that and say, oh,
go and, you know, get yourself destroyed, and you'll be stronger, you know, whatever doesn't
kill you makes you stronger. It's not that it's to know that within you as a human part of your
birthright is this capacity, this amazing capacity to scan the horizon and pick a line and, and that
you think is going to lead you to something better. That and, and the very fact that humanity is here
at all means that we have a 10,000 year, at least history of exactly this of generation after
generation after generation, by hooker by crook, figuring this one out. So, you know, do not despair
of this, this time. It's tough. It's not right. It's terrible. It's horrible, grieve, cry, but be
undaunted. What do you care most about in the world, Vicki? Besides my cat. Besides my cat, my friends.
It's true. I care about my dogs quite a bit. But yeah, I mean,
no, no, I mean, I, I, I care about the community of life. I don't care about like, I care about the
specific dug for that are, you know, are stressed now and will be, I care about the individual
people and plants and animals a lot. But I care about the community of life. For me, I am part of
the community of life. And that, it's so comforting to me, as I belong here. I do, you know, because I'm
part of the community.
I understand. What are you most hopeful about in the coming decade or so?
You know, what I mean, it could be because I, it's my area of focus. But I think that relocalization, I
actually think, you know, if the, if the empire comes apart and may it happen without huge wars and all
that stuff. But you know, as the people are sorting themselves out by their politics, you know, people are
moving to Texas, people are moving to California, people are moving where their people are. So we're
already voting with our feet for a falling apart of this country. I would love to have it be graceful. I
actually think localization has a lot to offer in terms of all the things I talked about, networks,
competency, all the other forms of wealth. And where I live is as polarized as the country. We have a
naval air station up north. It's like a red, you know, red zone. And now I live in the blue zone. And we're
just going to have to figure it out.
Yeah, I, I do have hope as well on localization. And we're probably not going to choose to do that en masse, but
little examples of what you're doing, if they could scale, and we get a little bit ahead of the curve, I
think that is a positive development. So any other words of wisdom, advice or closing thoughts for our
listeners before you go to your youth climate change local meeting, Vicki?
It's sort of like what occurs to me, and this is unplanned. There was a spiritual teaching, I don't know
who offered it. But it's like love as much as you can from wherever you are. I think that love is the
lubricant. Love is the glue. Love is the practice. Love is the possibility. Love is the nature of, you
know, the spiritual gravity that holds us together. And there's so much fear and so much anger and so
much loss and so much grief and stuff like that. And so just, you know, to not forget love, I guess
would be the thing that occurs to me at the moment.
Vicki, so great to talk to you today and so great to talk with you too. We'll be in touch. I'm really
glad to know you.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the Great Simplification, please subscribe to us on your
favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com for more information on future
releases.
