Okay, Ukraine situation, I believe this has even in the best of cases shortened the runway
leading to the great simplification. Our society, for those who have followed my work,
has four pillars of subsidies that support our modern living standards and expectations
that are kind of hidden or at least not talked about. One is energy. We are subsidized by energy
like a fish in water and we don't even see its ubiquitousness. We are energy blind. Number two
is credit, freely available, low cost credit for pretty much anyone who's of credit worthiness,
nations, municipalities, etc. Number three is complexity. We have a six-continent supply chain
that has Byzantine complexity of little spark plugs and tiny components that we ship around the
world that we take for granted will always continue. And then the fourth pillar is trust
and peace generally. And it's my opinion that in the best outcome of what's happening in Ukraine
right now, those four things will become more recognized by the general public. And in the
worst case, those things will shrivel and get smaller, which has large implications. So what
I'd like to do now is just give a one or two minute overview of a bunch of different topics
related to the Ukraine situation. I think the best case outcome militarily and geopolitically,
and I'm not an expert on either of those things, but I have a lot of close friends
that are following this closely. I think the best case is Ukraine is going to be split like World War
Germany was into the East and West. There's a new stable military border between NATO and Russia,
and this begins Cold War 2.0. They'll probably demilitarize the entire country and then pull
back to the Eastern Oblasts, and there's some sort of natural détente that happens there.
But that is, on the surface, the best outcome. But there are all kinds of economic financial
and other externalities that would happen from that. It would change the world order as far as
geopolitical partners. We would probably start to use China more as a bridge to get fuel, energy,
commodities into the world economy via China instead of directly via Russia.
In that sense, it might not be a terrible blow to the global economy, but I think what it's going
to do is start choosing sides for the new multipolar society. It's possible Russia, China,
India are all vectors versus the West on how the economic system functions. Here's why this is so
important. Long-time followers of my story know that energy is fundamental to our economies.
A barrel of oil does around five years, labor potential of a human. We use 100 billion barrels
of coal oil and gas natural equivalent every year, so we get this subsidy of 500 billion
human workers that we create monetary markers for. The US has the world's reserve currency.
We benefit from this in your edge, which is the trade and commerce benefits from other
countries having to denominate their trade in our currency. There's this giant chest match and
paradigm shift that's happening behind the scenes right now because Russia is a very small economy
by measured by GDP, but their energy superpower by any metric. Russia produces around 11 million
barrels of oil a day, and they only use three and a half million. Russia produces 700 billion
cubic meters of gas every year, but only uses about half of that. Russia mines 800 million tons
of coal every year, but only uses 300. In contrast, Europe produces only three and a half million
barrels of oil every day, but they use almost five times that, over 15 million barrels.
They produce 230 billion cubic meters of gas every year, but they use 560 billion.
They use almost a billion tons of coal a year, and they produce only a half of that,
but they have the Euro, and they're trading partners with the United States, and they have
the military support of the United States. This is this giant inflection where we're trying to
put sanctions on a country that has some of the fundamental inputs that make the world economy
go round. I think we're going to find new partnerships and alliances and a possible new
Bretton Woods agreement, Bretton Woods III, because how can the West still try to
financially crush Russia when Russia has its own energy independence that many of these other
countries don't have? I think it's a real, real scary issue. Here's the scariest issue of all,
of course. There is a chance that this escalates. The best case is that it's split Ukraine into two
pieces, and NATO and Russia are at some sort of detente. I think we have a month or longer before
that happens, and everyone in the world has an opinion about what's happening in Ukraine and Russia,
and I'm no different. I'm going to tell you why I've become a little humble on that in a second,
but let's talk about the worst case. Some of my friends who are very much in the know
are telling me there's a one in five to one in three chance of nuclear war right now.
The reason is that if they engage NATO or the United States, there is no off-ramp then,
because what ends up happening is this network effect of higher-level escalations. Where will
the adult in the room or the relief valve happen if we start to engage, like if we have planes
going via Poland or if some Americans get killed or something like that? Who will stop the
escalation there? You should go back and listen to the podcast I did with Chuck Watson. We talked
about the concept of risk homeostasis, which is that if you perform a risk several times that
has a one in ten chance of happening and it never happens, you behaviorally go in the opposite
direction because your mind thinks you're taking less risk than you actually are. There have been
estimates that showed during the Cold War there was a 70% chance of a nuclear war. Well, there was
a 0% actual outcome of nuclear war, so we overestimate how we underestimate the risk of a nuclear
exchange because it's never happened before. I think there's a complacency in our culture.
Maybe it's because we watch all these movies on Netflix and at the last minute crisis is averted
and we just assume that nothing so horrible could happen, but where are the peace activists?
Where are people in the streets saying no nuclear war? It's like people are so complacent about
this because it is civilization ending. If there is a tactical nuke is one thing where there would
be damage and casualties and it would be horrific, but strategic nukes would, we might not die
from radiation, but the complexity risks of the global system would unravel very quickly.
This is something I have perpetually worried about and I think in the phase shift away from
economic growth, a big war is an eminent possibility given our species history and I am not an expert
on this. I just think we need to be talking about this and downplaying the rhetoric on what's
happening. You see Sean Hannity just like being all belligerent, we should take out this, take
out that. I think these people haven't a clue of the wider boundary risks. I think that's a big
risk. Let me talk about humility for a second. I was in California last week for some meetings
and I was fortunate to sit in on some discussions with people very close to military and geopolitical
intelligence on this stuff. I realized I'm a smart guy, I have a PhD, I have a podcast talking to
systems leaders around the world on all these topics. I don't know shit about nuclear situation
or what's going on and I think there's so many people that have gotten into this armchair
quarterback situation where they read a few expert blogs and they get some tweets and watch
CNN or Fox and now they have an opinion on Ukraine and Russia. I was humbled by how little I know
on what's going on. I don't want to get into details, but Russia did this.
It might have been Ukraine that did that. I think we are being very quickly persuaded
that Russia and Putin are the only evil in the world. I'm sure they are evil in many ways,
but they're not the reason that we consume 21 million barrels a day of oil or that Europe
consumes 15 million barrels a day of oil. In any case, I know what I know and I know that I
don't know what's going on on the ground in Ukraine and why should I. What I do know is the
context of how finance is this giant leviathan of claims on the physical world and we are growing
our financial claims while our physical claims are declining in quality and quantity and that delta,
the gap between the two is widening by the year and we're papering it over with more claims
and now there's geopolitics thrown into the mix. What I see is the possibility of a new
financial, economic, multipolar, both economic and geopolitical regime which changes everything.
It accelerates the timeline of the risks that I'm talking about on this podcast
and I think China very likely could become a bridge by which Russia's products end up on the
world stage. I think we also at some point are at another inflection point of 2008-2009
financial crisis, 2020 COVID financial crisis where all of a sudden the amount of economic needs
are greater than the income stream which is GDP needed to support them and so we have to print
more money and offset what's happening with financial guarantees, artificially low interest
rates, bazooka actions by the central banks and at some point this decade I fear and expect
that we will go from a too big to fail situation like AIG and some other financial firms in 2009
to a too big to save situation that a central bank will print too much and the bond markets
will call their bluff and we have currency reform or some sort of a musical chair situation
that our financial system can no longer kick the can on and that is the fundamental logic of
the great simplification we're going to have a smaller economy as the financial
world and its claims recalibrate to the underlying physical world and this is
you know one of the the best energy sources is conservation which is using less but in this
situation using less tightening our belts would directly reduce the income stream to pay back
our debts which is GDP so conservation is what we should be doing but in doing that we also
unless it's managed and planned we also cascade the financial system down which then crimps complexity
and all kinds of other things a word about Europe I think this fundamentally changes Europe the
United States still produces 85 percent of our own energy at least for now Europe is far less
Germany in particular gets 50 percent of its coal 55 percent of its gas and 35 percent of its oil
from Russia so no wonder Germany is not going to put direct sanctions on and stop their imports
their their economy would implode so I think this this entire war has changed not only the
geopolitical the financial and the economic game board but also the climate and the energy game
boards first of all and energy especially in Europe I think the energy wind or the energy
transition movement in Germany is now going to go more towards energy security if they have extra
ten billion dollars are they going to build more wind turbines and solar panels are they going to
be more concerned about energy security not only the flick of a switch that natural gas can give us
to meet the daily demand fluctuations that solar and wind cannot but also the the complex
supply chains needed to construct these rebuildable technologies I also think credit is going to be
an increasing limiter and the knee jerk reaction for people that don't follow this closely is oh
my gosh this country Russia produces all this energy we should do our own energy like solar and wind
well oil can't the the properties that we use oil and gasoline for can't easily be
swapped out with solar and wind so I think this changes the renewable discussion I also think
it changes the climate situation because this war could do more for climate than any activism over
the last 50 years at least in the moderate to worst cases this is going to be a huge carbon tax
for Europe and indirectly the world and I think that's going to change our emissions
it probably additionally cemented a fourth quarter 2019 as global peak oil
so there's a there's a lot's going on here that's it for a short off-the-cuff update
let's all root for the best case outcome but even that is going to have repercussions for our lives
if there's a one in five chance of nuclear war in the coming six months I'm going to now go do what
every normal human would do in that situation I'm going to go watch college basketball
and try to get some relaxation meditation play with my dogs be out in nature this weekend
and I hope you're all doing well in your corner of the world and to be continued on this channel
thank you
