Oh, how do I introduce my next guest? Let me count the ways.
Bill Reese is a professor emeritus at the University of British Columbia. He was the
former director of the School of Community and Regional Planning at UBC. He is the originator
of the ecological footprint concept and the co-developer of the method. He is a systems
ecologist long known in circles of scientists talking about global ecological overshoot
of the human endeavor. He is very involved in conversations about sustainable socio-economic
development of our culture and the challenges that we face as a global human species in
the 21st century. This is a rapid fire conversation. Bill is older than me but has much more energy
and I did all I could do to keep up with him. I think many of you will take away some core
insights of our planetary situation from this conversation with Professor Bill Reese.
Greetings, Bill. How do you do, Nate? Good to see you again.
Good to see you again. I was thinking about when preparing for this
when I first met you in person. Do you remember? I have a clue. It was in 2005,
six, seven-ish at an ecological economics conference in Burlington, Vermont.
And I followed you around. You had a line of ecologist groupies that were trying to get your
attention and I patiently waited my turn to shake your hand. You had a much better memory
than an old guy like me, Nate. So let's just start at the very basics. You were an ecologist.
What is an ecologist and how did you start thinking when you were a young man that,
hey, I want to be an ecologist? Well, an ecologist is someone who studies the
relationships between living organisms and their natural environment, which includes
other living organisms. So it's really the study of the ecological niche, the way in which
organisms fit into the biophysical and biological systems of which they are apart.
Now, the interesting thing is that humans don't consider themselves as part of ecosystems.
So we have this odd situation where ecologists scarcely ever study human beings.
The whole idea of humans in relation to environment has been given over to economists
who know absolutely nothing about ecology. In fact, I once wrote a paper in which I
argued that economists really ought to be ecologists and vice versa. But it's never
gone anywhere. We still have that separation of silos so that ecologists don't study humans
generally speaking. I have a really long story about that and I won't get into it.
Let me ask a quick question there. So they teach human evolution in college,
but they don't teach about what that means for our current situation. So it's kind of like
an anesthetized version of human evolution. Are you saying the same thing happens in ecology
that we teach about trophic pyramids and frogs and ecosystems, but they don't include the human in
that? Well, not in the way that we really ought to. Humans are always noticed as being at the top
of the food chain and so on. So when we look at food chains or energy pyramids, that sort of thing,
people are in there, but there's no real discussion of the implications or what that means.
So for example, if you look really at energy and material flows through ecosystems today,
human beings are the single largest consumer and producer and predator and carnivore predator
and herbivorous species in every single major ecosystem type on the planet. Now think about that.
Have you ever learned anywhere that human beings are the primary species in every single ecosystem
on the planet? Ecologists don't really teach that. They may think about it themselves,
but it's not part of any curriculum anywhere that I'm aware of. So here we have a very odd
situation in our culture. On the one hand, economics, which really ought to be human ecology,
because it's the study of how humans acquire and allocate and distribute resources, which is a
fundamentally ecological question, but it pays no attention whatsoever to the actual ecosystems
with which the economy interacts in the real world. Ecologists who study primarily non-human
species don't really interface in any significant way with economists. So in some respects,
neither economists nor mainstream plant and animal ecologists have anything useful to say about the
human conundrum right now, because one doesn't study the relationship between humans and the
biophysical environment. The other tends to study only non-human species and ignores the
economic implications. When I was, look, I want to go back to my early years. I was extremely
fortunate in having been able to grow up in my youth part-time on my grandparents' farm in
southern Ontario. And it was during that experience of being a farm hand, basically,
along with several other cousins that I recognized, and this is really curious for a 10-year-old, I
suppose, that, you know, the old expression, we are what we eat. So one afternoon, literally just
afternoon, we were sitting in my grandmother's country porch, a huge meal, because we'd all come
in 14 of us from the fields. And we're getting basically everything we had grown up until then,
June. So we're getting our first lettuces and tomatoes and so on and so forth. And it hit me
that everything on my plate, I had actually had some hand in growing. Now I'm a 10-year-old,
and suddenly it was if somebody had pulled the chair out from under me, I just felt,
I felt like I was in freefall in an elevator, and realized how profoundly connected to earth
that I was. We are what we eat. And to get what we eat, we have to expend energy and work and labor,
and here it was on my plate, and I was consuming it directly. It was a general purpose farm. We had
a market garden, 23 dairy cattle, an apple orchard. We were essentially self-sufficient. And it struck
me even then that this was a rare and privileged position to be in, because most of my city friends
hadn't a clue about any of that, that they're connected to nature in any way. So at 10, your
path diverged from being an investment banker or a tech developer to being an ecologist.
Well, that was the first, I suppose, insight into the human ecological reality that we are
of the earth. So it was 10 years later, I was from a working-class family, but I won a scholarship
to university, and suddenly I had to make a decision, what should I study? And I always
liked science. I did very well in sciences. And this whole experience that I just described on the
farm came rushing back to me, and it said, you've really got to learn more about this. You've got
to become an ecologist. So I wanted to be a human ecologist, and this is where I first encountered
this siloed nature of our educational system. You couldn't be a human ecologist at that time,
unless you studied geography or a weird branch of human ecology in sociology, which I don't want
to get into criticizing the sociologists or the geographers. But what they were calling human
ecology was nothing to do with what I thought of as ecology is the biophysical relationships between
organisms and their systems, the whole idea of the thermodynamics of energy and material flows
and relationships defined by those kinds of things. So I was told over and over again, well, we don't
do human ecology. There is no course on human ecology in a biology department. So I had to
settle to become an animal ecologist. My PhD was actually on bird population and competitive ecology.
And after I graduated, I sought a job as a human ecologist. No university would entertain
that position. And I mean, I did dozens throughout the United States and Canada.
I did get job offers from three universities, provided that I got abandoned in this human
stuff and did my standard bird or small mammal ecology. And I was astounded, astonished. I finally
got a job, but it was not an ecology at all. I taught in a school of community and regional planning
for the whole of my academic career, because it was the only place at the time we're going back
to the 1970s now, where I could actually apply what I learned in ecology to human beings freely
without being hamstrung by the departmental this that or whatever over publications and what not
in ecology per se. So I published an enormous amount, but it's not in the standard ecological
journals at all. So why was that the case then? And you and I both know that that is still the
case now. Why do you think that is? Well, there's a whole number of reasons, but the simplest starting
point is something called human exceptionalism. There's a kind of philosophical underpinning to
the whole of, I suppose, mainstream techno industrial society. It goes way, way back several
hundred years, but flourished in the, I suppose, the Enlightenment and scientific revolution
that kept humans separate from nature. We are not like the other species. We are in denial of
our animal nature. And so this isolation or separation of humans from the rest of the nature
is why ecologists don't study human beings and economists in setting up the economy
that don't consider it as part of the natural environment. Look at the horrible situation
we're in here. Another problem about human beings we can talk about later, something called a social
construction of reality. And that is we develop mental models of how things are. And that's all
they are mental models based on our beliefs, values, assumptions and experience in some cases. And then
we articulate these models, we discuss them, they become formal theories and people buy into them,
but then we start to live out of these models as if they were real. So if we look at economics,
we start from the position that humans aren't part of nature. So the economy is set up as a
self perpetuating, well it's called the exchange value model, okay, where you have firms and
households, the households spend money on products produced by firms, but then the firms pay the
household salary and dividends so that money comes back to the households. And so it's a circular
self perpetuating, a circular flow of exchange value. But the basic models in every single
economics textbook and that we're still teaching in class shows as Herman Daly, the late Herman Daly
has frequently pointed out and tried to get across these models make no connection to anything
outside themselves. So we have the economy operating in complete isolation from the environment as a
separate discrete non-dependent system. And once you believe that and attach to it, the notion that
human ingenuity is our most important natural resource, so that technology will help us out of
any kinky situation we might get into with respect to the natural environment. Those two beliefs
that were separate from nature and that technology can handle any residual problems are all you need
as a mental construct, a social construct, to develop a whole world economy based on the idea
that there's no limits to growth, that technology can't resolve. And so we have now underpinned
our belief in human exceptionalism. It's now moving forward on a foundation of a lot or economic
thinking that completely ignores the natural environment. Now flip over to the ecological
side of things. Here we have an economy and I said of economic paradigms and laws and strategies
and so on that sees us separate from nature. When any material flows analysis of the kind
we've done in my work shows that humans are the single most important and major species in terms
of material flows through every ecosystem on the planet. So we're operating exactly and it's
getting worse and worse. So how can you possibly imagine governing a planet where we are the
single largest component of every ecosystem using models that don't even consider us to be connected?
Well, here's a thought. So I agree with you that the genesis of this was human exceptionalism.
But now circa 2022, 19 terawatt metabolism, climate change, species loss, everyone's becoming aware
of these things to actually open up and widely teach and disseminate human ecology is a bit like
having a cancer cell become self aware. I mean, it's almost like a dangerous thing now to have
the full truth from an human ecological sense. Yes, or what do you think about that?
Well, it may appear to be dangerous, but I think it's absolutely necessary. You put your finger
on something extremely important here. That is the very recent awakening to the realities that we
are the fundamental way far more important than Tyrannosaurus Rex in any real ecological
consideration. But you know, it's all happened in many respects, almost all important respects in
just the last 100, perhaps 200 years. So if you think of the human species modern anatomically
modern humans as being say 250,000 years, people keep juggling this number. It took us the first
250,000 years basically of human history to reach 1 billion people in about 1810. Then in just 100
years, we're more than double that. And in 200 years by 2010, we're up at 677 billion by 2010.
So there's a 250,000 years to reach 1 billion. And then 200 years, that's 1 1250th as much time,
we expand by seven fold. Now this is because we become ecological beings again. For the first
long, long period, human population growth was held in check by negative feedbacks because we
were part of ecosystems. And disease, famines, resource shortages, those sorts of things kept human
populations in check just like every other species. Humans are no different from other
species in our population dynamics. We have a natural propensity to expand exponentially,
but we're held in check by the natural negative feedbacks of the human ecosystem.
Along comes fossil fuel, particularly in the early part of the 19th century when we began to use it
in great quantity, as well as a advance of public health measures. So fossil fuel provided the
means by which humans could acquire all the food and other resources needed to grow the human
enterprise. And public health improvements increased longevity and health of the population.
So for the first time in human history, in the last night, what one tenth of 1% of human history,
humans were able to realize our full potential for exponential population growth. Until then,
it had been suppressed. So we took the cork off the bottle, and we've had this enormous population
boom of the whole human enterprise in just the past 200 years. So what we take to be the norm,
I mean, this is what, 10 generations at most of people? The last 10 generations of people
who take 2, 3, 4% per year growth in, well, population never got above 2%, but the economy
has certainly grown faster than that. What we take to be the norm is the single most abnormal
period in human history. So I've begun to refer to this as the, we are like any other species
exposed to an abundance of resources that goes through a population boom, there will be a bust.
There has to be a bust, because the boom can't continue. Any system, any system that is primarily
driven by positive feedback is self-destructive, because it means that it will grow forever in
situation, in a context which is clearly not going to grow forever. And we're no different.
Moreover, we've got this enormous population, this enormous accumulation of manufactured
capital now, all dependent on the continued flow of abundant, cheap energy and resources.
But that well is running dry. And so we've, in effect, suspended, I've used this term in
something I wrote recently, we're suspended on a kind of a gusher of oil, but that gusher is losing
its power and we're going to have to come down along with it. And unfortunately, it, in my lexicon,
means that, I'll put it, broadly, we are in the plague face of a one-off human population boom
bust cycle. We're nearing the top and we will come down because of the onset
of negative feedback. Nature will restore balance between that positive and negative feedback,
and who knows what will come of that. So you mentioned the plague phase from
an ecological scientific perspective. Are you labeling humans a plague species?
I'm not labeling us as a plague species. I'm saying that our population dynamics resemble
that of every other species that we've labeled as a plague species. So if we are no different,
in fact, we're acting precisely the same way. We are going through the one-off population boom
bust cycle. And if it happens with mice, as it often does, or grasshoppers, we call it a plague.
So yeah, it's not a stretch to say that humans have become a kind of a plague
on planet Earth in the sense that we've reached numbers that can't be sustained
by the normal flow of energy and material from nature through the system. We've got there because
we've used an extra somatic or outside-the-body source of energy, fossil fuels, but that too is
running down. I have lots of questions, Bill. Let me insert this thing that I've thought about.
So what is the difference, since you mentioned mice, what is the difference between an R-selected
and a K-selected species? And I know that humans are normally considered K-selected,
but from a metabolism perspective, if you consider the 500 billion invisible laborers we get from
hydrocarbons and fossils every year, might modern humans, the last few generations,
be considered a behaviorally R-selected species? What do you think about that?
Well, just for our audience's sake, when we talk about a K-selected species,
K stands for carrying capacity. So K-selected species have certain characteristics. They
tend to be large, they tend to have very low reproductive rates, they tend to have high
degrees of parental care, that sort of quality. So if you think of humans, we're fairly long-lived
as mammalian species go, very high levels of parental care, and so on. And what this means
is there's a high level of infant survival, relatively speaking. So this means that K-selected
species tend always to press up against the available carrying capacity of their environments.
They're always using whatever resources are available. By the way, that was Malthus's great
insight. He realized that if more food was made available, human beings being K-strategists
would in effect always rise to the level of food availability. So in our strategy...
So he was right about that, but wrong about the timing.
Well, I think that's exactly right. He wasn't aware of the power of technology
to increase, and it goes back to what we were talking about earlier.
Nor of fossil fuels, nor of debt or globalization, or in any of those
canned kicking measures that we did. I'm glad you mentioned globalization, because it is
currently one of the greatest threats to the integrity of the ecosphere. We can come back
to that later, if you like. But yes, he missed the point that human beings, this is our ingenuity,
clicks in. We have found ways to relieve the negative feedback, allowing the positive feedback
to take off. Now, as I said, the reasons K-strategists are called K-strategists,
because we're always pushing up against that level of caring capacity.
So our success, our evolutionary success depends on high survival rates of infants,
and they're constantly pushing up against that caring capacity.
An R-strategist, R refers to the rate of reproduction. So an R-strategist is completely
different. They just throw millions of offspring out there, and not even a fraction of a tenth of
one percent of those offspring survive. But if there's millions of them, that's okay.
So it's two completely different approaches. Very few offspring, but you take good care of them
and ensure a high survival rate, or millions of offspring on the other extreme with an
exceedingly low survival rate. But in each case, the strategy succeeds, provided there's an adequate
replacement of the adult reproducing individuals in the next population. So I think that humans
remain, frankly, an R-strategist species. We are not, even with our 500,000 extra energy slaves.
What that means is we have an artificial means to keep feeding our K-strategic
way of being. And part of that I mentioned earlier is globalization. You see, if you have,
okay, there's a concept we haven't talked about called carrying capacity, which in ecological terms
is the average maximum number of individuals of a given species that can live in a habitat
without wrecking that habitat. Now, if I'm going to take another step back, when I first went to UBC,
interested in human ecology, I was asked to present a seminar to a group of new faculty
members and old faculty members to kind of get together, to bring us together of many different
departments. And I was struggling in my mind, well, what can I say? What can I say? I'm an ecologist
in a planning school. So I hit upon this idea of carrying capacity. So I did a quick and dirty
estimate of the carrying capacity of my region, the so-called lower mainland of British Columbia.
And it turned out that the carrying capacity, the capacity of that region to support people
at our then current average material standards was about a tenth of what the existing population was.
So I presented this model to my group of colleagues, and it was politely received and all that sort
of thing. But at the end of the meeting, I was taken aside by a very prominent Canadian resource
economists. And he said this to me, Bill, you've got to come to lunch with me. Because if you
continue, don't forget, I'd only arrived at UBC a few months earlier, if you continue your pursuit
of human carrying capacity and similar ideas, I can guarantee you that your career at this
university will be nasty, brutish, and short. And he invited me to lunch to expand on this thesis.
And this is where I was introduced for the first time. And again, this is a terrible admission
to economics. You see, we're so siloed in our educational system that we never really
get educated. There's an old joke, a PhD means piled higher and deeper, you learn more and more
about less and less. But here I was encountering economic thought for the first time and being
told that everything I had learned in ecology was irrelevant. Why? Because humans can both trade.
Why should we be limited in this region to whatever the population estimate I came in? In
fact, he said, you've disproved yourself, the population is 10 times greater than you said
the carrying capacity was. And that's because we can import from other places. And if we did
run up against any constraints, technology will take care of it. And he gave me a stack of papers
by economists this high to make the point. And by the way, this was of 72 when Limits to Growth
just came out. And he laughed, he said, that's the biggest piece of nonsense you could possibly
imagine. The economists have long shown that there are no limits to growth and carrying
capacities and irrelevant idea. So that was my introduction to academic life.
The way that I have presented it in public talks is I show an image of the tortoise and the hare.
And the hare is the economist and the tortoise is the ecologist. Because if that person who was
a tenured economics professor in 1970 or whenever, he's probably no longer alive or retired or
something. But during his lifetime, it appeared that he was correct. Meanwhile, our actual carrying
capacity has been declining apace that entire time and the carrying capacity for other organisms
and creatures we share this blue earth with. So it's almost one of those things that the truth
will be back loaded and not really recognized until it's too late to really do something about.
What do you think about that? Well, I think you're absolutely right. Economists
believe in something called the substitution factor that, okay, so we do use natural resources,
but it doesn't matter. Because through technology, any product of nature is infinitely substitutable
by something that humans can come up with better efficiency or some new material together.
There was a management science professor at the University of Maryland called Julian Simon. I
guess he died in the mid-90s. But he's famous for this kind of statement. We have now in our hands
the technology to feed, clothe, and provide energy for an ever-growing population for the next seven
billion years. Now, when you again disconnect humans from biophysical reality and you believe in the
ingenuity, these are the same people who think that he made a statement. The human mind, human
ingenuity is the greatest human resource, then everything we've been talking about becomes irrelevant.
And so you have that mindset, that social construct, which is a very attractive one,
keep in mind, because it does show no limits. That's what the world has bought into. The biophysical
reality is that human beings in the growth of the human system have displaced
other species from their ego niches. It's a concept I call competitive displacement.
You know, human unsustainability is a natural phenomenon. We are unsustainable by nature
because all we're doing is following our natural propensity to expand
and to fill all available habitat. But we do it better than any other species. So if you go back
10,000 years, humans were fewer than or less than 1% of the biomass of mammals on planet Earth.
Then with agriculture and just, you know, more recently in the last couple of hundred years with
fossil energy and the massive expansion of the human enterprise, humans have become 36% or 34%
of the biomass of mammals. And by the way, the biomass itself has gone up. But our domestic
animals are another 62% or 3%. So that when you add all of that together, it means that wild
mammals on planet Earth today are about 4%, 3% of the total biomass of mammals. So all those
great herds you see in Africa are a trivial appendage on the biomass of mammals, which has
absolutely been commandeered by both humans and our domestic animals. So there's been an enormous
displacement of non-human species. And the remaining populations in the last 50 years have been reduced
by 65 to 70%. It's actually worse than that because it's only, that's all mammals,
including ocean mammals. So if it's only land mammals, it's 98%. So let me, at this pace,
Dr. Ries, we're going to run out of time or your computer is going to run out of batteries because
I got a lot of questions for you, sir. So getting back to Julian Simon, I think that was a missed
opportunity because unfortunately, he got into a bet with Paul Erlich, who is a mutual acquaintance
of yours and mine. And Paul lost and lost badly. And now it's, you know, the cultural backward
looking story there is that Julian Simon was right. Even though the statement, the quote you just read
about seven billion years, the sun will have cooked the earth long before that, not to mention many
other problems. But the general zeitgeist in our culture believes that Simon was right and Erlich
was wrong. Do you have any comments on that? Yeah, two. First of all, Simon was right because of the
unique window in history, when in fact, resources were flowing at an extremely good rate. Let's
keep something in mind. Economist measures scarcity by one means and that's price. So according to
Simon, resources were getting more and more abundant because prices were declining. But prices were
declining because we were using very cheap energy to exploit ever diminishing sources of resources.
The quality of the resource base has been in steady decline. And had that bet been made today,
Simon would have lost. That's my first point. Second point, his assertion, which many people
still quote and believe in. Albert Bartlett, who was a wonderful physicist at the University of
Colorado wrote a little paper called The New Flat Earth Society, in which he took Simon at his word,
even contacted him. And anyway, Simon said seven billion years of population growth.
So Bartlett said, look, let's give Simon credit. Let's assume that the human population, which at
the time is about five billion, grows at 1% per year for seven billion years. The bottom line of
this, he was readily able to show that the number of people would be greater than the number of atoms
in the known universe, something like 10 to the 37,000th of power. So that statement by Simon,
which is taken at faith by so many, or at least similar statements, is so mathematically challenged
as to be ludicrous. And yet that's, you said it yourself, that's the star we have hitched our
wagon to. And that is another reason why we're blindly going down this path to a big surprise
within this century. So this gets to another question. You and I both are active in this space
trying to educate and inform both policymakers, citizens, students. And in our networks, I come
across lots of pro future, well intended humans working on this or that aspect of our unsustainable
system. But I am starting to group people, I used to group people in those that watch TV,
or those didn't, because they're behaviorally different, I had found. But now I group people
into those that view the future in an ecology lens, like yourself, or that view the future
in a technology lens, which is the 2020s version of Julian Simon with AI and
renewable energy and all kinds of other things. So let me ask you this, Bill.
When I taught my class at the University of Minnesota, the main textbook was The Social
Conquest of Earth by E. O. Wilson. And in that book, he said that religion and evolution,
as explanations for our origin and how we're here, are two views that can never be reconciled.
So are ecology and technology a similar pairing, or can we reconcile ecology and technology somehow?
Oh, I think they have to be reconciled. And in theory, it could be reconciled.
Look, every level of human cultural development has involved technology of some kind or other.
Simple mallets and bows and arrows are technology. So there's no inherent conflict between technology
and ecological thinking. The conflict comes from assuming you can use the technology to overcome
the biophysical reality within which we are embedded. So if we decided, as a species 200 years
ago, that the carrying capacity of planet Earth indefinitely was, say, two billion people,
we could have used technology at an appropriate scale to ensure the continued well-being of
some two billion people at infinitum. But we didn't do that. The assumption was that technology
can increase carrying capacity indefinitely, which is really what my economist colleague
was telling me, that carrying capacity, his words were, has no relevance to human beings.
He even went, you know, he got a little bit crazy on this because he talked about the
planets are out there. And we have people today, Elon Musk, among them who say, you know, we got to
get out there and colonize the rest of the universe. It ain't going to happen.
So in a recent paper of yours, and I can't believe how prolific you are as an emeritus
professor, you're writing, like, every seems like every month or two, you have a new paper
out there. But in your public speaking, and in recent paper, you highlight, and this is a view
that is patently obvious to me, but I still think is a minority view in the environmental
movement. You highlight that climate change isn't the problem, but instead is a symptom.
Can you unpack what you mean by this? Sure. To do that, I'm going to have to take a
wee step back. I believe that human beings and our cognitive capacities have become obsolete
in the world in which we live. So if you think about the evolution of humans,
we grew up in relatively simple circumstances. We were in small groups living in home ranges that
weren't all that extensive. We lived and died within a few dozens of kilometers of each other.
So there was no real, I suppose, pressures on the human mind to think beyond simple,
cause-effect relationships. Bottom line is that the human brain, our cognitive capacities,
tend to be limited in most people to rather simplistic, reductionist perspectives on reality.
And if you think about that, climate change is a perfect illustration because there are hundreds
of things happening, but we fixate on climate change. The focus gets shifted a little bit when
something like a pandemic comes along, but then it's all about the pandemic. We forget about
climate change. Then there's the war in the Ukraine, and we talk about that for a while,
and now we're back to climate change. And nobody bothers to connect all of those dots,
because human beings are not inherently intrinsically capable of thinking systemically.
When's the last time you had a dinner conversation about legs and thresholds and
chaotic behavior and collapse syndrome, which is called catastrophe and systems theory,
and so on, it just doesn't happen. Okay, so climate change is our fixation,
because there are obvious symptoms that many people can relate to. But it's only one of,
we could spend the whole day talking about plunging biodiversity, ocean acidification,
soil and land erosion, on and on and on. Every single so-called environmental problem is a symptom
of the same issue, which is overshoot. Overshoot is the fundamental issue, and the fundamental
issue is the cause of all of these other problems. So, overshoot means that human beings are using
even renewable resources, the products of ecosystems, much faster than they can regenerate,
and we're dumping wastes far in excess of the natural assimilative capacity
of ecosystems, of the ecosphere. So, on the one hand, we're drawing down all of our natural
capital, fish stocks are collapsing, soils are eroding at 10 to 40 times the rate of restoration.
We're polluting far beyond the capacity of the systems to assimilate. Climate change is a pollution
problem, because carbon dioxide is the single largest waste product by weight of industrial
economies. So, the anthropogenic component of climate, the carbon emissions, is a waste product,
it's a waste management issue. The system, the earth system cannot cope in a timely manner,
will over time, but not in time with the quantity of carbon dioxide that we're putting out there.
Wait a minute. By weight, CO2 is the largest waste product? I never thought about it that way.
Yeah. I mean, because it's like an invisible gas, but if you add it up, it actually has a
weight in tons. We're putting out 36 billion tons a year of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
of which a significant proportion is the carbon. And by the way, it's what goes in as fuel, the coal,
oil, natural gas is all carbon based. And of course, it has to go through the system and is
emitted as waste. But as you say, because it's an invisible gas, no one tends to think of it
as waste. By the way, you get the counter argument from people who don't look systematically at this,
oh, carbon dioxide is essential for life on earth, green plants needed for photosynthesis. So,
it's a good thing that this carbon is in the atmosphere and so on and so forth. But again,
you have to put this in total context. So, overshoot is the problem. Human beings are destroying
the biophysical basis of their own existence. We are literally consuming that which we need
to maintain the system even at a reasonable size and it's not at a reasonable size any longer.
How do you define overshoot and how does that relate to carrying capacity?
Well, overshoot means you've exceeded your carrying capacity. So, that if you think,
any farmer who has a bunch of cattle knows that if you put too many cows out in the pasture,
they'll leave the grass until there's nothing but mud and then they die.
Now, if you import a lot of grass from some other farmer, you can keep your cattle going.
So, that's what humans have been doing. I mean, we talk about urban ecology,
that's nonsense. The city is not a complete ecosystem. The city, as we currently think of it,
is the human equivalent of a livestock feedlot because you have all of these consumer organisms
jammed in this one area and you know, geologists, you're not geologists, geographers and urban
economists often say, well, cities are no problem and only 2-3% of the surface area of the earth.
But that's from their narrow keyhole reductionist simplistic perspective. If we look at human
beings from an ecological point of view, then each city occupies on earth an area anywhere between
a hundred and a thousand times more land than is within the political or built-up area of the city.
So, the human urban ecosystem now is larger than the entire planet because cities have become
parasitic on their environments because of globalization. I did an early study of Tokyo.
Tokyo has 38 million people, the whole population of Canada. But Tokyo, people used to say to me,
well, how can you explain Tokyo? I explain it this way. Tokyo uses more bio-capacity than the
entire nation of Japan, twice as much as a matter of fact. So, the ecological footprint of Tokyo
is larger than the entire country of Japan and it's only something like a quarter or a third of
the Japanese population. So, Japan has exceeded its carrying capacity because of globalization,
the capacity to bring in the resources needed to sustain its overpopulation. And because we can do
that, we become blinded to the reality of our overshoot. As long as you can import from elsewhere,
you are blind to the fact that you've exceeded your local carrying capacity. But what you're
doing in the meantime is drawing down the available productive capacity in other places.
And every country in Europe is in that circumstance. Japan is in that circumstance
where they are living on imported carrying capacity or the assimilative capacity of the rest of the
planet to absorb their carbon and other wastes. We don't actually measure the other wastes.
And this is in addition to the energy flux being provided by fossil carbon and hydrocarbons.
Absolutely. All right. Well, the next question on my list, our viewers and listeners might
speculate as to why this is the case. I was going to ask you, why isn't ecology more prominently
taught? Not in universities per se, because I think it is, but in high schools and grade schools.
And if these are some of the things we learn, this is kind of a heavy load for a 10-year-old,
yes? I don't think so, mate. Look, some of the basic principles are really easy. I often,
I don't do it anymore, but I used to go into grade schools and talk to kids. And I would make
this suggest to them, have you ever lain awake at night staring at the ceiling of your bedroom
asking just how much of the earth's surface is needed to support just me? So we've talked
a bit about food production and the fact that everybody uses. But that ought to be the first
question of human ecology. And it's not a difficult concept because every kid knows that they have
to consume food. I have a wool sweater that comes from an animal which grew on land somewhere and
so on and so forth. So these concepts aren't that difficult, but we don't teach them because we
don't have to think about them. Why should anybody worry about this stuff? Urbanization
has done two things, many things, but the important things that is done from an ecological point of
view is to separate people psychologically from the ecosphere and separate them physically
from the ecosystems that actually sustain them. So many people can live all their lives and most
are very young people in school, in cities with no psychological or physical sense of
connectivity to anything outside of themselves. So in some sense, it replicates the economist's
notion that we're disconnected from all things. When the reality is that every city on the planet
would curl up and die where we cut off from diesel transportation, the trucks that are required to
provision those cities, the trucks, the marine transportation, the aircraft. There's a huge
arterial network needed to supply cities, but in the process we're depleting the resources of the
land base all over the planet. So let's say that everyone on earth understood and agreed with your
diagnosis of overshoot and carrying capacity and everything that you've been talking about,
but that none of the effects of this would manifest for 50 years. Meaning we could
continue everything roughly like today, but in 50 years there would be all of the negative things
that we can imagine. Would that change anything? Or are we such a biologically short-sighted
species that that would be like, oh my god, that's my lifetime, so it's not going to happen
in my lifetime. I'm not going to change. What do you think about that?
Well, I think you've put your finger on it right at the end there. Again, humans are an evolved
species like the others. And one thing that we have evolved to be is short-sighted. There's a
number of wonderful papers on the nature of myopia. So even economists have recognized this in the
concept of discounting. So we tend to prefer our present. We tend to prefer our close relatives
and friends. And we tend to prefer our home places over distant futures. Other people who are complete
strangers and other places. In fact, if you think of climate change, most people in our country or
the United States or Canada think, well, it's probably important, but it's probably mostly going
to hit somebody in India or in other lands far away. So it's not a big issue for me.
Except for that suburb of Vancouver last year. Oh, sure. And we all get hit from time to time.
But the point is, it's still, to most people, a distant prospect. So if you're a politician,
you would much rather risk future damage to somebody else somewhere else than to impose
right now on your own people today constraints on their consumption, their growth, and all sorts of
other things. That's a certainty. And it's certain to get you thrown out of office. So we have no
incentives in the system, being natural discounters, to do anything about it. And if you tell me
something's going to happen 50 years in the future, and I'm an economist, my automatic response is,
well, then we better grow and get rich to have the wealth necessary to develop the technologies,
to head off those problems that may or may not come in 50 years. So you see, in many respects,
it's our human nature that has got us into this conundrum. We operate from a belief set
that is guaranteed once you relieve the negative feedback that to get us into a crisis situation.
But it's also human nature that has allowed you and I to have this conversation.
The technology that is allowing someone in Vancouver to talk to someone in Minnesota
and the care and wide boundary empathy that we're doing this to hopefully somehow affect
steering away from the worst trajectory and the pro-social sharing of information to others
using technology. So this too is part of human nature. Of course it is. I mean, nothing's ever
black or white. But again, Nate, first of all, the world is not a uniform place. It's incredibly
heterogeneous. So you and I are a very minority culture now, the advanced societies at perhaps
a quarter of the world's people who have the privilege of doing what we're doing. There's
another 800 million people, nearly a billion who don't get enough food to eat every day,
who aspire to acquire the same level of at least material comfort as middle income countries.
And then there's the middle income countries, which are not only growing economically and hence
consuming more and more, but have still very high population growth rates. In fact, I've just finished
a paper that shows population growth is one of the major drivers of overconsumption. So it's not
a uniform place. You're about to say something. Yeah, well, I was more getting on to the cultural
evolution side of things. There is human nature, but is it possible that instead of universities
advertising the STEM programs, science, technology, engineering management, that it becomes steam?
And we put an extra E in there for ecology. I mean, I guess I'm asking two questions. Could
ecology become more prominent in our educational awareness around the planet? And then a second
question is, we now know, thanks to the work of you and people like you, where we came from,
how we got here, what we're doing, what we need, what the consequences are, what sort of limits
there are, what technology and tandem with hydrocarbons and fossil minerals can provide.
Is this a, we had to go through this overshoot. We had to train people as human ecologists to
figure out our situation. Is that worth anything? Can that self-awareness as a culture at the
height of the carbon pulse amount to some possibility for change?
Well, of course it can. Look, I hate to be pessimistic about this, Nate, but we've reached
the point where what you're suggesting involves what's called social learning. It's a huge change
in the nature of our education system, which itself will take a decade to implement. And then
for it to have any impact on the way graduates thank and affect societies, another two or three
or four decades. So social learning is a very, very slow way of moving us through the kinds of
crises that I think we're about to head into. So yes, it's a wonderful dream, but keep in mind
there's no incentive for most people to do it. You and I are talking here, we think this is
necessary, but we're two people and not many others would agree that this is a possibility
at the present time. I see no evidence whatsoever in my own university of anything like this
taking over. In fact, I'll go a little bit further than that. There's resistance to this idea
because it goes against the fundamental grain of the way people think today.
Point one, point two, if you plot, you said we know all of this now. We knew all of this
50 years ago. I mean, in fact, exactly 50 years ago, the limits to growth study was published.
And before that, we had Rachel Carson, we had dozens of other authors heralding the kinds of
things that we now see occurring around us. But if you plot the trend lines for various pollutants
or resource consumption against the number of meetings and so on that have taken place to
declare an end to all of this, there's no effect whatsoever. So for example, we've had what,
something like 30 climate meetings, 36 maybe there's been 27 COP meetings has been six formal
agreements, all of them oriented toward reducing human emissions of carbon dioxide. But if you
plot the dates of those along with the scientists warning to humanity, the limits to growth book
and any other number of major announcement, they've had no effect whatsoever. The trend line just
keeps going on. So what does it take for social learning to kick in to have a significant effect
on these trend lines? And I see no evidence whatsoever that there's been an effect in the
past 50 years, nor is it likely that there will be an effect in the next 20 or 30 years,
which I think is critical to resolving this in a relatively peaceful manner, not peaceful, but
you know, less chaotic manner. I'm going to come back to that because I have some questions on that.
But can you, as a former college teacher, do you still teach? No.
No, no, not formally. I mean, I get invited to do guest lectures from time to time, that's it.
Can you speculate, Bill, on the current relationship between science and postmodernism
in the universities around North America or just on the scientific process in general,
circa 2022?
Look, I've been out of it for 10 years now, Nate, so I think I'd be sticking my neck out.
My general sense is that postmodernism has been a catastrophe for teaching in universities. I used
to get students standing up in my classes from other departments, not so much our own planning
students, but I'd get economists and sociologists coming in and say, well, isn't that just your
opinion? Isn't that just your opinion? And after all, there's no objective reality. It just,
it goes back to the social construction of reality that we were talking about earlier,
that postmodernism in its radical form really suggested that whatever one person thought
was equivalent to whatever somebody else thought, regardless of the evidence based upon
any of these kinds of theorems. So we wound up in a situation where you would get into class
debates where people simply insisted that their view was as good as any other view,
and who are you to say that I'm not right in, you know? So that I think has been a catastrophic
development, and I don't know the extent to which it still exists, but the whole woke movement is
moving as I think even further in that direction, where evidence doesn't mean a damn thing.
And what matters is what you think about things, how you feel about them,
much more than what the evidence says.
Tomorrow, actually, the podcast that will be coming out on the great simplification is Thomas
Bjorkman, who had a really great example here on the relationship between oxygen and money,
that if everyone agreed that we didn't need oxygen at all and we voted on it,
it wouldn't mean a damn thing because we absolutely do need oxygen. But if we decided
that we didn't need money, which is a social construction of claims on energy and resources
and such, we could do without money if we created some other alternative metric. So there are things
that are biophysical realities that someone's opinion doesn't matter, but there are other
things that are socially constructed. So I do kind of like to think about it that way.
I do, too. In fact, I keep saying things like this. I did a paper not long ago in which I pointed
out that economics is a social construct. There are many, many different forms of economics,
communist economics, neoliberal economics, and so on. But they're all invalid to the extent that
they don't recognize there are certain biophysical realities, which if they are not incorporated
into an economic theorem invalidate that economic theorem. So you're absolutely right. There are
certain real physical phenomena, which simply are. And what you think about it makes no difference
whatsoever. They are. But things like civil rights, democracy, communism are pure constructs of mind.
They don't exist in nature outside of the human domain. So those are things that we can change,
but we cannot change the fundamental biophysical realities and the necessity that we have as human
beings for fresh air, fresh water, decent food, and so on and so forth.
I've parsed that into the term energy blind, but I think we're also ecology blind and systems
blind as you've kind of pointed out. So piggybacking on that could a broader understanding of biophysical
reality either self-taught because of people are learning on the internet or YouTube videos or
formally taught in high schools and great schools and universities help in mitigating
our upcoming reality. Or does it just make people more depressed and anxious?
Big question. It's a huge question. I'm not sure I can answer it. I think that knowledge
is liberating if you actually understand the nature of that knowledge. We're in a situation
right now where I read 100 papers a week. Everybody is talking about what must be done.
If only we change their value system, if only we change their behavior, if only we change this,
it's all about the what, what, what, what. And there's almost no focus whatsoever on the how,
how, how, how. So how is it that you go into a culture such as Western
techno-industrial society where our entire political foundations, our economic foundations,
are dependent on the concept of perpetual economic and material growth and tell people,
well, there's a limit on that. And now in order to be sustainable, we in the Western world,
in fairness to other millions of human beings in poorer countries, we have to reduce our consumption
of energy and material by 75 or 80 percent so that the impact that we have is equitable and fair
and everybody living at that level would be able to live within the short-term carrying capacity
of the planet. How do you do that? By what political means, by what policy measures
do you take an entire culture and convince them that they need to reduce their material
well-being, at least that's how they will perceive it by some 75 or 80 percent.
You couldn't do it for five percent even. So that's not going to happen.
So then what, so what are we stuck with? We're stuck with it.
Well, you know, my view, Bill, is that we're not going to tighten our belts, but the momentum
and the metabolism of the financial overshoot, which is overlaid on top of ecological overshoot,
is going to snap back. That rubber band is going to snap back and there's going to be a 20 to 40
percent drop in the size of the economy in the not too distant future. And from that moment,
predictions are futile, but we could then, if things are in place ahead of time, could be
resource and carbon taxes, all kinds of different possibilities, because if such a drop were to
happen, we would only go back to 1990s level of GDP, which wasn't a disaster. So I'm trying to plant
the seeds of what could we do during that moment or ahead of that moment. And we're in the liminal
space between total belief in economic growth forever and the post-growth living. These years
that you and I are doing these conversations and we're having emails and writing papers and doing
podcasts, this is the liminal space between those two eras. What can we be doing? What
recommendations do you have, even if they're not practical? What can people think about?
I mean, I do personally, I've gotten tired of watching environmental movies, look at what we're
doing to the oceans, look at what we're doing to elephants, but wait, it's not too late if we do
these wind turbines and a circular economy, and there's always got to be a hope, little carrot
at the end. And I think, I don't know what you think about the word hope. I do think humans need
something to look forward to, and that's a dopamine thing. We need to have a motivation,
but it has to be grounded in some biophysical reality. And I think there are lots more humans
than you might think, Bill, that are ready for that path, which is the whole goal of this
conversation. So what do you think? Look, I'm on your side, Nate, but I look at history and I look
at our current situation and I look at the directions we seem currently to be hitting.
So if you asked me what we could do, you've mentioned one thing already. I think ecological
tax reform is an extremely important first step that we could as a society in theory take. And by
that, I mean that we attempt to move toward what I would call full cost or full social cost pricing
of our goods and services. Right now, almost everything we consume is produced at less than
the true cost because we're allowed to pollute, we're damaging the ecosystem, we're changing the
climate. All the climate damage costs are really the costs of production that have not been included
in the prices of goods and services that we... Now, the problem is, what's been the success in your
country in getting even a simple carbon tax implemented across the board? Zero. Absolutely.
So if we started talking realistically about the political willingness of a population, keep in
mind that we go back to our earlier conversation, we're still largely in ignorance about the nature
of our dilemma. So there needs to be a huge catch-up in the educational system in the popular
media. The media don't consider these issues, but why don't politicians even get up and describe
the situation in real terms? We have to do this because they don't. Because for one thing, they
hold into the corporate sector that has no interest in imposing these terms on their current...
Well, and the other is, from a discounted standpoint, the damages from climate change
are largely in the future, the big damages. And so if you discount that at any positive rate back
to the present, they're very small. Well, they aren't any longer, Nate, but politics, again,
it goes back to something I said earlier. Politicians would much rather risk
damages in the future that may or may not occur and are more likely to occur to other people
far away than impose immediate pain upon their own people today. That's the dilemma they find
themselves in. Put on your crystal ball, Bill. Will nations in the world ever have systems ecology,
language, and politicians talking about the things you're talking about today? Will that ever happen?
I don't believe it will, Nate. Listen, we are embedded in a culture
that has a set of beliefs, values, assumptions, and narratives that have largely been socially
constructed during an era of abundance. You and I have lived through an era of unprecedented abundance
during which a whole set of completely unrealistic and false assumptions didn't matter.
Even if they were wrong, it didn't matter. And so we have acquired an incredible cultural momentum
such that it becomes almost impossible to start even here where we have the resources to do so.
To make matters worse, we've spread this set of beliefs, values, and assumptions to the entire
world. So we've created a set of human expectations that they too can follow in these trends. By the
way, they feel absolutely that they have the right to do so and condemn us for not allowing them to
do so. And by the way, they're correct. They're absolutely right in this. There's no moral reason
why they shouldn't be allowed to follow the tracks that we follow. We didn't pay any attention to the
constraints. Why should they? So I guess I see what we could do is completely separate from what we
will do because of the inordinate momentum that our culture has acquired in just in the past 50
years. Combine that with something I think most people again don't understand, and I'll credit
our Albert Bartlett with saying, the greatest shortcoming of the human race is our inability
to understand the implications of exponential growth. One half of all the fossil energy,
oil and gas particularly, ever used by human beings have been used since 1990.
I was born in 1943. 90% of the fossil fuels used by human beings has been used in my lifetime.
So with exponential growth, you have a constant doubling time. But the amount of materials and
energy and whatnot used during one of those doubling periods is equal to the sum of
all the energy and material used in previous doubling periods. So here we are on a planet
expecting to double the scale of the economy in the next 35 years or so, increase the population by
what, two billion or so, and we're already in a state of overshoot by something like 47%.
So if we maintain the current relationship between energy and resource use and the scale
of the economy, we will consume more stuff in the next 35, 40 years than has been consumed since,
say, the beginning of the Industrial Revolution at great damage to the planet. We're already,
as I say, in a state of at least 70% overshoot. So I don't see that that's a biophysical
possibility. I don't see that it's conceivable in the short time frame we're talking about here
because of this exponential function for social learning to catch up to the biophysical reality
within which we find ourselves. So yes, we could, but we won't for the reasons, many of the reasons
that we've been talking about. So you were born in 1943, and you just said that our culture,
our species has used 90% of the fossil carbon hydrocarbons ever since you've been alive on the
planet. Do you feel like you, as a human being, hit the lottery that you won or you have gratitude?
Or do you feel shame or sadness that they're simultaneous with that? There's an unfolding
tragedy. How do you, at approaching 80 years old, look at that all?
All of those things. Again, we're no different from any other species.
Human beings have a tendency and will consume only available resources.
We could get into a big argument about this around First Nations and Indigenous people,
but I'm not going to get into it because I'd have to, oh, I will get into it. Let me say this,
that in many cases, the relationships, the stable relationships that Indigenous peoples
have developed with their natural environments occur after they've obliterated the natural
environment. They occur after they've hunted out all of the megafauna, the large, easily
caught species. If you just think of New Zealand, which has been settled since Christ,
800 years ago or so, 12 species of gigantic birds, the moa, went extinct as a result of
the deprivations of the Indigenous people that now occupy New Zealand. Australia is a wonderful
book by Tim Flannery called The Future Readers. The decimation of populations of large mammals
rather, marsupial mammals in Australia, just follows the progression of the occupation of
that subcontinent by aboriginals in the last 50,000 years. Yes, we can develop a harmonious
relationship with their ecosystems, but it's often only after we've inserted ourselves into
those ecosystems and appropriated the habitats and food chains of many of the mammals that would
have occupied. Do you think that 800 years ago in New Zealand or Australia or any one of these
prior cultures that had a negative effect on the population of megafauna, do you think there were
a few environmentalists at that time saying, wait a minute, look at the population of moa,
they're declining, we need to hold off? Or is energy privilege living in the era that you've
just described allowed an environmental ethic to populate and have this podcast and lots of people
are worried about climate change, etc. Is our concern for the environment a product of our
energy surplus? I think our concern for the environment is a product of our capacity to
see that it's coming apart around us. But listen, Nate, I live in a privileged position. You
live in a very privileged state. And neither of us voluntarily
taken the steps that we need, we know need to be taken to reduce our standard of living
to the point that it could be shared equally by 8 billion people on planet Earth. So again, I just
really have to emphasize here that knowledge per se doesn't change behavior. Knowledge per se
does not change behavior. There's been a number of studies of the relative purchasing patterns of
the best informed people on the environmental issues compared to the average population,
and there's virtually no detectable difference. So simply knowing the nature of our circumstances
doesn't really alter behavior all that much. I once at a meeting of what was called the
heads of meeting committees at my university suggested to my colleagues that perhaps it would
be smart to show leadership to the community by refusing our next salary raise on grounds that
we were already overpaid and over-consuming relative to the equitable capacity that we were
entitled to. I was practically run out of town. I can't think of a single circumstance in which
a significant number of societies, let's just leave it at that, has voluntarily said, okay,
we've screwed up, we've now got a cutback to the point where this, this, and this is going to be
the case, and we will do that on behalf of our future. I just don't see human beings in that
light at this time. Well, I've certainly not cut back to be the equal share of one eight billionth
of humanity, but I have cut back quite a bit from when I worked on Wall Street 20 years ago,
and I think the issue now is those people that can simplify first and beat the rush,
not to save the planet or to be equitable per se, but to be more resilient and flexible
act as pilots or examples of a lower material throughput on the future. That's not a bad idea.
Of course, it's not a bad idea. In fact, if I had some hope, it's a very large number of NGOs
and community organizations that are attempting to do exactly what you're talking about. So,
their fringe organization, I think of them as the lifeboats. The mainstream society is the Titanic,
and these little lifeboats are going out there exploring what the future might look like with
a much reduced material lifestyle, with much greater community development, with much greater
cooperative instruments and so on and so forth. But I, look, I have to wonder myself whether
this is only possible because this is a time of relative abundance. What happens when push comes
to shove and the grocery stores don't have supplies? What happens when you can't get around?
What happens when, you know, we have to cut down every tree in the neighborhood to heat our homes
and so on and so forth? It should, you know, fossil fuels become too costly or simply run
down in the next 30 or 40 years, and there's no reasonable substitute in the form of alternative
so-called green energy, which to my mind so far is mythic. So, again, it's the sheer momentum
of the situation that scares me more than anything else. And the fact that we're sending out these
little lifeboats is encouraging, it's hopeful, but I just wonder whether they're going to founder
in the eddies and whirlpools created by the sinking of the much larger ship.
I've known you for a long time, and I think you're such a kind and wise man, but you always,
at the same time, kind of bum me out when we talk.
Well, I'm sorry about that. Look, I don't know what to do about it, Nate, and if I wish it.
No, I know. I want you to be honest, and I want, I think we have to have an honest
conversation as a culture. I did not mean that comment as pejorative. I mean, I love you, man,
but this is heavy stuff, and you are not afraid to say what you think in your lifetime of scholarship
on this, so I appreciate that. I think much of it comes, Nate, it goes back to just basic
population ecology. And the simple fact of the matter is that any species capable of exponential
growth will respond to a period of resource abundance, and many species in nature go through
cycles. Okay, it's a boom-bust cycle. Things get good, we expand, then negative feedback kicks in,
we crash, then we get good and expand. Humans have never done that, not globally. We've done it locally,
but now, for the first time, we've managed to, in effect, colonize the entire planet.
We've grown, but listen, we are growing by liquidating our capital. As a former financier,
you should understand what that means. You cannot continue to grow by liquidating the
natural capital basis of your own existence, and so we get to the point where we become so large,
there's simply insufficient there to maintain even the maintenance activities, let alone further
growth. Then things get really tough because you're now in a competition for the residuals.
By the way, what do you think is going on in the world today around food and energy and the
war in Ukraine and cutting off this, that, and something? We're learning very quickly,
and maybe it's a good thing. The extent to which we are dependent on fossil fuel,
the extent to which we are dependent on global trade for fertilizers, what happens
when we can't grow food with fertilizer any longer, and we haven't taught ourselves about
agroecology and all of the other fundamental ways of growing food and equal abundance that don't
destroy the planet in the process. We've gotten lazy, we're intellectually lazy, or technologically
lazy, because look, agroecology is a technology of superb potential, but we don't do it because
it's easier just to throw poisons and fertilizers out on the landscape and make more money in the
process. We're going to need a lot more people that have to go back to the land instead of 3%
working on agriculture. It's going to have to be something higher.
I once worked, look, right now, if you go back to 1920 in the United States,
there were 20 million horses working the fields. They've been replaced by tractors.
There'd have to be 75 or 80 million horses working the fields now, just to give you the
same proportion of horses to people as there were in 1920. But now you've got to have 3 hectares
or 3 acres of land to feed each of those 80-odd million horses. So it's a hugely complicated
issue, and we haven't really begun as a culture to think it through. If we could stimulate one
senior politician, supposing the next president of the United States stood up in the world courts,
I mean, the forum that presidents of the United States occupy, and said, look, we've really screwed
up here, and this is what we've got to do instead. That would be an earth-shattering moment,
a moment of unprecedented leadership that would force everyone from the prime minister of Canada
to Max Hall in France to say, my God, you're right. When is it going to happen?
You and I both know the challenge of that is any person that would be willing to say that
wouldn't choose to be president, nor would they get elected.
Well, that's right.
So, Bill, you are known for, among many other things, being the co-creator of the ecological
footprint. What was the thinking behind this metric? What is the ecological footprint? How
does it differ from the carbon footprint, and what has been its impact since you developed it?
The thinking behind it, Nate, was that I have a profound sense that humans remain utterly dependent
on ecosystems and the productivity of nature for our basic survival. And yet here we were
confronted with an economic model that suggested we were decoupling from nature and that the economy
was a separate functional entity altogether. So I set about to disprove that thesis. I had been
challenged at one point in my early career that ecological ideas such as carrying capacity were
utterly irrelevant to human beings. So I thought, you know, if I take the economist seriously and
think that we can trade infinitely, they're right. Why should this region be limited in its population,
for example, if we can import resources from everywhere else? But there was something basically
wrong. It's still stuck in my craw. So if you turn the carrying capacity ratio over, instead of asking
how many people can this region support, which becomes irrelevant if it can import stuff from
all over the place, ask a different question. How much area, how much productive ecosystems
is required to support this population, no matter where on earth those productive ecosystems are?
So it struck me that if we could develop a way of looking at this, a model using material flows
analysis, incorporating trade flows into the consumption patterns of a particular region,
and if we could quantify the amount of land area required to produce all those goods and services
consumed in this region and extrapolate that out into the rest of the planet, we would have some
idea of the total, I used to call it whether the human impact index or something of that nature.
By the way, I got a new computer, which had a smaller tower footprint on my desk and one of
my colleagues came in, I was just writing the first paper on this other concept, and he said,
oh, you got your new computer, how do you like it? And I said, it's fine, there's a much smaller
footprint. Another epiphany, there it was, I was writing about the ecological footprint,
the amount of land, let me define it formally, a population's ecological footprint is the area,
the physical area of productive ecosystems required to produce all of the biological
resources that that population consumes and to assimilate its wastes. Basically, we looked at
carbon waste, so it becomes the carbon footprint. So when we undertook this kind of modeling,
we discovered that the eco footprint was an inordinately powerful tool in convincing
students in our own program, a land use planning part of the program, that the city of Vancouver,
for example, wasn't the dot on the map, but rather an area about 325 times larger,
spread all over the planet. And we could create a map with little stickers and arrows showing
where all of our land imports took place and so on. So that's what an eco footprint is.
It's a way of showing through trade flows and direct consumption data, it's a consumption-based
index, and it corrects for trade both imports and exports. It's a way of showing the absolute
quantity of land required to sustain any defined population.
So what's the ecological footprint of global human civilization?
Right now, it's something over 21 billion hectares. So if, by the way, let me explain
something else. I was interested in showing this connectivity to the land. So it was ecosystem
appropriation, really the appropriation of ecosystem productivity by the expansion of
the human enterprise that I was interested in measuring. That's what the footprint shows.
So it leaves out all sorts of things. We don't account for many forms of pollution or the
destruction of land by this or that or desertification. So there's all sorts of other
things going on, which if you added them into the footprint would make the footprint estimate
much larger than it is. Well, not to mention that you're measuring ecosystem impacts and
productivity, but we're also adding historical productivity to our system in the form of fossil
carbon. Absolutely. So the basic global footprint now is over 21 billion hectares,
but the amount of bio capacity available on earth is somewhere between 11 and 12 billion hectares.
So the actual quantity- How can we consume more than we have?
By depleting what you've got. With the exception of fossil fuels.
Okay. You're a financier or used to think of interest in a bank account. If you had a million
dollars in a bank at 5%, your income would be $50,000 a year. Now, if you chose to live on
50,000 a year, you could live in perpetuity. This is a sustainable, what we would call sustainable
income because you haven't touched your capital. Well, ecosystems, the soils, the fisheries,
and so on and so forth, forests, grasslands are capable each year producing an annual output.
If human beings were content to live on that annual output, we could live in perpetuity
without destroying the capital base, as it were. But instead, we've continued to grow and grow and
grow under the illusion that there are no limits because trade flows abolish the illusion of limits.
For example, it's only one of many things. Technology helps to do that as well.
So what we've done is managed to grow the human economy beyond the bio capacity of the
planet. But that's why fisheries are being depleted. That's why we've eliminated 94% of them
biomass on the planet and replaced it with humans and our domestic livestock and so on.
So we are living literally by liquidating the basic natural capital base that we are utterly
dependent upon. Growth is destructive once you're beyond carrying capacity.
So to summarize that, roughly rough numbers, we have 10 billion hectares of productive land.
We're using 20 billion hectares worth of resources. So we're doubling our consumption
drawing down our bank account. At the same time, the whole enterprise is supported by
fossil energy and materials. Absolutely. In fact, you've put your finger on an extremely
important point. The means by which we have been able to over exploit every ecosystem on the planet
is through the use of fossil energy. We all have these energy slaves digging deeper,
are farming more and more soils, producing fertilizers and pesticides to enhance the
productivity of those things. And keep in mind, the footprint just measures the amount of land
we're using with all of those inputs. If the inputs were eliminated, if we abandoned fossil fuel
use or ran out of economically viable supplies of fossil fuel, and we're no longer able to
fertilize or irrigate and so on and so forth, then the natural footprint would increase by
probably a half an order of magnitude. So we're in rather more dire straits than even eco footprint
analysis shows. Let me just make two final points. We are currently about 75% in overshoot. We're
using the planet as if it were 75% larger, and that's an underestimate. And to put it in very
simple terms, the per capita bio capacity on earth is about 1.58 hectares that's seen in 2018.
So each of us would be entitled to the productivity and assimilative capacities of about 1.58 hectares,
a hectares 2.47 acres. But on the planet right now, the average eco footprint at inadequate
average material standards is 2.77 global average hectares. So we're almost, as I say,
75% over the top. And that's average. In North America, we're eight hectares per capita,
which means we're three or four times above the fair share of our planet.
Does that include land all around the world that's maybe less productive or nonproductive,
like deserts and high mountains and things like that? No, we're only counting in these
numbers. We ignore deserts and ice caps and that sort of thing. So we're looking at those lands
and waters that are capable of producing adequately to support a human population.
And you had a second point. I think maybe I made it that are per capita.
I think it's even worse than that, what you just said, because if there's 12
billion hectares and we're using 21 or whatever the number you said, that presumes that all those
hectares of productive capacity are for humans. And there's 10 million other species.
Absolutely. And as I've talked about many times, that the expansion of humanity
into other species ecosystem. I mean, this is one of the great ironies.
Human beings, as I've said, are the single greatest consumer organism the planet has ever seen.
We're the major predators, we're the major herbivores, the major carnivores, and every single
accessible ecosystem on the planet. We're part of those systems in the biggest way you can imagine.
And yet we're operating from a model that says, well, we're decoupling from nature.
The economy is dematerializing. In fact, every growth of the economy, every growth and income
increases the human demand on the shrinking biocapacity of Earth. It's a perfect example
of how the mental models from which we live often have no correlate in the natural world
upon which we are living. What an incredibly stupid situation for a so-called intelligent species.
So, of course, I know most of the things you're telling me today, but if someone was trained
in economics or in business and it was listening to this podcast, this sounds obvious, but it also
sounds, how come I've never heard this before? How can this possibly be true? So, let me just
start this where I'm starting to ask this of all my scientific guests that have
done work on something. How might you be wrong about this, about overshoot, carrying capacity,
or any of the things we've discussed so far? That's a really good question. And I have to say,
I don't think we could possibly be wrong, Nate. If you think of the climate change,
nobody disagrees. Even economists realize now we're deeply into climate change,
but it's interesting how they dismiss it. For example, a Nobel laureate economist is well
known for saying, well, you know, climate change is likely mostly to affect agriculture. And since
agriculture is only 3% of GDP, just two years of growth and we've obliterated the effects of
climate change. Well, that obviously is an extra, what I call a keyhole vision of the nature of
reality. And yet that's where most of us are coming from. So I suppose we could be wrong.
Here's how we're wrong. We're underestimating the total human impact. We are underestimating
the total human impact. So I admit to being wrong, but I'm being wrong in the kind of
conservative cautious way of saying, look, if I'm wrong, what I'm saying is an underestimate
of what's going on here. We can't avoid the reality that humans are biophysical entities,
that we are ecological species that have evolved as components of nature, and that we require just
to breathe a certain energy flow. Historically, that energy flow has always been fuller energy
through our food supply. We broke from that just about 200 years ago. And with this extra
somatic or outside the body source of energy called fossil fuel, we've vastly increased our
capacity to exploit and destroy the planet. And so we see everywhere measurements of the
decline in forest fertility. North America has lost 50 to 70% of the organic nutrients that
took 11 or 12,000 years in the Gloss glacial, post glacial period to accumulate. So in less than 200
years of deep tillage agriculture, half of that's gone or 70% is gone. And the only product way we
maintain the productivity of the Great Plains is through the massive implications of fertilizers
and pesticides and increasing the irrigation. U.S. agriculture, heavily irrigation dependent,
but the alcoholic reservoir, which surprised so much of that, the groundwater supply is drying up.
California is in deep trouble. They provide what a third of all the table vegetables in North America.
And yet we're within a decade or two of seeing that the biophysical basis of that productivity
destroyed because of the overshoot that we can illustrate clearly through ecological footprint
analysis. Now, the other side of the coin is, well, technology will solve all our problems.
That's the economist's talk. But it's an article of faith of Josh Farley, a very good friend of mine
who said, look, I'm immortal. How do I know? Because I've lived for 21,000 days. And every day
that I live is additional affirmation of my belief that I am immortal. And that's exactly how
economists think. You can make the same chart of a turkey that grows and lives until a week before
Thanksgiving. So you have... So far, so good. You have... And Josh is a very good friend of mine,
as you know. I have just made a impromptu plan after hearing your last four minutes.
I think it would be great to have a friendly debate between you and someone like Bjorn Lombard,
the skeptical environmentalist who is a reasonable person, but he has a completely
different lens with which to view the future that you do. The challenge is that it's kind
of like getting a Christian and an atheist or a Muslim and a Christian in a debate.
Even if they're well-intended people, if they're using different lenses with which to view the
future, it's almost impossible to have a conversation. But I'm going to work on that, Bill.
Okay. Just for your information, I've actually debated Bjorn Lombard here in town. Oh, yeah.
And in Nature magazine, he published a critique of ecological footprint analysis,
but it was clear he didn't understand where he was coming from. And I had to rebut that critique.
So that's in the record. So, Bill, we don't want your computer to run out of batteries. So I'm at
the point of the interview where I ask you some questions, some personal questions that I ask all
my guests. So first of all, given your lifetime of scholarship, of teaching, of research, of reflection
on these issues, do you have any personal advice to the listeners of this program at this time of,
as you have adroitly pointed out, global overshoot?
Yeah. Look, this is an extremely confusing domain, obviously. And there are many different, as you
put it, windows on reality. So I think every person who has any even whisperings of concern about this
has a personal obligation to do what they can to understand the scientific and material basis
for the various claims that are being made. So first of all, educate yourself. Follow those
rabbit holes where they take you and then come to some kind of considered judgment about the nature
of reality facing us. Keeping in mind that you and I, all of us are biophysical entities that require
a certain quantity of energy, a certain quantity of material, just to maintain ourself, never mind
to grow everything. And the point is, this is a finite planet that has a limited productivity,
which is in now steady decline, precisely because of overshoot and the fact that we're
depleting those assets. So self-education is an extremely important thing. Then recognize that
this is a, it's a collective problem. One of the kind of false leads we've been given from
our current very individualistic capitalist kind of society is that there's 101 things you can do
to save the planet. And we see over and over again this offloading of responsibility under the
individual. But individuals can't do, screw all. I can't as an individual create the rapid transit
systems in my city that would greatly reduce the transportation footprint. I cannot as an individual
implement the ecological tax reform, the transport carbon taxes necessary to change the economy
through the price incentive into more conservative ways of resource use and so on. So individuals
have very, very limited capacity as individuals. But as a collective, we theoretically certainly
in democracies have control over the circumstance. So you have to become a political animal here.
Even writing letters important. I used to understand, I worked for a political party,
I will leave it unnamed. But for every 10,000 letters they got, they knew there was another
100,000 people out there that thought the same way but didn't bother to write. So letter writing can
influence the way politicians think. We've got to appear at political meetings. We have what we
call all candidate party meetings up here where during an election representatives from each party
the several get to speak. We need people in the audience to ask the embarrassing questions
that we're talking about right now to force them to begin to think. Ultimately, however,
I think we're you and I are now engaged in and all of us on this podcast in what's called social
learning. It's an exercise in passing information, gradually increasing one's cognitive understanding
of the situation, raising to consciousness the nature of the problem. But it takes decades to
have an effect. We're getting to the point now where we don't have decades where what is going
to make real change is people in the thousands, in the 10,000s on the street raising bloody blue hell
about the things that they can see going wrong on the planet today. I'll give you a perfect example
that I'd like to see happen. Right now my own government, your government are both subsidizing
the production of EVs, electric vehicles on grounds that this is a great salvation for climate.
Well, look, first of all, climate isn't the real issue. Overshoot is. Secondly, if you do a full
life cycle analysis of an average large EV, it's a worse option ecologically overall and also
culturally and socially because of the slave labor and all then in the mining and the refining
and manufacturing and so on and so forth. It's probably a worse option than a standard internal
combustion vehicle and yet taxpayers are now being asked in fact to subsidize an option which is
really engineered not to solve the climate, not to solve overshoot, but to keep the machine going,
to maintain investment, to maintain jobs, to increase the span of the economy. In other words,
to maintain what I call business as usual by alternative means. But it's business as usual
that it's got us into this situation. So get politically engaged.
And by an electric or non-electric bicycle. So moving on, you are a retired college professor
who has outlined the human predicament to students for a long time. What specific recommendations
do you have in addition to what you just said for young humans who become aware of energy,
climate, biophysical constraints, overshoot and the human predicament?
I guess my first piece of advice is to be aware that they're standing on very fluid grounds.
That it is very easy as a student, and I see this all the time, to get sucked into the need to find
a job in the existing system and so on and so forth. I think each young person today has an
obligation through self-education beyond what they're getting in universities. Universities
don't educate. What they do is narrow your focus in a single discipline. So look beyond that. My
education didn't start until I graduated with a PhD and came face-to-face with economists and
sociologists and geographers and others who disagreed utterly with what I'm saying. That
is the source of real knowledge where you're confronted with your own beliefs.
My other beliefs that are totally at odds and you have to reconcile these things.
Young people do that. You may decide after doing that that you should get together with some other
friends and even develop some kind of land cooperative in the outback somewhere where you
can perhaps salvage something of a life should the great unraveling occurs rapidly as some of us
think it may be occurring. You know, if you look into the historical record, a very simple little
society called Ticopia, an island in the South Pacific just a few square kilometers, for some
3,000 years it seems, managed to control its population in the vicinity of 1,200 people.
1,200 people over 3,000 years, but they did it using seven forms of birth control,
including by the way, when things got tough in the lean years, the old guys like me would
set themselves out into the ocean and disappear. The Inuit in Northern Canada and the U.S. did
the same thing, departed on ice floes so that there'd be more resources for young people.
Now, I'm not recommending that we do that. I'm just saying that in desperate times people do
desperate kinds of things, but we can head off those desperate times by thinking through what
our options are. And one of the options is to be prepared for the coming years of deprivation.
What tools would you need to survive in the absence of many of the kinds of conveniences
that we have today? What would you do if you were left with very intermittent or perhaps no
electricity for days on end? We're getting some very valuable lessons, I suppose, out of the
current war in Ukraine. And because what that war has shown us is the utter dependence of modern
techno-industrial countries on a constant steady supply of energy, a constant steady supply of
fertilizer, a constant steady supply of electricity and water and so on and so forth. But in the great
unraveling, many of those things will just either gradually be whittled away so that we have time
to adjust, or suddenly they just disappear. What would happen to a city like Tokyo or Shanghai,
which is currently underdependent on fossil fuel transportation for its provisioning?
Those cities have ecological footprints several hundred times larger than the cities themselves,
but all of the productivity of those ecosystems is being transported into the city where they're
consumed and wastes produced and exported out of the city by fossil fuel. Well, what are you
going to do when you can no longer provision our major cities with fossil fuel? And there
will be no alternatives in my humble opinion in the short period of time that we have left to
consider. But that may be 20, 30, 40 years out. So a young person that's 20 years old listening
to all of this, I was just more curious as to what you would tell them at a dinner table,
giving them advice. I'd tell them exactly what I've said now, that look, you've got to look
that far ahead. What are your children going to do? Look, humans, unfortunately, and you've
illustrated it right there, are naturally conditioned to be short-sighted. Economists call it
discounting. Discounting, that is to say, not paying too much attention what's going to happen
in the future, because after all, it's not going to affect me, it's other people somewhere else.
Well, Nate, it may not be 20 years, it may be 10 years. 10 years ago, I didn't think it conceivable
that I would see the obvious evidence of the climate change that was ahead. A year ago,
in this region, we saw billions of dollars of damage to agriculture and communities that were
completely flooded out by an unprecedented atmospheric river that inundated this area
in rain that we haven't seen ever before. So it's happening now, and you can't depend on it
not happening for another 20 or 30 years. So it may happen to you. It'll certainly happen to your
children, kids, and your grandchildren. Well, I don't have children for some of the reasons discussed
on this call, but I'll ask you a question I didn't intend on it. Is there an information
hazard here? People that tune into this podcast kind of know what they're getting,
but if you could press a button and have the whole world understand what you
have outlined in this conversation, would you do that? And might that have even worse effects
if everyone believed what you're saying? That's an unperformable experiment. I don't
know the answer to that question. But I do know this, Nate, that look,
we need to have a common understanding of our future. And perhaps this isn't the correct future.
Maybe I'm a complete bullshit artist and everything I've said is untrue. On the other hand, most people
don't know about the kinds of things you and I are talking about. So I think we have an obligation
to put that in their toolkit of possibilities so that every individual at some point can better
interpret the kinds of information they hear daily coming through the media of one kind or another.
Eventually, there will be a gelling around the truth about the nature of reality here.
My primary hope is that this gelling, this sense of communal responsibility for the future of our
species and that of thousands of other species is something we really have to take seriously.
And I think, unfortunately, many of our cultural heroes today simply don't take it seriously.
If you think of the Elon Musk's of the world who want to abandon this wrecked planet and start all
over again on a dead rock, you know, half a million light years away, it just makes no sense to me
whatsoever. This planet is still essentially functional. It makes far more sense to rescue
and rehabilitate and reconstruct that which works then to attempt to colonize a dead rock like the
moon or Mars. So slowing down a little here, two more questions. What do you care most about in
the world, Bill? That's a really tricky question. Obviously, I love my wife and my immediate friends
and family, but in the world, Nate, look, we have romantic nature, images of nature,
but I'm one who has been in places. And when I did my PhD research in the Arctic in Canada,
I literally wept on the ground sometimes out of the sheer beauty and the incredible
illustrations of the productivity of life. There were birds nesting everywhere. I mean,
I've seen wolves, I've stepped on a polar bear that was sleeping and nearly saw an immediate,
that was a really interesting story. It was astonishing. No, look, nature is not
all that pleasant. You know, if we go back a couple of hundred years, you're going to have
lice and fleas and parasites and nature is a cool place. It's a competitive ballgame,
but it's also a thing of immense beauty. And when you begin to understand how life itself is created,
the living film on the planet and maintains and regulates the environment so that all of it can
survive, it becomes a thing of immense beauty, just understanding the way the system operates to
self-produce. And look, all the material necessary for the life as we see it has been recycling
through the ecosphere for literally millions of years. You undoubtedly have thousands of molecules
that once roamed the Great Plains of what is now North America as Tyrannosaurus rex. We are
the exemplars of natural recycling. And yet we're totally unconscious of this and think we're
disconnected from it all. I think evolution is one of the most amazing things that have
ever happened. And I think humans puzzling out that evolution happened is equally amazing. And
just what you just said is a parallel to that, that the natural world is so beautiful. But
understanding how it works, the systems ecology that you've helped us unpack a little bit in this
conversation, understanding the drivers, the biogeochemical processes, the the trophic flows,
how everything is connected, that also is beautiful. And maybe not to everyone, but I think to you
and certainly to myself and a lot of our colleagues, the understanding of how the human
and and earth ecosystem fits together is a thing of beauty, I think. You're absolutely right.
Human beings are an ecosystem, or at least part of every ecosystem. And that's the thing we have
forgotten. Human beings are the major consumer organism in every single ecosystem. We should
be husbanding and caressing every single ecosystem upon which we depend. But we're operating from
a mindset that says it's not important. We can exploit this to the hilt and then simply move on
to the next ecosystem or next planet, an absurd, self-defeating mindset, in my opinion.
So we have reached the last question, Professor Ries. And given everything you've said so far,
I'm reluctantly looking forward to hearing your answer. If you were benevolent dictator,
Bill, and there was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you might do to
improve human and planetary futures? I suppose the one thing I would attempt to do is to
create a new constitution for the world based on the concept of avoidance of overshoot.
And that would mean recognition, the need to implement somehow, I would think, in as gentle
and a non-coercive manner as possible, a mental attitude, a mindset totally different from the
current mindset from which we operate. Keep in mind, humans don't live in reality. They live in
the social constructions the way they think the world works. Well, we created a mindset, a paradigm,
if you want to call it that, a set of beliefs, values, and assumptions that are totally self-destructive
because they were created in ignorance as if we were apart from nature. So the new paradigm,
the new vision, the new cultural narrative has to be one which sees human beings as an
integral component of the ecosystems upon which we literally, currently, we were parasitic,
but we now have to become conventionalists. How can we live on this earth in ways that sustain
and support the rest of the systems that support us? And to do that, we need to develop policies
that increase equity, that is to say, the distribution of natural wealth among the human
species. We need to do that while reducing our overall consumption by at least 45 or 50%. That
would be 75 or 80% in rich countries. And we need to do this while getting a grip on human
population because on a finite planet with a limited reproductive capacity or bio capacity,
you can support twice as many people on a little bit or half as many people on this,
what am I saying? If you have a given flow of resources, you can either support
X people or two X people, but the two X people won't be living nearly as well as the X people.
So that's a simple relationship. And we have to understand that we're on a finite planet
whose capacity is actually shrinking because of our overwhelming predisposition
to deplete, literally to liquidate the natural capital that's supporting us. So population control
is absolutely, I think, essential in the future. If we want to have a reasonable standard of living
for, say, somewhere around 1 to 2 billion people on a planet that could exist in perpetuity, at
least for the next couple of billion years, we won't be around for all of that. But let's keep it
going. Well, you are 25 years older than me and seem to have two X the energy. So I suggest you do
write such a constitution and maybe it would serve as an Overton window sort of tool for others.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Bill, for your lifetime of scholarship and speaking truth to
power on ecology and these issues. And thank you for your time today. Thank you very much, Dave.
I think you're about the only person who's listened. Certainly none of the politicians have paid a
whole lot of attention to what we've been talking about. Anyway, it's been a pleasure talking to
you again, old friend. Take care. Thanks, Bill. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of
The Great Simplification, please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit
TheGreatSimplification.com for more information on future releases.
