Greetings! Happy Earth Day! Another year, another day, April 22nd, where we kind of can tell
the truth about the planetary situation without fear of social reprisal. It's kind of shocking
to me that every day isn't Earth Day, but that is our education and our cultural situation.
I have a podcast. One of my upcoming guests is a Native American of the Muskogee tribe,
Marcus Cloud Breaks, and I was talking with him and he said there's like 22 people in the
world that speak this Muskogee dialect and he's teaching his two children. And I asked him why
and he's like because our cultural concepts, our values, can't be translated in the English
language. That got me to thinking what is the semantic influence of our words, on our behavior,
on our values, on our cultural permission for different things. So what I'd like to do here is
kind of a whirlwind list of common cultural terms and their biophysical equivalents from my Earth
Day perspective. Here we go. So first economy, very common word. The biophysical equivalent would
be the human ecosystem. The economy takes money and technology and tells a story about
distributing the largesse of that system to all the humans. A human ecosystem not only includes
money and technology, but energy, materials, pollution, externalities, why we pursue these
things to get the same emotional states of our ancestors. It looks in the parts and the processes
how the parts and processes fit together in a system. So that's quite a big disparity between
the two terms. Progress. We hear about progress all the time. Those following this podcast know
that underpinning progress is the carbon pulse. Progress is the internet suburbs, the wealth and
goods and services that we have. The carbon pulse in contrast is 500 billion human labor
equivalents per year added to the human economy. And we only pay for the cost of their extraction.
And all other technology and industrial progress is based on that foundation and the foundation of
the ecosystems underneath that. This is a one-time endowment for humans. And of course,
it's going to be very correlated with our historical progress, but it is the principle and
we're treating it as if it were interest. Technology. Technology can solve every problem.
From my perspective, I think technology largely serves as an energy vector. So technology is able
to offset problems that humans face. And a lot of people hearing this story, well, humans are
clever. We'll figure it out. Technology always comes up with a way. But in most cases, over 80 to
90% of our technological inventions actually just create new devices that draw on future energy.
The average American has something like 65 devices plugged in in their houses. We have new
innovations that give humans experiences that we didn't have before like cell phones and televisions
or replace tasks that humans used to do manually or with draft labor. All of this requires energy.
We need energy, technology and materials for every single thing in the global economy. But most
people just look at the technology portion of that. Finance. I have a master's in finance from
the University of Chicago. And so I understand it. But from a biophysical perspective, I've come to
believe that a better term is energy laundering. So finance greases the human system. It's a social
construct that allows us to move around like a shell game. Who owns what and get the shells closer
to the spigot using the cantaloupe effect to access more wealth and power. And money laundering
is taking some ill-gotten gains and turning it into money that is socially acceptable. And the
same thing is happening with finance and the carbon pulse. Finance is like a magic wand that
extracts resources and damages ecosystems from the earth faster and moves it towards a smaller
portion of those humans alive today. Energy laundering. Efficiency from a biophysical systems
perspective. The real word would be fragility. So we have pursued efficiency in our global
supply chains, outsourcing to the least cost country of production, making things, tweaking
things to be a little bit better, creating new partnerships in different areas that combine
to have the lowest cost product. This has all been on the backs of incredibly cheap liquid
fuel that greases the global transportation system. But what we've been efficient on is monetary
profits and time and capital. We have not been efficient on soil degradation, natural resource
conservation, ecosystem protection, and we certainly have not been efficient on resilience.
Efficiency and resilience are kind of opposites. And so the more efficient we've gotten, we've
actually increased the fragility of the entire system. Actually, if we were much, much less
efficient today, there would be a lot more slack and opportunity for error in the system on the
six continent overnight supply chain that we've built. The American way of life, from a
biophysical perspective, this is largely due to the special geology and the seniority we get
from the US dollar being the global reserve currency. The United States has used more fossil
hydrocarbons and carbon than any other country in history. We tell these stories that it's the
American way of life, the American dream, but we happen to have found and moved into a country
that had a lot of ancient oceans here. There was more fossil hydrocarbons here than anywhere else
in the world. We also have developed the petrodollar 50 years ago where other countries in the world
have to use our currency to buy key commodities, including oil. And this has resulted in huge
economic benefits where we can consume beyond our means and that deficit is siphoned up by the
rest of the world who need dollars. So the American dream, yes, we are empathic and creative and
have helped the world since World War II, but a lot of our wealth and productivity is due to these
unique and potentially unsustainable tailwinds. Speaking of which, shale oil, we talk about the
shale oil miracle. From a biophysical perspective, the reality is that shale oil is the bottom of
the barrel. We have used the conventional oil as long ago peaked. We use the oil in the North
Slope of Alaska, which is part of the United States. We've used the oil in the Gulf of Mexico,
and now over half of our oil is in the shale plays. All the shale plays have peaked, except for
the Permian. The Permian is expected to peak in the next couple of years. There is nothing after
shale oil, except perhaps oil shale, which is like carrage and rock that has the energy density
of a baked potato. So shale oil drilling effectively created a larger straw to access oil that was
migrated from the source rock, and what it meant is we're that much closer to a slurping sound,
and there's plenty of oil left in the United States. We'll probably be at some sort of plateau for
a decade or so, a reduced plateau, but the issue is that it's not going to continue to grow, and
that has massive implications. After shale oil is gone, there's nothing left. That also has massive
implications for our children, our grandchildren, and our expectations, and our institutions, and
our country. Globalization, again in contrast, the biophysical world might be dependency. We have
a six-continent supply chain that is completely dependent on liquid fuels. Many countries have
pursued import substitution policies with the specialization, the whole economic comparative
advantage argument of guns and butter, so that a lot of countries, including the United States,
are no longer self-sufficient on key goods. We have to import things like active pharmaceutical
ingredients from India and China, lots of oil from Saudi Arabia and other places. So globalization
has been growing for a long time, and we assume that this will just always be the case, but as
oil gets more expensive, as complexity starts to not be affordable, the world is going to become a
bigger place, and we're not prepared for that because we just assume that globalization will
continue as it has. Growth. Economic growth is a very common thing. It's expected. It is an anomaly
in human history, except for the last couple hundred years. The actual term that I think
correctly represents this is metastatic cancer. If we continue to grow at 3% a year, which all
institutions and governments expect, we will double the size of energy and materials in our
society in the next 30 years or so, and quadruple the energy and material use in the next
60 years, and this is not to mention all of the ecosystem degradation, the accelerating population
decline of insects, animals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish. We are functioning as a global
energy-hungry superorganism, and no one wants cancer, but this is kind of a decent metaphor,
and I guess these Earth Day talks in a weird sort of way are an attempt to
imbue self-awareness to the individual cancer cells, but this is an apt metaphor.
Profits, biophysical unpacking of that term would rather be called optimal foraging dynamic
combined with energy surplus. Animals in nature invest a little to get a lot back in the calories
they get from their prey. Humans have this same dynamic where we want to buy two-for-one
cocktails or get a 70% sale on some shoes or get a discount on a house. We have these same
animal instincts to invest a little and get a lot, but we're doing this in a time of a massive,
massive bolus of fossil energy that is supporting human economies, 19 terawatts worth of energy
surplus, and so this seeking of profits has become a cultural objective relative to humans in the
past that didn't have access to a lot of energy surplus, so those options of growing your individual
pie in society were much different than we have today. Money, well biophysically money could have
two terms. One would be a claim on energy because every single thing of money we spend on will then
require energy to burn, but I think in our current global situation a better term would be optionality.
What that means is that even billionaires or middle-income people, everyone recognizing what we
face ahead of us, these times of uncertainty, global central bank printing, debasing of currencies,
people want more money because it gives them more options for the future, and so we're not
so much greedy as people neurochemically want more security and our brains are tricked by thinking
more money will give us that, so money is a claim on energy but really today we pursue it
to have more options in the future because we're uncertain about the future.
Marketing, well marketing is this optimal foraging dynamic plus the fact that we're a social
species and we compare ourselves to others. In my opinion marketing is probably the single most
deleterious invention of human history. We're constantly told on advertisements, you suck if
you buy this product you'll be cool and so it's combining our optimal foraging dynamic
with social comparisons and it's very very powerful. If I were benevolent dictator I might
outlaw advertising. Capitalism and communism very loaded common terms from a biophysical perspective
both of these are social methods that pursue and result in industrialism. Capitalism and
condomism are both growth-based and they are both ecology blind. Capitalism has just been much more
efficient because of finance and no holds barred on the rules but all these isms are still growth-based
industrial-based philosophies so I just wanted to make that suggestion. Consumer, we hear in the
news the consumer was strong this quarter. The vocabulary translation of this is actually
human. We're not consumers, we are human beings. We live in a culture that promotes consumption
but the reality is is that we are biological creatures. Yes there's the ecological
definition of consumer but an economic consumer labels us in such a way that consumption is expected
and culturally approved. We are human beings. Fossil fuels. We have to get off fossil fuels.
Fossil fuels are very powerful. The correct name is fossil carbon and hydrocarbon or flammable
fossils. Once we give the name fuel it automatically gives us permission to burn it. Of course we're
going to use it. Of course we're going to burn it. Of course we're going to develop cars and
infrastructure to access this thing. It's a fuel so this is where semantics become very important.
They are not fossil fuels. They are flammable fossils which we as a culture are choosing to burn.
The environment. Here's the economy. The environment is out there. The actual
correct term would be the web of life. The environment is separate from the economy but humans are
embedded in a very intricate web of life with 10 million other species in complex interacting
intricate fragile systems and so the environment is not out there. It's part of us and we are
part of it. Fish stocks. Another common phrase in our vocabulary. No actually they are fish
populations. Many things in nature are labeled such as they're there for humans to use. Humans
are using almost 40% of the net primary productivity of the planet in addition to all the stored
fossil carbon. Fish are populations of species the same way that rats or armadillos or elephants
or giraffes or dolphins are so they're not stocks they are populations. Apes the true definition
of apes is they are our family. There are five species of great apes bonobos orangutans gorillas
chimpanzees and human beings. We are one of 10 million other species. Our nieces, nephews,
cousins in nature that have all followed similar paths evolutionary to this moment
and again we we don't treat them as the incredibly precious relative that we have on this only
planet that we know of to house life and complex life. Apes are our extended family.
Beef and pork. Well the contrasting actual response to this is dead mammals who probably
lived horrible lives. We go to Whole Foods or to our supermarket and we see these nice
displays of meat and it's all clean and packaged in plastic and we see advertisements on TV that
these hamburgers are these steaks and it looks delicious and it tastes delicious.
The reality is that most of these animals lived in cafe farms had crappy lives and we don't think
about that. We compartmentalize the fact that these one billion cattle live on the planet.
700 million pigs over a billion goats almost as many sheep. Many of these live pretty terrible
lives and it's one of those out of sight out of mind things in our vocabulary. Beef and pork.
Global warming. This is a new term. Well actually the new term is climate change
but global warming itself is a more charged term than climate change but the real term
is global heating. We are adding heat to the earth from our burning of fossil carbon. It in turn is
adding a blanket over earth that is turning into a greenhouse effect that is warming
the earth continually. 90% of the heat or so is going into the oceans. That is not sustainable.
Warming is a euphemism. What we are doing is we are heating the earth. Global heating and this
will continue likely for centuries before the full earth system equilibrium point is reached.
There will be a time hundreds of years from now, a thousand years from now, where if people are
still alive they can look back and see what might one day be called the hetum, the Holocene and
Anthropocene Thermomaximum which is the absolute peak in temperature that was reached on the planet
due to human activities. Very similar to the Paleocene Eocene Thermomaximum that was one of the
more extreme mass extinctions on our planet. We don't know what that is but we're so focused on
this year this decade even this century that the Holocene Anthropocene Thermomaximum will be a thing.
Porn, gambling, junk food, etc. Well all these things produce empty calories.
We pursue supernormal stimuli that are very targeted rewards that mimic a real great
experience that led to an evolutionary advantage for our ancestors but we didn't have to do the work
that our ancestors did to get that special reward. We can pick up our phone and check an email,
we can have a pizza or an ice cream or go on the internet and have mental sex with a stranger
without the tenderness, the intimacy and the real act and there's so many things in our life
that we get these empty calories for from and it's one of the reasons I think we're so unhappy and
so unhealthy is because we don't have to do the work to get these powerful, emotional,
emotionally salient rewards that match our ancestors. Renewables, those of you who follow
the podcast know that a better term for them is rebuildables. An oak tree is renewable, a chicken
is renewable, a solar panel and a wind turbine are rebuildable every 20 or 25 years if we have
the complexity, if we have the global infrastructure, if we have the polysilicon
wafers and the neodymium magnets and all the other rebar and cement and everything so
many of these items are repeatable and rebuildable but they're not renewable, the sun and the wind
are renewable so I think this is a semantically powerful dichotomy. Decarbonization, as we
decarbonize the global energy supply or try to, this will lead to rematerialization.
Many of our lower carbon devices will require lots more copper, lithium, cobalt,
other metals and minerals and we will shift the battle from the atmosphere to the land and
will be a land war where we try and mine and get like orders of magnitude more
metals and minerals to add to our economy so in this sense there is no decoupling,
there might be a decoupling from carbon but there'll be a recoupling of our impacts on
nature and the natural world. In the same sense we use the word green but most of the green
things in today's world are actually brown. We've got a lot of talk, the Biden administration is
talking about electric cars but these electric cars use almost as much energy, have complex
supply chains, we still are burning the energy and even at the same time many of the things that
we've done in the past like Germany and California have done green investments but because of the
natural gas situation in Russia and Ukraine now Germany is having to reopen towns that have coal
plants. So many of the things that we think are green would be green if they were part of a larger
systemic strategy but since they're at the margin in a current system optimizing economic growth
their impact on society actually is brown. Sustainability, to be truly sustainable we will
need contraction of the human enterprise. I don't even like the word sustainability because first
of all just like peak oil and fractional reserve banking system it's kind of a burned term socially
but what we're really talking about when we say sustainability is we mean to be more sustainable
than we are today but if we really mean sustainability if we really mean that term it means a moderate
to significant reduction in the size and the scale of the human enterprise which isn't a
popular thing to say which is why we just say sustainability. Need the corollary there and the
vocabulary for the future is want. Of course we conflate needs and wants and many of the things
that we want might very well be desperate needs for people in the global south or different
generations in the future. In the United States we use a hundred times more energy than our bodies
need two hundred and fifteen thousand kilocalories a day per United States citizen versus around
two thousand twenty five hundred that our bodies need. So many things in our world we conflate
between wants and needs. Peak demand is in the news because we won't need oil anymore because
technology will obviate the need for any more oil. The biophysical equivalent of that is a
simplification so humans use technology to solve problems. The technology results in complexity
the complexity builds a higher metabolism for the last couple centuries every single year
other than recessions we have had more access to energy than the year before and when oil starts
to decline due to depletion ongoing depletion is around six percent a year on the existing
wells in the world this will be many fewer fossil workers to support the economy. So peak demand is
a real misnomer because first of all it assumes that oil is the gasoline is the only product from
oil if we were somehow to miraculously not need internal combustion engines at all because of
EVs we would still need around the same amount of oil. So to say that peak demand is a real thing and
we will continue to grow after that is akin to saying that the reindeer on st. Matthew's island
didn't need lichen anymore like peak lichen. So we have enjoyed a couple centuries of
complexification because of increasing total energy once energy starts to decline there will be
the converse of that which is a simplification the name of my podcast and my work is the great
simplification because I think it's quite likely this could be the largest event that humans ever
face. So I'm not a fan of the peak demand narrative governance the government will figure it out the
government will have a plan we will have republicans and democrats come together to come up with an
answer. Really today the government is in crisis management there a lot are very smart very well
meaning people in government they are overwhelmed with the needs and the challenges of the day
and I'm not sure that our current mode of governance can handle the systemic fragility
and unexpected emergence of some of these threads that are going on in the world. So right now
people in government and I know this because I talked to very senior people and in senate
in congress in 2020 and I got like seven minutes to meet with them or 10 minutes because they're
so busy with the needs of the day that they can't think two or three steps down the road
we're going to need something other than crisis management to solve what's ahead we need
foresight and scenario planning viewed from a systems perspective. The modern media in contrast
the consensus trance or propaganda I think the Ukraine war is one example where there's this
public narrative that Ukraine is kicking butt and Putin is Hitler and some of that is certainly
true but anyone that speaks opposite to that gets canceled or shouted down the same thing with this
story the same thing with maybe climate change is being publicly discussed because the answer to
climate change is building renewables and efficiency so that that's an answer but it seems like the
journalistic truth and integrity that existed 40 50 years ago has dissipated and now there is a
path dependence nature to what we read in the conventional media and certainly this complex
systems story that I'm unfolding in this presentation is not going to be on the evening news
ever so we are kind of the general public is part of the consensus trance that it's really a
intellectual opposite of bread and circuses that we can't unless we look at alternative media on
twitter or podcasts or things like that we can't really ascertain what's going on from the fourth
estate the way that we used to investments well the corollary to that is real capital real capital
investments traditionally have been financed into stocks and bonds real capital is social capital
our networks our friends our relationships natural capital our trees our ecosystems our rivers our
clean air our soil human capital which is our knowledge our skills our health and built capital
which is the camera doing this earth they talk and a chainsaw and aloe vera plant and a house
and a solar panel so we're going to have to increasingly change how we think about investments
to be more diversified among these four areas because finance as a marker for these things
is going to be increasingly unrelated me versus we our culture has lauded rugged individualism
and promoted people rising above i think this is natural that during a period of
steep steep steep energy surplus and economic growth that naturally those opportunities arose
but in our ancestral times many times it was those cooperative units those tribes
that shared sacrifice and cooperated out competed those tribes that had primarily
competitive individuals in them so all of us have this shared genome of cooperation and
competition but our culture has been me me me and what we face now is a series of collective
action problems and we is the operative term i think there are people that take ayahuasca or
mushrooms or other things and they quickly have a shift in perspective that sees that
they their individual body is part of a grander whole but most people are still in this
um me me me dynamic in this country um and i think we is the operative word for the future
not only we as a community as a culture but we as a as a web of life how we relate to
the other creatures on this planet and in the future success well similarly this has a
corollary in the word meaning i think many people of course want to achieve success success
during this one-time carbon pulse has been linked to having more money which gets more
bling and more social status but people are now starved for meaning they feel like just
pursuing this rat race of dopamine and supernormal stimuli and gadgets is interesting and fun but
leaves a hollow feeling in your soul but the good news is given the synthesis that i'm
laid out here uh and in my podcast is we can make a difference we can live a life of meaning now
just pick any one of the multiple challenges that we face and dive into it and dedicate your life
and be a champion for that task but people want meaning depart not economic growth or religion
per se but some value and directive in their lives because economic growth is not going to
give us meaning for too much longer people we come across a lot of people in our daily lives
we see people at the grocery store the gas station or the airport the real word i think is
relationships we don't have time in this busy wealthy society to actually have relationships
with other humans the way that our ancestors did and i expect this is going to be important again
there's a difference between people and relationships development this is getting close to the core
theme of earth day i think development really means wherever you are listening to this watching
this it is an encroachment on your home on your little place on this blue green planet that is
the ecosystems the insects the animals the trees the weeds that are part of your place
um where you your family your friends spend your life and at some point the metastatic
gross growth uh dynamic of the super organism is going to lay this planet bare and we're going
to have to have champions that draw the line on development where they live and protect the
natural systems the ecosystems in their home development and damaging our home homo sapiens
in contrast homo kaleidos which is clever man homo sapiens is the ninth perhaps last perhaps not
uh of the homo line there was her gaster habilis florensis neander tallis forget the other two
but we are wise man we have been anything but wise we have been incredibly clever
it's an open question whether we can live up to our our moniker heaven and in contrast earth
we have lots of stories in our society about the unexpected reward that awaits us after we die
it has been a cultural objective for a long time from a biophysical perspective
i think earth is heaven life everlasting is not something we need to gain it's something we need
to not lose there should probably be around 500 million years remaining the age of complex life
on earth that's time for us to exist discover and thrive for a time greater than any of us
can really imagine and before the carbon pulse before our economic uh super organism took control
of the world those hundreds of millions of years were stretched out before us essentially
indefinitely but our current economic system and aspirations and um you know doubling down on what
we plan to do the next 30 to 50 years has hit the earth like a rogue asteroid and created change
that is essentially instantaneous on geologic timescales humans will not transcend life we are
life and damn fragile life at at that once our our toys run out if it were our primary goal to
sterilize the earth of large life of conscious life and the diversity of this planet we could find
few ways more direct than what we're doing now the only real long-term future is an ecologic
and biophysical future paradise is ours to lose and we're losing it a trillionth human child sometime
deep in the future should be able to share her world with hummingbirds orangutans elephants
and millions of other species including to be able to watch a field of fireflies at night
i've come to conclude that such a future many many human generations in the future
coexisting with all the other wild diversity of life on this planet that is heaven
and against all odds i hope that people listening to this recognize our time and place
what's at stake in a very lonely universe we have to value and protect the ecosystems and
species that we share this planet with thank you for listening i hope you play a role in some small
way in your corner of this beautiful earth
