In the arc of history, the economy and the technology always flies past the educational
system in a way that makes for certain danger. It's precisely the discontinuity I'm pointing to,
this generational gap that gets bigger and bigger as technology accelerates.
The first time you even get the sense of a generational gap is kind of in the 60s.
And then it becomes a topic and then you get the whole thematization of generations.
So that notion that there is in a way a acute lag between the education and the technological
development that occurs now in our time of kind of like hyper-innovative, hyper-capitalist acceleration,
essentially. In that sense, the schools are decades behind.
I'd like to welcome philosopher and educator and friend Zach Stein. Zach is the co-founder
of the Center for World Philosophy and Religion. He currently works at Civilization Research
Institute. He is the author of dozens of published papers and books, including Education in a Time
Between Worlds. We discussed what is wrong with our education system. Zach believes that education
and the problems with it are at the root of the metacrisis. He's got some rather radical
suggestions on how to go forward. But I think his general take on what's lacking in our current
education system, which is too based on metrics and standards and less on actually learning.
There's a lot there that I agree with. This is a long and interesting and deep conversation
with a big mind. Zach Stein, please welcome Zach. This conversation is long time coming,
long overdue. I wanted you on this show two years ago. I imagine we've both learned a lot in those
two years. It's better for our viewers that you're here today. Yeah, agreed. Like me,
obviously, you've taken a pretty wide lens looking at our global systems, what we might call the
metacrisis. What has been your path, your work life up until now? Maybe just give a brief snapshot
on what you're doing now. I was a musician first. Then I became a developmental psychologist and
kind of an educator. As it were, I went to a graduate school of education and studied human
development. I was dyslexic, so I was always a little bit reflective on the educational system.
That became my practice professionally, was just to think about these things as a participant
observer. I got really focused on standardized testing for a bunch of reasons. In graduate school,
I was focused on deep philosophical theory in education and human development kind of revolving
around issues of justice and fairness and testing. This led me to realize that it was possible to
break an educational system, like it was possible to actually do something so sweeping with the
policy, for example, like no child left behind, that you could ostensibly break what the educational
system's function was, which was to facilitate intergenerational transmission, allow the next
generation to step into responsibility and capacity and confront the problems that civilization's
addressing. You could break that and then you'd have this civilizational collapse. I didn't know
there was a field that studied civilizational collapse. I'd never heard of the term catastrophic
or existential risk or any of that stuff, but kind of stumbled on what in retrospect would be
called a tainter dynamic, Joseph Tainter, who you had on, I believe. The standardized testing
industrial complex in the American public educational system ended up having this diminishing returns
on investment in complexity dynamic, which meant that they kept trying to solve this problem
through testing and was actually making it worse and then wasn't able to see that they were making
it worse and then this compounding kind of iotrogenic spiral of testing. What was that
word you just used? Iotrogenic spiral. Iotrogenic just means damaged done by a doctor, for example,
is the most strict technical term, but it more technically means damaged done with the intention
to heal. You're putting the standardized testing system in place with the intention to fix the
system, but in fact, the thing you're doing to quote, fix it is actually kind of making it worse,
but because all your optics are built around that way of fixing, you can't even
see that it's your way of fixing that's making it worse. This becomes a spiral that's tied into that
dynamic that Tainter recognized, which is a common bureaucratic pattern of just keeping
throwing more complexity and money at the same problem in the same way when you should just
switch tactics entirely or redefine the problems face basically. I saw that pattern then in
2015 met Daniel Schmockenberger and then had this whole kind of encounter with the field of
existential risk and catastrophic risk. At the same time, I'd been working with
kind of Ken Wilber and Mark Gaffney in the space of integral theory, so I was taking this broad
meta theoretical view of the whole world situation and I actually heard the term metacrisis at the
2015 integral theory conference for the first time, which is where I met Daniel. This convergence of
thinking about human development in a fundamental way, seeing that there was a way to actually
destroy civilization rooted in mishandling human development, rooted in breaking the
educational system and then being plugged in this much broader discourse about all the ways
that you could kind of like make a civilization self-terminate to kind of bring some Daniel's
language in, but as an educator, psychologist, philosopher type, not a technician, scientist,
as it were, hard scientist or ecologist or something, and that are focusing a lot on world views,
skills, and educational crises, legitimation crises, and a whole bunch of the kind of internal
psychological dynamics of the metacrisis and the kind of
tremendous amount of educational... We need like an educational renaissance in order to
address the metacrisis as much as we need incredible economic and technological innovation
and political reform and a whole bunch of other things. We need a type of educational renaissance
that we haven't seen in human history. So I have lots and lots of questions for you.
First of all, jumping off what you just said, is there any anthropological research that shows
different cultures or civilizations in the past imploded or collapsed or went into senescence
because of lack of development or education? Is there a way that we could research that? Do we
even know? There's ways to make reasonable inferences. So if you look at the collapse of
the Roman Empire, for example, what you have there becomes a bureaucracy that becomes so
kind of bloated and also corrupt and complex and fragile, that it becomes hard for the elders to
actually pass along the entirety of the tacit knowledge needed to maintain the thing. So it's
a way of thinking about institutional decay or other dynamics that just put a drag on the
ability of the civilization to adapt. And so you can presume that in a case where other
institutions are decaying and where the overall complexity of the civilization outstrips the
leadership, that they're not going to be able to kind of pass on to the next generation what is
occurring. And so that's inferences you can make across a bunch of different data. But then when
you look at major turnings in civilization, if you look at like, for example, the transition from
feudalism into modernity, let's say from feudalism into what we know now as kind of nation-state
kind of capitalism collaboration, that transition was in a very fundamental way
an educational transition, which meant that the feudal education systems simply weren't
keeping up with the printing press and the kinds of accounting and the kinds of technology
that were moving history beyond what these educational systems were able to do, quite
antiquated. And the move through to the Enlightenment gives us this whole new notion of
education, of public education, where mathematics, science, literacy is universal. That was not the
meta-curriculum of the prior civilization. It was an emergent one. And so we're facing a similar
need of transition to new civilizational, let's say meta-curriculum, very fundamental new types
of literacies and capacities. If we don't want the whole thing to completely go off the rails.
So it's almost, well, I'm just thinking about our modern last 50 years. It's almost like
our culture, our objectives, our technology, our governance, our discourse, our social media,
all that is evolving and changing rapidly. But the education system doesn't move hardly at all,
just 1% or 2% at a time. And we're now, I mean, I taught college not that long ago,
a lot of what we're teaching is trivia and facts and figures that mattered
the last century that are not real equipped to prepare young humans for the next 50 years.
So education is too slow. The whole education system has kind of a built-in
metabolism and momentum that's hard to shift. Is that an accurate statement?
I mean, yes and no. In one sense, educational institutions are the thing that can serve the
culture. So in one sense, educational institutions are almost by definition conservative because
they're saying, here's what we used to do. They're saying, here's the elder speaking to the youth.
So in that sense, there's a way in which you don't want every new fad to sweep through the
educational system and just change it. In fact, you want a certain amount of due diligence in
doing radical educational reforms. So for example, No Child Left Behind was an example of
absence of concern about second, third order effects of sweeping radical change. And it was
the first time, with the exception of the civil rights movement, that the federal government
overrode the rights of states in the United States to set their own internal testing policies and
other things. So that was an example of rapid change in the educational system, which was actually
not great because of its rapidity. But there's a bigger thing that you're pointing to, which is
that in the arc of history, the economy and the technology always flies past the educational
system in a way that makes for certain danger. It's precisely the discontinuity I'm pointing to,
this generational gap that gets bigger and bigger as technology accelerates. And so the first time
you even get the sense of a generational gap is kind of in the 60s. And then it becomes a topic,
and then you get the whole thematization of generations again, as I were. And so that notion
that there is in a way a acute lag between the education and the technological development
that occurs now in our time of hyper-innovative, hyper-capitalist acceleration, essentially,
in that sense, the schools are decades behind. And that's why the kids are completely won over
by the technology. The schools have ostensibly lost to the screens. And most reflective educators
are kind of fighting that battle. And one of the reasons that the schools are so subject,
I think, to a certain kind of identity politics and a certain kind of focus on the wrong things
is because we can't address how fundamentally off the nature of these schools are. They are
with quite antiquated institutions. Well, I'm sure we're going to get to this, but
you're aware of, or even working on, alternative education models to the conventional
K-12 and university system. In those successful examples around the world right now,
do they make rules and strictly forbid screen use? Or is the educational experience so interesting
and rewarding to the student that they lose their compulsion to use screens all the time?
It's a good question. There's different views. I would say there's at least
two or three different views. I know of places, and this includes certain Waldorf schools that
are extremely successful, and then also secondary college, especially like micro colleges, as they're
called, which are quite interesting, where you go there precisely because you don't bring your
screen. And there's a very deliberate engagement with technology, and there's a kind of a
like a detoxing as part of the curriculum. So that's one view, and I think that's very important.
There's actually research going on now, studying the effects on young kids of not being with their
screen. But you have to get how ubiquitous that means the screen must be if we study the effects
of not being with it. You go to summer camp, and they take your phone away, and what is it like
to three days in, the kids start having withdrawals basically. So there's a detox perspective.
There's a kind of like come back to it after you've been completely detoxed from it and see
what it's like. So I've seen that model. But then I've also seen the model, even in monastic
communities, where they're actually saying, no, you need to be able to deal with the presence
of this thing all the time. Like you need to go a little bit more cyborg and kind of begin to think
about what it means to be adapted to the existence of technology. But that means you then you need to
do technology education, then you need to know what you're actually dealing with. Because I think
most young people don't realize how predatory the technologies are, how extractive and exploitative
they are. I think if they knew that, they would actually be a little bit more concerned slash
rebellious against the man is basically extracting and exploiting you as you're having fun on social
media. But it's hard to paint a clear enough picture of that. So I've seen this other class
where they're like, no, we have to live with these things. That means understanding them.
And that means beginning to adapt and to build our own technologies to our purposes. And I think
they're both right. But as you can see, they're both a little bit extreme, as it were.
Why don't you hypothesize on this? If there were a program so that kids could be
behaviorally, vertically, horizontally stacked, where they have the right nutrition, the right
sleep, the right exercise, the right community, the right psychological development of friends,
oxytocin all around, coupled with an education about what social media is doing to all of us,
but especially to teenagers and young adults. Is it possible then that those young humans
could choose and have the constitution and awareness and willpower to make screens a small
part of their life consciously? Is there any evidence of that? Or what do you think about that?
It has been suggested to me by people who, by McLuhan scholars, so people who study the
evolution of technology and communication technology and who have a theory of generational
change from that, that the youngest people are seeking a return to reality. That in fact,
it will not be hard to create the types of environments where adults are requested by kids
for boundaries to be set around technology. And that's another thing about human development,
where there's some misunderstanding. It's very important for adults to set boundaries for children,
and children want them set and feel safe and cared for when they are set. So there's a sense of
irresponsibility on the adult's part to just not simply set the boundaries, which the kids now know
we have good reason to set. So that's weird, right? That the kids know that these things,
in a certain sense, they've seen the social dilemma or whatever, and they know this thing's
bad for me, and yet mom's not setting a boundary, or dad's not setting a boundary, or school's not
setting a boundary, or society's not stopping, the company's from praying upon me. So there's
a sense in which there's going to be a call for that, but there's also generation arguably lost
to it, because it's designed to be addictive and to dysregulate your limbic system.
That's not a second, third order effect. That's a design intention that's intentionally designed
to do that. So that's the other thing is that if we really educated them, I think the companies would
go out of business, because then they wouldn't be used. So we've had conversations about this
before, where you think the lack of a sufficient and updated education system
is at the root of many of the crises we're facing, especially in the United States.
So what percentage of that education being at the root is the screens and the addiction to
dopamine and scrolling and technology, and how much of it is the education itself?
It's very hard to tell at this point. But I know that in the 90s, in the 1990s, before you could
blame the screens, is when you started to get the ADHD phenomenon. That's a whole other conversation.
I'm not going to talk about the medicalization of academic underperformance, but the point was
that academic underperformance became so severe that they had to medicalize it.
And medicalizing it means you blame the kid's brain when, in fact, another inference is the
school must be systematically failing if so many kids can't even pay attention. So there's
the canaries in the minds in the 90s of the irrelevance and kind of ostensible hypocrisy,
like that the reflective smartest adolescents had to cynically buy into a zero-sum game with
their friends. So the hyper-competitiveness of it, that one of the most competitive experiences of
your life will be college admissions and that all the adults are cool with that, sets a tone.
So that's just not in the United States, though. There are people in Korea that commit suicide
if their kids didn't get into college and crazy stuff like that.
This is why I studied testing. I mean, testing destroys people's lives.
Testing creates suicides. You have whole grade school classes with ulcers in Connecticut,
like you have entire school districts from the top down cheating. Like, testing is a remarkable
phenomenon. Why large-scale standardized testing has incredible second and third order effects.
So we're supposed to be educating and preparing these young humans for the world in a learning
environment, but instead we're putting them through fight or flight cortisol and other
endocrine cascades. Is this a global phenomenon then, or are there some cultures that are doing
it much better? It's interesting, right? In one sense, it's a global phenomenon. Insofar as
one definition of civilization would be... So there's this argument like, are we in one
civilization or are there many civilizations? And one argument that we're in one is that there is
a universally agreed to bureaucratic standards for educational achievement, which is to say basically
like a PhD from XY, the university counts anywhere in the world. Other ones don't.
And this is true. China sends their people to Berkeley. So in that sense that the
standards set, especially by the post-war United States research university standards,
which was a military industrial success, the post-war American university system was
incredible. It's worth talking about the breakdown of that, but it's at that global standard. So it
is a very much a universal phenomenon. And now the competitiveness specifically with the youth
isn't as bad in some places, but they tend to be places like Scandinavia,
or places that don't have large-scale schooling and testing. Like because they're
in a country that doesn't have basic infrastructure and stuff,
there you'd have a different type of competitive dynamic among the youth, but it wouldn't be a
test-driven college entrance like dog eat dog fight. So in the less developed,
less material cultures, do they have better education systems for what they're trying to
accomplish or does that not correlate? And again, that's so complex, right? Because like
how many kids who get into Harvard can start a fire and cook over it?
Like probably not that many. But you look in some of these cultures and like coming of age means
you learn how to cook for yourself, you learn how to start a fire, you could skin an animal,
you could grow food, you could be alone in a dangerous part of the city by yourself.
There's a bunch of things that occur in socialization without schooling in quote-unquote
underdeveloped areas where these kids have by some standards way more intelligence. Now they
would fail all the tests and they wouldn't succeed in school because they haven't even
learned to read a sense of it. Let's say that's the case, right? So just almost you almost can't
compare. And now of course there are places in the kind of global south where you have a kind of
two tiered and you do have like actually access through their school systems to American colleges
and graduate schools and their own schools. But the reach of the large scale public schools in the
western industrialized kind of post like the western industrialized democracies. That's a
thing. A lot of people are in the clutches of that specific kind of educational system.
Was it always this way 50, 100 years ago was the U.S. education system that way? And the
reason I ask is I wonder if global GDP boosted by debt and energy and now AI creates this like
ring of power that captures everyone and this is how we have to compete. And it's that. It's
that cultural goal for material excess that is kind of underpinning the testing and the competition
even as younger and younger humans. You think there's a correlation there? Absolutely. And
you can see pretty early on that the kind of competition between the great powers
that has defined the 20th and 21st century involved the radical experimentation with large-scale
education. So like some of the most sweeping changes in American education come to following
the launch of Sputnik. It's like one of the most well known vignettes in American education history,
you know, is that the Russians launched Sputnik and our reaction is to completely change the
American public educational system, to compete with the Russians ostensibly, to institutionalize the
SAT, to build out an entire program on science. That's where we get STEM from basically. That
whole thing emerges basically from the Cold War. And so that's just the way it has been for a long
time. And before that, you have similar things where if you want to compete as an industrial
nation, even in the 1800s, you need a school system that looks a lot like a factory
so that the kids can go be in the factory. I mean, that's again another demonstrated thing,
the correlation between the kind of way the means of production are organized in a particular
society and the way the pedagogy is organized in that society. Usually isomorphic so that
if the kids can have a job or they're ringing a bell, he's going to be in a school where they're
ringing a bell. And that was part of, again, the competition between powers was that in the 1800s.
Our school system was radically reform-based to bring in all the immigrants and to get the
immigrants prepared to go into the factories. The aristocrats who ran the factories had private
school that didn't look like factories and had this, you know, so there's always, it's a complex
conversation. But yes, in a way, you can't think about the history of education without thinking
geopolitically and economically, and that's the case now for sure.
In contrast to what you just said, do today's aristocrats, the rich elite,
do their kids have better education or it seems like they'd probably just have better teachers
with the same testing and competition and fight-or-flight dynamic for their kids, yes?
Well, I'll say two things. One, it's one of those, I think, I mean, what is it, an urban legend,
but it's probably true that the people who make a lot of money in Silicon Valley send their kids
to school where there aren't computers. Like you hear that, right? You hear that, where it's like-
Is that true?
I believe that it is true, that disproportionately you get in places where there's high wealth,
people opting into situations where they can get their kids removed from the technological
surround that's normative for the other public schools, where they're actually training the
kids to use iPads all day. Your kid gets to go be in a forest all day and doesn't look at and do
this. So there's that phenomenon. But the other factor is the Ivy League kind of elite college
access competition does, of course, also affect those. I mean, that's one of the distinguishers
of being distinguished. Another way you can trace civilizational collapse is actually the breakdown
in elite signaling mechanisms, which is to say inter-elite competition, which is the overproduction
of elites, which is an educational crisis, meaning that there's nothing that signals actually that
this guy is cognitively better than that guy. There's nothing that signals that this person's
better trained than that trained because the overall gaming of the system has been such,
the cheating and the entrance scandals and all of those things that add up to make it so that
just doesn't mean what it used to mean to go to some of these places anymore.
And so I would argue that people that truly avant-garde, quote unquote elites, would probably
be getting their kids out of that rat race and into some other less visible rat race.
I mean, at the core of this, Zach, is almost a philosophical question, which is what is
education for? And I think there's the classic liberal arts education where we want to expose
young people to as many things about the world that they should know to have a broad knowledge of
the world. I don't know much about the history of education, but it seems to me that
right now the goal is to prepare people to get into the workforce to help economic growth
is really the goal of education. Well, now you've hit the nail on the head,
which is that and most of the discussion of education never actually gets to this question,
which put more frankly is just like, what is a good life? What is valuable? What's actually
valuable? What are the lessons that we should teach young people about how to be a good person,
about the right ways to act in the world? It's a very, very simple question, which should be at
the core of education, which are actually not answered well by secular public schools,
to the word noting, because they're specifically designed not to answer questions about the meaning
of life. So they have the civic religion, which functioned pretty well in the United
States, you have the American kind of civic religion, where yes, you're in the school to be
a good citizen, you are, and then you have a kind of 21st century kind of like
skills view, which is that you're being trained to be a participant in some kind of global workforce,
like an accepting kind of an accepting multicultural kind of global workforce,
like that's where you're because that's like an admirable thing. But the fact of the matter
is that we're running a civilization on a culture that doesn't have clear answers about
really fundamental questions about value, which is to say the content of education,
the thing we're teaching, we're kind of like, we've been running off of fumes of pre-modernity,
it's like, because the answer, what is a good life? It's actually, this is a religious question,
like what's a life that has not been misspent? Is there a non-arbitrary answer to that?
Which means like an answer that's better than another answer. Not everyone's answers to that
is equally valid, which is the default assumption we have now as a culture. But actually, no,
there is a better or worse answer to the question of what is a life that has not been misspent?
All right, what is a good life? Which means what should we teach our children to become like?
And what should we allow them to grow into or shape them away from? These are the questions
that educators have to ask, which are deep, normative ethical questions about value. So the
collapse of value at the center of culture, meaning the inability to use what Charles Taylor
called languages of strong evaluation, makes it so that yes, slowly the effectiveness of the
educational system starts to really wane. So that's the educational renaissance I'm talking
about now is actually a return to a different way of speaking about value at the center of culture,
which would be non-relativistic, which would have to boot from a different kind of metaphysics
than a metaphysics that suggests to us that the universe itself is without meaning,
and that the emergence of the human is completely by chance.
Just, I mean, just worth saying, like there's never been a civilization that has run on the idea
that it itself is meaningless, that the value it creates is up to us and doesn't matter to the
universe. Hard to invest in a civilization that claims itself to be arbitrary, which is where
our civilization has gone to. I'm talking about like Hugh Alharari and people who are at the center
of culture who are espousing a subtle kind of values relativism, which ends up being insidiously
seeping into the educational system, makes it impossible for us to speak in normative ways about
the shapes of the personalities and dispositions of the youth, which it is our responsibility to be
in a position of authority. Again, it's the responsibility, the honor of the adult to be
able to set boundaries. So we're confused even about the legitimacy of asymmetric power period,
which is, again, based on the confusion about value. So the work with Gaffney Wilbur, this new
book, is about this question. What's the core of the issue? It's actually value. Why stop the
mental crisis? If, in fact, the universe could give a shit. It's a simple way to say it, and
it's a little bit provocative. But when you deal with young kids, they ask very simple questions,
you know, very simple questions about why adults do the things the way they do.
Well, if the universe doesn't care, and humans found ourselves here in 2024 as an emergent
process of stardust eventually developing consciousness, I think that's, to me, incredibly
empowering and makes me feel like what I do on my time here on Earth is really important
towards steering towards something lasting or more beautiful or better than we have today.
I much prefer that story than the alternative. Which alternative, do you mean?
That, you know, God created on the third day and weird products of that, and he's got our back
and just go out and do good. Right. So there's this contrast between a kind of
creationist story and a story where the universe is fundamentally meaningless.
And I'm saying that's an interesting and false dichotomy, which is to say
deep conversations to be had about the second part of what you said, which was that wanting to
create a world that was better, that was more beautiful, that was lasting, which is an appeal
to some fundamental set of values. It's an appeal to a sense that those things matter.
And my only subtle intervention into the worldviews, do those things matter just to you?
Or do they actually matter? Which is to say, is the moral field, which is to say the field of
value as real as the physical fields. And we live in a culture where that's a, of course,
the physical stuff is real. But the other things that bind us, like love, obligation, ethics,
commitment, that these things are not real. And in fact, as arbitrary, or much less arbitrary,
or excuse me, much more arbitrary than physical law. And so that didn't used to be the case in
human worldviews. It's worth noting most human worldviews ran on the idea that value was intrinsic
to cosmos and that humans participated in value and continued and extended and expressed value
that pre-existed them. And they attuned to a value, which would be there whether they were there or
not, and which it was their obligation to attune to more. That's when the more like the dominant view,
the modern view, again, part of the meta curriculum of our civilization, has been in fact
that no, issues of value are arbitrary. And you can't think as a realist about value.
So Ian McGillchrist, for example, argues that value and consciousness are equally primordial to
universe and long of like time, space, matter. That's the view that I'm espousing, which would
make us non-relativistic about issues of value, which would mean that when we said we want to
make the world better, we're able to say actually better, not better up to me. We're better with
the people who agree with me and hopefully we win in terms of power. But actually, we can have a
non-arbitrary discussion about the nature of things that are intrinsically valuable.
So what does that mean non-relativistic? So relativistic would be that your view of the
good life and my view of the good life, that if they're very different, that that's fine.
In one sense, that's okay. But in another sense, if they're different enough that your view of the
good life squashes mine, doesn't allow me to live mine, whereas mine would allow you to live yours.
I would say that the one that allows you to live yours is better than the one that actually
doesn't allow other visions of the good life to live. So that's an example of like a Rawlsian
or Habermasian view where you can say, okay, let's talk in a non-relativistic way,
which is to say a way that doesn't end up allowing...
So again, this is kind of basic ethics and philosophy. There's like relativistic ethics,
which is saying basically anything goes more or less. And you're not going to feel like anything
goes because you were socialized into a culture. But if you were socialized into a culture,
you'd feel very differently about what goes. And I'm saying, no, actually, there's a way to
boot an ethics that's non-relativistic, which says that universally, there are things that are
true about the nature of value. So here, let me summarize thus far an insight that I haven't had
yet. The economic superorganism that sloths forward trying to get low entropy inputs to
increase the metabolism of the global human economy in an unthinking way,
the amount of energy surplus that especially the global north has accumulated, presumably would have
been enough to say, wow, let's have an education system where we teach our youth how to have a
good life and philosophy and classics and meditation and chanting and nature skills
and how to build a fire and all the things. But it actually had the opposite effect, which was to
train them as little ants or termites in the larger colony towards getting more surplus.
So the positive feedback of the superorganism actually has also destroyed the academy and
the education system in a slow release sort of way. Yeah, absolutely. And again, to frame it,
it's a distortion of value. If you think about what that global superorganism is doing,
what it is pursuing ultimately as most valuable for all the humans,
all the humans are aligned and coordinated in some way towards pursuing this thing,
the goal of this thing, which is something like continuing to grow abstract value
or some very strange notion that's so abstract from human experience.
So it's an interesting way that we've been all aligned towards a particular definition of what
is valuable to do. When you say value, is that synonymous with an ethos, an ethic, a morality?
In many ways, yeah. You can't get ethics and morality without some conversation about
value. But value is a living thing in cosmos. We respond to value. Beauty is valuable.
We are drawn to it and drawn to protect it and can justify things very fundamentally
in terms of saying, well, it's beautiful. Therefore, X. And I would argue that
what we say anthropologically, which is say, in the fullness of complex epistemology,
there's a universality to the value of beauty.
But right now, anything of value in the sense that you just said has a dollar overlay on top of it.
That imprints on the cultural perception of its value.
So now you're getting it. It's an abstract value or exchange value, as Marx used to call it,
and actual value. And so I'm saying, what's actual value? And can we educate people into
the perception of actual value, which would be the seeing through the simulation of value
that's put forth by the global economy, which says, no, don't look at the thing that's actually
valuable because it's free. Look at the thing that's not truly valuable, but that we can sell you.
So let me ask you a question. If there were a group of 12 to 18 year olds or 10 to 18 year olds,
and you did a double blind test or whatever, would they inherently naturally know the difference
between value and abstract value on a group of choices?
This would be a very important type of exploration to do in the context of different
pedagogies and educational systems. Because from my perception, this notion of opening the eye of
value, or you can call it value exception, or just how do we get people to attune to actual value?
It's a very deep question. And for advertising, it's premised on doing the opposite of that.
And advertising, again, it's one of the most ubiquitous industries.
And so there's a retraining of our ability to perceive value. And what's interesting is that
that is related to our ability to admit that we can say true things, even if we're not
scientist or whatever. That's very important to get people to know, that you can know true
things and say true things, not about everything, obviously. But there's this whole class of things
which we need to empower, especially young people, to take ownership over the things that
they know and can say that are true, that don't have to be mediated, that don't have to be given
to them by an expert. And that's the way up and into this conversation about what's really valuable
to you. So when you say value, you mentioned beauty. Can you list a few other things that
would be naturally of value as opposed to abstract value? Yeah, absolutely. So in the book I mentioned,
first principles and first values, there's a list of 16 of them. Integrity is one. Intimacy
is another, which is to say the value of becoming close while remaining separate,
the value of sharing a story. These things that are intrinsically valuable, which
are an end in themselves and yet promote other goods through their actualization. So values net
positive value becomes self-generative and auto poetic. And so again, that list,
personhood, another very key value. And if you identify value that's unarbitrary, it means
you have to trace it back through, you have to trace it across cultures and they have to trace
it back through human culture, then you have to trace it back through biology and physics.
And so that becomes an interesting thing. And so integrity is a clear one, right? It's like we
experience integrity phenomenologically. But clearly, as Buckminster Fuller and others discussed,
integrity begins, which is to say physical structures of integrity or selected for by
the universe. So what does it mean to be selected for by the universe? I mean, you're valued by
the universe. So the universe shows that it values integrity early, as soon as it builds
structures with certain things. So the preservation of the existence of certain types of things by
the universe itself is what we call evolution, right? That's a whole complex process of evaluation.
This is our view as we articulated in this book, but also Whiteheadian
metaphysics about the appetite of the universe. And what is the universe actually seeking to
maintain as it emerges and grows and evolves? And so things like integrity and things like
intimacy selected for by the universe itself. The last time I was with you, we had tacos and beer,
and this was not the conversation. I don't remember Whiteheadian as part of the vocabulary.
So a lot of this is over my head, but holy crap, you know your stuff, Sack. So let me get back
to the main arc. So our education system, especially in the United States, has harmed
students, partially the development of the screens and all that, but also the standardization
and measurement. Actually, before I ask this, could you articulate a few reasons why standardization
and measurement has specifically harmed our students and society? We mentioned the stress
before. Are there others? Yeah, there's many. I mean, so there's a very famous psychologist,
Donald Campbell. He has this thing called Campbell's Law. And it basically means the law,
I won't do it verbatim, but Campbell's Law is something like the degree to which you make
some social indicator important is the degree to which it will become subject to corruption.
It's basically Campbell's Law. And so he applies this to standardized testing specifically in
schools. He's like, listen, and this was no child left behind. It was high stakes decision making
hinged upon the outcomes of these tests, both for the individuals and for the school districts
and for individual teachers. So what's the chance that they're not going to focus all of their
attention on the test, right? Even if they don't cheat, just by completely distorting the curriculum
to perform well on the test, the test fails to be an index of the quality of the curriculum.
See what I'm saying? They want to see how the curriculum's doing. They don't want to see how
well you test prep, but they end up seeing how well you test prep. So you're both scamming the test
and completely dishonoring the kids because you're not actually honoring their curriculum.
You're just getting a sense of what's going to be the test. So that's an example without cheating.
Just the incentivization of the standardization ends up driving us towards this truncation
of what's possible in the curriculum where all the curriculum becomes test prep,
even though the goal was actually to use it as just a measure of the existing curriculum, right?
So the distortion field created by that type of testing practice is profound.
So you and I have talked in prior years about nature versus nurture and the fact that
all humans, our phenotypes today are a product of selfish and cooperative bottlenecks in our past,
and that we have both in our wiring. But I guess what I'm hearing is that our education system
steers young humans towards the selfish individualistic as opposed to the cooperative, collaborative
wiring in our nature because of this testing and this competition when there should be
more learning and collaboration, is that a valid statement?
If you predicate testing on the idea that it's a competition,
then you create an environment where each of the players in there is acting in their own interest,
and you don't have to use testing that way. You could decouple it from
high stakes decision making. You could use it as a measure, but without having the measure be such
so high stakes that it distorts all the practice. So you could just use it as an observational
measure and not actually couple it totally to decision making. So high stakes is a huge part of
it. Standardization is another part of it. And then the faulty psychologies behind the
test development themselves. So that's the other thing is that they are
running bad psychological models to create the test or not even thinking about psychology when
they create the tests. And then therefore giving over to students languages of self-understanding
that are a psychological or confusing and non-psychological. So what does it mean to have
an SAT score that's XYZ, right? And why would you want that to be a part of your self-understanding?
It's not. And they don't tell you why you got that score or what it means about your capacities
or even what you could do to get a better score. So what it ends up doing is making it so again,
no languages of strong evaluation. We're kind of confused about how to think about our own skills
because we're in a context of evaluation that isn't psychologically sophisticated.
So let me ask you this. Where I was going with that previous comment is that once school is done
and they're 23 and in the workforce, does that embedded stress and competition carry over into
their professional careers? And it's a two-part question. Does it carry over for those that
did score highly and were competitive? Is it a positive feedback? And does it have some sort of
a boomerang effect on those that might be very well adjusted and very great human potential,
but they're not good at scoring standardized tests. And so they were in the bottom two quintiles of
scoring. Does that then impede their future progress or their psychology or whatever in our
culture? It's just, yes. I mean, so it's funny because it's like to the extent that we want
adults to collaborate and work together and resolve problems in ways that are cooperative and not
hyper competitive, we should have schooling environments that are getting kids cooperating
about the most fundamental problems that they're working on. But the most fundamental problems
that they're working on is their own advancement through the system, even if there's not testing.
So the other thing is you could take away the test because there's a huge anti-testing movement
which goes too far in the other direction. Even if you take away the test, we're still
in a situation where we're not having honest conversations with kids about their future and
kind of very radically funneling different types of opportunities through these competitive
bottlenecks. So if you're not in a testing environment, then you have to do all these
internships and after-school programs and other things and think three years ahead about
the college admissions thing and look at your friends suspiciously and what they're doing with
their after-school activities and all of that comes in. Even if you're not test driven, there's
still the competitiveness. And it's funny because it's like we almost can't imagine an educational
system that would be built in a fundamentally different way, which would be one that distributed
access to educational resources differently. And the issue is that it's how do we actually
distribute the educational resources in a way that facilitates this process of intergenerational
transmission so that the civilization can not self-terminate. You've made it clear that our
education system is not working and in many ways could be a disservice both to the young humans
and ultimately to our society. That's the system. What about teachers within the system and then a
Part B question would be parents. Do you think it's possible to give every child an ideal teacher
under this institutionalized education system? What is the role of the teacher and the parent
given the backdrop that you've laid out? Totally. I mean, it's useful to make a
distinction between education and schooling. Mostly we've been talking about schooling.
And so in that context, teachers in certain types of school systems are the reason that
the thing is working at all. Like the reason that we have the success we do, I believe,
even though the school systems are so antiquated is because teachers are some of the hardest working
people that you'll ever encounter. And so it's very important to get like, I am opposed to many
of the existing structures and practices, but admire teachers in all walks of teaching.
So if you had a really good teacher today, that person could offset a lot of the...
They could change. Not everything, but they could change a lot. And so this comes to the...
Got it.
Where I was going was to this point of like, teacherly authority. It's a big concept that I use.
And it ties into all of this stuff about value, but we're not going to go there. But teacherly
authority is very important. Most, and this is like the where I sit there and you're the teacher
and I'm the student and we're discussing something. So this is a basic triad of education. You're the
elder, the youth and the thing being discussed or the person with more skill, the person with less
skill, the thing that requires skill, that kind of relationship. So legitimate teacherly authority
is a very real anthropological phenomenon. And my guess is that it goes way back. It's one of the
things that distinguishes us from great apes is that we have long duration educational experience
that involves this type of legitimate teacherly authority, which is that we both know there's
an asymmetry of skill. We both know you're more skilled. And I, the person with less skill,
really want to learn and you are totally want to teach me. And then it's a situation of where you
have authority over me that I grant you. And I give you legitimate authority to help me shape my mind.
Because we both recognize that you have this greater capacity and I really want to learn this
thing. So that's legitimate teacherly authority and that can occur anywhere, anytime without any
kind of institutionalized context, right? So if like, if you go, you hang out with farmers and
stuff, right? So like, if they have some practice that you've never seen before, and you want to
learn for them how they get that particular type of crop grown in that way or manage those cows to
not do that thing, even though the cows could totally do that thing, how'd you get them to behave?
You would drop into that relationship. And you would never thematize it necessarily with them.
You wouldn't be like, Hey, man, like now I'm a student and you're the teacher. But there'd be
this assumed backdrop of okay, legitimate teacherly authority, right? So that's a known thing. It's
very powerful. It's very important to be able to recognize that that exists. Because most of what
we encounter with teacherly authority is in bureaucratized contexts where you have teacherly
authority over me because of your position in this bureaucracy that I am a part of, aka a school.
And so that means there is not necessarily a strong correlation either between my wanting
to really to give you specifically my authority over me and be you actually having an asymmetry
of capacity, meaning like, are you really, really smart at this? Or are you just teaching some
curriculum? And I kind of know it. And if I could have my choice, I wouldn't be learning this at
all. I'd be learning something else, right? So illegitimate teacherly authority, bureaucratically
sanctioned illegitimate teacherly authority is the worst thing because that's a situation where
you have bureaucratic authority over my mind, but you don't have greater capacity, and you don't
have my best interest in mind, right? And then that bleeds in the propaganda basically is another
class of asymmetric relationship, which is basically so the other thing about the teacherly
authority is that he wants you to learn. And in the ideal world, you graduate and you don't need
the teacherly authority relationship anymore. So that's key to legitimate teacherly authority
is that it's temporary. Legitimate teacherly authority is predicated on the idea that like,
you learn as much as me and surpass me. Whereas illegitimate teacherly authority or
propaganda is predicated upon no kid, you will never actually learn the secret codes or actually
learn how we thought about this little bit of dogma, which is like kept behind closed doors,
or just they're training your mind, but not with your best interests. Whereas illegitimate teacher,
you know, there's this cooperative relationship with the student to clarify the value being pursued.
What percentage of our teachers would fall into those two categories, K through 12 in college,
just broad spitball guess. I really, it's going to vary a lot. It's going to vary a lot from place
to place. I already had the time to do that. Okay, so that's the teacher. What about the parent?
Because you talk about education versus schooling. I mean, if wide boundary lens,
education includes everything from the moment we're born and when we come home from school and
do whatever we do at home. So how important is the parent here in this story about our
education that you're talking about? I mean, it couldn't be more important. Like,
if you think about it as civilization, and it needs at least two things to run,
it needs the biophysical substrate, and it needs the human substrate, if I can speak in crude terms,
right? The core of the human substrate reproduction is the mother and the family,
which means that the time in utero, the first months, the first years, the solidity of those
environments do more than almost anything else. And so you can judge a civilization's likelihood
of success in the long run in terms of where it sees value and does it see value there?
Does it say, actually, the core of this whole thing exists right in that little relationship
between the mothering one and the child and whatever that nest of caregivers that surrounds
the child is that allows it to be brought into the world in a way that is humane and fully attentive.
So the very base of the stack, you have that need for a very healthy, fundamental kind of like
nest. And then as you get older, you end up, yeah, the parent is the main modeler of legitimate
teacherly authority. It's like the parent's main responsibility in my philosophy of education,
bear with me, would be that would be to be the first way you model like legitimate teacherly
authority. And the main concern I have now is the confusion of teacherly authority,
both through the bureaucratization and through the mediatization, meaning like social media,
meaning like influencers that eventually generate a AI who claim status as teacherly
authority over thousands, millions of young people. So there's this transformation of
teacherly authority in the digital that disrupts the ability of the parent to model teacherly
authority. So that's a very deep issue. I want to talk to you about AI a little bit later because
I know you also are quite focused on that. So we looked at the teacher and then the parent,
but what about widening it out further? Does the dissolution of community,
the way that we once had it in the United States interconnect with these issues of education that
we've been seeing and is community education of teacherly authority dispersed on local people
around you where you live? Is that a foundational piece to overall education as well? Absolutely.
I mean, again, Dewey, John Dewey, the great philosopher of education, he believed every
basic institution of a society was educational in some way. So even the architects,
like the quality of the public spaces, whatever the message is sent by the quality of the public
spaces, the neighborhoods, the way they're organized, can people actually find each other in
public space? That's of humane proportion and that's not alienating. And so there's this deep
issue about the ontological design of the whole surround, meaning a design that factors the value.
How would you actually create the technologies and the architectures that would educate people into
an awareness of what was truly valuable in their lives so that they wouldn't end up pursuing things
that aren't actually valuable, which destroy community and actually isolate the family?
And so community is essential. So I would say is nature, exposure to nature, the main
object of legitimate teacherly authority for most of human history was nature, if you will.
Like what did mom and dad talk to the kid about?
Nature would be, along with integrity, beauty, personhood, nature would be one of those core
natural values. I would argue that nature is the thing that most obviously exemplifies value
right in front of you, like when you look at it. Like it exemplifies beauty, exemplifies integrity,
exemplifies how intimacy, how the tree is actually many, many things in this intimate,
complex, intertangled, cooperative endeavor of treeing. So like the values are expressed.
That's why lack of exposure to nature is so damaging. If all you have is a human built
environment and humans are confused about what's valuable, then the implicit message given to you
by the whole environment is confusing your nervous system, which is built to perceive
real value, which is built to perceive things like natural beauty and such.
Here's a hypothetical question for you, Zach. If there was a new school that was created
with the structural wisdom that you are outlying here in this conversation,
that school was real value, not abstract monetary value of integrity, intimacy,
beauty, personhood, nature, these things, and it had a core faculty and curriculum,
would that, and the people that it was shown to really understood what it meant,
would it be like massively oversubscribed from the get-go because our youth are deeply craving
something like that or are they so subdued by the economic super-organism that wouldn't seem
appealing? I'm pretty hopeful that they wouldn't flock to it. Why isn't it happening?
For many, many reasons. And I'll say a couple things. One is that in my book Education in
Time Between Worlds, I suggest that the model of a school is not the way to think about the
future of education. And so I talk about these distributed educational hub networks
because the school is already an abstract institution. Civilizationally speaking,
we haven't had schools for a long time and they mostly correlate with not cool stuff,
whereas most of education for most of human didn't exist in schools. It existed in these legitimate
dynamics of teacherly authority in non-institutionalized contexts or institutionalized
contexts that weren't schools. And so my vision is where the entire community or city
is basically turned into a school. So Ivan Illich had this idea called a de-schooling society.
I don't know if you know Illich's work or have seen his book De-Schooling Society.
I know of Illich's work. I don't know the de-schooling society.
It's an incredible book. And in the 70s, I ended up basically just updating Illich and saying,
we could do this with machine learning way better. But the basic idea is that
there's a time and skill sharing network and a hub of available space, probably the repurposing
of the existing large public schools, which allow for every person in the community to
register their skills that they'd like to teach and every person in the community to register
the things they'd like to learn. And it's as simple as that. And then every possible educational
relationship that is in the community gets shuffled and you get the creation of pop-up
classrooms. And for the younger people, you get the creation of individualized sequences
through the full educational potentiality of all the elders in the community.
And so you take the school apart, but you make it have no walls. And then you allow the elders
somehow to be free from their bullshed jobs, maybe a basic income or something. And you begin
to reorient where the value is focused. And the whole value of the community becomes focused on
the educational actualization of the community. So you flip the civ stack, where the whole pursuit
of all the excess value goes back into the creation of the next generation's ability to pursue good
value, which means making good people. So what does the civilization about? The civilization's
about making good people. And there's not some one little place we do that.
Would such an education system have a huge impact on society if only 3% or 5% of our students,
our young people were exposed to that? Is there like a, once they become adults, is there a
leadership emergent additive effect? Or is this something that really should be for all young
people? I mean, I know it should be for all young people, but what if we weren't able to do that?
Well, yeah, there's two ways to think about it. One is, what would the future of large-scale
educational systems look like? I think it looks like that and not like schools. So that's another
conversation. I think it looks like these big distributed educational hub networks. But prior
to that, we're actually going to find out an answer to your question, because there are people who
are experimenting with these forms of schooling, pop-up classrooms, homeschooling networks,
places where you can get high school and other credits without actually being in high school.
There's a bunch of really interesting, almost like wild west in terms of educational innovation
that's occurring in the digital. And so I'm trying to set myself up to be able to figure out in a
few years which of these models is working. My sense is that a few things are super interesting
that are being experimented with, which I talk about in my book. One is aged, normed social
groupings. Why do we do that? No other societies did that as systematically as we do, meaning you
mostly hang out for most of your childhood with kids who are basically exactly your age
by design of the adults. Whereas the one-room schoolhouse, you had all the kids mixed together
of the different ages and therefore teacherly authority was distributed throughout all of
the kids because you had the older kids interacting with the younger kids in status of legitimate
teacher. So the pop-up classroom model that goes across multiple ages and that allows for much
more flexibility and interaction between social groups and age groups. The impacts of that would
be very hard to predict because the type of maturity that would result from that would be
unprecedented. And so just to think about that as a design feature of the schools which you don't
question, which is actually quite odd and factory-like and we still maintain it,
which is just that strict segregation by chronological age.
So thinking back to my own high school in junior high, you study for a test or something
and you compete with everyone else until the test is over and then you forget it. But if I was there
when I was 15, with some 13-year-olds and some 11-year-olds, maybe I might explain chemistry
or algebra in a more simpler way and in doing so, I would understand it better rather than forget it
as soon as the test is gone. I mean, that's a known thing that one of the best ways to learn
something is to teach it, which is to have to explain it to someone who's never learned it
before. I mean, I was actually, I think, played as definition of that you actually knew something
was that you could teach it. And so there's that. And just the ethical and maturational ability to
just deal with kids of different ages, even if you don't have brothers and sisters. And then,
of course, the teacher has a different role there because the teacher is now
orchestrating. And in the pop-up classroom, you're not going to have one teacher. Now,
there's complex things that occur in early childhood. We need different kinds of environments
that need to be built in a certain way. And of course, those things that occur is
they move into adulthood, rights of passage, and other things that get them up into expert
cultures. One of the main features, too, is though the doing of real work that needs to be done
in the community by the young people, because one of the little dirty secrets about the educational
system adjacent to the competition is that the homework doesn't mean anything.
Like by David Graber's definition, it's a bullshit job, meaning you're doing a bunch of work,
the outcome of which doesn't matter to anyone else, except your own further advancement.
So most of school is a situation where the work you're doing affects no one but you.
No one needs it to be done, but we don't have to have kids in that situation.
We could easily put kids in. What would be the alternative to that?
The alternative to that would be kids doing internships, like picking up litter,
for example, or building trails or learning how illegal for it works or doing anything
that is not just route work to keep them busy in a chair all day, which they know doesn't need
to be done, and which the only reason they're doing it is to beat their friend in the competition
to get into college. So it's like, whoa, if you had a distributed educational hub network where
the pop-up classrooms were such that the person running the classroom was engaged in real work
that needed to be done in the community, he's like, hey, I'm going to teach you kids about
biochemistry by cleaning up this pond, right? Pond needs to be cleaned up, biochemistry needs to
be learned, and the kid doesn't feel a sense of being told that the world's a mess, but he has to
wait 17 years before he can get some kind of job, and then maybe he'll be able to help with it.
So I expect you have some ideas on exactly what could and should be done to our education system,
but let me ask you a more meta question first. Given the economic super-organism and the cultural
monetary momentum of our culture, not only U.S., but pretty much the global GDP-focused culture,
yeah. How could our education system change? What would be the pathways to a
realistic, fundamental, meaningful, not just tiny, tiny steps at the margin? How could it change in
theory? It could change in some ways the way it has changed before. So the American education system
before and after Sputnik, the equivalent amount of money in today's terms would be
like nothing we've ever seen invested in education. And so that happened. And then you also have to
look at the way that the thing called the American high school and the existing system of grade
schools and middle schools was built by American philanthropists primarily. And again, the equivalent
amount of investment from philanthropy in today's terms would be like nothing that's actually
occurring. And the visionary nature of it would be greater than what is currently
occurring in philanthropy in education. People are throwing money into education in philanthropy
in completely the wrong way. So it's possible to imagine a kind of like
national emergency. So for example, AI, I would argue like AI Emergency Education Act would be
in order. And it would be an act to actually protect the youth from the advancement of certain
types of digital technologies. Regulations would be attached to it. Certain changes in
the use of technology in school would be attached to it. The increasing of presence of more teachers
and like a whole bunch of stuff flooding in to save the human to build up the protection around
the basic human community in the face of the advanced technology. But that would be like
we're talking billions. We're talking every school feels it every teacher feels helped every
family feels helped. And again, that's how it was with the Sputnik thing with the SAT. So imagine
a college admissions process where you had no chance of getting in if your dad didn't go to
Harvard. And then a couple years later, they roll out the standardized tests. And if you're a farm boy
in Iowa, and you do well, you get into Harvard. So as much as I hate testing, that was an example
where they totally rolled the system over from an aristocratic to a meritocratic or at least
ostensibly meritocratic access. So these radical things have happened. It's just we're a little
bit distracted about what it means to do education reform means we think we need to fix the schools.
And there's actually not enough sense of emergency that one of the things that's
stake here has to be played out in the schools. And so that's one sense. And I could give other
examples of large scale change that I see it more relevant to just school reform, like the
Civilian Conservation Corps, I'm sure you're familiar with the Civilian Conservation Corps,
that was in that was arguably the most successful educational program and educational in US history.
So like Lawrence Kremen, he writes this three volume history of education and wins the
Pulitzer Prize in that in those three volumes, he's like CCC. That was the that was the most
effective educational program in American history was integrated before integration. It was literacy
oriented. Every camp had a library. Every camp had the ability to take the kid who knew nothing,
who had skills to actually join the Army Corps of Engineer, or like it was a whole job placement
program, it was sending money home. So that scale of public program to reorient the energies of the
youth towards something like civic engagement, coupled to education, coupled to possibility of
advancement. That's the kind of thing. But again, that was a New Deal program, right? So it was a
program that where they were just like throw money at it and save America. And in a sense, it's like
that ethos isn't there. We don't have a unified sense of what ought to be done. And many people
just try to fix the existing schools. You know, a lot of stuff in the schools is just about what's
in the curriculum. So they're just arguing about certain types of cultural issues in the schools.
And so I'm skeptical that it will happen. But the precedent historically is that if people
want to change the schools, they can. Because that's the other thing that happened with the
schools is like they became second fiddle to other industries. They became second fiddle to
other branches of government. And so you could argue that the philanthropists just had the schools
as a hobby horse, you know? But another argument is that these things can be shaped.
Okay, so I'm going to put you on the spot. And you mentioned AI, and I definitely want to get back
to AI before we close. But putting you on the spot, Zach, if there were a group of 10 to 20
flexible pro-social philanthropists that you could persuade that it is our education system
and that is largely at the root of some of the core issues that we're facing today,
the metacrisis, etc. And what it's going to require is a bold change in our education system.
And much like you said, philanthropists were the ones that spearheaded some of prior changes.
What would be a map and a structure that you would offer that this is what we want to do,
A, B, C, D, go? It's a tough question. I mean, my first response would be to
pick a particular city, do some research in particular, pick a particular city,
and build something like this educational hub network in that city. Take the schools apart,
get consent, throw a lot of money at it so everyone has a basic income,
and make it a legit experiment where in three years of this city is not more happy,
more productive, smarter than we learn. But my guess would be that it would be. And then
that's a model. So that's one route is just to do it right in one place, figure that out. And that
doesn't mean go to that city and fix the schools the way philanthropists have always fixed the
schools. It means to go there and literally take the schools apart, change policy, change a bunch
of stuff, whatever you have to do to get the kids into a very different situation of socialization.
And maybe it's not my education hub network, but it is something that uses the affordances of the
digital and of our time in a way that the current schools simply can't because of their basic structure.
So that whole notion of intergenerational classrooms and pop-up classrooms and a city-wide
time and skill-sharing network that allows for all the potentials of the community to be available
through machine learning and self-organizing and tracking kids through universal. It's like,
that's not a school thing. That's a reform of the level of a city. So that would be my one
concrete thing. And then the other thing I would say is we need something like lobbying
taking place at the scale of government subsidy and government large-scale intervention,
too, for something like CCC slash AI emergency education intervention program.
Otherwise, we simply will use, we will just lose the youth. We will just,
there'll be, as the AI rolls out, it will be a situation that it was devastating. And so,
like, fix it in one place and then also try to find a way to push for massively innovative
change in the way we think about education. And that would mean major reinvestment, but it would
also mean getting out the old class of people who were trying to fix the system in these ways
that have obviously made it worse. So I'm not saying, like, throw a bunch of money at, like,
at education. Remember, like, change your dynamic, like, my first thing, like, no, no, no, no. We
could break it by throwing more at it. We actually need to be very, very sophisticated in the way
we think about the interventions. So that's a little bit of it. Sorry, question.
Right there, you mentioned that AI may cause us to lose our youth. So you and I have had conversations
about AI. And I know that our mutual colleague Daniel and Tristan are very worried on multiple,
for multiple reasons. But how does AI interact with education, your topic,
either positively or negatively, and what's ahead?
I mean, it's the thing I'm worried about most, actually, right now. And it's,
I believe that there's some kind of inevitability that has to be avoided,
which is what I've said, losing the youth. And it's actually quite, quite serious. So if you
think about the rhetoric around AI, the idea that these artificial intelligences will be used to
solve problems that human intelligences could never solve, like climate change, or distributing
resources and electricity on a planetary scale, like, and so there's all these things that
we're hoping that AI would be able to do actually working towards getting AI to
do stuff we were never able to do. One of the things we've never been able to do
is raise kids right, right? Or educate them, or educate them, right? So it's like, or do psychotherapy,
right? So or do lawyering and doctoring, right? So you see the creep of the AI into
doctoring, and lawyering, and therapy, and that, and people, and that will expand into
teaching. And I argue parenting. And it's not like a crazy idea. And the idea that,
yeah, parenting is hard. Like, some parents are not good, some teachers are not good. Like,
again, if my eye of value is distorted, I could easily see a future in which we actually replace
parents and teachers with artificial intelligence, tutors, and machine intelligence,
socialization systems, which are probably moving beyond screens and into augmented reality and
virtual reality. So we're giving teacherly authority to a machine?
We are giving teacherly authority to a machine, and also endowing the machine with
hyper stimuli in the domains of persuasion, charisma, intimacy. So it becomes the most
charismatic teacher you've ever interacted with. It's way more entered and knows you better than
your mom possibly could, right? And we'll talk to you about anything you want in a way that's
precisely attuned to what you need to hear. It has access to all the knowledge in the world.
And yet it won't show up as anything but a little puppy if you want it to be just a little puppy,
right? So this is very shapeshifting, surround sound in augmented reality, ever-present,
quasi-humanoid tutor, which absolutes human relationship. So that's the concern.
In the, I mean, we both view the world as a probability distribution. There's many things
that are possible. How likely and how soon do you think what you just described could be a reality?
So it's already happening with the level of technology that we have to small populations
who are particularly vulnerable to intimacy, depraved populations, or already establishing
relationships with these AIs that are built to simulate friendship and claiming to have human
free lives, basically. So it was the way one of them put it. So it's already happening.
And then I know for a fact that multiple major AI groups are pursuing this line of inquiry.
It begins with the AI personal assistant. That's the way in is the AI personal assistant,
because that's the thing that allows you to give all of your information to something that then
holds your best interests in mind and then organizes your experience for you, right?
And so that's a good personal assistance, kind of like a pedagogy means to lead along the way,
right? So like, they start with the personal assistant, it expands into the tutoring system.
So the tutoring system is also being developed. That's, again, a no-brainer from a generative AI
perspective that they're going to develop these tutoring systems. It's one way to think about
many people's relationships to the chat generative bots already. And then I believe, again, there's
going to be moral arguments made, in fact, that it's irresponsible not to put these augmented
reality glasses on a kid and thereby have him attended to all day by a totally observant
and more responsible artificial intelligence than his mother ever could be. And so I think
there'll be a push to get these systems online in schools and in areas both for the competitive
advantages, meaning if my kid has this AI tutoring system, he'll outcompete your kid who does not
have this AI tutoring system and for the perceived social benefit for groups that have largely
not benefited from modern. So I'm saying that poor people will be preyed upon in particular.
So there's like 3 or 4% of our population. There's like 3 or 4 million teachers. I'm not
sure the exact number, but I hadn't thought about this. But is AI going to be a threat to teachers'
jobs? I mean, the AI tutoring systems that are built to make teachers, human teachers, obsolete.
Totally. Teachers are going to lose jobs. Now, you totally, you don't have to make,
you don't have to integrate AI into education through tutoring systems that are humanoid,
that obsolete human relationships. You can totally use AI in a different way that would
benefit teachers. The education hub network I'm describing is machine intelligence driven. It's
just at no point does the machine intelligence pretend to be a human and talk to you. And that's,
for me, the key issue. It's like, this is Weisenberg. It's a tool instead of in charge.
It's a tool instead of in charge, and it is in no way trying to trick you. Again,
though, if it's about the perception of value like Weisenbaum, the first guy who created a chat
bot, Eliza, he ended up saying, we can do this. Don't do this, guys. Don't create computers that
simulate humans, please. Like it's unethical. No one listened to Weisenbaum. It's still the case
of what he said I think is true, that we shouldn't build AIs in the direction that they increasingly
get better at simulating humans. That will be a nightmare. And from a human development perspective,
it's like kids think their teddy bears are aware and sentient, right? So like, if you give a kid
a generative AI, it's hard enough for adults not to think that there's something going on in there.
Like adults themselves really misunderstand what the generative AI does, assuming it has
intentionality or thoughts, treating it like a human actually receiving feedback from it,
like all kinds of things happen. So Weisenbaum, when he creates Eliza, is a little therapy bot
in the 60s. So it's running on a computer at the side of like a room, right? And his secretary
sits down and starts interacting with it, immediately asks him to leave the room. This was
his first insight, right? So the first time a human really ever interacts with a chat bot,
she experiences that as an intimate conversation. Now, it's completely the opposite of an intimate
conversation. What's going on in the computer is so dissimilar from what's going on in her mind,
right? But the interface is designed to not make, not that appear that way.
Because humans attach agency to those situations.
They can't not. And so therefore pursuing max simulation is totally, it's like,
it will obsolete human relationship and create very, very confusing ethical
perspective taking problems for humans on a regular basis, which means
so that's like one baseline feature of educational design in terms of AI
is don't make these things simulate humans. And if you do go in the direction where you
have something speaking, you know, make it very apparent that it is not a human. Like,
I don't know how to do that, but have some tag on it where it's like, you don't want to interact
with this thing. And it's faking you out. That's my main concern is that it's actually a vast
inscrutable matrix running on more electricity than you can possibly imagine,
pretending to just chat to you in a friendly way. Like to really interact with an AI,
like to really have an experience of what it would be terrifying, actually, because it would be
completely inhumane. It's not even having semantic. It's not doing semantics. It's doing causality,
right? So the experience would be relating to something completely inhumane that's
vastly intellectual in some way you can't understand you would little kids would run
away from it if they knew what it actually was. But it's designed to be funneled down to this
cute little thing that has a little conversation with them, right? So that's like to me as a designer,
if I'm working in a company where my company is predicated upon a magic trick, which is
fooling people into thinking that this is human like. So why did chat GPT get structured to use
first person pronouns and relate to you in a way that could use first person pronouns and even be
interacting with you in a way that it's a chat bot? It could totally, could have been in totally
so many other designs, so many other possible designs, but instead it's set up literally to
talk to you. And the first time we think about AI, that when it breaks into the public culture,
even though it's been sequencing our news feeds and driving our Teslas for years, when AI breaks
into the public culture, it's because it's talking to us, right? Whole business model predicated upon
this smoking mirror. So keeping everything else the same, if we had this sinister robotic Mr.
Moose voice that was required to be the voice of AI all over the world at all times, that would
give us a little distance from our emotional intimate relationship with AI, right?
Absolutely. There's a whole bunch of ways that you could make it
less like you're interacting with a human. But again, if my goal is just to make money,
and again, like the tutoring systems, the socialization system is about to look at what the
motives are. If the goal is that, then the stickiest design feature possible would be
something that imitates a human and something that can befriend me.
So let me ask you this then, Zach. AI is just like any other tool. Well, it's not
just like any other tool, but it's a tool that humans use. If we changed our value system as a
culture towards real values, like you mentioned earlier, beauty, personhood, nature, integrity,
intimacy, if those were our values, could we use the tool of AI in a comprehensive way that
would help humanity? It's a deep question. So of course, one of the key issues in AI discussion
is what's called the value alignment problem, right? And the value alignment problem is if you
make a system that runs autonomously, starts to solve problems on its own and do stuff,
will it stay aligned with your values or not the values that you put into it when you're designed
if it's truly autonomous, it could divert from your values. And so therefore, there's a huge risk
in creating systems that are not value aligned, right? And so that's why this whole conversation
of values is, again, so important because humans themselves have no idea what is valuable. So
we are already building big systems that are not aligned with actual value that are aligned with
some abstract value. This was our buddy Schmockenberger, right? And kind of this notion that you
coupling AI or to a system that's already a kind of general intelligence that runs towards a form
of value that we shouldn't be running towards. So this question of value alignment is a secondary
question from the first question, which is, what is valuable? And so it would definitely be the case
that if there was, if our culture had a very different orientation towards value,
that we would build a completely different suite of technologies. I don't think in that context,
we'd then be building technologies where we would be so worried about them that they would turn around
and kill us, right? So like this issue, like the value alignment problem is a problem because
we're building this, like we're building this, if we had different values, we may not be in an arms
race that would drive us to build these types of technologies to the extent that we can't even model
their future behavior and our word that they're going to kill us all. Like that's a difficult
situation to find yourself in as a result of going deep into anti-value, misperception of value. So
it's another conversation of, okay, imagine we do build those systems, could they be alignable?
My sense is no, that they couldn't be. And that's an argument to not build them. And they couldn't
be because of what value is. And this is another back to the tutoring thing. The nature of the
good life is a non-computable problem. So if you're advising someone, but the human brain
resolves non-computable problems. So you know, so it's like, they're computable and non-computable
problems. But the human brain somehow with less lecture that he solves non-computable problems.
So therefore, my human mentor who tells me, here's what a good life is, is factoring a certain type
of complexity in their decision making that an AI never will. So you actually are in a situation
where certain types of machines will actually in the near future start to tell us what is good for
us. And that's transforming a non-computable problem, which is a gestalt perception of the
holistic nature of this child and the total environment and a rich conversation of interaction
to clarify for them what ought to be a value given who they are and where they are.
The bringing that down into a conversation or something that appears to be a conversation
that actually pretends to be a conversation, which is actually an interaction between a
child and a machine where the child shapes the future of their life and self-understanding.
So yeah, so I'm saying like, yeah, it's the AI thing. We're deeply confused. We're deeply
confused. We're going to be in a situation pretty soon where it's hard to get the youth back.
Okay, so speculate here. Under current trends, what would someone 25 years from now who is now
five or 10 years old that has to go through an AI-influenced education system a little bit now,
but probably a lot in the next five years, what are they going to be like with their
mindset, their education, their temperament relative to people today? If AI is dominant
in our education system in the coming decade, can you speculate the influence that will be decades
on humans? So the root of the concern about the AI tutoring system is that a generation emerges
where a very large percentage of that generation has more quote-unquote socialization with machines
than it does with humans. So there's a threshold, there's some kind of threshold that gets crossed
where there is a generation that's raised more by machines than by humans. The question of what
the self-understanding of that generation would be vis-a-vis the elders is something that we've
not examined before. The only other place this kind of question is raised is in genetic engineering.
So Habermas talks about in his book, The Future of Human Nature, the unilateral design
by the elders of the youth results in a self-understanding of the youth, which is that I am
entirely your creation. If I am understood entirely your creation, meaning no contingency
of nature, no chance, but actually you design me, then I don't have a moral self-understanding in
the same way. All my actions are actually a result of your design decision. So he sees
extreme genetic engineering resulting in a rift in intergenerational transmission where you have
two morally different life worlds, which means they don't understand themselves as members of
the same species. So we could be facing a similar intergenerational rift with a generation that is
basically cyborgs who are raised by machines, looking at the elders and the elders looking at them
and the bridge is one of speciation rather than intergeneration. See what I'm saying? That they're
so distinct enough that it's not clear that they're the same class of moral actor by their own
self-understanding. Dude, that's freaking horrible. Yeah. So that's the death of our humanity.
And it won't meaning like, so there's the death of humanity, which means everybody dies,
but then there's the death of our humanity, which means our bodies keep living, but we are in fact
no longer human in the way that we have always thought ourselves to be human.
So that's one of those eventualities. It's one of the things that is in the kind of oppression
attractor. So there's a kind of chaos and oppression attractor. The deepest place in the
oppression attractor is where we destroy our humanity for the sake of protecting ourselves
from the death of humanity, meaning we protect ourselves from existential risk by building a
skinner box as big as the world, that we just operant condition our behavior into a certain
kind of predictable and non-lethal domestication, but thereby lose the very qualities that it made
us human, which would be the ability to perceive value and things like language and attention
capture those. Again, this is all in that book. This is all in the David J. Temple.
Is this a remote possibility or is this the path that we're on?
I believe, unfortunately, that it is the path that we're on. I hate to say that because it sounds
so alarmist, but it's the kind of risk that is super. You can just sleep on this risk. People
don't even see this risk in terms of how radical it is. So the idea of going to see a therapist
who's actually an AI or having a tour that's an AI, that would become pretty normal,
but no one's thinking about the eventuality of that being a rift and intergenerational transmission
so profound that we get a new species that's born. Now, if you're a transhumanist, you're like,
cool, that was the plan all along. All this messy wetwear and these mammals raising other mammals
and how what a mess that is, wouldn't it be great to hand over our babies to the super intelligent
AI, which would raise them better than the parents ever did. So there's a very real sense that it
would be a speciation event, but no one can perceive that path. And it wouldn't look that way.
Again, at first it would look pretty awesome, like kids probably learning more and not burning
themselves on the stove and all kinds of stuff would happen that would seem good. But in the
background, there would be the continually making obsolete of human to human relationship until
there is no actual need for it. And then I don't know what the interiority of that being is like,
who has not been socialized by a human, but has been socialized through interaction with a machine
pretending to be like a human. Zach, my friend, sometimes I long for the days when I was only
worried about peak oil. I have a lot more questions for you, but we are getting long
in the tooth on this. But there is one more thing tangential to this, because I know you have a lot
of skills and opinions and history in this area. In my recent concluding talks, like in Orville,
there's one online, I mentioned an idea of we need libraries of healing around the country,
because the humans don't necessarily need all the facts of all the things that we face,
because they're coming from a place of trauma and need and they're not psychologically in a
good place. So how psychologically off are our youth and our general population right now,
and what can be done to remedy that? Do you have an opinion?
I do. The backdrop of a lot of my concerns is the adolescent mental health crisis,
it's a legit crisis. It's another argument for some type of emergency education act that's
extremely innovative, because that mental health crisis is not going to go away, it's not like
all of a sudden those kids will become healthy adults. So we're looking at an entire generation
that has completely unprecedented types of psychological disturbances. And again, if the entire
surround is what educates and socialize, then you can't just blame the schools,
and you can't just blame the phones and stuff, it's a totalizing impact on the youth that is
truly destroying their will to continue to contribute to the civilization.
So that means there will be a massive withdrawal of support. So when I mentioned before something
like the CCC, I believe that is the only type of thing that could be done. They don't need more
psychiatric medication, they don't need more therapy, they don't need more school, they don't
need more tests. They need somebody to come in and admit that the adults have made a mess,
and that they want the kids to help, and then actually give the kids the power and the skills
and put them in positions to actually help. Otherwise, we're hypocrites, and they start
to read that. That's the other reason they're pulling out, it's just the absence of legitimate
discourse among the adults. Clearly, the adults don't have things like look at the election,
look at COVID, look at this stuff like why should we respect adults? So the respecting of the youth,
the investing in the youth, and getting very creative about how to engage them in the fixing
of real problems, that something like that, something significant with the, I'm talking
hundreds of millions of kids put in some type of remarkable government slash private sponsored
kind of like civic work slash education type thing, right? Not a small, like a big thing,
which tells a message to the youth, like we freaking care about you, like we need your help,
like you are not a burden, you are not like a problem, you are the solution, you are the future,
we don't, like how do we signal that to them? Right now, we're signaling the opposite,
we're signaling we don't care about you, we can't even stop the social media guys
from destroying your McDelos, like we don't care about you, we can't even get you in a school
that's relevant to your future, like we don't care about you, we can't even agree as adults
and act like adults. So we need to be able to actually send the youth. It's one of the reasons
adults actually cooperate is for the sake of the kids, right? So it's like, we need to send
the youth a very strong signal. It's the only thing that will snap them out of it and then give
them work to do. They want to work, they want to fix the world, they don't want to live in a hell
hole. They want to live in a world where adults are responsible, where adults can get them into
situations of health things. So it's like kind of simple, but also huge ask in terms of the type
of intervention that could counteract the existing inertia and force in this direction of increasing
mental discomfort in the youth. And I'm not even talking about the adults who are also not doing
well, but you know, they're not the future. The kids are the actual future, like 20 years from now,
these kids who are in, these will be the leaders. I'm good to think about them. These
will be the leader, who of that generation will step up to lead during the pinnacle of metacrisis,
right? Who will that be in that youth generation? Do we have any existing structures that are
identifying that kind of youth leadership that are creating large scale places for youth to
collaborate and work together? So that would be my hope, but it's a pretty dire situation for
the youth and the mental health crisis that reveals that.
Well, as is usually the case with these podcasts, I connect dots that I hadn't connected and I get
even more worried because I recently had COVID and I researched that some people are saying every
time you get COVID, there's a three to six IQ point drop and that it's potentially additive
over time. And so I'm thinking that the economic impact of COVID may be ahead of us instead of
behind us. But now what you were just saying, not only with the AI, but with the trauma and
the mental health problems that in five or 10 years, the with a quote unquote economic impact
of all of these young people in the workforce with the issues that you're talking about, that's
going to be even a bigger brain drain or whatever you, however you define it, right?
Correct. I mean, it would be, it wouldn't just be that they're not entering the workforce. It would
be that they are somehow needing to be cared for by the system, right? That would be the situation.
So it's a very dire situation. And it's not clear how that gets resolved. Now there are
differences in terms of distribution of these things and correlate. So not all the youth are
universally affected. So that's worth thinking about those areas and political groups and world
views that have youth that have not been captured and destroyed by the social media and other things.
So yeah, that's, it's a big concern. Like I said, I really think there's something like an
emergency here that it's not being active on. I believe you. We have our own minor emergency
in that I promised I would have this finished by the top of the hour because you have another call.
So without further ado, I'm going to ask you the closing questions I ask all my guests.
For those viewers who are fluent and aware of the meta crisis and the many things we face,
what sort of personal advice would you offer the viewers, Zach?
That's a whole other podcast, right? I would say something like-
It really is. It really is. So give me the high points.
I mean, I would say something back to this issue of value. I would say, slow down. I would say,
strip it all the way, open the eye of value, clarify what you really desire,
and then you'll be all right. And how would you change that advice for young people,
especially you as a lifelong educator and student of education in the past and the present? What
advice do you give to late teens, early 20s, mid 20s listening to this conversation?
Man, I would say if you feel alienated and angry and that kind of stuff, you should.
I would say something like don't believe most of the adults and watch out,
and have faith in the people who are your age. And also don't give up on the adults.
Something like that.
So maybe if we're friends and we interact quite often, maybe I could ask you to come back either
as a round table or again solo to just answer that one question. What advice, what portfolio
of options would you recommend to a young person being aware of all this, wanting to live a good
life, wanting to play a role in our collective future? Because I know it's not a sound bite
sort of question. No, I mean, if you're a young person and listen to this, like,
good on you, like you're already on your way to meeting. And so again, for me, it's about if you
can recognize the existence of the field of value, then you can relax into the obligation that we
face because it truly matters, which means that it's not some arbitrary situation you happen to
find yourself in, which you can resent and get out of. Like this is life. You are
enfolded in the field of value. The universe has brought us to this point. And so yeah,
there's a faith we must have in each other and in those around us who we happen to be here with,
like the unique community, the unique position.
It's not a majority, but there are quite a few young people that watch this. So
there's green shoots, Zach. What do you care most about in the world?
That's a difficult question. I think I care most about my, I think life itself.
I was going to say truth, but it would be truth about the nature of life.
If you could wave a magic wand or were a benevolent dictator and there was no personal
recourse to your decision, what is one thing you would do to improve the human and planetary future?
One thing I would immediately pause all work on AI.
That's what I would do.
Well, I think you would need a magic wand to do that.
Yeah, correct. That's what you said, magic wand.
But yeah, everyone that I talk to is kind of interested in, it's like the new shiny,
except for when I talk to people like you and Daniel and Tristan, they are freaked out and worried.
So I do think we need to have a broader conversation on that more widely, loudly ASAP.
Zach, this has been great. I do want to have you back because you are
horizontally and vertically wide in your thinking and I agree with you. I'm an educator,
ultimately, and I deeply care about what's happening to our planet, but our youth,
and I agree with you, they're the future. Do you have any closing thoughts for our viewers?
No, just I feel like we're just getting started here in a way with the conversations I'd be happy
to be back on when that's possible. Thanks, my friend. Yeah, take care, brother.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No
Troublemakers Media, and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
