Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 2, Aqueous Solutions.
Life is possible because of the chemical compounds which are soluble in water,
and because of those that are not.
In this lesson, we will consider aqueous solutions,
samples consisting primarily of water, but which also contain other chemicals dissolved in that water.
We'll examine the characteristic behaviors of the solutions,
the chemical forces responsible for those characteristics,
and the energy considerations that drive solution formation.
And we'll also consider the formal terminology that chemists use to describe solutions.
Take a few minutes and think about some things that you know are soluble in water,
and then think about some that are not.
You probably identified salt and sugar among the substances that dissolve in water.
Perhaps you included oil, cooking oil, or motor oil,
or flour among those substances that are not soluble in water.
Let's formalize the definitions of the terms we're using here.
A solution is a homogenous mixture of a solvent, the substance present in excess,
and one or more solutes, the substances uniformly distributed throughout the solution because they are dissolved.
Homogenous, or homogenous, means the same thing,
means the solution is uniform in its composition and properties throughout the solution.
Homogeneity is a macroscopic property of solutions.
You can discern it by looking at the sample.
The macroscopic observations and solutions, like in lots of chemistry,
are explained by the microscopic structure.
On a microscopic level, each of the solute components in a solution
is completely surrounded by water or solvent molecules.
Other solutions are described as heterogeneous.
They look like they're composed of a variety of components,
say a sample of sand and water scooped up in a pail at the beach.
You can see the sand separate from the water.
Our primary interest here is in homogenous or homogenous solutions.
Why are salt and sugar soluble in water, while oil and flour are not?
You've probably heard the old adage, like dissolves like.
But exactly what is like between water and sugar,
and exactly what is unlike between oil and water?
To answer these questions, we need to consider the structures of the sugar and oil molecules.
In lesson one, we talked about three intermolecular forces,
hydrogen bonding, polar attractions, and London dispersion forces.
The extent to which solutes and solvents are like depends on the structure of the molecules
and the forces with which they interact.
The more similar the intermolecular forces between a solvent molecule and its solute molecules,
the more soluble the solute is.
Remember that hydrogen bonds only form when hydrogen is directly bonded to oxygen, nitrogen, or fluorine.
You might recall that those are among the most electronegative elements on the periodic table.
Polar attractions are important in asymmetrical molecules with polar bonds,
and all molecules have dispersion forces,
and those dispersion forces increase in strength as the number of electrons in the molecule increase.
Because the structure of molecules is the key to determining intermolecular forces they experience,
chemists often examine the Lewis Dot diagrams of molecules to describe the forces.
Let's look at alcohols, an important category of molecules which have solubility properties
which are clearly related to their structures.
An alcohol is a compound containing one or more carbons and at least one oxygen bound to a hydrogen atom.
The commonly available alcohols include methanol, CH3OH, which is an ingredient in gasoline additives.
Ethanol, C2H5OH, which is the alcohol and alcoholic beverages.
And isopropyl alcohol, C3H7OH, the alcohol and rubbing alcohol.
The chemists know of many other alcohols including pentanol, C5H11OH, hexanol, C6H13OH, and octanol, C8H17OH.
In my classroom, students take test tubes, some distilled water, and dropper bottles full of each of these alcohols.
And they test the solubility of each.
If you place one milliliter of water in a test tube, you can add drops of alcohol to it until you see a separation between the two phases.
At that point, all the alcohol that is going to dissolve in the water has dissolved.
If 20 drops of alcohol dissolve in a milliliter of water, we consider that alcohol to be highly soluble.
If only 5 drops dissolve, we consider it somewhat soluble.
And if the first drop of alcohol forms a separate, visible layer, we consider that alcohol to be non-soluble in water.
If you draw a Lewis dot picture of methanol, CH3OH, the CH3 group is a hydrocarbon, but the OH group looks like half a water.
In the lab, if you add drops of methanol to one milliliter of water, you can keep going as long as you like until you run out of methanol.
And the two compounds will still form a solution.
You will never see a separation between the water and the alcohol phases.
We say that methanol and water are miscible. They form solutions in any proportion.
Despite the fact that only half of the methanol molecule looks like water, the two molecules are enough alike that you can't see a phase separation between them.
Let's move to ethanol, the alcohol and alcoholic beverages.
Ethanol contains two carbons, with one OH group on one end.
The OH group still looks like half a water molecule, but in comparison to methanol, the hydrocarbon component in ethanol is twice as big.
Ethanol looks less like water than methanol, but it still looks enough like water to be highly soluble in my classroom test.
You can mix any amount of water with any amount of ethanol and still have a solution form.
But as we increase the number of carbons in the alcohols, the part that looks like half a water becomes less and less important a component of the total structure of the alcohol molecule.
And it becomes less and less able to determine the behavior of the alcohol molecule.
In the classroom, students start to observe the presence of two layers after they add a few drops, five or six, of butanol to water.
By the time they move up the ladder to octanol, most students will observe a separate layer forming when the first drop of octanol is added to one milliliter of water.
By this crude test then, we say that methanol and ethanol are miscible in water, butanol is slightly soluble in water, and octanol is insoluble in water.
The hydrocarbon chain of 10 carbons in octanol overwhelms the ability of the OH group to interact with water, and the molecule of octanol is not enough like water to be soluble.
Let's turn our attention to sucrose, table sugar.
Sucrose has a chemical formula C12H22O11. That's a pretty complicated formula, and sucrose has a pretty complicated structure.
It's actually composed of two rings of carbons and oxygens. There are eight OH groups in a sucrose molecule.
The eight OHs in sucrose provide eight sites per molecule for hydrogen bonding to occur with water. Sucrose is very soluble in water.
Let's return to our ethanol example for just a moment. The chemical formula for ethanol is C3CH2OH.
Remember that the OH group at the end is the structural feature that makes the compound an alcohol.
We can take the atoms that make up the ethanol molecule and rearrange them and come up with an alternate structure which satisfies all of Lewis's rules, CH3OCH3.
In this case, the carbons hook onto three hydrogens to share three of their valence electrons, and then the oxygen forms a bridge between the two CH3 groups.
Note that both ethanol and this new compound have exactly the same number of atoms of each type, two carbons, six hydrogens, and an oxygen.
In both of them, all the atoms have satisfied their octets.
But when we put the oxygen between the two carbons, we no longer have an OH group.
If you look at the structure of this molecule around the oxygen atom, you'll find that the two CH3s play a role similar to the two hydrogens in water,
and the oxygen still has two lone pairs of electrons. So this molecule is a bent structure just like waters.
The compound is called dimethyl ether. It is not an alcohol, it does not have an OH, and it cannot enter into hydrogen bonding with water.
Because its geometry is the same as water's geometry, and it is bent, dimethyl ether is considered to be a polar molecule, but it does not have hydrogen bonds.
Unlike ethanol, which is an liquid at room temperature, dimethyl ether is a gas at room temperature, and unlike ethanol, which is miscible in water,
dimethyl ether is only slightly soluble in water.
If we continue to modify this structure and replace the oxygen in the middle of the dimethyl ether with a CH2 group,
then we have made the molecule propane, CH3, CH2, CH3.
Note that propane has exactly the same number of electrons as dimethyl ether, and the angle between the end carbons and the central carbon is still a tetrahedral angle.
But propane is a hydrocarbon, a non-polar molecule, and it has only weak van der Waals forces when it is present as a pure sample.
Propane is a gas at room temperature, and essentially it is not soluble in water.
It doesn't look like water at all, and therefore it is not soluble.
Motor oil is not soluble in water either.
Motor oil is a mixture of a number of different hydrocarbons, all larger than propane.
A typical molecule in motor oil might have 16 carbons and 34 hydrogens, all strung together.
The carbons acting like the beads of a necklace, and the hydrogens filling their octets like little extra decorations on each bead.
The entire molecule can act like a wet spaghetti noodle.
It sticks to others like itself, tends to coil up on itself in an aqueous environment, and eschews water whenever possible.
In contrast to ethanol, which is described as hydrophilic water-loving, C6H34 and its hydrocarbon brethren are described as hydrophobic water-fearing.
Although we have described the van der Waals or dispersion forces as relatively weak, these intermolecular forces are quite strong enough to determine the physical properties of hydrocarbons.
The viscosity and boiling point of hydrocarbons increase with the number of carbons in the chain, the mass of the molecule, or the number of electrons in the molecule, however you want to look at it.
Vegetable oils are chemically both quite similar and quite different from petroleum oils.
The fat component in vegetable oils is a triglyceride, not a hydrocarbon.
Structurally, glycerol is a tri-alcohol.
It's a propane, except that each carbon has an OH group replacing one hydrogen.
Glycerol then has three locations where hydrogen bonding can occur.
If you draw a Lewis dot structure for glycerol, you will see that it doesn't matter how you draw the picture.
If you arrange the molecule in three-dimensional space, as long as there's one OH on each carbon, you get exactly the same molecule.
It's flexible and you can easily rearrange it so the OH groups are all on the same side or each is headed off in different directions.
But the OH functional group behaves in glycerol just like it does in alcohols.
When it functions as the basis of a triglyceride, the OH group on the glycerol is replaced by a fatty acid.
A fatty acid is a cousin to a long-chain alcohol.
It has a long hydrocarbon chain.
Typically, animals and plants produce oils where the carbon chains are 16 or 18 or 20 carbons long
and have enough hydrogens to fill all but one of the carbon's valences.
At the end of a long-chain and fatty acid, however, is a carboxylic acid group.
The last of the carbons is bonded to two oxygens, one shown on the Lewis diagram as a single bond
and the other as a double bond where the carbon and oxygen share two pairs of valence electrons, making doubly strong bonds.
When constructing an oil molecule, the glycerol and three fatty acids come together.
The glycerol end and the carboxylic on the fatty acid react to dehydrate and form covalent bonds
so that there's a direct chemical connection between the carbon on the glycerol and the fatty acid.
The reaction to form the triglyceride produces three water molecules
and is therefore classified as a dehydration.
In oils, the three fatty acids are usually different, but their most important feature,
both physiologically and from a physical standpoint, is whether the fatty acids are saturated or unsaturated.
Saturated fatty acids contain only carbon-carbon bonds.
They are saturated with hydrogen.
Unsaturated fatty acid or unsaturated hydrocarbons contain one or more pairs of carbons
where the carbons directly share two or even three pairs of electrons to make a chemical bond.
When some of the carbon valence is satisfied by sharing electrons between two carbon atoms,
the molecule is not saturated with hydrogen and we call it an unsaturated hydrocarbon.
Multiple bonds, double bonds and triple bonds, have a substantial impact
on both the geometrical shape of molecules and their physical properties.
Multiple bonds restrict free rotation.
In the case of fatty acids or hydrocarbons, a series of double or triple bonds
prevent a molecule from curling up like a wet noodle.
The more unsaturated the fatty acid or hydrocarbon, the more rigid it is in three-dimensional space
and the more likely it is to form a solid at room temperature and the less soluble it is in water.
So we see that the old adage, like dissolves like, means that covalent molecules that have enough hydrogen bonds
or are polar enough to look like water are more soluble in water than nonpolar compounds.
We should mention another whole class of compounds which is held together not by sharing electrons
but by trading them to form ions.
These compounds are called ionic compounds and their solubility is ruled again by how they are like water.
Chemically pure water contains so few charged particles that it is considered an electrical insulator.
It does not conduct an electric current.
Nor does a solution of sugar in water nor of alcohol in water,
but a solution made by dissolving salt in water is different.
A crystal of sodium chloride, the salt on your table, is composed of three-dimensional alternating arrangements
of sodium positive ions and negative chloride ions.
When the salt dissolves in water, the sodium cations and the chloride anions separate and are surrounded by water molecules.
The highly polar water molecules are attracted to the charges on the ions from the salt
and the positive ends of water molecules orient themselves towards the anion
while the negative ends of water molecules organize themselves towards cations.
The water molecules are said to form a hydration layer around both types of ions
and the hydration layer helps to keep the opposite charged ions apart from each other in solution.
When you dissolve even a small amount of salt in water, the resulting solution conducts electricity
much more efficiently than pure water or a solution of sugar in water or a solution of alcohol in water.
So what is an ionic solid?
Binary ionic solids form when elements from opposite sides of the periodic table
have the opportunity to complete their octets by donating or accepting electrons from a partner
rather than sharing as they did in covalent bonds.
When atoms donate or accept electrons, both species end up with a net charge
and an octet of electrons on their outer shells.
The elements on the left-hand side of the periodic table, the metals,
have a few too many electrons and are willing to give those away and form positive ions, cations.
The number of electrons each atom will give away is equal to the number of the column it occupies on the periodic table.
Sodium forms a plus one cation. It gives one electron away.
Calcium forms a plus two cation and aluminum a plus three cation.
Meanwhile, the non-metals on the right side of the periodic table are happy to take the extra electrons the metal wants to give away.
When they accept those electrons, they become negatively charged anions.
Again, the number of electrons they're willing to accept is determined by the column in which they appear on the periodic table.
On the right-hand side of the periodic table, the halogen column includes fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine.
Fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine need one more electron to complete their octets.
Therefore, they form negative one ions. Oxygen forms a negative two ion and nitrogen forms a negative three ion.
When ions get together to form ionic compounds like salt, the net charge on the compound has to be zero.
When binary ionic compounds are named, the name of the cation comes first and the anion comes second.
The cation keeps its name that it had as a metal and the anion gets the ending I-D-E to indicate that its charge has changed.
So the compound form between sodium and chlorine is called sodium chloride.
The sodium transfers its extra valence electron to the chlorine atom and they both become charged, oppositely charged and therefore attract each other in space.
The compound between calcium and chlorine is called calcium chloride.
Chemists know that the charge on calcium is plus two and that the formula for calcium chloride is CaCl2, but there's nothing in the name that tells you this.
You just need to know it from the position of the atoms on the periodic table.
The formula for aluminum chloride is AlCl3.
Unlike covalent compounds, ionic compounds do not occur in discrete units.
In fact, a salt crystal is a huge number of sodium and chloride ions alternating throughout three-dimensional space.
So the numbers in the formula for ionic compounds just gives the ratio of the number of cations to the number of anions that must be present to make a neutral salt.
Because the net charge on the large collection of formula units is zero, crystals of ionic compounds are considered to be electrically neutral.
The force responsible for the structure of ionic solids is a force described by Coulomb's law.
Coulomb's law says that the force between two charges is proportional to the charge on each species divided by its radial separation squared.
We'll come back to Coulomb's law in a little bit.
In general chemistry courses, there are a number of polyatomic ions which are important in ionic solids.
Important polyatomic cations include the ammonium cation and H4 plus 1.
Important polyatomic anions include carbonate, CO3 minus 2, hydroxide, OH minus 1, nitrate, NO3 minus 1, phosphate, PO4 minus 3, and sulfate, SO4 minus 2.
The ammonium cation consists of one nitrogen atom and four hydrogen atoms covalently bonded together.
If you try to draw the Lewis structure for an ammonium ion, you will note that nitrogen brings five valence electrons to the picture and each hydrogen one.
So a neutral NH4 has nine, not eight valence electrons.
If NH4 can give away one of its electrons to another species, the covalently bonded unit can get a stable octet.
That's why the species NH4 plus is stable, but the species NH4 neutral is not.
In contrast, if you combine an oxygen with a hydrogen, you have only seven valence electrons.
If that system can find another electron, it can satisfy its octet and become a stable species.
So the formula for the hydroxide ion is OH minus 1.
In ionic crystals or in the aqueous solutions they form by dissolving in water, the covalently bonded polyatomic anions and cations hold together as specific units,
solvated by water molecules in the same way that monatomic ions are.
Chemists recognize polyatomic ions when they're written in the chemical formulas for salts.
For instance, they know that MgCO3 is magnesium carbonate and that an Mg plus 2 ion is attracted to the negatively too charged carbonate anion.
What about the formula for ammonium sulfide?
We know that two ammonium cations are required to make a neutral compound with S minus 2, but writing that formula down can be fairly complicated.
To make it easier to distinguish the numbers from the structure of polyatomic ions, when we write the name ammonium sulfide,
we write the NH4 plus in parentheses and we put a 2 subscript on the right hand side of the parentheses.
NH4 2S is the chemical formula for ammonium sulfide.
Sodium phosphate on the other hand can be written Na3PO4.
There's no parentheses needed because the cation is a monatomic cation and it's clear that Na sub 3 means that three sodiums are present and only one phosphate is required to balance the charge.
When sodium phosphate dissolves in water, the solution will contain three times more sodium ions than phosphate ions because of the 3 to 1 ratio in the structure.
Just as Mendeley have looked for patterns of behavior in the elements to help to organize the periodic table, we can look for patterns of behavior in the solubility of ionic compounds to dissolve the solubility rules.
In general, we find that all sodium salts are soluble, all potassium salts are soluble, as are all ionic compounds with chloride or bromide or nitrate as their anions.
Things get a little bit more complicated when the ions in our compounds have multiple charges.
For example, some calcium and magnesium salts are soluble but some are insoluble.
In fact, you are very likely to be familiar with the insolubility of calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate if you live in an area where the natural waters are called hardwater.
Hardwater has a high mineral content and contains a lot of calcium and magnesium relatively speaking.
When a drop of water evaporates from the surface of your sink or when you boil the water in your tea kettle,
you can leave deposits of magnesium carbonate or calcium carbonate behind.
In a gross generalization, we can say that ionic compounds which contain multiply charged cations and anions are laced likely to be soluble in water.
Remember that magnesium has a charge of plus 2 and carbonate a charge of minus 2.
But please note one thing, in our definition of solubility, we are depending on our macroscopic ability to observe changes.
We'll return to a more microscopic picture of solubility later in this series.
Most chemists consider the dissolution of a soluble salt in water to be a physical transformation, not a chemical transformation.
It is a physical transformation because it simply involves the physical rearrangement of the chemical components in three-dimensional space.
Dissolving a salt in water has some similarities with melting ice. The building blocks don't change, they just get rearranged.
But when two salt solutions are mixed together, then we can initiate a chemical transformation.
Let's say we take a solution we've made by dissolving calcium chloride in water and another solution made by dissolving sodium sulfate in water.
Both of these solutions look just like water to our eye.
But if we test their ability to conduct electrical current, we find that both of them are very highly conductive and therefore quite different from water.
It's when we mix them together that a magical transformation occurs.
A snowstorm forms in the container holding the mixture.
After a few moments, the snow settles to the bottom of the container, forming a layer of white powder on the bottom.
We call the white powder, which is a solid, a precipitate.
The clear solution left on top is called the supernatant.
If we test a supernatant, it still conducts electricity.
So we ask ourselves, what formed the white solid and why does the supernatant still conduct electricity?
If we examine some solubility rules, we can answer these questions.
The calcium chloride dissolved in water to form plus 2 calcium ions and twice as many Cl-1 anions.
The sodium sulfate dissolved, forming twice as many Cl-1 ions as Cl-2 anions.
Recall that we said that all salts of sodium and chloride were soluble.
However, when we mix the two solutions together, there are now four ions altogether in a single solution that results.
Sodium ions, sulfate ions, calcium ions, and chloride ions.
Opposites still attract.
And the calcium and sulfate ions are very strongly attracted to one another.
They both have charges of 2 plus 2 for calcium and minus 2 for sulfate.
And the attraction between calcium and sulfate, according to Coulomb's law, is four times stronger than the attraction between sodium and chloride, all other things being equal.
This attraction is sufficient for calcium ions and sulfate ions to make their way through the sea of water molecules surrounding them,
find each other, and fall together in a joyous storm of precipitation.
Calcium sulfate is insoluble or not soluble in water.
In addition to leaving hard water deposits on our plumbing, the insoluble ionic compound calcium carbonate forms the shells we pick up on the beach,
the limestone in the steps at City Hall, and the crystals that form balance organs in your inner ear.
And other insoluble calcium compounds are the major components in your teeth, kidney stones, and bones.
As you can see, life really does depend on compounds which are soluble in water and those that are not.
Let's diverge from our focus on solubility for a moment and look at the way in which we find chemical elements in nature.
Some elements, like copper or gold or oxygen, we find as independent elements in nature.
But others show up as compounds, sodium chloride, in the case of sodium and chlorine.
We can imagine making sodium chloride directly from its elements.
And we can watch movies of the dramatic reaction that happens when sodium-solid is mixed with chlorine gas on YouTube,
even though this is not a reaction we should try at home.
To write the reaction between pure metallic sodium and the diatomic halogen gas chlorine,
we would write Na-solid plus Cl2 gas goes to sodium chloride-solid.
But this is not a completely correct summary of the reaction because it does not illustrate the conservation of mass,
which is observed in all chemical reactions.
Since there's only one sodium on both sides, the sodium is okay.
But since chlorine comes as a diatomic gas, there are two chlorines on the reagent or left side of the reaction
and only one shown in the products.
Chemists balance chemical reactions by placing numbers in front of each reagent and product,
so the same number of atoms of each type are present in both the reagents and the products.
In the sodium-chlorine reaction, the fact that chlorine is diatomic means that it can form two chloride ions on the product side.
Therefore, we balance the chemical reaction by putting a 2 in front of the sodium
and a 2 in front of the sodium chloride produced.
The reaction becomes 2-sodium-solid plus Cl2 gas produces 2-sodium-chloride-solid.
In this balanced equation, the total mass of the reagents is the mass of two sodium atoms and a chlorine molecule.
And that's exactly the same as the mass of two sodium chloride formula units.
If we wanted to take the crystal of sodium chloride apart and form it into independent sodium and chloride ions,
we would have to provide a lot of energy to the crystal.
This energy would be called the lattice energy of the ionic solid.
You have to provide all that energy to overcome the attractions between the sodium and chloride ions
in order to separate them and dissolve them.
When water molecules surround the ions in solution, however, energy is released.
The formation of chemical bonds, even intermolecular bonds like the hydration of ions by water, releases energy.
And in this case, the amount of energy released is proportional to the charge on the ion.
Let's return to the process of the dissolution of sugar on a molecular level.
The molecules of sugar are held together in small crystals by intermolecular attractive forces, including dipole-dipole forces and hydrogen bonds.
The molecules in the liquid water are attracted to each other predominantly by hydrogen bonds.
The large size of the sugar compared to the size of water means that the attractive forces are spread out over a larger volume or surface area.
For sugar molecules to become uniformly distributed among water molecules, the individual molecules again need to be separated from one another.
To overcome the attractive forces, energy must be absorbed by the system.
Chemists say that the energy absorbed by the separation of molecules from one another is an endothermic process.
And energy must flow into the system to separate the samples.
Therefore, the separated molecules are at a higher energy than they were when they were together initially.
To make the solution, we envision taking the separated molecules and putting them back together, but mixed up this time.
The mixing step forms intermolecular chemical bonds, and this mixing step is always exothermic.
Energy is released from the system when it happens.
When we really perform an experiment to dissolve sugar in water, all of this happens simultaneously.
But a mathematical treatment of the energetics is simpler if we think of each step as independent from the other.
As long as we start and end in the same chemical environment, chemists would call it the state of the system,
we can think about the transformation in any of several different ways and gain some insight about it.
Overall, the process of dissolution can be either endothermic or exothermic,
depending on the relative amounts of energy involved in separating the solvent and solute and in producing the mixing.
Because we do not conduct dissolutions in this stepwise manner, we just mix solvent and solute together.
You might realize that actually measuring the energies associated with the specific steps of separating the molecules
and then combining them together is a very difficult undertaking.
But measuring the overall energy change for dissolution is not difficult at all.
It's just unfortunate for a person trying to relate chemistry to everyday life
that the amount of energy required to separate water molecules from each other and sugar molecules from each other
is almost the same as the amount of energy released when the sugar solution is formed.
The energetics of the system are not immediately apparent to us in our everyday lives.
However, when some solids dissolve, the energetics are much more obvious.
For instance, ammonium acetate, an ionic compound, is an active ingredient in many cold packs.
To make a cold pack, you put ammonium acetate in an ampule that can easily, but not too easily, be broken.
The rest of the pack is filled with water.
When the ampule is broken, the ammonium acetate dissolves in the water and the water gets very cold.
The energy required to separate the ammonium ions from the acetate ions is much larger than the energy released by their salvation.
The dissolution of ammonium acetate is an endothermic process
and the resulting solution is much colder than the starting temperature of the ammonium acetate or water.
On the other hand, if you want to make a hot pack,
at least one commercial product uses a super saturated solution of sodium acetate.
A super saturated solution is one which contains more dissolved material than you would expect from the solubility of the compound.
Super saturated solutions are metastable.
Given the opportunity, they will precipitate solid and return to the situation of being a saturated solution in contact with its solid.
You can make a super saturated solution of sugar in water or sodium acetate in water
by heating a large quantity of the solid with an equal amount of water until a homogeneous solution forms.
If you do this carefully and you let the sodium acetate cool slowly without disturbing it,
it will stay dissolved in the water, forming a super saturated solution.
However, give the solution any opportunity to become saturated.
Shake it, drop a little piece of sodium acetate in it,
or in a commercial hot pack click the metallic button inside the pack
and immediately sodium acetate solid crystals begin to form.
This precipitation is very exothermic and provides a chemical source of the heat for the hot pack.
Unlike cold packs which need to be opened and allow the water to evaporate in order to be reused,
hot packs can be reused over and over.
You simply place the entire thing in boiling water,
re-dissolve the sodium acetate,
and then leave it alone to cool off, reforming the saturated solution again in the process.
In this lesson, we have discussed the characteristic behavior of solutions,
the chemical force is responsible for those characteristics,
and some energy considerations associated with the formation of solutions.
We've also talked about some terminology that chemists use to describe them.
In the next lesson, we will take a more quantitative view of solutions
and discuss the ways chemists count and quantitate solutes and solvents and solutions and reactions.
This ends lecture two.
