Elemental matters, an introduction to chemistry lecture four, the origin of atoms.
So where do atoms come from and how do we know anyway?
We've already established that atoms are so small that to detect any of them with our senses we need a large quantity.
But there are methods for looking at individual atoms one at a time.
Have you ever seen a rainbow?
Rainbows are manifestations of water's ability to diffract light from our sun.
Isaac Newton is widely credited with first observing that white light, sunlight, could be dispersed into the colors of light you observe in a rainbow.
Newton made this discovery by passing solar light through a prism.
Most probably he was not the first to see this non-rainbow rainbow, but he was the first to observe in 1672 that if he used an inverted prism he could take the spectrum produced and recombine it to give back the white light that he had started with.
Newton concluded that white light was composed of all the colors of the rainbow.
Today scientists call the rainbow of light form when sunlight passes through raindrops or through a prism or through a grading, a spectrum.
The visible spectrum stretches from red to violet colored light and the colors of a rainbow always appear in the same order.
After Newton demonstrated that white light was composed of the separate colors of visible light, he took one piece of the visible light, one color from his spectrum and he put it through a second prism.
But he established through that that no further colors were generated.
That is, light of a single color does not change when it's refracted through a prism.
So his white light was made up of all the colors of the rainbow, but the colors were something in and of themselves.
In 1752 a Scottish physicist Thomas Melville discovered that putting different substances in flames and the passing the light from the flame through a prism gave different patterns, different colors of spectra.
Ordinary table salt, for instance, generated a bright yellow light.
Not only could the bright yellow be seen by the naked eye, but when the light was passed through a prism only specific yellow light colors appeared.
The rest of the colors of the rainbow were missing and each substance Melville tested seemed to have its own identifiable pattern.
The spectra produced when the substance was burned in a flame, produced specific bright colors and left large gaps.
When passed through a prism, the bright color showed up in the same locations as when white light was passed through the same prism.
Eventually it occurred to scientists to ask if there was anything outside of the visible spectrum.
William Herschel, an astronomer, investigated this question and published his results in 1800.
Herschel used a prism to refract light from the sun, just like Newton.
But he placed a thermometer against the wall just past the red end of his rainbow.
He carefully recorded the temperature as it increased over time.
Herschel used his results to report the discovery of infrared radiation.
Even in Herschel's time, people were certainly aware of the warmth provided by basking in the sun.
A primary consequence of the interaction of invisible infrared light with our material world.
The year after Herschel's report, Johann Ritter reported the discovery of invisible light at the other end of the visible spectrum.
Ritter used sodium chloride in his experiments.
He knew that silver chloride turned from violet-white to dark-black when exposed to sunlight.
This was actually the technology that underlined most of photography in the 18th and 1900s.
Ritter measured the rate at which silver chloride reacted when exposed to different colors of light.
He demonstrated that blue and violet light causes silver chloride to react more quickly than red light did.
Then he decided to place his silver chloride sample in the region just past the violet end of the visible spectrum.
The silver chloride turned black even faster than it did when exposed to blue or violet light.
Ritter concluded that an invisible kind of light existed past the blue or purple end of the spectrum, and he called it ultraviolet.
By 1802, William Wollaston in England had discovered that the solar spectrum was really not continuous.
It had dark lines interspersed in the rainbow of colors that Newton had observed.
A scientist called Frauenhofer undertook a systematic study of the dark lines beginning in 1814.
He used improved technology and better prisms to spread the solar radiation out in broader and broader swaths.
He found an almost countless number of dark lines in the solar spectrum and developed an identification method for the lines that is still used by astronomers today.
He labeled the strongest dark lines, the darkest of the dark lines, A, B, C, and D.
By the 1820s, Herschel had recognized that Melville's flame spectra provided a way to detect and identify small quantities of an element in the lab by putting its powder into a flame.
The brightness of the flame correlated to the amount of substance that you put into it.
In 1849, Foucault of Pendulum fame used the technological advances of the age and examined the spectrum of light emitted when a voltaic arc was sent between two carbon poles.
In this laboratory generated lightning, he saw a bright double yellow line at exactly the same wavelength as Frauenhofer's dark D line in the solar spectrum.
Investigating further, Foucault passed the sun's light through the arc and then through a prism.
He observed that the D lines in the spectrum were less bright than usual.
After testing with other sources, he concluded that the arc which emitted light at the D line frequency could also absorb light from another source at that frequency.
Today we use discharge tubes filled with low pressure gases that we pass arcs through to generate the line spectra of all kinds of gaseous elements for study in the laboratory.
And we fill up tubes with neon and discharge arcs in them to provide neon lights that illuminate Las Vegas and Times Square.
The predictable pattern of light absorbed and emitted by each of the elements allows for sophisticated analysis of trace amounts of those elements using modern techniques like atomic absorption spectroscopy or inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy.
Astronomers use the line spectra of atoms to identify the elemental composition of distant stars.
The relative brightness of the spectral emissions by the elements gives a clue to their relative abundances.
Although the analysis is quite sophisticated, current data shows that a hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, with helium a distant second.
The abundance of heavier elements in general decreases as the atomic number increases.
However, elements with even atomic numbers are more abundant than those with odd atomic numbers.
An iron and its immediate neighbors defy the general trend and have unusually high abundance, with iron as the third most abundant element behind hydrogen and helium.
Chemists, physicists, geologists and astronomers are all interested in explaining why the universe contains the elements that it does.
In order to understand their arguments, we need to review the structure of atoms and we need to realize that their spectroscopic tools allow them to see things that we can't begin to see with our eyes.
We know that atoms are composed of three subatomic particles, protons, neutrons and electrons.
The protons carry a plus one charge and have a mass of one atomic mass unit.
The neutrons, which occupy the nucleus along with the protons, are uncharged, neutral and have about the same mass as a proton.
For our purposes, we'll take them to weigh one AMU.
Electrons, on the other hand, have a unit charge of minus one and are only one eighteen hundredth as massive as the proton.
Therefore, they contribute very little to the total mass of an atom, although they are essential for its electrical neutrality.
The number of protons in the nucleus identifies the element and is called the atomic number.
Atomic numbers are represented in scientific shorthand by the alphabet letter Z.
The elements on the periodic table are arranged in order of increasing Z, and Z is the integer shown at the top of the blocks on the periodic table.
In addition to protons, all the elements but normal hydrogen have neutrons in their nuclei.
Since protons and neutrons have the same mass, the mass number represented by the letter A is equal to the total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of each element.
The mass number represents the approximate mass of the atom in atomic mass units because the electrons don't contribute very much.
Mass numbers are shown as a superscript to the left of a chemical symbol.
Two atoms of the same element must contain the same number of protons, but can have different numbers of neutrons.
The two are then called isotopes.
Carbon-12 is the most common isotope of carbon, but carbon-13 occurs in nature too, and carbon-11 can be prepared by a variety of nuclear reactions.
The nucleus of a carbon-12 atom contains six protons and six neutrons, whereas the nucleus of a carbon-13 atom contains six protons and seven neutrons.
Electrically neutral atoms must contain equal numbers, protons, and electrons, so a neutral carbon-12 has six electrons, as does a neutral carbon-13.
Since chemistry is primarily concerned with atoms trading electrons, the chemistry of carbon-12 is very similar to the chemistry of carbon-13.
But nuclear reactions, which involve what medieval alchemists called transmutation, the conversion of one element to another, involves the nucleus itself.
Nuclear can undergo transformations by absorbing or emitting particles. You've probably heard of alpha and beta particles.
Alpha particles are helium nuclei, two protons, and two neutrons, stuck together.
It's very easy to understand how a nucleus, a large nucleus, might produce an alpha particle.
But beta particles are electrons.
How do nuclei, which consist of protons and neutrons, emit electrons?
Good question.
It turns out that neutrons aren't as fundamental or as permanent as we might hope.
In fact, neutrons can decay, forming a proton, an electron, and a third product, which is not of interest to chemistry, but is of interest to physicists, called an electron anti-neutrino.
When a neutron converts to an electron proton and the anti-neutrino, the proton is captured by the nucleus.
The electron is emitted and called a beta particle, and the anti-neutrino is really hard to detect, so chemists usually ignore it.
Some nuclear processes don't produce particles, just energy. The energy emissions are called gamma rays.
Emitting a gamma ray does not change the chemical nature of the nucleus, but due to the law of conservation of energy, it produces a less energetic nucleus.
Just as mass is conserved in chemical reactions, we observe that charge, mass number, and atomic number are all conserved in nuclear reactions.
So now we are back to the question that began this lesson. Where did the atoms come from?
Today, the accepted scientific model for the formation of the universe is called the Big Bang Theory.
The Big Bang Theory asserts that the universe began in what mathematicians would label a singularity.
An initial state with unimaginably high mass, density, and temperature, from which the universe began expanding some 10 to the 10th years ago, 10 billion years ago.
As the primordial soup expanded, it cooled, and its particles began to stick together.
After a few seconds, the temperature dropped enough, although it was still hotter than any environment we can produce today, that neutrons and protons could begin to stick together and form hydrogen, helium, and lithium nuclei.
The reactions which allow these nuclei to form are called fusion reactions, where heavier products are formed from the combination of two lighter particles.
For example, one proton plus one neutron can form an H2 ion with a gamma ray emitted.
The notation for nuclear reactions is very helpful in allowing us to understand what's going on.
The proton is represented by one superscript on the left, the letter P, lowercase P for proton, and a plus on the right to indicate a plus one charge.
When a proton and a neutron symbolized by a superscript one, because the mass number is one, a zero subscript to the left to indicate that there are no protons, and a zero charge to the right because there's no net charge.
When those combine together, they form one product.
The product is a hydrogen atom.
It contains one proton, but it has a mass number of two, because the proton and neutron have stuck together to make one nucleus.
Initially it was a very high energy nucleus, so the gamma ray is emitted to carry some excess energy from the situation.
The hydrogen atom that's left behind with one proton and one neutron gets a special name.
It's called a deuterium, and it is an isotope of hydrogen, one of three common isotopes of hydrogen.
Normal hydrogen contains one proton in its nucleus and no neutrons.
That's hydrogen one, normal hydrogen.
Deuterium has one proton and one neutron for a mass number of two, hence deuterium.
There's also a form of hydrogen with one proton and two neutrons.
That has a mass number of three and is given the name tritium.
Hydrogen is the only element whose isotopes get special names.
We've remarked about deuterium because it turns out to be an essential player in the evolution of higher mass particles from the Big Bang.
Once you've produced enough deuterium, you can start to see reactions between two deuterium molecules.
And so the second step in the evolution of the elements is considered to be that where two deuteriums combine with each other to make a helium nucleus.
When the two deuteriums combine together, each one brings a proton and a neutron to the reaction.
When they produce a helium, the helium has two protons in its nucleus, but holds onto one of the neutrons.
It's not too surprising that a nucleus with two protons would need a neutron as a mediator,
because we know that the two positive charges on the protons repel each other.
We'll come back to this in a minute.
The second stage of the nuclear reactions from the Big Bang, then, is two deuteriums forming one helium-3 and releasing a neutron.
Once we have enough helium-3 produced, helium-3 can begin to react with deuterium.
And a helium-3 plus a deuterium makes a normal helium-4 isotope, releasing a proton.
At the incredibly high temperatures that followed the Big Bang, the helium and hydrogen nuclei had sufficient kinetic energy to overcome the Coulombic repulsion caused by both of them having positive charges.
They had enough energy to collide with each other and react.
Fairly quickly, however, remember we're talking on the timescale of the age of the universe, the expanding universe cooled and the kinetic energy of the nuclei was reduced,
effectively bringing these nuclear fusion reactions to a halt.
Eventually, the universe cooled sufficiently for the nuclei to capture and hold onto electrons, allowing them to form atoms.
Today, the universe is full of vast clouds of hydrogen and helium atoms, remnants of the Big Bang.
So if the Big Bang cooled off when everything was still hydrogen and helium, where did the rest of the elements come from?
All of the elements came from stars.
As vast clouds of hydrogen and helium began to cool, the effects of gravity took over and gravity began to cause local increases in the density of hydrogen and helium.
In these high density regions, as gravity drew atoms closer and closer together, the process of nuclear fusion was able to begin again.
As the fusion processes continue, the number of particles present in the star is reduced because smaller particles have fused to form larger ones.
Much like a balloon collapses when you remove air from it, the star collapses as the number of particles within it is reduced.
The collapse causes more heating, allowing more fusion.
And continuing cycles of fusion, heating, and collapse have produced all of the naturally occurring elements in the universe, up to element number 92, uranium.
Using fusion cycles similar to the ones discussed here, you would predict that the higher the atomic number, the less abundant element in the universe.
Since fusion builds atoms one at a time by combining two smaller pieces into a larger one, the number of larger pieces is limited by the number of smaller pieces available.
You might ask yourself, is this prediction true, and how would we determine the abundance of the elements in the universe anyway?
The answer is spectroscopy.
Astronomers can analyze light arriving at Earth from distant stars and violent astronomical events.
They match the wavelengths of the light observed to the wavelengths of the light observed by atomic absorption or emission studies in the lab, and they can identify the elements that are present in stars.
The relative intensity of the light provides information about the abundance of each specific element.
In addition to optical spectroscopy, it is now possible to detect and analyze the energy of particles emitted as products in nuclear reactions.
We are most familiar with alpha and beta particles, neutron and gamma rays, all of which can be emitted from nuclear reactions.
But more exotic particles, positrons and neutrinos, for example, can also be produced and detected.
Nuclear reactions follow conservation laws, just like chemical reactions do.
But in nuclear reactions, it's the total mass number, the total atomic number, and the total charge that must be the same for reagents and products.
But just because a nuclear reaction follows the rules doesn't mean that it produces a stable product.
In fact, many of the products of nuclear reactions are themselves unstable and undergo further nuclear processes on a time scale that we characterize as the half-life.
The spontaneous decay of uranium was first observed by Henri Becquerel in 1896, and allowed him to report the discovery of radioactivity.
Kulmsov, of course, predicts that a nucleus with more than one proton should instantly self-destruct.
There are obviously a number of other forces, nuclear forces, which come into play and allow nuclei to be stable.
Among these forces is the strong force and the weak force.
These forces are active over very short distances, distances comparable to the size of a nucleus, and are not evidenced in macroscopic systems, even atomic systems, that we investigate in chemistry.
The half-lives of naturally radioactive elements ranges over the complete possibility of time scales from submicroseconds to millions of years.
The most common stable nuclei in living systems on the Earth include hydrogen, deuterium, carbon-12, carbon-13, nitrogen-14, nitrogen-15, and oxygen-16, 17, and 18.
In each of these examples, the lowest mass number isotope accounts for more than 99.5% of the naturally occurring atoms on Earth.
How do we determine the stability of nuclei?
You might note an interesting emission from the list of quantities conserved in nuclear reactions, mass.
In fact, if you compare the total mass of the individual protons and neutrons that make up any nucleus to the mass of the nucleus itself,
you will find that all the nuclei, except for hydrogen-1, weigh less than the sum of their parts.
This mass defect is released as energy when you build a nucleus from each of its individual nucleons.
If you build a nucleus from each of its component protons and neutrons.
However, even when the nuclei are built in stepwise fashion, the amount of energy released is calculated according to Einstein's famous equation,
E equals mc squared.
The energy released when a nucleus is formed is equal to its mass defect times the speed of light squared.
The mass difference between the nucleus and the sum of its parts is called the binding energy of the nucleus.
And the larger the binding energy per nucleon, the more stable the nucleus is.
As chemists, let's note that the periodic table lists the average mass of each element according to its relative abundance on Earth,
not the mass of individual nuclei.
Information about the mass of individual nuclei is compiled in tables called tables of the nucleons.
Since hydrogen-1 has only one proton in its nucleus, its binding energy is zero.
Despite being the most abundant species in the universe, it might be considered the least stable.
However, the most stable element is clearly iron-56.
It has the largest binding energy per nucleon of any nucleus.
The stellar fusion reactions we have discussed as important in the formation of the universe can now be reexamined from the standpoint of the energies of their reactants and products.
If we try to build a nucleus bigger than iron by adding a deuterium to an iron nucleus,
the binding energy of the product is less than the binding energy of the reagent iron.
The product we make is less stable than iron.
A completely different process is credited with being responsible for forming elements through astronomical history.
Large nuclei, which have less binding energy per nucleon than iron-56,
are therefore prone to undergoing different types of nuclear reactions, spontaneous nuclear fission.
During fission, a large nucleus splits into two or more smaller nuclei, emitting the excess binding energy in the process.
For instance, uranium-235 undergoes a fission reaction which produces strontium-90 and xenon-143,
and two neutrons, with a half-life of about 713 million years.
This reaction also releases 70 million kilojoules of energy for every gram of uranium-235 that decays.
To put this amount of energy in perspective, the methane that is burned in a gas stove or gas furnace produces about 56 kilojoules of energy per gram.
It is also possible to induce a nuclear fission by hitting large nuclei with other particles.
The same fission process that occurs naturally in uranium-235 can be induced by hitting a uranium-235 nucleus with a neutron.
The reaction then becomes uranium-235 plus a neutron yields strontium-90 plus xenon-143 plus three neutrons.
Note that the net reaction here is identical to the natural fission reaction above.
The energy released is the same as the natural reaction too.
The three neutrons formed as products here illustrate that spontaneous fission can undergo a chain reaction.
If there is enough uranium-235 around, the three neutrons produced by the first fission can promote three more fissions,
and those fissions can promote nine more fissions, etc.
The fission rate expanding with geometrical precision and increasing impact of this otherwise slow spontaneous process.
How does the binding energy per nucleon affect the abundances of the elements?
If you consult a chart of binding energies, you will note that lithium, beryllium, and boron have unusually low binding energies.
They are not very stable.
There is less energy released when they are formed by fusion,
and therefore they are more likely to undergo spontaneous fusion processes that preform them into heavier elements.
So it is not too surprising that they are less abundant in the universe than their neighboring elements.
The higher abundance of even number elements compared to odd number neighbors
is also explained by balancing the competing rates of formation and decay.
Recall that the first step in stellar evolution was accompanied by a depletion of the hydrogen which fuses to form helium.
High atomic number elements are more likely to form by fusion of even numbered atomic species.
The binding energies of these even number species combines with the environment in which you find them
to determine which even species undergo reactions forming odd number nuclei.
The importance of helium in stellar evolution supports the abundance of even atomic number nuclei.
It is important to note that stellar evolution is continuing to happen today.
The spectacular pictures sent back from the Hubble Space Telescope not only impresses with their beauty,
but provide new data for astronomers, physicists, chemists and geologists
to examine and continuously refine our understanding of our universe.
The Hubble Space Telescope specifically detects ultraviolet radiation from remote locations throughout the universe.
In 2012 we can expect to see equally impressive pictures from a completely different part of the electromagnetic spectrum
as NASA releases data from its WISE infrared satellite
which has been studying invisible infrared radiation from across the universe since its launch in 2009.
Today we make use of naturally occurring radioactivity in a number of ways.
Since its discovery by Becquerel, radioactivity has been employed to examine the age of archaeological items
and the earth itself and has found a variety of applications, especially in medicine,
and has been used to generate power and has been loose with terrible fury and acts of war.
The lifetime of radioactive process is one important factor in determining its utility.
The half-life, as we have said, is the period it takes for half of the nuclei in a sample to undergo a specific nuclear process.
It turns out that this time is always completely independent of the amount of radioactive material present when we start to observe the process.
For example, carbon-14, a carbon nucleus with six protons and eight neutrons, undergoes beta decay with a half-life of 5,730 plus or minus 40 years.
The reaction is carbon-14 produces nitrogen-14 plus a beta particle.
If we have a collection of 1,000 carbon-14 nuclei, the half-life tells us that 5,730 years later,
if we come back and examine the same collection of nuclei, half of them, or 500, will be present as carbon-14,
and the other half, 500, will be present as nitrogen-14.
After another 5,730 years, or 11,460 years after we first began our study,
half of the remaining carbon-14s, or 250 carbon-14s, will remain, and the rest, 750, will have been converted to nitrogen-14.
Mathematically, we can calculate the fraction of the original nuclei remaining after any number of half-lives,
but the fraction is the number at the time we're interested in, divided by the number at the time we started,
equals one-half to the n, little n, where n is the number of half-lives.
Of course, we can't date archaeological items by comparing the number of carbon-14 nuclei present today to the number present when they were made,
because we don't know the number of carbon-14 nuclei present when they were made, or do we?
It turns out that within some uncertainties, we do know how much carbon-14 was present when some archaeological items were made.
That's because the primary source of carbon-14 on Earth is from a reaction of nitrogen-14, the major component of our atmosphere, with high-energy cosmic rays.
The cosmic rays provide neutrons to promote the reaction neutron plus nitrogen-14 makes carbon-14 plus a proton.
Although the baseline has refined over time, we will simplify the argument here.
The rate at which cosmic rays have been hitting our atmosphere is assumed constant over the history of man.
The rate of natural decay of carbon-14 is also constant.
Therefore, over time, a constant amount of carbon-14 has been present in our atmosphere.
Because plants use atmospheric carbon dioxide and convert it to provide their structural components and energy, a known amount of carbon-14 is present in all living things.
But when the living thing dies, it stops exchanging carbon-14 with its environment.
Over time, the amount of carbon-14 it contains decreases, so the rate at which the material produces beta rays from carbon-14 decay decreases too.
It is the beta particles rather than the actual amount of carbon-14 that historically has been monitored to evaluate important archaeological objects.
After about 10 half-lives, it becomes difficult to detect sufficient beta particles to use carbon decay as a reliable dating strategy,
so items which exceed about 60,000 years in age have to be dated using other techniques.
One estimate of the age of the Earth is given by examining the ratio of uranium-238 to lead 206.
Although the decay of uranium-238 happens in a stepwise manner, the first step in the decay, with a half-life of 4.5 billion years, is by far the slowest and controls the ratio of uranium-238 to lead 206.
The age of rocks can be dated using the uranium-238 to lead 206 plus 8 heliums plus 6 electrons, overall decay reaction.
We can assume that there's no lead 206 present, initially only U238.
This assumption seems valid because uranium-238 and lead 206 are usually found in the same rocks, but other isotopes of lead are not present in those rocks.
Let's assume we start with one mole, 238 grams of uranium.
After one half-life, half the uranium would remain, 119 grams, and half a mole of lead 206, 103 grams of lead would have been formed.
The ratio of the mass of lead 206 to the mass of uranium-238 would be 103 grams divided by 119 grams or 0.87.
As time goes on, and more U238 decays, the mass ratio will increase in a predictable way.
So far, from all the rocks we've analyzed, the highest lead uranium mass ratio found on earth is 0.85.
This ratio indicates that the rock was formed slightly less than one half-life ago.
The age of the rock is estimated to be 4.45 billion years, and the age of the earth therefore must be close to 4.5 billion years.
Humans have always lived in an environment which includes natural radioactivity.
Nuclear processes have been a part of science since radioactivity was discovered by Becquerel.
And despite the terror of nuclear weapons, we have developed a number of helpful technologies since Marie Curie discovered the next two radioactive elements,
radium and polonium, when she was searching for the elements that made the minerals pitch-blend and chalcolite more radioactive than uranium.
Although many of us fear radiation exposure, it is important to note that nature is responsible for most of the radiation exposure that most of us experience in our lifetimes.
In addition to using radioactive dating, as we've discussed, radioactivity has found a helpful role in medicine.
In particular, iodine-131, also called radioiodine, is an important radioisotope that's used in medical applications.
It has a decay half-life of about 8 days.
The principal use of radioiodine is in treatment for Graves' disease, where the iodine concentrates in the thyroid.
Paradoxically, although iodine-131 is used to kill cancer cells, the fact that it has an 8-day lifetime means that it decays rapidly enough that the long-term hazard of exposure is very low.
After a few half-lives, the radiation levels are low enough to meet what is standard radiation in the background environment,
and iodine-131 samples can be disposed of as regular trash once they have been stored for 8-10 half-life.
One demonstration of radioactivity that never fails to astound students is to put a piece of red fiesta ware, the china that was made in the U.S. between 1936 and 1944 with a modified recipe later on, under a Geiger counter.
Geiger counters detect radiation by looking at the particles that are emitted.
Red fiesta ware is made using a uranium oxide salt as the coloring agent in the glaze.
And until 1944, when the U.S. government took control of all radium stocks, the radium oxide was used to produce the bright orange color of some fiesta ware.
If you go to an antique store and buy a piece of vintage red fiesta, you should know that it's more radioactive than virtually any other common household item.
There are arguments about whether the radiation level is damaging, dangerous or not, but most of us would tell you that if you have some orange fiesta ware at your house,
you probably shouldn't feed any children in your household food from that orange fiesta ware.
The principle hazard, of course, is that small amounts of glaze might come off of old materials and contaminate food that's being served in it.
This is especially true for foods with excessive acid content.
So although nuclear processes are the source of all the elements in our universe, they're not the primary concern of chemistry.
And in the subsequent lessons, here we'll return to a focus on the chemistry.
However, this detour into the origin of the universe has established some scientific principles that are important in the chemical as well as in the nuclear world.
And it will provide the basis for some of our future discussions.
This ends lecture four. Remember to visit this course's webpage at www.modernscholar.com.
