elemental matters, and introduction to chemistry lecture five, the structure of atoms.
The periodic table was developed through empirical methods. Mendeleev and Meyer independently
completed periodic tables in 1869, which you'll note was before the discovery of the proton,
electron, or neutron. In this lesson we will discuss some of the analysis of the chemical
and physical properties that allowed Mendeleev and Meyer to find order in the chaos of the
chemical elements. We will then discuss the revolutionary worldview developed beginning
in about 1895 and undergoing continuing refinements today, the quantum model of the atom. The quantum
model allows chemistry to develop a formal mathematical theory of atomic structure,
which is accepted today because it explains the pattern so elegantly summarized in periodic table.
In lesson one we discuss the density of materials, the ratio of mass to volume. Meyer
considered the molar volume of the elements determined by taking the inverse of the density
and multiplying by the molar mass. Meyer graphed molar volume versus atomic mass and showed that
lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, and cesium had unusually high molar volumes.
His graph of boiling points versus atomic mass showed that the same set of elements
had relatively low boiling points, but that their neighbors, fluorine, chlorine, bromine,
and iodine were even lower. Remember that none of the noble gases had yet been discovered in 1869.
Mendeleev, on the other hand, focused on chemical rather than physical properties.
He knew that sodium, potassium, and cesium reacted violently with water and formed one-to-one
compounds with chlorine, iodine, and cesium. Mendeleev was confident enough that he left
holes in his periodic table where he thought that elements belonged even if they had not yet been
discovered. The subsequent isolation of these missing elements by other scientists was an
early confirmation of the validity of the periodic table. After the discovery of the electron,
chemists were able to measure the ionization energy of the elements. The ionization energy is
the amount of energy that must be provided to an atom to remove an electron from it,
leaving a positive ion behind. This quantity is often measured by spectroscopic studies.
In atoms with more than one electron, the first ionization energy is the amount of energy it
required to remove the outermost electron from the atom, leaving a plus one ion behind.
The second ionization energy is the extra energy that must be provided to remove a second electron
from the nucleus, leaving a plus two ion, et cetera. The first 20 elements reveal a constant
pattern. Helium, neon, and argon have particularly high first ionization energies, while their
neighbors lithium, sodium, and potassium have particularly low first ionization energies.
The other second and third row elements produce a zigzag pattern connecting the low ionization
energies from lithium and sodium to the high ionization energies at neon and argon as we move
across the periodic table. Spectroscopy provides another window into the organization of electrons
and atoms. Spectroscopy is the study of light with matter. Although Newton perceived that
solar radiation was continuous, technical advances allowed mid-19th century scientists
to observe the dark bands when solar radiation was dispersed. Bunsen improved the technologies
by Melville and made some definitive studies of metal salts and documented the characteristic
line spectra they emitted. The missing lines in the solar spectrum are the same as the lines
observed by Bunsen. Take sodium, for example. If you place sodium chloride in Bunsen's burner,
you clearly see a bright yellow flame. The yellow color is characteristic of the emission spectrum
of sodium, and if you observe the light through a suitable grating or prism, you will see that it
actually consists of two separate spectral lines, one with a wavelength of 589 nanometers and one
at 589.6. If, instead of loading Bunsen's burner with sodium chloride, you vaporize some solid
sodium and place it in the path of light emitted from a truly white light source, the sodium vapor
absorbs these same two wavelengths of light, leaving dark bands in the otherwise continuous
spectrum. The emission absorption of light from elements is a reversible process, and today chemists
and astronomers use visible spectra to identify the elements present in samples both in the lab
and in remote locations in outer space. Before we examine how spectroscopy reveals the structure
of atoms, let's remember some things about the nature of light. Light has a dual nature. At the
very beginning of the 19th century, Thomas Young performed a series of experiments where he passed
a collimated, single-color light beam through slits and observed the patterns the light produced
on the screen behind the slits. The light will form an alternating series of dark and light bands
on the wall. This pattern was familiar to Young and may be familiar to you as a diffraction pattern.
Diffraction patterns are formed when waves overlap with each other. If you have ever dropped stones
in a pond, you may have seen diffraction patterns form on the surface. Based on his observations,
Young concluded that light travels through space like waves travel on the surface of water.
The height to the top of the wave is called the amplitude of the wave. The valley of the wave
is called the amplitude of the wave. In general, waves are the same height, both above and below
their null position. The distance between crests of two adjacent waves is called the wavelength,
and the velocity of the wave is the speed with which it moves through space. With water waves,
you might measure the wavelength in units of centimeters and the velocity in centimeters per
second. If you keep your eye focused on one specific location in space and count the number
of wave crests that travel past it in a second, you can determine the frequency of the wave,
measured in units of cycles per second. Lazy chem is usually just assigned frequency units of one
per second or inverse seconds, which is also called Hertz in honor of the radio pioneer.
Scientists have agreed to use a shorthand where the wavelength of a wave is represented using the
Greek letter lambda, and the frequency of the wave is indicated using the Greek letter nu,
and the speed is a lowercase u. The simple mathematical relationship found to hold for
all these variables for most all waves is that u, the speed, equals the wavelength times the frequency.
u equals lambda times nu. Water and sound waves are familiar to all of us. We know that each
propagates through medium, sound waves through air, and water waves through water. In the 1800s,
scientists asked themselves about the medium that propagates light waves. They knew it was invisible
and that it was present even in the vacuum of space because sunlight was able to propagate to
the earth. Although scientists made excellent progress in understanding the wave nature of light
in the 1800s, it took almost to the end of the century to resolve the issue of the medium through
which light propagated. Albert Michelson, a professor of physics at Case School of Applied
Science and Edward Morley, a professor of chemistry at nearby Western Reserve University,
conducted experiments trying to detect an ether which was assumed to be the material that permeated
the universe and carried light waves. But in 1887, Michelson and Morley improved their technology
and using a precision inforometer were able to publish results showing that if there was an ether,
it was moving at only a fraction of the speed one would predict based on the speed at which the
earth orbits the sun. Michelson continued to refine his experiments in this field and today
the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment are taken as conclusive proof that there's no ether
and that light, unlike sound or water, propagates without a medium. James Clerk Maxwell was able
to propose a modern picture of light as self-propagating because it is composed of mutually perpendicular
electromagnetic waves. Classical physics tells us that changing magnetic fields produce electric
fields and changing electric fields produce magnetic fields. These coupled, fluctuating fields
make life self-propagating and independent of any medium, as Maxwell was able to show.
Furthermore, by the end of the 1800s, it was well established that the color of visible light was
correlated with its wavelength and therefore its frequency and it was determined that invisible
infrared and ultraviolet lights as discussed earlier in this series were also electromagnetic
radiation but with longer and shorter wavelengths respectively than the visible radiation that
comprised rainbows. Today, technology makes it possible for us to use and detect the entire
range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Radio waves with wavelengths greater than one meter
allow radio communications. Radar and cell phone signals propagate on waves down to 10
millimeters in wavelength. Microwaves in infrared radiation cook our food, carry communication
signals, and run electric eyes to open doors for us. Visible light with wavelengths from 750
nanometers in the deep red to 400 nanometers in the violet allow us to see our world. And shorter
wavelength radiation, ultraviolet and x-rays, cause sunburn and are used in medical applications
and for materials testing. Chemists use all types of electromagnetic radiation to investigate
chemical behavior but for now let us return to the visible part of the spectrum. If you have an
electric stove at home, you know that the coil looks red when it is hot. If you have ever seen a picture
of a steel furnace, you know that molten steel glows white hot. If you know any astronomy, you know
that astronomers give color names to stars. Red giants, yellow dwarfs, or white dwarfs, our sun
is yellow door. These names are derived from the behavior 19th century physicists ascribe to
objects called black body radiators. A black body radiator is an ideal system which completely
absorbs and emits every wavelength of light. The hotter a black body, the more high energy light
it emits. The red coil of your electric stove emits lots of red light but does not emit much
blue light because it's not hot enough to emit blue light. If we increase its temperature,
we would see the color shift as the temperature increased. It would become yellow, then green,
then blue. As the temperature goes up, the amount of radiation emitted at each wavelength increases.
Eventually, your stove would emit all colors of light to a significant degree
and at that point we would see all colors together. That makes white light. Of course,
stars are made of different stuff than your stove coil but the principle is the same.
Red stars are cooler than yellow stars, yellow stars are cooler than blue stars,
blue stars are cooler than white stars. Throughout the 19th century, scientists
believed that materials could store any amount of energy and that materials interacted with light
by absorbing and emitting a continuous distribution of those energies. But there was one set of data
that could not be explained using this assumption. In working through the mathematics associated with
the application of the wave theory of light, Max Planck realized that he could derive a mathematical
description that would match the experimental measurements of intensity versus wavelength
if he made one assumption. In purely mathematical terms, he had to sum the energies, not integrate
them. In macroscopic terms, you could think of Planck's hypothesis as saying that if you climb on
a swing and start to swing, you could swing at one swing per second or two swings per second
or five swings per second. But no matter what you do, you can't swing at 1.3 swings per second
or 4.26 swings per second. The rate at which you swing is quantized, not continuous. If you want
to change the energy at which you're swinging, you have to absorb or emit enough energy to move you
from one or two swings per second to the next two or one swing per second, not just an arbitrary
amount that somebody decides to push you with. Planck chose a value of the proportionality constant
h that best fit the experimental results. Today, the accepted value of h called Planck's constant
is 6.626 times 10 to the minus 34th joule seconds. You can see this is a very small number, and if
you're multiplying it by a very small integer, we're talking about energy levels that are relatively
close together. Planck's hypothesis illustrated another fundamental shift in the way scientists
thought about light. The energy depends on the frequency of light, not on its amplitude.
As you might expect, most scientists required independent confirmation
before they could accept such an exotic idea. In 1905, Albert Einstein provided confirmation
and more. Einstein was trying to explain the photoelectric effect. In the photoelectric effect,
light hits a metal surface, knocking electrons off of the surface. A battery is connected between
the metal surface and another conductive surface, and both surfaces are enclosed in a glass tube.
The glass tube allows you to evacuate air from between the surfaces. The electrons emitted by
the metal can fly through the evacuated tube and strike the second surface, completing an electrical
circuit which can be read through a current meter. The voltage source is not so strong that it allows
a continuous current to flow, and it can be adjusted to control current flow if needed.
Using the traditional model of light as a wave, whose energy is determined by its amplitude,
scientists predicted that the exposure to bright light should provide enough energy to knock
electrons off a metal surface and cause a current to flow. The data was not consistent with this
model, however. The data indicated that the color of light was more important in causing a current
to flow than its brightness. Essentially, when a red light was used, no electrons were liberated,
no matter how bright the light or how long the exposure. But if blue light was used, electrons
were emitted even at the lowest measurable intensities, and there was no delay between the
exposure of the light and the emission of the electrons. Furthermore, the energy of the emitted
electrons depended on the frequency of the light and not on its intensity. Einstein applied conservation
of energy as a basis to reason that the energy of the electron emitted from the metal surface
had to be the energy of the photon of light that struck the metal surface minus some amount of
energy required to remove the electron from the metal. He assumed Planck's model that the energy
of light was proportional to a constant. When he analyzed the data, Einstein found that the
proportionality constant from the photoelectric effect was the same as a proportionality constant
Planck had derived. This demonstrated that light provided energy in discrete packets and the energy
of light was quantized and that it was conveyed to material bodies in units of h nu. Einstein called
the little packets of energy that were transmitted by light photons. Einstein's independent confirmation
of Planck's proposal led scientists to accept it, but it did throw them into a conundrum.
The interference behavior of light could only be explained if light acts as a wave
and the photoelectric effect required us to treat light as photons which delivers energy
in discrete packets when they interact with matter. Today we say that light has a dual nature.
It has both wave properties and particle properties. The wave particle duality of light is well
accepted by scientists of all stripes and both natures of light are exploited in scientific
studies and in technological applications. Once the quantized nature of the energy of
light was established, it didn't take long for the idea to be applied to explain the spectra
and structure of atoms. Niels Bohr is credited with making the fundamental intellectual breakthrough
that has led to the modern era of quantum chemistry. In the early 1900s, the accepted model was that
atoms were like a plum pudding. The positive charge and mass associated with it was spread
uniformly through space and the electrons were buried in this positive sea like plums in a classic
British pudding. Some had proposed a nuclear model with heavy positive charges in the center and
light electrons around, but classical physics said that similarly charged particles repelled
each other while oppositely charged particles attracted each other and that charges undergoing
acceleration such as those moving towards an opposite charge should emit radiation.
But observations said that atoms were stable and did not emit radiation. It seemed that the charges
had to be uniformly distributed in space for this to be the case. Then two scientists called
Geiger and Marsden started to do an experiment under the direction of Ernest Rutherford.
Geiger and Marsden shot alpha particles, the helium nuclei we've talked about in the previous
lesson, at gold foils. Took them a while to refine their experiment and to make the gold foils thin
enough to demonstrate single scattering of the helium nuclei alpha particles from the gold atoms.
But what their results ultimately demonstrated provide the foundations of modern chemistry.
If the plum pudding model of atomic structure was correct, they expected to see alpha particles
travel uniformly through the electronic environment of a gold foil with very little deflection.
For the most part that in fact was what they saw, but their data clearly showed that about
one alpha particle in every 8,000 was deflected by more than 90 degrees. That means when they
shot the alpha particle at the foil, it bounced back towards them. Rutherford is famously quoted
as saying, it was if you had fired a 15 inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and
hit you. It was a stunning experimental result. Nevertheless, Rutherford immediately set about
to derive equations to estimate how concentrated the positive charges needed to be in order to
account for the scattering results of the alpha particles. He applied classical physics and determined
the size, mass, and charge of the nucleus that would be required to cause the deflections observed
by Geiger and Marston. Rutherford was able to demonstrate that the nucleus occupied a very
small central portion in the atom and that the rest of the atom was filled with electrons.
Niels Bohr was the next to contribute. His insight was to appropriately apply classical physics to
Rutherford's nuclear model. Bohr worked out his model for any atom with one electron. He assumed
that the nucleus was so heavy that it could be considered as a stationary center about which
the electron traveled in a circular orbit. He calculated the electrons total energy as the
sum of its kinetic energy of motion and its electrical potential energy in the field established
by the positive charge of a nucleus. Then, because atoms did not self-destruct and electrons did not
collapse into nuclei, Bohr simply asserted that the force of attraction between the charged
species had to be exactly balanced by the centrifugal force of an electron's motion.
Though today this seems trivial, it was a revolutionary assumption at the time. It defied
the common understanding of the behavior of electrically charged bodies and implied that
electrons and atoms behave as planets about the sun. Nevertheless, Bohr asserted it because it matched
the observation that atoms did not self-destruct. And Bohr asserted one more thing. He said that
the angular momentum of the electron had to be quantized in units proportional to Planck's constant.
The result of these assertions was that the velocity of the electron was quantized
and the allowed velocities could be calculated as integer multiples of a first fundamental velocity.
The integers, symbolized by the letter n again, are called the principal quantum number in an atom.
The radius of the electron's orbit could be calculated and was found to depend on n squared,
as n increases the electron is shown to occupy a discrete state with a discrete total energy at
a discrete radius from the nucleus. Bohr postulated that an electron that moved from one stable orbital
to another either emitted or absorbed the energy it needed to conserve energy by emitting or absorbing
a photon. The required energies could be calculated from Bohr's model. In a stunning
demonstration of the confirmation of the theory, Bohr was able to calculate the wavelengths of
light that would be absorbed or emitted by hydrogen. And if he used n equals two as the
closer level in the hydrogen atom and n equals three, four, five, and six as the excited levels,
he was able to reproduce the wavelengths of light that had been observed in the hydrogen atom discharge
spectrum to within 0.05 percent. The reproduction of the pattern would have been enough, but the
small discrepancy between experiment and theory could be explained by noting that the nucleus and
the electron actually should be traded as moving about their mutual centers of gravity. This correction
brought experiment and Bohr's model into complete uncanny agreement. The era of the quantized atom
was born. Unfortunately, Bohr's model only works for atoms with one electron. If you add a second
electron, the model completely breaks down. Nevertheless, Bohr's model is a useful picture
of atomic structure, and even today it provides us with the terminology we use to describe the
quantum structure of atoms and molecules. In hydrogen, the stable orbit closest to the nucleus
is called the ground state, and it's labeled with principle quantum number n equals one.
Bohr's model clearly gave a correct mathematical description of the behavior of the electron in
the hydrogen atom, but physics had yet to resolve one question. How was it that electrons could
occupy stable orbitals around the nucleus and not collapse into it? The reality contradicted
everything classical physics knew from its study of macroscopic charge system. In 1924, Lewis de Broglie,
in a remarkable summary of 30 years of revolutionary physics, finally postulated that if light could
behave like both a wave and a particle, perhaps particles could also behave like waves.
With absolutely no justification, except that it worked, de Broglie asserted that the electrons
in an atom could be associated with a wavelength, and that the wavelength could be calculated using
Planck's constant and dividing it by the electron's momentum, the momentum being the classical product
of an electron's mass times its velocity. Soon after de Broglie made his hypothesis, two American
physicists, Davison and Germer, were able to use the hypothesis to explain the results of their
experiments. Davison and Germer had used accelerated electrons rather than x-rays to examine the
structure of crystals. The x-ray data was well known and could be explained by assuming that the
atom spacing in the crystal provided essentially a grating which scattered the x-rays. Davison and
Germer found that when they accelerated electrons appropriately and let them interact with crystals,
the electrons also produced a diffraction pattern identical to the pattern produced by x-rays.
Furthermore, the wavelength of the electron waves could be determined from knowing the spacing in
the crystal lattice from the x-ray results. Davison and Germer's calculated electron wavelengths
matched those from the de Broglie equation. Electrons were behaving like waves. Both light and
waves had particle and wave-like properties depending on the experiment being conducted.
Wave particle duality was complete. Subsequent refinements to the description of the electronic
structure of atoms depended on the application of the wave mechanics and on Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle which followed de Broglie's hypothesis by less than a year.
Discovery that electrons can have wave-like properties allows us to explain the non-collapse
of the electron into the nucleus in two different ways. In Bohr's hydrogen atom, the electron orbits
have circumferences which are equal to integer multiples of the wavelengths of the electrons
which occupy them. In each allowed orbital, the circumference of the orbit is an integer multiple
of the wavelength associated with an electron at that energy. The electron can therefore be
considered to be a stable standing wave about the nucleus. In a more sophisticated perspective,
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle abrogates the simple standing wave model. Heisenberg's
principle says that you cannot know both the position and the momentum of an electron exactly
at the same time. There's an uncertainty in the position or in the momentum which is inherent
in the electron having wave-like properties. The magnitude of the product of the two uncertainties
in position and momentum is of course directly proportional to Planck's constant. The inability
to know both the position and momentum simultaneously means that we cannot calculate a trajectory
for the electron like we can for the earth around the sun or for a bullet shot from a gun.
The best we can do is calculate the probability of finding an electron in a small region of space
or the momentum in a small window of possible momentums. The description of the electron in
atoms changes from being an orbit around the nucleus to a three-dimensional probability map
of the regions where the electron is likely to be in the space around the nucleus. Even today,
pictures of the orbitals occupied by electrons in any atom are based on the simple probability maps
derived for one electron atom following Bohr's model. Unfortunately, most atoms have more than
one electron so what happens with them? We need to realize that our inability to calculate the
orbitals for multi-electron atoms is really based in physics. Physics is able to solve a two-body
problem but has a hard time with the three-body problem and once you put more than one electron
in the vicinity of a nucleus you have at least a three-body problem. We can gain a lot of insight
into the structure of multi-electron atoms though as we have said by looking for patterns in their
ionization energies. The ionization energy of hydrogen is 1312 kilojoules per mole. It takes
1312 kilojoules of energy to separate all the electrons from one mole of ground state hydrogen
atoms producing one mole of free electrons and one mole of H plus ions. Helium has two electrons
and therefore two ionization energies. The first ionization energy required to pull the first
electron away from helium forming He plus 1 takes 2373 kilojoules per mole. Let's think simplistically
about where the two electrons in helium can be and how that might cause the ionization energy
of helium to be so much different from that of hydrogen. Again, we assume that Coulomb's law
governs the energy between the nucleus and its electrons. Coulomb's law says that the potential
energy between two charged particles is K a constant times the charge on the first times the charge
on the second divided by the radial separation between them. If we're looking at atoms in every
case the charge on the electron and the proportionality constant are the same. The potential energy
therefore can be seen as depending on two variables. It increases when the nuclear charge increases
and it decreases when the radius between the nucleus and the electron increases. Now we have a
simple model for discussing electron organization in multi-electron atoms. Let's compare hydrogen
to helium. The nuclear charge in hydrogen is plus 1. The nuclear charge in helium is plus 2.
It seems reasonable to assume that one of two things is true about the two electrons in helium.
Either they are the same radius from the nucleus or the second one is further away from the nucleus
than the first. If they are at the same radius then the fact that the charge on the nucleus is
double in helium should mean that helium's ionization energy should be about double the
ionization energy for hydrogen. If the second electron in helium however is further away from
the nucleus than the first then the first electron will provide a shield preventing the second electron
from seeing the entire nuclear charge. In this case we might expect the ionization energy for the
outer electron the furthest out electron in helium to be less than the ionization energies
for the electron in hydrogen because q stayed the same but r is bigger. Which of these scenarios
is consistent with the data? The ionization energy required to take the outermost electron from
helium is 2,373 kilojoules per mole. This is close to but not exactly twice the ionization energy of
hydrogen 1,312 kilojoules per mole. It is definitely not less than the ionization energy of the
hydrogen. We can interpret this data to indicate that the two electrons in helium are at the same
radial distance from the nucleus. We know that the two electrons will repel each other and can use
the electron electron repulsion to account for the fact that the first ionization energy in helium
is not quite double the ionization energy of hydrogen. The electron electron repulsion makes
it a little bit easier than it should be to remove the second electron from helium. We say that the
two electrons in helium occupy the same principal quantum number n equals 1 orbital. What if we
go to lithium? Now the nuclear charge is plus 3. The experiment shows that the first ionization
energy for lithium is 520 kilojoules per mole. This is a fraction of the ionization energy of
hydrogen. The third electron in an atom clearly occupies a space at a larger radius from the
nucleus than the first two. We say it occupies principal quantum level two. We can continue
the analysis of first ionization energies to predict the relative radius of each electron
as we build up the number of electrons around the nuclei. If adding an extra electron causes
the ionization energy to increase then the new electron must be at about the same distance from
the nucleus as the previous electron. If the ionization of the new electron goes down then
we know that the new electron must be further from the nucleus than the previous one. The positions
of the electrons around the nucleus appear correlated with the periodic table. The electrons in
hydrogen and helium are the same distance from the nucleus. The third electron, the valence
electron in lithium, is clearly further away from the nucleus than the first two. Electrons 4 to 10
seem to be about the same distance from the nucleus with minor variations that are so far
unaccounted for in our discussions today. Electron 11 however is further from the nucleus than
electrons 4 to 10 but the electrons through number 18 then appear to be at about the same
distance from the nucleus as electron 11. In quantum terminology we call the regions of
space occupied by the electron shells. It appears that the shell closest to the nucleus can accommodate
two electrons. The next larger shell at a larger average radius can hold the eight electrons and
the next shell still at a larger average radius can also hold eight electrons. However if we move to
elements 19 through 27 things become a little bit fuzzier. The wave equations developed in the 20th
century answer the question about the structure of atoms in a more formal way. Schrodinger proposed
a formalism to replace the equations of classical particle dynamics with equations whose solutions
are given by mathematical functions called electron wave functions. In contrast to the
algebraic calculation you might have seen in your high school or college physics course
Schrodinger's equation expands Hamilton's approach to classical mechanics and applies
Newton's calculus to solve the problem. The equations that satisfy Schrodinger's equation
can be equated with those describing standing electron waves. If you're familiar with the
wave behavior of strings on a musical instrument or the surface of a drum you know that standing
waves can be established and provide the tone from the musical instrument. A standing wave is
one where the wavelength is correlated with either the length of the string or the dimension
of the drum surface. Standing waves are quantized if one wavelength corresponds to the physical
length of that guitar string putting two waves in the length of the guitar string reduces the
wavelength by half. A standing wave is one where the nodes in the wave picture are fixed along the
length of the string as the string is vibrating. In the same way that you could number the standing
waves on a guitar string Schrodinger's equation allows us to number the mathematical equations
that describe the wave functions of electrons in atoms. The very formal mathematics can be quite
confusing for students just starting the study. However a graphical picture of the results is
very transparent to most students. So let's talk about the graphical representation of these standing
waves for a moment. Principle quantum number n equals one and l equals zero correlates to a
spherical part of space around the nucleus occupied by the electrons. The density of the electrons
changes as you move away from the nucleus and reaches a maximum at a distance which is very
closely correlated with Bohr's predicted radial separation between the electron and the nucleus.
When we go to n equals two the next principle quantum number l so now we're talking about
lithium and beryllium on the left hand side of the periodic table. When n equals two l can equal zero
or one l equaling zero means that we have a spherical part of space that the electrons can
occupy but this time the dimension of the sphere are larger than the dimensions when n equals one.
The most probable radial distance of an electron in n equals two is larger than the most probable
distance in n equals one and so the energy of n equals two is less negative than the energy of n
equals one. Also when n equals two we have the possibility of having an angular momentum associated
with an electron. When we correctly illustrate the mathematical solutions that solve Schrodinger's
equation for n equals two and l equals one we see that we get three separate parts of space
all three of them being dumbbell shaped with the node at the center of the dumbbell centered right
on the nucleus. There are three possible orientations for that dumbbell in space roughly we could say
one on the x, y and z axis that we define in most mathematical descriptions of physical reality.
So the three different n equals two l equals one orbitals point in three different directions.
It's worth noting for a second that the actual mathematical solutions to Schrodinger's equation
give functions which are imaginary. They use the imaginary square root of negative one i
in order to give correct mathematical solutions and so when chemists talk about showing orbitals
they're doing two things to the formal answers to the Schrodinger equation. One they're calculating
a probability distribution of where the electrons are and that requires you to square the wave function
the square of the wave function tells you the amplitude of the wave and that's correlated with
the probability and the other thing they're doing is combining the mathematically formal solutions
to give real results and the mathematical manipulations that allow you to do this are not
particularly difficult but they are beyond the scope of our discussion here today. Once we have
these real parts of space where electrons are likely to be and we indicate them by assigning them
three different quantum numbers and the principal quantum number l the angular momentum quantum number
and m sub l the azimuthal quantum number you might realize that there's some discrepancy between
the quantum numbers we've assigned and the electron structure as defined by the periodic table.
A simple experiment allows us to resolve this discrepancy. If you take a beam of helium gas and
you pass it through a magnetic field the atoms pass straight through the field and are not deflected
but if you repeat the experiment with a beam of lithium atoms and pass it through exactly the same
field none of the atoms pass through undeflected all of them are deflected half of them are deflected
half of them are deflected towards the north pole and half towards the south pole. It appears that
lithium atoms are behaving as small magnets. Today this magnetic behavior of lithium is interpreted
to mean that electrons in addition to orbiting the nucleus have a property that we call electron spin.
Electron spin is mathematically a consequence of a relativistic treatment of electron dynamics.
If you think that electrons are spinning around their own axes the same way that the earth
rotates around its axis as it orbits the sun you can start to gain a satisfactory physical picture
not a realistic one but a satisfactory one of how electrons occupy the space around nuclei.
Remember we said that in helium the two electrons appear to be at the same radius
from the nucleus. You might ask yourself how that could be because two electrons have the
same electrical charge and should repel each other. The current model of the atom says that those two
electrons are able to occupy the same part of space for one reason they spin on their own axes
in opposite directions. We say one has a spin positive one half and one has a spin
minus one half or one is spin up and one is spin down and it provides just a little bit of magnetic
attraction between electrons sufficient to allow us to say that the two electrons can in fact occupy
the same part of space as long as they have opposite spins. So we come now to a description
of electrons and atoms which requires four quantum numbers. The first tells us the size of the volume
that the electron occupies. The second tells us something about the shape of that volume. The
third tells us something about the projection of the volume and the fourth tells us about the spin
of the electron itself. We can use these four quantum numbers as the basis to write what are
called electron configurations and it's the electron configuration that is closely correlated
with the periodic table. This terminology reflects what's called the off-bow principle
that electrons are put into orbits in a sequential way and that the energy of the orbitals increases
as the principal quantum number increases. This application of the off-bow principle makes a
very nice consistent picture between the very theoretical computational results of quantum
mechanics and the experimental results observed for ionization energies of atoms. It also allows us
to account for the octet rule. Note that between helium and lithium we are moving from putting
electrons in an orbit close to the nucleus to one substantially further away at substantially higher
energy. When we move across the second row on the periodic table we see that at neon we filled up
all the orbitals with principal quantum level n equals two, two electrons in the 2s, six electrons
in the 2p and the next electron needs to go in a level with principal quantum number n equals three
and that's further away from the nucleus and it's substantially higher energy. And so we can start to see
why eight electrons seems to be a bit of a magic stable number in electron configurations.
In our next lesson we'll discuss the applications of some of these basic ideas
to determine the structure of molecules and not just atoms.
This ends lecture five.
