Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 6, The Structure of Molecules.
In the last lesson, we examined the quantum description of the arrangement of electrons in atoms
and saw that the presence of an octet of valence electrons seemed to make atoms stable
because adding an extra electron put it at a much larger radius from the nucleus and at a higher energy.
Earlier in this class, we introduced the idea of Lewis diagrams as a convenient way to summarize
a preference for octets shared by many elements on the periodic table.
In this lesson, we'll expand our discussion of Lewis structures,
adopt the quantum mechanical model to describe molecular structure,
and resolve some of the questions we've left open in earlier lessons.
To begin this discussion, let's reconsider the properties of structural isomers first introduced in lesson 2.
Remember that structural isomers are chemical compounds which contain the same atoms,
but arranged in different ways in three-dimensional space.
As the number of atoms in a covalent molecule increases, the number of possible isomers increases even faster.
In lesson 2, we considered two isomers of C2H6O.
Now let's consider the isomers of C4H10O.
This formula can describe four different alcohols and a variety of other compounds as well,
but we're going to focus on the alcohols.
One of the alcohols has the OH on the terminal or end carbon.
Another has the OH on one of the middle carbons.
The first compound is called one butanol, and the second compound is called two butanol.
Both of these are considered straight-chain alcohols because the carbon backbones form a straight chain of carbon atoms.
Note that if you were to draw the structure backwards and put the OH on first,
you're just getting a different two-dimensional picture of the same three-dimensional molecule,
and that's why we don't consider the OH first or the OH last to be different when we're looking at butanols.
However, it is possible to make branched alcohols with the same formula.
In a branched alcohol, three of the carbons make a straight chain,
but the fourth attaches to the central carbon to make a T-shape.
If the three carbons attach to the middle carbon all have their valences filled by hydrogens,
then the middle carbon fills its last valence by holding the OH group.
If one of the three terminal carbons has the OH group,
so the fourth valence on the central carbon is occupied by hydrogen,
that makes a different structural isomer.
The compound with the OH on the central carbon is called two-methyl-2-propanol,
or tert-butyl-propanol.
The compound with the OH on one of the terminal carbons is called two-methyl-1-propanol,
or isobutyl alcohol.
These compounds are similar in that they have the same mass,
they have the same number of valence electrons, and they all have an OH group,
but their physical properties are dramatically different.
Tert-butyl alcohol is admissible in water and has the highest melting point
and the lowest boiling point of the four isomers.
One butanol is the least soluble in water, only 9 grams per 100 milliliters.
It has an intermediate melting point, but the highest boiling point of the four compounds.
This seems like a very complicated series of properties to organize.
Perhaps a related but simpler set of isomers will be helpful in showing us the way.
Consider the isomers with the formula C5H12, a hydrocarbon.
There's a linear version where the carbons hold together in a chain
and the hydrogens fill a valence.
This is called normal pentane, if we want to be neurotic, or pentane more casually.
If we take one carbon off the end of the normal chain
and stick it on the second carbon from the other end,
we get an uneven, T-shaped structure.
This compound is called two-methyl-butane.
The third and final isomer can be thought of as resulting from taking the terminal CH3 group
off the long arm of the T and putting it on the middle carbon
so that we have a plus sign where the four carbon atoms are arranged around a central carbon.
This compound is called two-two dimethyl-propane.
None of these hydrocarbons are particularly soluble in water.
Even though they all have the same formula, the molar mass is the same and all are non-polar,
they have similar boiling points.
The melting points are dramatically different.
The melting point of two-two dimethyl-propane is minus 17 degrees,
more than 140 degrees higher than the melting point of two-methyl-butane,
which is minus 160 degrees C,
and 110 degrees higher than the melting point of pentane, minus 130 degrees C.
If you look back on this discussion so far and think of the atoms in each molecule
as if they are sort of squishy spheres which glob together to make molecules,
there appear to be three general classes of compound structures that emerge.
Linear molecules, branched molecules, and spherical molecules.
When you think about how molecules are packed into solid or liquid states,
thinking about their shapes can help.
Short linear molecules behave like pasta noodles or logs.
Spherical molecules are balls,
and branched molecules might look like three-dimensional tetris shapes
with soft edges or overblown teeter totters.
All things being equal, you might expect the linear version of a non-polar species
like C5H12 to have the highest boiling point,
because its linear structure allows lots of points of contact between two molecules.
And the dispersion forces that hold the molecules together in the liquid
have the best chance of making contact with each other.
On the other hand, if you think about putting a bunch of balls in a container,
the contact area between the adjacent balls is much smaller
than the contact area between adjacent logs.
Therefore, the boiling point of the spherical molecule should be less
than the boiling point of the linear form,
because the contact area between the adjacent molecules is considerably less
when the molecules are shaped like spheres and not like logs.
Branched molecules should be somewhere in between.
This reasoning, you'll note, is consistent with the trend in boiling points
for the C5H12 isomers.
By similar thinking, the linear isomer of one butanol
should have the highest boiling point, and it does.
And the most spherical of the C4H10 isomers, 2-methyl-2-propanol,
should have the lowest boiling point, and it does.
But the trends in melting points are harder to explain on the basis of molecular geometry.
We'll hold on to that for later.
Now we want to move forward by applying the quantum theory
to describe the structure and energetics of molecules.
We should state that molecules are communistic in their approach
to the available electrons they bring to a covalent molecule.
All available electrons get thrown into a pot and distributed as needed
to minimize the total energy of the entire collection of electrons and nuclei.
In our development of the quantum theory, we identified that electrons and atoms
have the high probability of being found in specific parts of space called orbitals.
In atoms, the potential energy term in Schrodinger's equation
is given by the attraction between the electron and the nucleus
and the repulsion between the many electrons in the atom.
A molecule is inherently more complicated than an atom,
and the multiple nuclei attract multiple electrons,
and multiple electrons repel each other.
Just as we use the simplest atom hydrogen as the basis for a quantum description of atoms,
we will use the simplest molecule, the molecular ion H2 plus 1,
as the basis for a quantum description of molecules.
The total energy of the hydrogen atom is given by the sum of the potential energy
between the electron and the nucleus and the kinetic energy of the electron.
Remember that we've assumed the nucleus, which is much heavier, is stationary in space.
The potential energy is determined by Coulomb's law,
always provides a negative contribution to the total energy of the atom.
The kinetic energy of the electron equal to its mass times its velocity squared is always positive.
The atom is stable and does not ionize as long as the kinetic energy of its electron
is smaller in magnitude than the potential energy between the electron and the nucleus.
But if the magnitude of the kinetic energy of the electron in the atom
exceeds the magnitude of the potential energy, the atom ionizes.
The Schrodinger's equation for the hydrogen atom is quite complicated, but it is solvable.
However, as soon as we add a second electron to the system,
we have seen that it's impossible to solve the Schrodinger's equation.
And with a molecule, and in any atom with more than one electron,
we must be satisfied with an approximate solution to the problem.
In atoms, we use the atomic orbitals we calculated for hydrogen atom
as the basis of our description of multi-electron atoms.
When we want to investigate the energy of the H2 plus molecule,
we also have a three-body problem.
The potential energy now contains three terms, not just one.
There's an attractive negative contribution to the total energy
from the potential energy between the electron and one of the hydrogen nuclei.
There is a second attractive negative contribution to the total energy
because the electron is also attracted to the other hydrogen nucleus.
But there is also, and this is new in molecules,
a repulsive potential term in the total energy
because the two nuclei repel each other.
Finally, because we are treating the nuclei as fixed,
there is one positive contribution to the total energy
because of the kinetic energy of the electron.
One of the primary characteristics of a molecule
is the bond length between the nuclei.
This can be measured experimentally using infrared or microwave spectroscopy.
If we consider only the two nuclei,
we find that the repulsion between like charges
means that they have a minimum potential energy
when they are infinitely far apart,
and the potential energy is zero.
The presence of the electron is therefore essential
in permitting the formation of a molecule.
The potential energy between the electron and either nuclei
is always negative because they have opposite charges.
Since there are two attractive components in the potential energy
and only one repulsive component,
the net potential energy becomes more and more attractive
as we bring the three particles closer and closer together.
But the repulsion also becomes bigger
as the two nuclei come closer together.
Therefore, it seems that there is some optimal distance
where the attraction between the electron and the nuclei
is sufficient to overcome the nuclear repulsion
without putting them coincident in space.
We should also note that as the electron is confined
to smaller and smaller volumes of space,
its kinetic energy increases.
A good physical example of this
is one of those cyclone things at the mall.
You know, the plastic cones that you put a quarter in,
and first it rolls slowly around,
but then it goes faster and faster and faster
as the diameter of the cone narrows
until it's flying so quickly that you can barely see it
and it goes horizontally before it drops out the bottom of the cone.
In a molecule as three particles,
the two nuclei and the electron come closer and closer together,
the net potential energy becomes more and more negative.
At the same time, the kinetic energy of the electron
becomes more and more positive.
Fortunately, the rate at which the potential energy
becomes more negative is not the same
as the rate at which the kinetic energy increases,
so the total energy of this system has minimum at some location,
and at that location, the distance between the two nuclei
is called the bond length of the molecule.
Since it's not possible to exactly solve the Schrodinger equation
with three terms and the potential energy,
we need a way to represent the one electron molecular orbitals.
One approach is to approximate molecular orbitals
as combinations of the atomic orbitals from the hydrogen atom.
This approach is called LCAO for linear combination of atomic orbitals,
and in it, the molecular orbitals are seen as sort of the sum
or the combination of the orbitals on hydrogen atoms.
If you think about having two nuclei with two 1s orbitals attached,
then when we put the nuclei sufficiently close in space,
the two orbitals will overlap each other in space,
and that overlap allows the electron to occupy the space between the nuclei
and provides the attractive force necessary to form a molecule.
When you graph it, the molecular orbital that results from the overlap
of the two hydrogen 1s orbitals becomes cylindrically symmetric
about a line that connects the two nuclei together.
Sort of like a soda can.
A soda can is cylindrically symmetric about a line that connects a dot
at the center of its top to the center of its bottom.
The lowest energy orbital also reveals that the probability
of finding the electron is highest in the region between the two nuclei,
but it's not zero outside the two nuclei.
The sharing of the electron between the two nuclei
allows the attractive term and the potential to dominate
and minimizes the kinetic energy by allowing the electron
to occupy an extended volume in space.
Therefore, the one electron molecule is stable.
In atoms, we call the spherically symmetric orbital an s orbital.
To clearly distinguish molecular orbitals from atomic orbitals,
we name molecular orbitals with Greek letters
and call the cylindrically symmetric molecular orbital
made from 1s atomic orbitals a sigma orbital,
sigma being the lower case Greek letter most similar to s.
If you draw a surface in space showing the volume
where there is a 90% probability of finding the electron in the sigma orbital,
the boundary looks like a football with the pointy ends cut off
or an extended symmetric egg.
The orbital does extend past the two nuclei located on the symmetry axis.
A mathematician would say at the folk eye of an ellipse.
In the case of the sigma bond formed between two different nuclei,
the sigma orbital is still cylindrically symmetric,
but the electron density is enhanced
near the more electronegative of the two nuclei.
So if we draw a picture of H2+,
we see a completely symmetric distribution
of the sigma orbital around the two hydrogen nuclei.
But if we draw a picture of HCl,
the first sigma orbital is very asymmetric.
The higher electronegativity chlorine atom
has a higher probability of having the electron near it
than the lower electronegativity hydrogen atom it shares a bond with.
Every pair of nuclei connected by a line in a Lewis dot diagram
is connected by a sigma bonding orbital.
Each sigma orbital can accommodate two electrons with opposite spins.
When an atom has several valence electrons
and participates in multiple bonds, like the carbon in methane,
four sigma bonds occupy mutually exclusive regions of space
and do not overlap each other.
The lone pairs of electrons and molecules occupy orbitals
that are commonly called non-bonding sigma orbitals,
labeled sigma sub n.
In order to be mutually exclusive of each other,
the sigma orbitals around the carbon in methane
have to point towards the corners of a tetrahedron.
This is the origin of the tetrahedral structure
of methane, ammonia, and water, and anything else
which shares an octet of electrons
with its partners in a molecular structure.
Incovalent compounds which contain second-row elements,
the total number of bonding and non-bonding sigma orbitals
always adds up to four orbitals per second-row nucleus.
In a molecule of F2, there are eight sigma orbitals.
In CH4, there are four, hydrogen being a first-row element.
In CF4, there are 20,
since both carbon and fluorine appear in the second row.
You will recall that we define the shape of orbitals
by the relative geometries of the nuclei that compose them.
Orbitals identify the regions of space occupied by the electrons.
Therefore, it is not always the case that the electron geometry
and the molecular geometry are the same.
In particular, if non-bonding sigma orbitals contain electrons,
the molecular geometry will be different from the orbital geometry,
although in every case, the orbital geometry determines the molecular geometry
by locating the bonding electrons in space.
In the molecule CH4 and NH4+,
the four sigma orbitals are each occupied by a pair of electrons,
and the four sigma orbitals point towards the corners of the tetrahedron.
The four sigma orbitals do not overlap in space,
but rather narrow when they are close to the central carbon or nitrogen nucleus
and wider when they are closer to the hydrogen nuclei to which they are bonded.
A very convenient model demonstrating the shape of the sigma bonding orbitals
in a tetrahedral molecule is a set of four standard balloons.
When inflated, these are wide at the top and narrow as they approach the tie-off.
If the four tie-offs are joined together,
the region where they overlap identifies the position of the central carbon
or nitrogen atom in CH4 or NH4+.
The bond angles in the tetrahedral molecules are matched by calculations
from the Schrodinger equation,
locating the minimum energies of the nuclei relative to one another at 109.5 degrees.
In ammonia and water, the number of bonding sigma orbitals is 3 and 2 respectively.
The balance of the sigma orbitals are non-bonding.
Because the non-bonding orbital interacts with only one nucleus,
the energy associated with the electrons occupying it is not lowered
as much as the energy associated with a bonding orbital.
Also, the non-bonding orbital maintains more of its S character,
so it is wider and rounder than the elongated sigma bonding orbital.
Because the orbitals must occupy mutually exclusive regions of space,
the larger size of the non-bonding orbitals constricts the angles
between the sigma bonding orbitals in ammonia and water.
This confirms our discussion earlier that the HNH bond angle in ammonia was 107 degrees
and the HOH angle in water was 104.5.
Calculations also show that increasing the nuclear charge from carbon to nitrogen to oxygen
causes the sigma bonding orbitals to move someone closer to those nuclei.
So the CH bond length, 109 picometers, is larger than the NH bond length, 101 picometers,
which is larger than the OH bond length, 94 picometers.
In general, as in atoms, the orbital radius decreases when the nuclear charge increases.
Because hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen are the most abundant elements in living things,
the geometry of the compounds containing these elements is of particular interest to organic and biochemists.
However, some third-row elements also play important roles in biochemistry,
especially phosphorus, sulfur, and chlorine.
How is bonding to these elements similar to that of second-row elements and how is it different?
Remember that we generally separate the core electrons in an atom from its valence electrons.
One substantial difference between the second and third-row atoms is the size of its core electron cloud.
The core of the second-row elements contains only the 1s electrons,
and the 1s orbital is quite small when compared to the 2s and 2p orbitals.
Therefore, it seems possible that the larger size of the third-row core
might allow third-row elements to accommodate more than four sigma orbitals.
There are two known neutral compounds of phosphorus and fluorine, Pf3 and Pf5.
Spectroscopic data shows that all three Pf bonds in Pf3 are equivalent and that the molecule is polar.
The same spectroscopic study on Pf5 shows that it has two similar but slightly different Pf bonds and is non-polar.
According to our second-row rule, Pf3, which has 26 valence electrons, should have 12 sigma bonding and non-bonding orbitals.
Pf5, which has 40 valence electrons, should have 20 sigma bonding and non-bonding orbitals.
Let's draw Lewis dot diagrams for these species, keeping all this information in mind.
The Pf3 molecule has a Lewis dot diagram, which is identical to that for ammonia.
This is not a surprise as phosphorus is directly below nitrogen on the periodic table
and fluorine is a halogen needing one more electron to fill its orbital shell just like hydrogen.
The phosphorus is in the center, connected via a single bond to each fluorine.
The fluorine valences are filled by three non-bonding electron pairs.
This accounts for 24 of the 26 valence electrons,
meaning that a final non-bonding lone pair is available to complete the valence on the central phosphorus atom.
The orbital geometry around each atom in the molecule is approximately tetrahedral,
but as we noted before, the non-bonded lone pairs of electrons take up somewhat more space than the bonding electron pairs.
So the bonding electron pairs around the central phosphorus are compressed to slightly lower bond angles than a perfect tetrahedron.
The fluorines are surrounded by three large clouds of non-bonding electrons,
providing the Pf3 molecule with a virtual halo of negative charge.
For this reason, even though the structure of Pf3 is quite similar to the structure of NH3, their chemistries are quite different.
When we consider the Pf5 molecule, we have to take advantage of the larger core on the P atom.
The data on Pf5 indicates that all five fluorines must be connected via sigma bonds to the central phosphorus.
This requires that the phosphorus atom be able to accommodate five sigma bonds.
Both experiment and calculation indicate that it does this,
the first of several violations of the octet rule that we will see in third row elements.
Because the molecule contains five fluorines, it must have 20 bonding and non-bonding sigma orbitals.
The molecular structure demands five bonding sigma orbitals,
and satisfying the evalances of the fluorines takes the remaining 15 in non-bonding sigma orbitals.
From the perspective of the linear combination of atomic orbitals,
the phosphorus has hybridized its 3S, 3-3Ps, and 1-3D orbital into what we call an SP3D hybrid orbital
in order to make bonding sigma orbitals with each fluorine.
The five bonding orbitals around the central phosphorus are arranged in a trigonal bipyramidal structure.
This means that there are three phosphorus fluorine bonds pointing towards the corners of an equilateral triangle,
which determine a plane containing the phosphorus.
The other two fluorines are on a line perpendicular to the plane through the phosphorus,
one above and one below the plane determined by the three fluorines.
There are two different bond angles in this molecule.
The FPF angle in the plane is 120 degrees, while the FPF angle between a fluorine in the triangle
and the phosphorus in the fluorine above the plane is 90 degrees.
The two different bond angles produce two slightly different environments for the fluorines in the plane
and the fluorines on the line, confirming the behavior that is observed spectroscopically.
There are two examples of larger elements bound to more than five fluorines, SF6 and IF7.
Sulfur is a third row element.
Its core is slightly smaller than that core of phosphorus because of its higher effective nuclear charge.
Nevertheless, it has the space to accommodate six bonding sigma orbitals to allow each of the fluorines in SF6 to bond to the sulfur.
The bonding sigma orbitals can be described as pointing to the corners of an octahedron,
a geometrical solid with eight triangular faces and six apexes,
four of them pointing towards the corners of a square,
the other two above and below the plane of the square on a line that passes through the center of the sulfur atom.
The octahedral structure is highly symmetric and all its FSF bond angles are the same 90 degrees.
The remaining 18 sigma orbitals are non-bonding orbitals holding the electron pairs satisfying the octet rule for each of the fluorines.
IF7 is the most highly fluorinated binary compound known.
The size of iodine's core coupled with the high electronegativity difference between iodine and fluorine
means that the core is large enough and the sigma orbitals are elongated enough to allow seven of them to pack in around the single iodine.
A spectroscopic study of IF7 indicates that it also has two different electronic environments and two different bond angles.
Analysis of the study shows that five fluorines are arranged in a plane around the iodine at the apexes of a pentagon
and the other two fluorines are on the line perpendicular to the pentagon through the central iodine,
one above and one below the plane of the pentagon.
The bond angle in the pentagon is 72 degrees and the FIF bond angle when the first fluorine is in the plane
and the second is on the line is again 90 degrees.
The rest of the 28 sigma molecular orbitals are non-bonding orbitals that satisfy the octet for each of the fluorines.
So far, all the molecules we've discussed in this lesson are centrosymmetric molecules.
That is, they have an atom in the center to which all the other atoms are bonded.
But centrosymmetric molecules, while of great interest in presenting the basic principles of chemical bonding and structure,
represent only a small fraction of known molecules.
So we really should expand our discussion to include a variety of the other types.
Let's consider a simple hydrocarbon, C2H6.
We know that CH4, methane, is a tetrahedral molecule with the hydrogens arranged in a tetrahedral way around the carbon.
C2H6 can be thought of as two methane molecules, each missing hydrogen,
so that the carbons stick together instead of bonding to a hydrogen.
And that's pretty much what the structure of ethane C2H6 looks like.
Both carbons have tetrahedral geometry, but one of the sigma bonds is a carbon-carbon sigma bond rather than a carbon hydrogen.
This pattern continues for all saturated, called them saturated hydrocarbons,
where every valence on a carbon is either filled by a sigma bond to another carbon or by a sigma bond to a hydrogen.
In all saturated hydrocarbons, both the HCH bond angle and the CCH bond angles are 109.5 degrees.
It's important to note in C2H6, the two CH3 groups are free to rotate around the bond between the two carbons.
And just like tinker toys, they're observed to rotate freely in three-dimensional space.
However, there's another class of hydrocarbons called unsaturated hydrocarbons.
An unsaturated hydrocarbon has lost two hydrogens and is forced to form a double bond between two carbons.
It has fewer hydrogens than it needs to be saturated,
and the double bond is required to fill the octet rule for two or more of the carbon atoms in the unsaturated hydrocarbon.
If we look at the unsaturated hydrocarbon C2H4, etheene, and draw its Lewis-Dott structure,
we see that each carbon forms a single sigma bond to each of the hydrogens,
but the two carbons form a double bond that connects them together.
Experiments show that the bond length of a double bond is less than the bond length of a single bond,
and that its energy is lower than the energy of a single bond.
If you think of the geometry of the molecule as being defined by keeping the electron pairs around a central atom as far apart in space,
then the presence of a double bond means that there's only three regions of space holding electrons that need to be as far apart as possible in an unsaturated hydrocarbon.
The C2H4 molecule is therefore planar, and the bond angle between the hydrogen and the carbon in the hydrogen or the hydrogen-carbon-carbon is 120 degrees,
as if the hydrogens and the extra carbon are pointing towards the corners of an equilateral triangle.
The molecular orbital picture is a little bit more complicated here than it is for the sigma orbitals.
As a matter of fact, if we go back to our linear combination of atomic orbital model,
we take two P orbitals, one on each carbon, and let them overlap in space to form the double bond.
The dumbbells have a node at the carbon atom itself,
and so the overlap puts the electron density in space above and below the plane determined by the sigma bonds that are holding the C2H4 structure together.
This second bond is called a pi orbital, and it has two lobes, one that is above the plane of the sigmas and one that's below the plane of the sigmas.
The presence of the two lobes really is what restricts the geometry and makes double bonded molecules planar.
You might recall that for some species, we needed to draw resonance forms to satisfy the octet rule and account for spectroscopic observations that certain bonds are equivalent.
For instance, let's consider the carbonate anion, CO3-2.
The carbonate anion has 24 valence electrons, 6 from each oxygen, 4 from carbon, and 2 extra to account for its charge.
The best Lewis diagram we can draw requires that we draw three resonance forms, each showing a double bond between one of the oxygens and the carbon.
We understand that the true picture of carbonate is given by morphing all three of these Lewis structures together, but we don't have a very good way of doing that in the Lewis formalism.
Spectroscopic studies, however, show us that three carbon-oxygen bonds are equivalent in length and of the same strength,
and therefore a picture where one carbon-oxygen bond is a double bond and the other two are single bonds cannot describe the carbonate anion properly.
The molecular orbital theory allows us to clarify the description of bonding in the carbonate anion.
In particular, we describe three sigma bonds as holding each oxygen to the central carbon.
And then we take extra p orbitals, not involved in bonding yet, from all four carbons and let them delocalize over the entire molecule.
This combination of p orbitals forms a delocalized pi orbital, pi molecular orbital, that is shared equally among the carbon-oxygen bonds.
And each carbon-oxygen bond is considered to represent one and a third of a regular sigma bond.
We say that bond order in CO3 is one and one-third.
If you look at ozone, the molecule famously responsible for behavior in the stratosphere, ozone is O3.
O3 has 18 valence electrons and can be drawn in two separate residence forms, one with the double bond on the left-hand side, one with the double bond on the right.
In the molecular orbital picture of ozone, the unbonded p orbitals on each oxygen overlaps in space, forming a pi bond which is shared equally across the entire molecule,
so that the two oxygen-oxygen bonds in ozone are equivalent to each other, have a bond order of 1.5 and the same energy.
Let's see if we can extend this picture of molecular orbitals just slightly into solids, ionic solids, and metallic solids.
We've already seen that ionic solids are formed when oppositely charged particles are held together by coulombic forces.
And if you've ever tried to cut a crystal of sodium chloride, you've seen that it's a very difficult thing to do.
The coulombic forces between the oppositely charged sodium and chloride ions in the crystal are very strong and resist being cut.
On the other hand, if you take a piece of aluminum foil, you can cut that very easily.
There must be something different about the bonding in aluminum foil as a solid than there is in the ionic solid of sodium chloride.
And in fact, there is. The current model of metal bonding, as in aluminum foil, or any other pure metal, is that the metals resemble nothing more than the old plum pudding model.
The metals release their valence electrons and share them completely among all that metal atoms in the structure.
And so a sea of electrons surrounds the positive atomic cores in a metal.
And the metal orbitals are shared by all the atoms in the metal, extraordinarily delocalized.
But this means if you push on them, the electrons have plenty of place to go.
They can easily move out of the way when you try to cut a sample of metal and relocate without too much stress.
This allows metals not only to be cut, but to be malleable that is pounded into sheets, to be ductile, pulled into wires, and accounts for their high conductivity and their high electrical heat conductivity.
It's worth introducing one more feature which is important in biochemical systems.
If we look at the structure of butene, which is an unsaturated hydrocarbon containing four carbon atoms and eight hydrogen atoms.
And in particular, if we look at the structural isomer that puts the double bonded carbon in the center of the molecule.
The two carbons that share the double bond in the center of the molecule are each attached to a methyl group and to a hydrogen.
And since the molecular structure about the double bond is planar and rigid, there's two possible arrangements of the methyl groups relative to each other.
One case puts the two methyl groups on the same side of the C double bond and the hydrogens on the other side.
That structure is called cis tube butene.
The second structure puts the methyl group from one carbon to the bottom of the molecule and the methyl group of the other carbon towards the top or left and right.
That configuration is called trans tube butene.
The two isomers, cis tube butene and trans tube butene, have different boiling points and are considered stereo isomers because of their different three dimensional geometry.
More complicated biological systems can have multiple kinds of isomers.
Some isomers interact with polarized light and are considered to be optically active.
Most of the biological systems that are found in living things today are considered to be left handed.
The left handedness is related to the optical properties of the geometrical isomers of the various biological molecules.
The left handedness is a result of how the biological molecules interact with polarized light and we'll consider this in a further lesson.
This ends lecture 6.
