Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 7, Chemical Reactions.
So far we have focused on the structure and properties of atoms and molecules.
Of course the real value in chemistry lies in chemical reactions.
In this lesson we will introduce some major classes of chemical reactions and discuss
some of their consequences for making new materials and for converting or storing the
energy that drives modern civilization.
As in all our discussions of things chemical, the attraction between negatively and positively
charged entities underlies all of the reactions we will discuss.
Sometimes when you combine chemicals it is easy to see that a chemical reaction is occurring.
If you put some baking soda in a cup half full of vinegar, a dramatic mass of bubbles
appears immediately.
If you drop an iron nail in a puddle of rainwater, it does not take too long for red flaky rust
to appear.
Perhaps the simplest example of opposite charges causing a reaction is in the precipitation
of ionic salts.
Sodium chloride, the most familiar ionic salt, is soluble in water.
In fact virtually all salts containing a plus one cation and a minus one anion are soluble
in water.
But there are some notable exceptions.
In 1887 one of the earliest female chemists, Ellen Swallow Richards, used the fact that
silver and chloride form an insoluble precipitate of silver chloride solid to map out the concentration
of chloride ion in the waters of the state of Massachusetts.
Salt was ubiquitous in human activity used as a food preservative and in a variety of
industrial applications.
Richard tested more than 40,000 water samples from across the state and established the
first map of polluted waters by defining polluted waters as those that contained excess
chloride.
In a chemistry lab you can replicate Richard's test.
A solution of sodium chloride dissolved in water can be mixed with a solution of silver
nitrate dissolved in water.
The two solutions look like pure water, which is one reason chemists are pretty neurotic
about labeling every bottle in every lab.
When the salt and the silver nitrate solutions are mixed together, a change is immediately
obvious.
The solution turns milky and in a few minutes the solid silver one chloride precipitates
and begins to settle to the bottom of the container.
We can separate the solid by filtration and weigh it.
And as long as chloride is the limiting reagent, in other words as long as the chloride gets
used up first and the silver ions are left over, the mass of silver chloride precipitated
will tell you how much chloride ion was present in your original solution.
As we've seen before, the reaction describing this precipitation is sodium plus one aqueous
plus chloride minus one aqueous plus silver plus one aqueous plus nitrate minus one aqueous
produces silver chloride solid and nitrate minus one aqueous.
The sodium and nitrate were called spectator ions because they do not participate in the
reaction but are present in the solution.
And if we omit the spectator ions and focus on the net precipitation reaction, we see
silver plus one plus chloride minus one produces silver chloride.
We do not observe precipitation reactions very often in our everyday lives, but we are familiar
with the consequences of several precipitation reactions.
Stalag mites and stalactites form when calcium carbonate precipitates from dripping groundwater
in caves.
Many stones are produced when calcium phosphate and calcium oxidate precipitate as those materials
pass through the body.
The second category of reactions is the acid-base reaction.
Historically acids and bases have generated much interest in chemistry and there are three
different definitions that have been applied over time.
The earliest definition of acids and bases focused on the ions formed by the disproportionation
of water.
Water H2O can react with itself and forms small quantities of H3O plus ion and OH minus anion
even when it's 100% pure.
Acids were defined as compounds that produce extra H plus H3O plus in aqueous solutions
and bases are compounds that produce OH minus in aqueous solutions.
The acidity or basicity of aqueous solutions is reported with a quantity called pH.
You think of it as the power of hydrogen.
A solution with a pH of 7 is considered neutral and has equal amounts of H3O plus and OH minus.
A solution with a pH less than 7 is considered an acid and has more H3O plus than OH minus.
A solution with a pH greater than 7 is considered to be a base and has more OH minus than H3O
plus.
It is worth taking a minute to discuss the pH scale with which most of us are probably
familiar.
The pH scale is a logarithmic scale like the Richter scale that describes earthquakes or
the decibel scale that describes the intensity of sound.
Logarithmic scales are used to describe phenomena which cover a huge range of magnitudes.
Simply, the log of a number tells its relative order of magnitude.
In the decimal system, the log of 1 is 0, the log of 10 is 1, the log of 100 is 2, the
log of 1000 is 3, and the log of 10,000 is 4.
You get the idea.
An increase of 1 on a log scale means that the absolute number has increased by 10.
An earthquake that rates at 5 on the Richter scale is 10 times stronger than an earthquake
with a magnitude of 4.
The pH scale has an extra complication in that it includes a negative sign.
This simply inverts the order of things.
A solution with a pH of 4 has 10 times the concentration of hydrogen ions as the solution
with a pH of 5.
For every unit increase in the pH, the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution decreases by
a factor of 10.
A later definition of acids and bases focuses on the reactions that occur between acid molecules
and base molecules.
According to Bronsted and Lowry, the acid is a molecule that donates a proton in a chemical
reaction and a base is a proton acceptor.
Remember that the H plus 1 ion consists of a proton only because it has lost its electron
when it forms the plus 1 ion.
So the Bronsted-Lowry definition can equally be referred to as describing proton donations
or H plus donations.
But today the Lewis definition is the most comprehensive definition of acid-base behavior.
Lewis's focus on the behavior of electron pairs carried over in his definition of acids
and bases.
In a chemical reaction, the Lewis acid is defined as the partner that accepts a pair
of electrons, and a Lewis base is the reagent that donates a pair of electrons.
You can probably tell that being able to draw correct Lewis dot diagrams for compounds participating
in acid-base reactions is essential to being able to identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis
base.
There are a wide variety of reactions that can be classified according to the Lewis
acid-base scheme, and we'll consider three here.
The first type of Lewis acid-base reaction is the actual hydrogen ion transfer that we've
talked about so far as characteristic of acids and bases.
Consider the reaction that occurs when hydrochloric acid is dissolved in water.
The reaction is HCl gas plus water goes to H3O plus aqueous plus Cl minus aqueous.
If you draw the Lewis dot diagrams for HCl and H2O, it is easy to see in this reaction
that the hydrogen plus one ion from the HCl is transferred to the H2O, forming H3O plus
hydronium ion and leaving Cl minus one ion behind.
The H plus acts as an electron pair acceptor and the water as an electron pair donor.
The HCl is considered the acid in this reaction and the H2O is considered the base.
Even in the Bronsted-Lowry definition, HCl is a strong acid.
Essentially, all of the HCl's present donate their hydrogen ions to water molecules when
HCl dissolves in water.
That's why when you draw this reaction, you draw a one-way arrow.
The HCl solution is highly conductive and has a pH determined by the HCl concentration.
In contrast, acetic acid, the active ingredient in vinegar, is a weak acid.
When CH3COOH is dissolved in water, some of the hydrogens originally attached to oxygen
atoms are transferred to the water molecules.
The acetic acid molecule is considered the acid as its hydrogen accepts a pair of electrons
from the water molecule, forming an acetate anion and a hydronium cation, H3O plus cation.
If you write this reaction or see it in a textbook, you should note that there is a
double-headed arrow in the equation.
The arrow means that only a small fraction of the acetic acid molecules are actually
dissociated in vinegar solutions.
If we look at the reverse reaction, treating CH3CO2 minus 1 and H3O plus as the reagents,
the H3O plus acts as an acid.
This hydrogen accepts an electron pair from the oxygen in the acetate anion, so the H3O
plus is called the conjugate acid in this reaction, and the acetic acid anion is called
the conjugate base.
Acetic acid is considered to be a weak acid, and the extent of dissociation when a weak
acid dissolves in water depends on the relative strengths of the base and the conjugate base
in the reaction.
When the strength of water is compared to the strength of the acetate anion, the acetate
anion is a substantially stronger base.
The acetate anion forms a strong covalent bond with the hydrogen ion, and is the majority
component in the solution.
The acetate anion forms a strong covalent bond with the hydrogen ion, and therefore
the neutral acetic acid molecule is the majority component in the solution.
The pH of acetic acid is less than that of pure water, but higher than the pH of the
equivalent concentration of HCl, because only part of the acetic acid has been converted
to H3O plus.
In chemical reactions when acids combine with bases, the generic description is that they
form a salt and water.
Some examples of acid-base reactions which occur in solution are hydrochloric acid plus
sodium hydroxide forms sodium chloride in water, sulfuric acid and ammonia forms ammonium
sulfate in water, and acetic acid plus sodium bicarbonate forms sodium acetate in water
and CO2.
The last reaction is the reaction between vinegar and baking soda, and shows the production
of CO2 gas which accompanies the neutralization.
A second category of Lewis acid-base reactions involves metal ions that form complex ions
with molecules that can donate electrons to the metal.
Metal complexes form when metals have deorbitals available to take in electron pairs.
Many metal ion complexes are colored and are familiar to us as the name of pigments
used by artists, cadmium yellow, cobalt blue, chromium oxide green.
However, different ligands, different species attached to the metal, can cause metal complexes
to have different colors.
The color changes reflect the extent to which the metal ligand complex results in a reorganization
of the energy levels associated with the metal and the complex formation, and provides
a contrast to the energy levels of the isolated metal ion and the isolated ligand species.
Because of the relatively large size of deorbitals, complexes can sometimes accommodate six ligands
in an octahedral arrangement around the central metal atom.
For example, an aqueous solution of the salt nickel-2 chloride is green.
The nickel-plus-2 ion forms a complex with six water molecules, and the oxygen from each
water molecule donates an electron pair to the nickel to minimize the total energy of
the system.
If you take a nickel-2 chloride solution and add drops of concentrated ammonia to it,
the color changes from green to blue, as the stronger base ammonia displaces the water
molecules from around the nickel ion.
The product formed in this reaction is a complex ion with the formula nickel-ammonia-6-plus-2.
An even stronger base, dimethylgloxene, can then be added drop-wise to the nickel-ammonia
complex.
The dimethylgloxene excludes the ammonia and forms a bright red complex, nickel-dimethylgloxene-plus-2,
which actually precipitates from the solution.
Before the advent of modern spectroscopic methods, the appearance of red-nickel-dimethylgloxene
was considered a definitive test for nickel ions in solution.
The study of metal complexes belongs to the branch of chemistry called inorganic chemistry.
The structure of metal complexes continues to be an active area of investigation because
metal complexes have wide applicability.
In biology, both chlorophyll and heme get their colors and their biological functionality
from the energetics and chemistry of the complex environment.
Metal contains magnesium and heme, the oxygen-carrying component of blood, contains iron.
In all of these examples, the metal ion acts as a Lewis acid and the ligands attach to
the ion act as Lewis bases.
It is appropriate in an introductory course to consider that the ligands are donating
electron pairs to unoccupied orbitals in the metal atom or ion.
The application of the Lewis model extends to all arenas of chemistry, however, not just
general chemistry and inorganic chemistry.
In fact, the reactions which populate the dreaded organic course, bane of pre-meds,
are best understood in terms of electron pairs looking for the lowest possible energy configuration
for themselves.
In organic chemistry, a different set of terms is used to describe the behavior of electron
pairs.
Electron-rich areas, which we have so far identified as Lewis bases, are called nucleophiles,
meaning nucleus-loving.
Electron-deficient areas, which have effective positive charge, are called electrophiles,
meaning electron-loving.
Organic chemists often draw Lewis-dot diagrams of reagents in chemical reactions and use
arrows to indicate how electrons from nucleophilic regions in one molecule move to electrophilic
regions in another molecule, causing a chemical reaction.
The movement of electron pairs often causes a major rearrangement between the first products
formed, called intermediates, and the final chemically stable products of organic reactions.
Many have called the second half of the 20th century the age of polymers.
The word polymer was coined to describe the structure of a variety of naturally occurring
materials like rubber, cellulose, and proteins, as well as synthetic materials, polyesters,
and nylon.
Polyesters are formed when two types of monomers, a dye acid and a dye alcohol, react.
In order to form the long chain required to call the product a polymer, both ends of the
monomeric precursor molecules must be reactive.
In the chemical synthesis of polyesters, a nucleophilic part of the alcohol near the
oxygen atom is attracted to the electrophilic component of the acid, the carbon atom of
the COOH functional group.
Following a rearrangement process, the intermediate in this reaction produces a water molecule
and leaves behind an ester.
The alcohol and acid are connected together by an oxygen atom bridge.
Because water is produced in this reaction, it's called a dehydration.
If both the acid and alcohol are dye functional, their other ends can participate in identical
reactions, producing more waters and stringing more monomeric beads on the polymer chain.
Nature has produced a myriad of polymeric materials.
There is a third class of reactions that is described by electron transferred, but not
considered to be a Lewis acid base reaction.
Before we discuss the interpretation, let's talk about some examples.
The very dramatic reaction that occurs when sodium metal is thrown into water or into
chlorine gas is a good example.
In the reaction of sodium with water, solid metallic sodium is converted to sodium ions
and water is ripped apart to form hydrogen gas and enough heat is produced to catch the
hydrogen on fire.
A parallel but more prosaic example of this process is the conversion of iron to rust.
A generic description of the iron to rust transformation is 4 irons solid plus 302 gas
goes to 2 Fe2O3 solid.
In reality, rust is generally a hydrated form of iron oxides and the presence of water makes
the reaction more complicated than this equation indicates, but we'll come back to that in
a minute.
A more useful example is the conversion of cold carbon dioxide.
C-solid plus oxygen gas produces CO2 gas.
These last two are familiar examples of oxidation.
In both cases, oxidation means that the original element has combined with oxygen to form a
compound.
If we take Fe2O3 as the formula for rust, we would categorize rust as an ionic compound
in which the metal iron has a charge of plus 3 and the non-metal oxygen has a charge of
minus 2.
The neutral overall formula combines two irons and three oxygens so that the net charge
is zero.
But in the course of this reaction, an interesting thing has happened.
The iron which started out as a neutral metal has converted to iron plus three ions and
the oxygen, which started out as neutral oxygen, has converted to O minus 2 ions.
Somehow the iron has lost electrons and the oxygen has gained it.
In general, this process is called an oxidation reduction reaction.
And in the course of chemical reactions, electrons are neither created nor destroyed, but they
are just transferred from one element to another.
In this case, the iron, which started out as neutral, has gone to a positively charged
ion.
We say that the iron is oxidized.
The oxygen, which started out neutral, has gone to a negatively charged ion.
We say that the oxygen is reduced.
Its oxidation state, or its charge, is reduced in the course of this reaction.
Whenever elements combine to form ionic compounds, it is very easy to identify the species undergoing
oxidation and the species undergoing reduction.
The element that ends up with a positive charge is oxidized and the element that ends up with
a negative charge is reduced.
But when the reagents or products are covalent, it is harder to envision the electron transfer.
So let's look at the formation of carbon dioxide from a different perspective.
In its elemental state, carbon is present as graphite and oxygen is present as a diatomic
gas, and both are neutral.
Each atom on the reagent side is considered to have an oxidation state of zero.
The oxidation state of a monatomic ion is considered to be equal to its charge, but
we need a method for determining the oxidation states of elements in covalent compounds.
It appears that the oxidation state reflects the charge that atoms in molecules have when
all the shared electrons are assigned to the more electronegative partner.
In the example of carbon dioxide, we recall that the Lewis diagram for CO2 puts carbon
in the center, and both oxygen atoms have double bonds to the central carbon, and both
oxygen atoms have two lone pairs of electrons.
Because oxygen is more electronegative than carbon, when we assign the oxidation state,
we give the four electrons from the double bond to the adjacent oxygen atom.
Oxygen then looks like it has custody of eight electrons, four from the double bond, and
four from the two lone pairs.
Remember that oxygen from the periodic table brings six valence electrons to the structure
of the molecule, so essentially oxygen appears to have control of two more electrons than
it came to the party with.
We say its oxidation state is minus two.
The carbon atom, which came with four valence electrons, ends up having none of them credited
to it in this Lewis structure determination, and so we say that the carbon ends up with
an oxidation state of plus four.
The molecule remains neutral as the sum of the oxidation states of the carbon and both
of its oxygens equals zero.
If we write the reaction for the oxidation of carbon as C solid plus O2 gas goes to CO2
and interpret it from the perspective of changes in oxidation state, the carbon has gone from
an oxidation state of zero in its elemental form to an oxidation state of plus four in
the compound.
Each carbon atom in the reaction has given away four electrons and has become oxidized.
Each oxygen atom on the other hand has accepted two electrons from the carbon, reducing its
oxidation state to minus two.
The oxygens are reduced by accepting the electrons from the carbon atoms.
Redox reactions that start with elements and produce binary products are pretty trivial
to balance, but unfortunately many redox processes take place in complicated aqueous environments
and have terrifically complicated stoichiometry, but it is easy to understand the process of
electron transfer if you break them in half and consider the oxidation process independently
of the reduction process.
In the end, the two halves of the process need to come together and transferring the
same number of electrons in the oxidation reaction as in the reduction reaction is the
key to balancing redox reactions.
Because oxidation reduction reactions produce and consume electrons, a clever arrangement
of the two halves of the reaction can form a battery pushing electrons through an external
conductor, providing a current which can do work.
If you have a current tester at home, you can build and test a battery for yourself
in your kitchen.
You will need 10 to 12 shiny pennies and 10 to 12 shiny nickels and a coffee filter or
paper towel and some vinegar or clear lemon juice.
Cut the coffee filter or paper towel into circles that will fit between the pennies
and nickels and keep them from touching each other, but make sure the circles are not big
enough that the papers touch each other either.
You need to make a clean pile of alternating coins and paper for this experiment to work.
To assemble your battery, place one coin on a non-conducting surface.
Use tweezers to dip one paper circle in your solution of vinegar or lemon juice, then pull
it out and let the excess fluid drip off the paper.
Place the paper in the center of the coin and then stack a coin of the other type on
top.
Cover it with a paper and continue alternating paper, coin, paper, coin from the top until
you run out of one coin.
Now if you take the circuit tester and place one lead against the side of the bottom coin
and the other lead against the top coin, you will see an amazing thing.
The tester will deflect, indicating that a current is generated by the chemical potential
between the copper surface on the pennies and the nickel coins in the stack.
Although the current generated by this setup is not sufficient to do anything useful, as
a parlor trick it demonstrates the principles behind the construction of useful batteries.
Before we talk more about batteries, let's look at a chemically significant but potentially
unfamiliar example of an oxidation reduction process.
This is the reaction between hydrogen peroxide and iodide in aqueous solution.
The reaction is H2O2 aqueous plus Ki aqueous produces water, K plus aqueous and I2 aqueous.
This reaction was studied in some detail early in the history of chemistry because the I2
is highly colored and provides an easy sensitive way to follow the progress of the reaction.
Because there are different numbers of oxygens, but the same number of hydrogens on two sides
of the reaction arrow, the reaction is a challenge to balance.
However, it is pretty easy to identify it as an oxidation reduction reaction.
If we begin by assigning oxidation states to all the elements of the reaction, we can
see what we mean.
The Lewis direction for hydrogen peroxide shows a single bond between each hydrogen
and the oxygen and a single bond between the two oxygens.
Each oxygen also has two lone pairs of electrons.
In keeping with our definition of oxidation state, we give the two electrons shared between
the hydrogen and oxygen to the more electronegative oxygen atom.
The oxidation state of the hydrogen is then plus one and the oxidation state of the oxygen
is minus one because the oxygens, each credit for the pair of electrons shared with the
less electronegative hydrogen, but they split the pair of electrons that bond them together.
The potassium iodide is an ionic salt.
The potassium has an oxidation state of plus one and the iodines have an oxidation state
of minus one.
On the product side, the oxygen and water has an oxidation state of minus two and the
iodines have oxidation states of zero.
In this reaction then, the oxygen from the peroxide is reduced and the iodines from the
potassium iodide are oxidized.
We will balance this reaction using the method of half reactions.
In the reduction half of the process, the peroxide is being converted to water.
We write a skeleton reaction H2O2 goes to water.
This reaction is happening in aqueous solution, which means that we can have hydrogen ions
or hydroxide ions or water molecules if we need them to balance the reaction.
And we're going to follow a strict formalism to balance this reaction.
We're going to balance all the atoms aside from hydrogen and oxygen.
In this peroxide half reaction, there aren't any.
Then we're going to balance the oxygen by adding water to whichever side of the reaction
is deficient in oxygen.
For H2O2, we have to add another water on the product side.
Then we're going to balance the hydrogens by adding H plus aqueous.
We get an overall reaction that says H2O2 aqueous plus two H pluses produces two waters.
The mass is balanced in this reaction, but the charge is not.
So finally, we balance the half reaction by adding electrons to balance the charge.
Electrons have a negative charge, so in every case, we will add them to the side of the
reaction, which is too positive.
In a reduction half reaction, the electrons are always on the reagent side, as their negative
charge is required to reduce the oxidation state of the element being reduced in the
half reaction.
In our particular example, the product side is neutral, and the reagent side has a net
charge of plus two from the two hydrogen ions.
So we add two electrons to the reagent side and balance the half reaction, H2O2 plus two
H pluses plus two electrons makes two water molecules.
Meanwhile, the oxidation half reaction is Ki aqueous goes to K plus one plus I2.
We need to balance the iodine on the two sides of the reaction.
That means we need two potassium iodides in order to provide the two iodine atoms to make
the I2 product.
Since there aren't any hydrogens or oxygens in this reaction, we ignore the second step
of balancing the oxygens with water and the hydrogens with H plus.
In the oxidation half reaction, an element releases electrons when it is oxidized.
Therefore when we balance the charge, we expect the electrons to show up on the product side.
Here we have neutral species only on the reagent side, two Ki's, but on the product side we
have two potassium ions.
So we add two electrons to balance the charge.
Now it is easy to balance the overall redox reaction.
Since both half reactions have two electrons, we can simply add them together and cancel
out anything that is the same on both the reagent and product side.
We end up with a reaction that says peroxide plus two H pluses plus two Ki makes two waters
two K plus ions and an I2 aqueous molecule.
Although it is not part of the initial reaction, we see that this balanced equation needs a
source of acidic hydrogens to proceed.
Thus the method of half reactions doesn't just allow us to balance the reaction as it
occurs in aqueous solutions, but it provides us with some information we might not otherwise
have known about the reaction.
Hydrocarbon combustion is a subcategory of oxidation reduction reactions.
The complete combustion of a carbon-containing compound combines the carbon-containing fuel
with oxygen available from the atmosphere and always produces carbon dioxide gas and
water as the products.
If you ever cook on a charcoal grill, use a gas stove or flambé a crepe sousette or
burn gasoline or diesel fuel or biodiesel in your car, you are familiar with combustion.
The nominally balanced reactions for the total combustion of a fuel can be written by inspection.
That means by looking at the reaction and puzzling it out.
For charcoal, we know that carbon plus O2 makes CO2.
For natural gas, CH4 takes two oxygen molecules to combine to form a CO2 molecule and two
water molecules as the products.
In alcohol, CH3, CH2OH plus three oxygens form two CO2s and three waters.
In gasoline, nominally C8H18 octane, one mole of C8H18 combines with 12.5 moles of oxygen
to form eight moles of carbon dioxide and nine moles of water.
And in diesel fuel, which has a nominal formula of C15H32, the C15H32 requires 23 oxygen molecules
to form 15 CO2s and 16 waters.
In every case, the carbon is converted to an oxidation state of plus four, completely
oxidized by the total oxidation process of the combustion.
Many of the sources of pollution that we're concerned about in our atmosphere are because
it's difficult to get these fuels to completely combust given the small quantity of oxygen
that's present in air.
If you expose any of these hydrocarbon fuels to a pure oxygen atmosphere, they convert
completely to CO2 and water.
But because of the reduced oxygen concentration in air, we sometimes get incomplete combustion
products, compounds that contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and produce carbon atoms, which
are not in oxidation state plus four, but any other oxidation state plus three, plus two,
all the way up to minus four, which is where methane, of course, starts.
Now that we have examined some common categories of chemical reactions, we will turn our attention
to the energy associated with those reactions and begin a formal study of why some reactions
happen while others do not.
