Elemental Matters, An Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 8, Chemical Thermodynamics
In this era of the energy crisis, it is obvious that modern life is absolutely dependent on a variety of energy sources.
Historically, the modern energy era began with the development of the steam engine in the early 1700s.
The branch of chemistry concerned with energy transformations has its roots as a science in the studies of this era.
Today we call it thermodynamics.
Take a moment and think about the variety of fuels you use or benefit from every day.
When your alarm clock goes off, it is most likely powered by electricity from the grid or a battery.
If you drive to work, you likely benefit from the combustion of gasoline or diesel fuel.
You probably heat your home using natural gas or electricity
and are less likely, according to census statistics, to use fuel oil, natural gas, LP gas, or wood.
In 2011, in the United States, more than half of the electricity is generated by the combustion of coal
and natural gas is the fastest growing source of electricity.
You might find a natural gas-powered vehicle in your community, but they are just beginning to be available to consumers.
Most of our transportation is powered by the combustion of gasoline, diesel, or alcohol.
So what is combustion? Why does our modern society prefer to burn coal to generate electricity but gasoline to power cars?
The answer to the first question is one we will answer here, but the latter question is less about chemistry than about politics.
But I hope that clarifying the outcome of the chemistry of combustion will help you understand some of the scientific arguments raised
when political aspects of energy production and consumption are discussed.
When you burn wood to heat your home or gasoline to run your car, fuel is consumed and chemical energy is converted to heat
and released from the chemical system into its surroundings.
In the case of the wood stove, we want to maximize the amount of heat produced by the combustion.
But in the case of your car, the heat is a side product.
We would like to minimize it and maximize the amount of work that can be done by your engine to move your car down the road.
Let's formalize the chemical definitions of the terms which we use in the casual conversation.
Chemical energy, heat, and work are all forms of energy.
The first law of thermodynamics says that energy is conserved in chemical transformations.
The first law was established by British physicist James Joule,
who undertook a systematic study to optimize the efficiency of steam engines in the early 1800s.
In the combustions we will consider, the fuel is a carbon-containing compound.
When combined with oxygen, the fuel is oxidized, yielding both chemical products and heat.
Chemists understand that heat or thermal energy is a measure of the kinetic energy of molecules as they move through space.
The kinetic energy of a molecule depends on its mass and its velocity squared.
Physicists define kinetic energy to be one-half times the mass times the velocity squared.
Of course, we don't talk about the heat of the air or its average molecular velocity.
We report its temperature.
Temperature is directly related to both the average kinetic energy of the sample and the distribution of those kinetic energies.
When you compare a hot sample of air to a cold sample of air, the hot molecules are moving at a higher average velocity.
The hot air also has a higher percentage of its molecules moving at high kinetic energies.
Because of this, hot molecules appear to be more chaotic than cooler gas molecules.
A good analogy for the high velocity random motion which characterizes a hot gas could be looking at the balls used in lottery drawings.
Initially, all the balls are sitting at the bottom of a large container, but then a high velocity air jet is turned on and pushes the balls into rapid random motion.
If you were to watch a slow motion version of the lottery balls being mixed, you could see an example of a relatively cold gas sample.
But at regular speed, the lottery balls provide an example of a hot gas sample.
This chaotic motion helps to keep you warm in the winter, but it won't help move your car down the road or provide electricity to recharge your cell phone.
In order to move your car or recharge your battery, we need to harness the chemical energy produced in combustion and organize it to do work.
Work is defined as a force applied to move a mass through a distance.
Using the combustion of gasoline to move your car doesn't change the chemistry of the combustion at all,
but a good engineer manages the combustion to control the way the chemical products and heat produced interact with their environment and turn the chaotic energy into work.
This work is sufficient to move your one-ton automobile down the road or to turn generators to make electricity to light up all the cities in the world every night of the year.
How has kinetic energy converted to work?
Let's do a thought experiment.
Imagine you have a very tall, very skinny pot and you put a cup of water in the bottom of it.
It is tall enough that no water would splash out of the top even if you bring it to a full boil.
Now imagine that you have a really wide balloon which can take the place of the lid of the pot.
After you place the water in the pot, you put the balloon on in place of the lid.
Now imagine that the heat from the stove only heats up the water. It doesn't affect the balloon directly at all.
When you turn the stove on and heat the water, what happens?
You should recall from our introduction that liquid water does not expand very much when it is heated.
Certainly not enough to affect the balloon way at the top of a very tall pot.
But eventually the water will get hot enough to boil.
When one milliliter of water boils, it is converted to steam, gas-phase water.
And that gas-phase water occupies a volume of more than 1.2 liters.
Water expands by 1200 times its original volume.
Even in a very tall pot, it will not take long for the steam to begin to push on the lid.
In this case, because the lid is a balloon, it will expand as more and more water is converted to steam.
Is it obvious to you that the expanding balloon is doing work?
What if we replace the balloon by a piston in a chamber?
As more and more water converts to steam, the piston will be pushed higher and higher in its chamber.
Lifting a weight against gravity is the classic definition of work.
In both the balloon example and the piston example, we have harnessed the random motion of gas molecules
to cause the directed motion of a mass, the balloon, or a piston, through space.
Both of these are examples of work being done by chemical transformations.
How do we measure heat, energy, and work?
All our different manifestations of the same thing, molecular motion, and all are measured in the same units.
The most familiar unit might be the calorie with a lowercase c.
The little c calorie is defined as the amount of heat required to change the temperature of one gram of water
from 14.5 degrees centigrade to 15.5 degrees centigrade at a constant pressure of 101.325 kilopascals, otherwise known as one atmosphere.
This definition is for the truly neurotic scientists among us.
Menominally, we take the heat capacity of liquid water to be one calorie per gram degree at any temperature where the water is a liquid.
To make things just a bit confusing, we use the symbol small c sub p for heat capacity.
The p subscript reminds us that the calorie is defined for transition at constant pressure.
If you read a food label, you will see that it records the energy or heat content of your foods in units of big c calories.
A big c or nutritional calorie is equal to 1000 little c calories.
In this audio presentation, you can see why I prefer to use the metric unit of heat, the joule.
One little c calorie is equal to 4.184 joules.
For the rest of this lesson, we will use joules as the unit of heat, work, and energy.
How can we measure the heat associated with the chemical process?
Most measurements are made by applying what is commonly called the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The zeroth law says that when two bodies at different temperatures are put in contact with each other, heat flows from the hot body to the cold body until their temperatures are equal.
So for instance, in a chemistry lab, if you place 100 milliliters of cold water, say at 10 degrees C, in a room temperature room, say at 25 degrees C,
we know that heat will flow into the water until it is also at 25 degrees C.
In this case, the room is so large that the heat it loses to the cold water is negligible compared to the heat content of the entire room.
And it is difficult for us to measure the temperature change in the room even with the best of thermometers.
However, since we know that it takes one calorie or 4.184 joules to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree centigrade,
and we know that water has a density of one gram per milliliter, we can calculate the amount of heat that has been supplied to the water.
The heat, which is given the symbol Q, is equal to the mass of the water times the heat capacity of the water times its temperature change.
Or in this case, 100 grams times 4.184 joules per gram degree centigrade times 15 degrees centigrade.
That means that 6,276 joules of heat are transferred from the air in the room to the water to warm it to 25 degrees.
A typical heat capacity for air is about one joule per gram degree centigrade, and the density of air is 1.3 kilograms per meter cubed.
If we assume that a typical room is about 3 meters by 4 meters by 3 meters, 9 by 12 by 9 feet tall,
then the volume of the room is 36 meters cubed.
The room will hold 46,800 grams of air.
The temperature change associated with transferring the 6,276 joules of heat from the air to the water can also be calculated from the heat capacity equation.
This time we know the heat, and we want to know the change in temperature.
So we rearrange the equation and find that the temperature change is minus 6,276 joules divided by 46,800 grams times 1.012 joules per gram degree centigrade,
or minus 0.13 degrees centigrade.
Note a few things here.
First, heat flows into the cold water and out of the air.
In this example problem, I've chosen to identify the cold water as the system.
When heat flows into the system, it is considered to be a positive amount of heat.
The room is then considered the surroundings.
According to the zeroth law, the heat that flows into the system has flowed out of the surroundings.
The heat change in the surroundings is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to the heat change in the system.
Therefore, the heat flow from the surroundings is considered to be a negative quantity.
In every thermodynamic analysis, the first thing to do is to clearly identify the system and the surrounding.
In our example, we have implicitly assumed that both the system and surroundings are closed.
That means that the system cannot exchange matter with its surroundings or with any other part of the universe.
In introductory chemistry classes, the focus is generally on closed systems.
They exchange heat with each other but not material.
Open systems are important in biology.
All living systems are open systems and in some geology and environmental applications, open systems need to be considered as well.
But for our purposes here, the mathematical complications associated with open systems do not help illustrate the fundamentals of thermodynamics,
so all the systems we will discuss will be closed systems.
Also in most introductory chemistry courses, we assume that the system and the surroundings together form an isolated system.
An isolated system is one which cannot exchange matter or heat with the rest of the universe.
When we ignored the temperature change of the room in the example we just discussed,
it was because any room or we actually did the experiment would be exchanging air and heat with the space outside it.
In order to actually detect the 0.13 degree temperature reduction in the room,
the room would have to be completely sealed and perfectly insulated.
Neither the typical house nor the typical laboratory is going to allow you to detect this temperature change.
In our discussion of atomic structure, we discussed that most of chemistry is accounted for by atoms trying to find ways to minimize their total energy, kinetic plus potential.
We looked at one atom of sodium and one atom of chlorine coming together,
transferring an electron from the sodium to the chlorine, and then being attracted to each other to form an ionic solid.
We also looked at two hydrogen atoms sharing their single electrons to form a covalent compound of diatomic hydrogen.
In each of these examples, we have ignored what happens to the energy released as the isolated atoms undergo chemical transformations.
When we look at macroscopic samples of sodium and chlorine combining, the energy release is obvious.
Combining sodium and chlorine produces heat, light, and an explosive concussion, sort of a super fireworks.
The combination of two hydrogen atoms to make a hydrogen molecule is harder to envision because hydrogen usually comes paired up as a hydrogen molecule.
When we consider the combustion of hydrocarbons as a source of work heat or energy,
we see that the reaction allows the chemical components to move from relatively high total energy to a lower energy situation,
and therefore to release energy to the surroundings.
To see what happens when a transformation occurs, let's zoom out a little bit and consider a bigger picture of things.
Let's start with coal, the combustion of coal and oxygen.
The chemical reaction is pretty simple.
Carbon, solid, plus O2 gas produces CO2 in energy.
If we try to think about how the reaction happens on an atomic scale,
we see that the reaction requires us to pull individual carbons apart from each other in the coal,
and to pull the two oxygen atoms apart in the oxygen molecule so that we can jam the carbon atom in the middle between the two oxygens to form this carbon dioxide.
We know that this transformation produces energy in the form of both heat and light,
so we know that the products must have less chemical energy than the reagents to allow energy to be conserved in this combustion process.
If we look at a potential energy surface associated with this transformation,
that's a graph of how potential energy changes as the reaction proceeds,
we see that we need to put energy into the system initially to pull the carbons apart and to pull the oxygens apart.
The energy we have to put in is called the activation energy for the reaction.
But once the reaction starts, the CO2 product molecules have a much lower chemical energy than the carbon and oxygen we started with.
The potential energy looks like a cross-cut between two mountain valleys.
The reagents are in the high valley.
When the reaction begins, the reagents are able to climb up over the mountain using the activation energy we provide,
converting to intermediates at the top of the mountain,
and then falling downhill on the other side to a much lower valley where the products are.
The overall energy released by this reaction is represented by the difference in height between the high valley and the low valley.
This is the net energy released in the reaction.
The sketch of this picture showing the high flat region in the high valley,
the mountain and the flat area in the low valley, can be drawn for any combustion reaction.
If it is drawn to scale, chemists call it a potential energy diagram.
In most introductory chemistry courses, less dramatic reactions than the combustion of coal are examined to reveal the thermodynamics of chemical processes.
The practical approach to determining the heat associated with a chemical transformation is called calorimetry.
Let's look at two typical examples of calorimetry.
The first technique is called solution calorimetry.
Let's take 200 milliliters of hydrochloric acid solution in a container and measure its temperature with the thermometer.
If we add one gram of solid sodium hydroxide to the mixture, the sodium hydroxide NaOH dissolves and reacts with the HCl.
The reaction is the neutralization reaction HCl-aquias plus NaOH-solid produces H2O and sodium chloride.
If we watch the temperature on a thermometer as the reaction proceeds, we will see that the temperature increases.
Energy is released in this reaction. The products are lower energy than the reagents.
We say that the reaction is exothermic.
Okay, but as chemists we want numbers. How exothermic is it?
If we want to get reliable results from our experiment, we will define the system as the HCl and NaOH
and the surroundings as the water in the container.
With this definition, we assume that the heat released by the reaction is absorbed by the water and increases its temperature.
In order to get a good measurement of the temperature change, we need to set up the reaction so the heat stays in the solution and does not escape to the surroundings.
One way to do this in lab is to conduct the reaction in a styrofoam cup.
We know that styrofoam cups reduce the rate at which heat is lost from hot liquids.
Styrofoam cups are usually good enough in a general chemistry course.
But if you wanted to make very accurate measurements, you might want an even better insulator in which to run your experiments.
Chemists who want to make really accurate measurements usually work in the equivalent of a very high quality thermos bottle, which includes a well insulated lid.
These laboratory thermos bottles get a special name called calorimeters.
In very detailed work, the heat capacity of the calorimeter and not just the water becomes important and is determined independently of the experimental measurements being conducted.
Although it's not obvious, a coffee cup calorimeter allows a reaction to occur at constant pressure.
Because we don't really control the volume of the HCl and NaOH solutions, the volume could change slightly in the course of the reaction and we would have no way of detecting it.
But because a styrofoam cup, even with its lid, is an open system in the sense that it allows air to be exchanged between the inside and outside of the cup,
we consider that the sample is reacting at constant pressure, the pressure of the atmosphere in the room.
When you measure heat associated with a reaction at constant pressure, it gets a special name.
It's not exactly equal to the change in energy of the process.
It's called the enthalpy of the process and we'll come back to that in a later lesson.
Turns out that if you actually want to measure the energy associated with a chemical reaction, you have to do that in a container which guarantees a constant volume.
Guaranteeing a constant volume in a reaction that involves solids like NaOH and solutions like HCl is a non-trivial undertaking.
We've already seen the power of covalent and ionic chemical bonds and we know that containing them within a constant volume could be a real challenge from a technological standpoint.
So usually in the laboratory, an example of a reaction at constant volume is one which produces or consumes a gas.
That brings us back to our combustion example from earlier in this lesson.
If you want to conduct a measurement in the lab to measure the amount of heat produced by the combustion of carbon in charcoal,
you can do that in a device called a constant volume or a bomb calorimeter.
The bomb has a little bit of a misnomer because the whole point of the calorimeter is not to let the sample explode.
But the system is considered a bomb because it works at high pressures.
In addition to measuring the thermodynamic heat produced by fuels,
bomb calorimeters are also used to measure the heat content of the foods and provide the calorie data that is recorded on your food labels.
A bomb calorimeter is essentially a big piece of steel with a hole bored out in the center and a very tight, very firm lid that can be attached to the top.
In precise experimental measurements, the solid or liquid fuel is put in a small cup inside the container
and a wire which can carry electrical current is put into the sample.
The electrical current wires connect to the outside of the bomb calorimeter.
Since the reaction we're interested in is the oxidation of the carbon-containing compound,
we try to get pure oxygen as the reagent in the bomb calorimeter, pushing out all the air and replacing it with oxygen.
Because the calorimeter is a constant volume setting, we can measure the pressure of the oxygen we provide and calculate how much oxygen is available.
In all calorimetry tests on combustion, you want to make sure that the oxygen is the excess reagent in the chemical reaction.
So relatively high pressures of oxygen are usually used.
So the setup is a small, perhaps twice the size of a coffee cup, steel container, which has a small collection of fuel in the bottom,
an electrical wire passing through the fuel, and then the surrounding area filled by oxygen.
We then completely seal this container up and place it in usually a water bath.
And the water bath gets put inside a more typical styrofoam cup kind of calorimeter.
The whole system then can be set up so that when we initiate the combustion by passing electrical current through the fuel material,
it undergoes combustion in its oxygen environment and produces heat.
The steel is a pretty good conveyor of heat, and we monitor the temperature of the system by looking at the temperature change in the water.
Of course, when we calculate the heat capacity of this calorimeter,
we need to take into account the heating of the steel container as well as the heating of the water around it.
Most combustion reactions when observed in a bomb calorimeter produce a fairly impressive amount of heat.
Three or four or five or six degrees is not unusual even for the combustion of a small quantity less than a gram of fuel.
The goal is to completely combust the fuel forming only carbon dioxide and water as long as we're talking about a hydrocarbon based fuel.
The relative amount of heat available from methane, ethane, gasoline, diesel fuel can be measured from this apparatus.
In general, hydrocarbon fuels turn out to provide more heat per gram than oxygenated hydrocarbon fuels
because the oxygenated fuels have already partially oxidized the carbon in the fuel molecule.
When we perform two combustions, one in a constant volume apparatus and one in a constant pressure apparatus,
we see that the amount of energy released through the two processes is just slightly different.
As we said before, the energy released at constant pressure is called the enthalpy
and the energy released at constant volume is called the energy.
Why are these two different? One reason goes back to our definition of work.
In order to do work, the chemical system that we're investigating has to be able to change its volume.
And so if we maintain the system at a constant volume, we prohibit the system from being able to do any work.
Remember that the first law of thermodynamics tells us that energy is conserved in chemical reactions
and also defines that energy is equal to the heat produced in a chemical reaction plus the work done by the chemical reaction.
Therefore, a system at constant volume can only allow heat to be produced,
but a system at constant pressure can allow both heat and work to be produced.
And so the distinction between energy and enthalpy is the difference in the amount of work that can be produced by combustion
when we set the conditions correctly to allow that work to happen.
Since reasonable amounts of work is usually done when gases are either consumed or produced in a reaction,
most of the work calculations associated with thermodynamic measurements are done using the ideal gas law, pV equals nRT.
In order to do work, the volume needs to change and the change in volume can either be due to the number of gas molecules
changing between the reagents and products or the temperature changing between the reagents or products.
If the temperature goes up or the number of molecules of gas goes up in the course of a chemical reaction,
either of those can cause a change in volume, which we could measure as external work in a properly assembled apparatus.
In general, the heat capacity, the amount of energy it takes to raise the temperature of an object
at either constant pressure or constant volume is slightly different under the two circumstances.
Again, the issue is how much work the system is allowed to do.
If we did some calculations on heat capacities, we would find that in general the heat capacity at constant volume
is slightly larger than the heat capacity at constant pressure.
Chemists like to record data to make it easy to calculate rather than have to measure every time
the enthalpy or energy associated with chemical transformations.
There are two primary organizational schemes that are used.
One is to record the heat of formation of any chemical compound from its elements in their standard states.
In this case, the chemist is tabulating the amount of energy when any molecule is formed from the elements of which it's composed.
The heat of formation of sodium chloride would reflect the energy of the transformation
solid sodium plus chlorine gas produces sodium chloride.
The formation of CO2 would reflect the heat associated with the reaction carbon plus oxygen forms CO2.
The heat of formation of most materials is actually not measured directly.
It is usually calculated from a series of chemical reactions using a method called Hess's law.
Hess's law says if you add up the heat of formation of all the reagents in a chemical process
and subtracted from the heat of formation of all the products in a chemical process,
you get the energy change associated with the reaction itself.
Hess's law is very useful and means that laboratory scientists don't have to measure every single reaction
in order to see what the heat associated with a specific reaction might be.
It's also worth noting that Hess's law reflects the fact that all the functions we've talked about today,
energy and enthalpy, are what are called state functions.
They don't care how you get to where you are, they only care about where you actually are at any particular time.
A physical example would go back to our model of showing the potential energy diagram as a crosscut of a mountain pass.
If you refer to the altitude of the high valley and the altitude of the low valley,
you know that if you start in the high valley and end up in the low valley,
the altitude change you experience is exactly the same.
It doesn't matter whether one person climbs over the top of the mountain
between the high valley and the low valley, ends up down in the low valley,
and another person takes the windy side road that just winds around the mountain on the way down
and ends up in the side valley.
The altitude change for both of them is the same.
The path they have taken is different, but the state where they started, the altitude,
and the state where they end, the altitude of the low valley, are the same.
In thermodynamics, we want to distinguish between enthalpy and energy, which are state functions,
and work and heat, which are path functions.
It's the path functions that a clever engineer can help us manage,
but the state functions are determined by the chemistry of the reaction process.
This ends lecture 8.
