Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 9, Entropy.
In the last lesson, we talked about the energy or enthalpy released by chemical processes,
and we talked about how chemical systems like to reach minimum energy whenever possible.
But there are some chemical transformations where clearly energy has to go into a system.
Some of those include the endothermic processes of dissolution of ionic salts
like potassium nitrate or sodium acetate, and some include phase transitions. For instance,
if you want to melt ice from water, you have to provide energy to the ice to do that.
So clearly energy or enthalpy is not the whole story in deciding which reactions will happen
and which ones will not. You might be familiar with the informal statement,
disorders always increasing, but this doesn't appear true either.
Precipitates form when solutions are mixed, snowflakes form in winter storm clouds,
and living things build highly organized structures. In this lesson, we'll examine the
details that make the second law of thermodynamics the measure that determines which chemical
processes happen and which do not. Let's start our discussion by looking at mixing.
If you're at home, you can conduct a little experiment.
Fill half a glass with some water and add one drop of food coloring to the water. What happens?
At first, you should be able to differentiate the dye from the water,
but if you wait for a while, even if you don't mix anything,
the dye will gradually disperse until it is uniformly distributed throughout the water.
This mixing results from the constant random motion of the liquid molecules.
Interestingly, however, no matter how long you wait,
a uniformly mixed dye will never separate from the water.
The mixing of the dye and water illustrates the formal meaning of the word spontaneous
in science. It is different from your casual use of the word spontaneous.
A spontaneous chemical process is one that will happen,
maybe not instantaneously, but eventually. A non-spontaneous chemical process,
like the unmixing of dye and water, never happens.
This doesn't mean we can never separate the dye from the water.
It means specifically that if we keep the temperature and pressure
the same as they are when the dye and water mix,
and if we don't add anything else to the solution that results,
then the dye will never spontaneously separate from the water.
It means that mixing is a one-way road.
Let's consider a kind of unmixing, osmosis.
Osmosis is an important phenomenon. It is essential to keeping living things alive.
Osmosis occurs when two solutions with different concentrations
are separated by something called a semipermeable membrane.
Semipermeable membranes often look pretty much like plastic wrap.
They are thin and flexible.
They are called semipermeable because some molecules are able to pass through them,
but others are not.
In biology, the most important semipermeable membranes
allow water and oxygen through, but not much else.
Sometimes a cell wall can act as a semipermeable membrane.
In the laboratory, sometimes a synthetic polymer is used instead.
But whatever semipermeable membrane you employ, the process of osmosis is the same.
In a classic laboratory demonstration of osmosis,
you could take a bag made of semipermeable membrane
and fill it with a highly concentrated sugar solution,
perhaps one made by mixing a cup of water and a cup of sugar,
or one made by just pouring corn syrup right out of the bottle.
If you place a straw or glass tube into the bag and seal the bag tightly against it,
and then you put the bag in a container of pure water, an interesting thing will happen.
Almost immediately, the level of the solution in the straw will start to go up.
You will need a very tall straw to see where the solution level stops.
If your straw is not tall enough, the solution will just flow out the top
as if you had made some kind of anti-gravity machine.
But if your straw is tall enough, eventually the water level in the straw will stabilize.
Why does this happen?
One explanation used in introductory chemistry courses goes something like this.
On a molecular level, the water on the sugar side of the solution of the membrane
competes with water molecules.
On a molecular level, the water and the sugar on the sugar solution side of the membrane
compete with each other for contact with the membrane.
Clearly, a molecule must be in contact with the semi-permeable membrane in order to move through
it. On the pure water side, water has all the access it wants.
So initially, more water molecules can flow from the pure water into the sugar solution,
then can move in the opposite direction.
The solution level on the sugar solution side goes up as the water moves across the semi-permeable
membrane from the pure water side to the solution side. The water level on the water side goes down.
As the volume of the solution inside the semi-permeable membrane bag increases,
it begins to exert a pressure on the sugar side of the membrane.
Because of the straw, this pressure is evidenced by a change in the height of the solution
rather than by an expansion of the bag.
As the pressure on the sugar solution side increases, the water molecules on the solution
side are pushed harder against the semi-permeable membrane than the water molecules on the water
side. The rate at which the water molecules are moving from the sugar solution to the water
solution goes up. And eventually, the rate at which water molecules are coming from the
sugar solution is equal to the rate at which water molecules are moving in from the pure water side.
At this time, the height of the solution in the straw stabilizes. At this point,
the pressure exerted by the height of the sugar solution above the level of the pure water
is called the osmotic pressure of the solution.
However, there is a more sophisticated and more generally applicable way to look at the mixing
of the dye and water or the establishment of the osmotic pressure in this classic demonstration.
And that is where we really want to focus our attention in the rest of this lesson.
This more sophisticated view recasts the discussion in terms of probabilities.
You probably know that when you roll too dice, you have a higher probability of rolling a 7
than a 3. That's because there are more ways to arrange the dice to give a total of 7 dots on the
top than there are to arrange the dice to give 3 dots on the top. In the same way, in a chemical
system, the number of ways that the molecules and energy in the system can be arranged tells the
probability the system will be observed in that state described by that many sets of dots, essentially.
Since chemical systems like a cup of water with a drop of food dye contain huge numbers of molecules,
let's consider a system that we can actually count. Once we see the principle, we can extend it
to our large real chemical samples. Let's assume you have three pieces of candy in a box with
five compartments. How many different ways can you fill up the box with a candy? Assume only
one piece of candy can go in each compartment. We can label the compartments with a candy as a 1
and the compartments without a candy as a 0. Then one arrangement of the candy in the box
would be 11100 and another could be recorded as 11010. If you work through all the possibilities,
you will see that there are 10 different arrangements of the candies. We say that W,
the number of ways of arranging the candies in the box is 10. If instead of five compartments,
we have a box with six compartments, now there are 20 ways to distribute the three pieces of candy.
If we had seven compartments instead of six, now there would be 35 ways to distribute the
candies and in eight compartments, the three candies can be arranged in 56 different ways.
The more compartments, the more possible arrangements. Mathematicians tell us that
you can calculate the number of ways to arrange any number of candies in any number of boxes
using a standard statistical formula. W, the number of ways, is equal to capital N factorial
divided by capital N minus small n factorial times small n factorial. Where N is the number
of compartments, capital N is the number of compartments, and lowercase n is the number
of objects to be placed in the compartments. You should recall that a factorial sign,
which is an exclamation point, means that you multiply the number by all the integers smaller
than it. So two factorial is two times one or two. Three factorial is three times two times one
or six, and 10 factorial is 3,628,800. Let's go back to our dye and water example.
Let's assume that at a specific instant, the dye molecules have not yet mixed with the water.
If there are 10 dye molecules and 90 molecules of water and they're not mixed yet, there's really
only one arrangement for the system, one way to arrange it. The dye molecules stay in their boxes
and the water molecules stay in theirs. But if the dye molecules can occupy any of the 100 boxes,
the number of ways of arranging the system becomes 100 factorial over 90 factorial
times 10 factorial. 17.3 trillion arrangements are possible. That's really a lot. Of course,
real samples of macroscopic size contain many more than 90 molecules of water and 10 molecules of dye.
For example, in 10 milliliters of water, there are 3 times 10 to the 23rd molecules of water.
So in real samples, the totally mixed scenario has an even higher probability of occurring
than it does in this sample of 100 total molecules.
Based on the number of possible ways of arranging things, we find that a mixed system is always more
probable than a highly ordered system. Using mathematical probabilities, we then predict
that chemical systems spontaneously move in the direction of the most probable arrangement of
their components. This principle easily describes why perfume molecules move across the room when
you open a pure-fume bottle, why gas molecules escape from a balloon when it springs a leak,
and why the soluble dye molecules have dispersed when dropped into water.
We have also seen that energy is an important aspect of chemical transformations. Let's consider
the ways to distribute energy in a chemical system. Let's recall that energy in chemical
systems is quantized. In our sample calculations here, we'll identify the number of quanta of energy
present, as that is an easier way to count the energy than just looking at the total amount.
Let's consider a small sample, a solid consisting of four atoms, which has four quanta of energy.
How many ways could the energy be distributed? We can run through the options fairly quickly.
It's possible that the four quanta could be distributed so that all four quanta were on one
atom. If the energy was distributed this way, there would be four different ways to do this.
Each of the atoms could hold all four of the quanta, or the energy could be distributed so
that one quantum of energy was available on each of the atoms. There would be only one way to do
this, or there could be two atoms with one quantum of energy and one with two. There are
12 ways to accomplish that energy distribution using four atoms, and you can continue on to see
all the possibilities. Interestingly, it is more likely this system will have two quanta on two
molecules than that all the molecules will have one quantum of energy. As quanta are added to the
system, the number of ways to arrange the energy quanta increases dramatically, just as increasing
the number of compartments dramatically increased the number of options for distributing the molecules
in the previous example. Consider that we have two identical four atom solids,
one with two quanta of energy in it, and one with six. The number of ways to arrange energy
in two separate systems is just the product of the number of ways to distribute the energy in the
first system times the number of ways to distribute the energy in the second system. If we have a
system consisting of two identical four atom solids and one of the solids has two quanta of energy
and one has six quanta of energy, how can we distribute those energy? The total number of
ways to distribute the energy in the system is just the number of ways to distribute the two
quanta in the four atom solid times the number of ways to distribute the six quanta in the other four
atom solid. There are 10 ways to distribute two quanta of energy in a four atom solid,
and there are 84 ways to distribute six quanta in a four atom solid. The total possible number of
arrangements for the two solids in the system is then 10 times 84, 840.
If we put the two solids in contact, we realize that the number of quanta reflects the temperature
of the solid.
The higher the temperature, the more quanta of energy the solid contains.
So the solid with two quanta of energy is colder than the solid with six quanta of energy.
We know that if we put a cold solid together with a hot solid, the heat will flow from
the hot side to the cold side until the temperatures of the two solids are the same.
In this example, if we have two quanta of energy in one solid and six in the other,
the hot solid will transfer two quanta of energy to the cold solid, leaving both of
the solids with four quanta of energy when thermal equilibrium is established.
How many ways are there to distribute four quanta of energy in the two solids that are
part of the system?
We can distribute four quanta of energy in a four-body system in 35 different ways.
So if we have two four-body system, four atom solids, each containing four quanta of energy,
there are 35 times 35 or 1,225 ways to organize the quanta.
The equal arrangement of the quanta is the most probable arrangement possible.
In transferring two quanta of energy from the hot four-body solid to the cold four-body
solid, we've increased the number of ways to distribute that energy from 840 to 1,225.
This is another way of saying that a hot object and a cold object put in contact will spontaneously
come to the same temperature.
Of course, again, in a macroscopic-sized system, the number of possible ways to arrange energy
quanta can become huge.
So we define a function called the entropy.
To be a measure of the number of ways that the energy can be arranged in a chemical system,
the more ways to arrange the energy, the higher the entropy.
In formal mathematical terms, the definition of entropy is s equals k times the logarithm
of w, where w is the number of ways to arrange the energy, s is the entropy, and k is a constant
called the Boltzmann constant.
Turns out that the average energy of a collection of atoms described by a temperature is also
related to k.
The average energy of a mole of argon gas at any temperature, T, is three-halves kT,
for example.
T is measured on the absolute scale here, using a zero at absolute zero, minus 273 degrees
centigrade, or zero Kelvin.
If you multiply k by n Avogadro's number, you get the same value as the gas constant
r that we saw when we took the ratio of pv over nT for an ideal gas.
k therefore has the same units as r, joules per Kelvin, but r is joules per Kelvin mole,
and k is joules per Kelvin per atom.
The net entropy of any chemical transformation, then, depends on the total number of positional
and energetic arrangements possible in the system before and after the chemical transformation.
The second law of thermodynamics says that spontaneous changes are always accompanied
by a net increase in entropy.
Since the entropy is related to the temperature, and we know that there is an absolute zero
of temperature, it turns out that we can define absolute entropies for any chemical system.
Remember that energy and enthalpy are always reported as the difference between particular
standard states and the current state, but entropy can be assigned to an absolute value.
We say the entropy of a perfect crystalline solid approaches zero as the temperature approaches
zero, and note that an entropy of zero means that there is only one way to arrange the
energy and the structure of the system.
Let's consider phase changes more specifically for just a second.
You take a material, like water, and convert it from a solid to a liquid to a gas.
We've already seen that the solid is rigid.
That means that in terms of the structural entropy or positional entropy of a solid,
that entropy is low.
For right now, we'll consider it to be zero, because there's only one solid configuration.
Liquids, of course, occupy their own volume, but the molecules are free to move within
that volume.
And so there's much higher entropy associated with liquids than with solids.
And gases occupy huge volumes compared to the volume that an equivalent mass of sample
would occupy as a liquid.
So according to positional entropy calculations, everything should want to be a gas.
But we know that we're surrounded by solids and liquids, so what's going on here?
Of course, we need to consider the energy distribution in addition to the positional
entropy.
Since moving from a solid to a liquid to a gas requires the addition of heat to the
substance, we know that the thermal entropy of the substance will also increase as it
undergoes this series of transitions.
It does in fact seem that everything wants to be a gas.
So what's the glitch?
If heat flows into a system containing ice and allows the ice to melt to water, remember
that that same amount of heat must have left the surroundings of the ice.
The transition, which has increased the entropy of the ice as it converts to water, has cost
the surroundings some entropy.
Therefore we really need to look not just at the system under consideration, but also
at the surroundings to determine whether or not a transformation will happen spontaneously.
If you think about it, adding or subtracting energy from the surroundings affects the energy
of the surroundings in a way that is inversely proportional to the temperature of the surroundings.
For instance, if the surroundings are really hot, taking a little bit of energy from them
doesn't make very much difference in the entropy.
But if the surroundings are cold, taking the same amount of heat from it will have a much
larger effect on the entropy.
For a constant pressure transformation, we have seen that the heat transferred during
a process is called delta H, the enthalpy, and the effect of the heat transfer can be
shown to affect the entropy according to the equation delta S equals delta H divided
by T, the absolute temperature of the surrounding.
Let's look at a specific example here.
Say we take 10 grams of ice at 0 degrees centigrade and place them in a freezer where the temperature
of the surrounding is minus 5 degrees centigrade.
Then we take the same 10 grams of ice and place it in the surroundings where the temperature
is 5 degrees centigrade.
You already know that the ice will remain as a solid in the freezer, but will eventually
melt to become a liquid when the temperature is 5 degrees C.
If the ice is going to melt, we require the surroundings to provide heat to break some
of the intermolecular forces and allow the solid water molecules to become free liquid
molecules.
The heat of fusion of ice, which is the formal name of the energy required to melt ice, is
6 kilojoules per mole.
The positional entropy change is accompanying the conversion of solid ice to liquid water
is 22 kilojoules per mole Kelvin.
So the question is, when would the conversion of ice to water be spontaneous?
Let's look at the entropy of the surroundings to answer this question in a formal way.
At minus 5 degrees C, the 6 kilojoules of heat required to break the solid ice apart
and turn it into a liquid means that the surroundings have to have a decrease in entropy
of 6 kilojoules divided by 268 Kelvin, the temperature of the surroundings expressed
in Kelvin, or minus 22.4 kilojoules per mole.
Remember that we said the entropy increase when the solid ice was converted to a liquid
was plus 22 kilojoules per mole.
So if we look at the total energy change of the system and the surroundings when we try
to melt ice at minus 5 degrees C, we see that the net entropy change minus 22.4 kilojoules
per mole plus 22.0 kilojoules is negative 0.4 kilojoules per mole.
The net entropy change is negative and the reaction is considered to be non-spontaneous
at 268 Kelvin.
Ice does not melt to water at a temperature below 0 degrees.
What happens if we put the ice in an environment at 278 degrees Kelvin, right, 5 degrees above
its melting point?
Now the entropy decrease in the environment is reduced because the negative 6 kilojoules
come from a higher temperature environment, 278 Kelvin.
If we calculate delta S as delta H divided by T, we get negative 6.00 kilojoules per
mole divided by 278 Kelvin, which is minus 21.5 kilojoules per mole.
The entropy change in the surroundings is minus 21.5 kilojoules per mole, but the entropy
change in the water is 22 kilojoules per mole.
So overall, for the whole universe, the system and its surroundings together, there's a positive
net entropy change of 0.5 kilojoules per mole.
The melting of water at a temperature above its melting point is spontaneous.
The entropy of the universe has increased to accompany this transformation.
The second law of thermodynamics therefore gives us a very nice way of calculating whether
transformations are spontaneous or not.
And while the example of ice is trivial because we can observe that experimentally, the use
of the second law to calculate whether or not specific transformations are spontaneous
is very useful when you aren't able to access the system you're interested in directly.
But having to keep track of what's going on in a chemical system and its surroundings
at the same time is really a pain in the neck.
This would much prefer to focus simply on the system.
Is there a way to define a thermodynamic parameter that would allow us to focus just on the system?
The answer is yes.
The solution to this problem was proposed by Gibbs in the late 1800s.
Let's look at a specific example to see if we can motivate his definition.
Under the reaction, 2NO2 gas forms N204 gas.
This reaction is important in atmospheric chemistry because NO2 gas provides the brown
color that you see in the summer in the haze over most American cities.
At 298 degrees Kelvin, the conversion of 2NO2s into 1N204 molecule means that the entropy
has decreased in the course of this reaction.
The entropy for the reaction is measured to be minus 175.8 joules per Kelvin.
On the other hand, you are making a bond by putting the 2NO2s together into one molecule.
So the reaction is also exothermic and produces 57.2 kilojoules per mole every time the NO2
forms an N204 molecule.
So at 298 Kelvin, which is room temperature 25 degrees centigrade, is this reaction spontaneous?
Remember that the entropy of the universe is equal to the entropy change of the system
plus the entropy change of the surroundings.
The entropy change of the system is minus 175.8 joules per Kelvin.
The entropy of the surroundings is calculated by taking the heat released from the reaction
and divided by the 298 Kelvin.
So entropy change of the surroundings here is plus 191.9 joules per Kelvin.
Since the entropy change of the system is minus 175.8 joules per Kelvin and the entropy
change of the surroundings is plus 191.9 joules per Kelvin, we say that the reaction 2NO2
goes to N204, both in the gas phase, is spontaneous at room temperature.
What happens if we heat things up?
Say to 100 degrees centigrade, the temperature of boiling water.
100 degrees centigrade is 373 Kelvin.
Let's simplify our calculation a little bit by assuming that the entropy change and the
entropy change of the systems are not a function of temperature.
That's not strictly true, but it's okay for illustrating the example here.
If we run the same reaction, 2NO2 gas produces an N204 gas at 373 Kelvin and we assume that
the entropy change of the system is the same, minus 175.8 joules per Kelvin.
The entropy change of the surroundings is now 57.2 kilojoules divided by 373K.
Overall we see that the entropy change of the universe is negative under this circumstance.
And therefore, the reaction is not spontaneous at high temperature.
This counterintuitive situation where high temperatures do not promote chemical reactions
is seen fairly often when the entropy of a system is decreasing substantially during
the course of chemical transformation.
Gibbs' insight was that we could treat the entropy change of the system, delta S, directly,
but the entropy change of the surroundings was calculated from delta H of the system
divided by the temperature of the surroundings.
And so we can recast the complete argument of the entropy change of the universe in terms
of the system alone by defining a function Gibbs called the free energy.
Free energy is calculated as the delta H of the system minus the temperature of the surroundings
times the delta S of the system.
What's free in Gibbs free energy?
You'll note that entropy takes account of the molecular rearrangements that happen during
a chemical transformation.
The free energy then represents the ability of the reaction to be harnessed to do work
in its surroundings.
It doesn't mean that the system will automatically do that much work, but it means that for clever,
the delta G is the maximum possible amount of work that a chemical transformation can
do in its surroundings.
The endemic chemists have tabulated the thermodynamic properties of many chemicals in thermodynamic
tables.
We record the enthalpy and entropy changes of the formation of molecules from their elements
extensively.
And because of Hess's law, we can combine the thermodynamic changes that accompany the
formation of compounds from their elements in order to calculate the specific transformations
that happen during chemical reactions.
For instance, if we recast our discussion of 2N02 forms N204, and we want to look up
numbers on a thermodynamic table, we realize that we could look at this reaction as proceeding
in the following manner.
We could take two NO2 molecules completely apart to their elemental form, nitrogen gas
and oxygen gas, and then take those atoms in their elemental form and recombine them
to make the product N204.
This bypass road through the elemental form provides us a route where we can apply Hess's
law and calculate the energy, enthalpy, or entropy change, and therefore the Gibbs energy
change, for the reaction 2N02 goes to N204 simply by knowing how to make NO2 from its
elements and how to make N204 from those same elements.
This strategy allows us to have a moderate-sized table that explains many chemical reactions.
And although the calculations can be a little bit complicated, the tabulation is easy.
And most chemists will use the heats of formation or the entropy of formation of molecules from
their elements to calculate and predict what chemical reactions will happen spontaneously
and which ones will not.
Now we have seen that the thermodynamic properties of a system, and in particular its entropy
and Gibbs energy, define whether a chemical transformation will happen or not.
In the next lesson, we'll look at the factors that control the rate at which those reactions
happen because we know that the definition of spontaneity in chemistry, that something
will happen, is different than the casual use of the word spontaneity, which implies
that something will happen quickly or immediately or without thought.
So next time we'll look at chemical kinetics.
