Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 13, The Chemistry of Life.
In the very first lecture of this series of lessons, we talked about water and how natural water
actually contains a variety of different ionic compounds or dissolved compounds,
and that the line between natural waters and polluted waters could sometimes be a small line.
Now we'd like to put a little bit more attention to the question of water pollution
and how we understand that water interacts with the environment and provide a numerical description
of some of the concentrations of materials that we expect to find in natural waters.
We have seen that there are some general solubility rules for ionic solids and whether
or not those ionic solids dissolve in water, and we can come back now using our concepts of
equilibrium to determine what's called an equilibrium constant, a solubility product
constant, for salts that dissolve in water. Sodium chloride we have seen is very soluble in water,
and if we write the dissociation reaction for sodium chloride, a sodium chloride solid
goes to sodium ions plus chloride ions, we describe that equilibrium of sodium chloride solid
and sodium ions and chloride ions by taking the concentration of the products, the concentration
of sodium ion times chloride ion and dividing it by the concentration of the sodium chloride solid.
But of course we've discussed the fact that the concentration of a pure solid
doesn't change when the amount of that solid changes. Remember that concentration is defined
as moles per liter or grams per liter, and if you have a pure solid and some of it reacts,
you've reduced the number of moles of the pure solid available to you in the same ratio that
you've reduced the volume. So the concentration of a pure metal or a pure solid is considered
not to change when the amount of the pure solid or metal changes. For that reason we give the
equilibrium constant for ionic solids that dissolve in water a special name, we call it the KSP,
the equilibrium solubility product, and we delete the concentration of the pure ionic compound
from the equation. So the KSP equilibrium solubility product for sodium chloride
will be written as simply the concentration of the sodium ion times the concentration of the
chloride ion. Sodium chloride is very soluble and its equilibrium solubility product is very large,
close to infinite, and in many textbooks you'll see it listed simply as infinity,
because sodium chloride is so soluble in water. But at the other end of the spectrum
we've seen that silver chloride was not soluble in water. Now we're in a position
to put a mathematical number on that to fill in, if you will, the continuum of behavior between
infinitely soluble substances, which sodium chloride approaches, and non-soluble substances,
which silver chloride approaches. If you actually put some silver solution, silver chloride,
in water and wait for a while and stir it vigorously, there actually will be some silver
that can be detected in the water. You wouldn't want to do this detection by the chloride
precipitation test that we discussed in an earlier lesson, but you could do it using one of the
modern methods, spectroscopic methods we discussed earlier, for instance atomic absorption. In atomic
absorption spectra, you would vaporize a small sample of the silver chloride solution
and pass light from the emission of a silver electrode through it. We know that the light
produced by an excited silver sample is exactly the same as the light that would be absorbed
by a silver atom or ion, and so we could detect the silver ions in the solution
by looking specifically at those wavelengths of light produced when silver emits radiation.
This would not happen in the visible part of the spectrum, but would happen in the ultraviolet,
and ultraviolet technology as well enough established that we can certainly detect
silver concentrations using atomic absorption spectroscopy. If we measure the concentration
of silver ion in a solution made by dissolving silver chloride in very pure water, we find
that the concentration of the silver and the concentration of the chloride will be the same
because of the one-to-one stoichiometry in the silver chloride crystal, and if we measure the
concentration of silver, we can take it as equal to the concentration of chloride, and the product,
the concentration of silver times the concentration of chloride, is recorded as the Ksp of silver
chloride, which at 25 degrees centigrade is generally taken as 1.8 times 10 to the minus 10th.
If you set up the solubility problem to determine the concentration of silver,
you would take the square root of the Ksp to give you the concentration of the silver ion.
The concentration of the silver ions, which is equal to the concentration of the chloride ions,
is 1.34 times 10 to the minus fifth molar. That doesn't sound like very much concentration,
and really it's not. Silver chloride is only a very slightly soluble salt, but depending on where
we set the limits of chloride contamination in water, we might consider a solution of silver
chloride to be a polluted water solution or a healthy water solution. Now for many people,
a concentration of silver of 1.34 times 10 to the minus fifth molar is actually a very positive
kind of water to find, because silver is well known for its antibacterial properties, and people do
consume silver solutions, usually colloidal silver, but nevertheless silver solutions,
as a health tonic. Again, the line between what constitutes a polluted sample and a healthy sample
can be a little bit arbitrary. The natural occurring salts that make hard water hard,
as we've mentioned before, are predominantly calcium and magnesium salts.
The solubility constant for calcium carbonate, another 1 to 1 salt, is 6.0 times 10 to the minus
ninth. Calcium carbonate is almost in order of magnitude more soluble than silver chloride
when it comes to pure water. Almost no one would say that water containing lead is a healthy water
sample, however, and for the most part, public water systems and private water suppliers, for that
matter, try to remove as much lead from water as possible. Let's think of one strategy you might
use to remove lead ions from a natural sample of water. If you look at the properties of a number
of lead salts, we know that most of the binary lead salts are not very soluble in water. Lead
chloride is perhaps the most soluble of the lead salts, and its Ksp is 1.7 times 10 to the minus
fifth. If you write the dissociation reaction for lead chloride, you see that lead chloride
dissociates to form 1 lead plus 2 ion and 2 Cl minus ions. Therefore, when lead chloride dissolves
in water, the concentration of the chloride is twice the concentration of the lead, and the
equilibrium Ksp expression should be written as the concentration of lead times the concentration
of chloride squared. If we consider x amount to be the concentration of lead formed in an
aqueous solution in equilibrium with lead chloride, then 2x is the concentration of the chloride ion,
and the Ksp is mathematically equivalent to the quantity 4x cubed, where x is the concentration
of lead at equilibrium, and the 4x cubed part comes from balancing the lead and the chloride
ions that are the product of the lead chloride dissociation. If you solve the problem 4x cubed
equals 1.7 times 10 to the minus fifth, you find that an equilibrium solution of lead chloride
dissolved in water actually contains 0.16 moles per liter lead. That's a relatively
high concentration of lead, and anybody would consider a saturated solution of lead chloride
in water, which contained 0.016 moles of lead per liter to be a polluted sample.
How would we then remove the lead from this polluted sample?
One way could be to precipitate it by using a counter ion that produced a less soluble
species than lead chloride. Unfortunately for us, lead provides just such a separate
counter ion, because the solubility of lead sulfide, PBS, is substantially less than the
solubility of lead chloride. In fact, the Ksp for lead sulfide, 3 times 10 to the minus 28th,
is some 23 orders of magnitude smaller than the Ksp for lead chloride. In addition to that,
the stoichiometry of the lead sulfide solubility, one lead ion, and one sulfide ion per lead
sulfide unit, makes it easier for sulfide to precipitate lead out of water. If we had a saturated
solution of lead sulfide, in fact, it would contain only 1.7 times 10 to the minus 14th
molar lead. This is going to be well below the detection limits of any modern measuring methodology
and would constitute a clean water sample by almost anyone's reckoning. Therefore, one way
that modern water systems remove contaminations or pollutions from natural waters is to precipitate
them out by mixing in counter ions that will precipitate insoluble salt versions of the
nasty metals that they want to pull out of water. I've highlighted lead here because lead is a
particular bad player which has been widely used by technology and is therefore present at
relatively high concentrations in many urban environments in this country, especially from
lead paints and therefore also in the water samples where it runs off from home and commercial use
into the water supply. Fortunately, lead sulfide is so insoluble that it provides an easy way to
remove lead, at least from water supplies, so that most communities do not worry too much about
lead contamination in their water systems. Most natural waters, of course, contain many different
kinds of ions dissolved from many different sources. One of the magics of chemical equilibrium
is that somehow simultaneously, all of the solubility standards for all of the salts
dissolved in water have to be obeyed for a water system to be considered to be in equilibrium.
If we considered a sample of barium sulfate rather than lead sulfide and we wanted to
analyze a solution containing the barium ion by precipitating it as the sulfate,
we would recognize that the Ksp for barium sulfate is 1.1 times 10 to the minus 10th at
room temperature. If we dissolve barium sulfate in water, then the solubility of the barium sulfate
is about 1 times 10 to the minus fifth moles per liter. That would mean we could dissolve about 0.002
grams of barium sulfate in a liter. This is a low solubility, but it's not zero, and if we wanted
to precipitate some of the barium out, we could do it in a sort of clever way. For instance,
if we added some sodium sulfate, by most all accounts a benign compound, to the solution
containing barium sulfate, we could use Le Chatelier's principle to shift the equilibrium
and force more of the barium out of solution. Remember that under every circumstance,
the barium and the sulfate will obey the barium sulfate Ksp restriction. So by adding more sulfate
through the dissolution of sodium sulfate, we push the barium sulfate equilibrium to produce
more barium sulfate precipitate. This methodology, using what's called the common ion effect,
is called gravimetric analysis, and we can determine almost precisely the amount of barium
present initially in our solution by adding excess sodium sulfate to the solution which
contains the bariums to start with. Although most solubility reactions are straightforward
and precedes barium sulfate reaction we've just described, there are some situations in which
the solubility of ionic salts is complicated by other reactions that can occur in the aqueous
environment. For instance, if we were to dissolve some mercury iodide in an aqueous solution,
mercury iodide is not very soluble, it produces a saturated solution at a concentration of 1.3
times 10 to the minus fourth molar. We would expect when we add potassium iodide to the solution of
mercury iodide that we could precipitate more and more of the mercury out by the common ion effect
which would push the equilibrium for the dissolution of mercury iodide back towards the
mercury iodide solid just like the barium sulfate example. But an odd thing happens when you add
more and more Ki to a solution that you suspect contains mercury iodide. The solubility of the
mercury iodide actually increases rather than decreases. What's going on here? How could we
possibly explain this? Clearly it's not related to Le Chatelier's principle. What it is related to
is a secondary reaction that occurs especially with iodide in solution. You remember that I2,
a molecular species, was not expected to be at all soluble in water. Nevertheless, we talked earlier
in these lessons about the solubility of I2 in water. That solubility is really due to the fact
that iodine forms a complex I3- when dissolved in water. And I3- the ionic species is much more
soluble of course than neutral iodine, a nonpolar species would be. In addition to I3- there are
forms of I4- that can also be detected in aqueous solutions under proper conditions. And the formation
of these complex ions, we're using that terminology a little inappropriate here because there's nothing
different from iodine to which the iodine is connecting. But nevertheless, these complex ions,
these multiple polyatomic, let's call them polyatomic anions, considerably complicates
figuring out the solubility of ionic salts containing iodide. Similar behavior is seen with
aqueous solutions of aluminum. Aluminum can form a variety of higher order complex ions,
and the equilibrium of aluminum species is a very complicated scenario and involves principles from
inorganic chemistry that we're not going to discuss in any detail here. You hear a lot about
pollution of water by hydrocarbons, gasoline spills, oil spills. Let's consider the
Gulf oil disaster from the summer of 2010. In our early discussions on solubility,
we established that those compounds, which are nonpolar, are not likely to be particularly
soluble in water. Nevertheless, the presence of oil in the Gulf waters has produced a substantial
pollution problem with substantial environmental effects. Clearly, the simple principles of
solubility that we considered at the beginning of this series of lessons are not sufficient
to describe the impact of oils in the waters of the Gulf. And part of the reason for the
discrepancy between our simplistic model and reality is the presence of dissolved salts
in water. The presence of dissolved salts in water with oils requires a more sophisticated
analysis than the one we undertook at the beginning of this lesson. It's worth mentioning
that natural petroleum products, like those released in the Gulf oil disaster, are not 100%
pure hydrocarbons. The petroleum products themselves are contaminated by a variety of other compounds
which contain nitrogen and sulfur in addition to carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. It's the nitrogen
and sulfur in the petroleum products that is responsible in part for the excess solubility
of petroleum compared to what we would anticipate if we saw the petroleum as a pure hydrocarbon
material. In a chemical laboratory where you want to have a very pure sample of water,
a lot of attention is paid to producing that water. There are two primary ways that chemical
labs secure pure water samples. One is through the process of distillation and the other is through
a filtering process. The distillation process depends on the fact that water is more volatile
than most of the contaminants it contains. And so if you heat water until it's boiling
and collect the steam that's released from the boiling water and recondense that steam,
you have what's called distilled water. And the idea is that distilling the water leaves the solids
no matter what solid, silver chloride, barium sulfate, any solid behind in the reservoir.
And so the distilled water is of a higher quality. It is pure with less dissolved salts
than the water that you started with. But you shouldn't take this presumption that distillation
purifies water too far. A simple distillation where you simply boil the water once and recollect it
is often insufficient for removing the dissolved ions in solution. And a simple distillation
will often not remove organic contaminants from a truly contaminated sample of water
because the organic contaminants also have a relatively low boiling point and boil along
with the water sample that you're trying to purify. The filtration methods are actually
usually enhanced by a process called reverse osmosis. You may have heard of reverse osmosis
as a method for purifying seawater. And reverse osmosis is an application of the osmotic pressure
strategies that we talked about earlier in this lesson. In reverse osmosis, we use an external
power supply to push on the contaminated water sample, reversing the normal osmotic flow,
which would put pure water through the semipermeable membrane into the area where the
concentration of water was less and the concentration of solute was higher. In reverse osmosis,
we take advantage of the semipermeable nature of the membrane to keep everything that's not a
water molecule on the side that we're providing the push. So essentially, we push the water molecules
against the normal osmotic gradient and collect them on the far side of the semipermeable membrane.
Reverse osmosis is currently in use commercially to purify water in several countries in the
Middle East, but it's relatively expensive compared to the precipitation and distillation
processes we've talked about so far and is not widely used in the US.
Just as the contaminants in the petroleum products from the Gulf contribute to the
solubility of those products in Gulf waters, contaminants in naturally occurring coal deposits
are responsible for a lot of the pollution that we see from coal-fired plants today.
We've gotten pretty good about taking the nitrogen-containing compounds
out of the effluent from coal-fired plants, but heavier metals and in particular mercury
are vaporized through the process of coal combustion and are evacuated from the combustion
area through the smokestacks with CO2 and the other gases that are produced. The problem arises
when the mercury carried from a coal-fired plant, re-deposits in natural waters in the vicinity
of the plant. Mercury is another compound which has complex chemical behavior in aqueous solution.
Mercury comes in two oxidation states, plus 1 and plus 2, and either mercury plus 1 or mercury
plus 2 can be involved in a variety of equilibrium scenarios with a variety of counter ions in
natural waters. The problem, of course, is that there's always some mercury in contact with any
mercury deposited on the bottom of a natural water sample, and the mercury that's free to float
in the water is easily ingested and embedded in fish that live in those waters. And the small
fish, of course, become food for the larger fish, and the larger fish, of course, become the food
that we humans would prefer to eat. Over the past 100 years or so, the amount of mercury deposited
in our natural waters from coal-fired plants is substantial enough to cause concerns about the
consumption of fish because of the mercury content in the fish tissues. And biologists and
environmental biologists are actively studying the mercury flow through ecological systems
to try to evaluate the biopath ways that handle mercury and find a way to keep it from accumulating
in fish cells and contaminating the fish that we would prefer to eat.
Another example of water pollution that is of concern to, I think, to all of us is
the problem of synthetic polymers in our environment. We know that synthetic polymers,
which have been invaluable in improving our quality of life over the last 50 to 60 years,
also have one very unfortunate characteristic. They do not degrade very easily in the environment.
You may have heard that every time you take a breath, you breathe in an oxygen molecule
that was also breathed in by Julius Caesar during his lifetime. And that statement is a
consequence of a calculation you can do that compares the volume of air that we breathe
in our lifetime to the total volume of air on the earth. And in fact, you do probably breathe in
a molecule of oxygen with every breath that is one that Julius Caesar breathed in during his lifetime.
I say that not to cause you to do a horrendous statistical analysis, but rather to emphasize
that the elements of the earth are the same elements that have been here since the beginning
of time. And both non-living and living processes simply recycle the elements that we have on a
continuous basis to reproduce the next generation of living things. Right now, we've tied up a lot
of hydrocarbon type material in synthetic polymers. And those synthetic polymers as plastics
do not degrade in the way that natural products do. When a tree dies and falls in the forest,
we know that there are a variety of methodologies, biological and chemical,
that cause the tree to degrade. And the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen that compose the tree
are returned for reuse in the living cycle of the earth. Synthetic polymers are very resistant
to degradation. And that resistance means that they hang around, they hang around in our landfills
and don't degrade back into carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, or they float around in the ocean.
And large masses of even small pieces of plastic have an incredibly long half-life,
to use the terminology of kinetics that we developed earlier on. That incredibly long
half-life means that they can accumulate and cause a substantial change in the local environment
in the ocean. Most synthetic polymers are essentially non-polar. And so there's a tendency
as hydrophobic materials for them to aggregate into large clumps. Those aggregations exacerbates
the impact that they have on the natural environment. And the complications for the life forms
that occupy natural waters are really unknown and continually under investigation at this time.
So we have a variety of pollution sources. And I have to say that in the past 50 years,
American industry has become much more focused on reducing the amount of pollution
that it releases into the atmosphere. In part, this awareness has come because of efforts
by organizations like the Environmental Protection Agency and the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air
Act passed by Congress over the past 40 years. But in part, the awareness of pollution by American
industry has come because there's a recognition that any material that enters your plant and doesn't
exit your plant as a product is really a wasted raw material. And in the competitive market
that is American manufacturing today, wasted raw materials are not a tolerable component
of anybody's business model. In the next lesson, when we begin the discussion of chemistry in the
21st century, we'll see the ways in which the modern chemical industry is working to reduce
the waste materials from a variety of manufacturing processes in order to increase efficiency
across the board in chemical manufacture. This ends lecture 13.
