Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 14, Chemistry in the 21st Century.
Chemists in the 21st century are working to overcome the mistakes of the past
and create a clean, healthy, energy and resource efficient tomorrow.
The chemical industry recognizes that waste, in raw materials in particular,
is a cost to both manufacturers and consumers and not a benefit to corporations.
The era when waste materials were dumped into natural waters or released into the atmosphere
and that was seen as an advantage to a corporation is gone.
Corporations now realize that those wastes represent wasted raw materials
and that cost them a lot of money.
Meanwhile, nanoscale devices promise improved functionality
while demanding less raw material and promising lower energy consumption.
The recognition that we have only limited quantities of petroleum
is forcing chemists to search for alternative renewable resources of energy
and for renewable resources of starting materials for a whole variety of products
from fibers to pharmaceuticals.
Energy efficiency is mandated, not an option.
Improved separation and detection methods are pushing the limits of our ability
to measure the contaminate concentrations that we might not have ever suspected before.
And our ability to understand spectroscopy and build highly sensitive instrumentation
to communicate with it and measure with it, even to the depths of space,
promises a future of discoveries we cannot yet imagine.
Chemistry at the beginning of the 21st century
would be almost unrecognizable to a chemist from the dawn of the 20th century.
Consider that in the five years between 1895 and 1900,
the noble gases, Krypton, Neon, Xenon and Radon, were all discovered,
Marie Curie isolated polonium and radium, and other chemists discovered actinium.
A huge part of the periodic table was just being presented to science
at the beginning of the 20th century.
Also in 1900, Max Planck stated his radiation law and developed Planck's constant.
At the beginning of the 20th century, scientific computation required a pencil
and a piece of paper.
At the dawn of the 21st century, we have sophisticated computational tools
which allow us to model pharmaceutical systems and predict their effectiveness
before any chemical synthesis is undertaken.
We have harnessed the massively parallel methods available in modern computational technology
to test hundreds of thousands of compounds for biological activity
without extracting a single one of them from any natural source.
In the summer of 2011, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
officially accepted elements 114 and 116 as members of the periodic table.
These two elements, which live for less than a second before decaying into lighter atoms
through nuclear fission, are of very little chemical value,
but they have brought researchers a step closer to making heavy elements
which have been hypothesized to exist in the island of stability
at high atomic number and high mass number.
If it's true that elements with atomic number 120 to 126 are stable for a long time
and if we can figure out a way to make them in a sufficient quantity,
new avenues of chemistry can be explored.
In these very high number, atomic number, atoms,
electron velocities are so high that a fully relativistic treatment
of the model of the electronic structure in atoms is required.
Just as the study of relativity revealed fundamental changes
in our understanding of physics in the beginning of the 20th century,
a study of a fully relativistic atom could revolutionize chemistry in the 21st.
Also in the 21st century, we have new methods for driving chemical reactions.
In particular, I want to take a second and talk about laser-driven reactions.
Lasers provide the energy to overcome activation barriers
in a variety of chemical equations,
but they are fundamentally different than heating the reaction mixture.
A laser is a light source which is monochromatic.
It has one frequency of light only.
And therefore, using a laser to drive a reaction
means that you're exciting a particular kind of motion in a molecule.
And if that particular kind of motion is critical in the pathway of a chemical reaction,
you can initiate a chemical reaction as a consequence of laser irradiation
without having to worry about the consequences of too many side reactions
or the consequences of high temperatures.
Lasers create what are called non-thermal distributions in molecules.
A thermal distribution in which the energy in molecules is subscribed
by the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution means that there's a whole spread of molecular energies
in translational energy, in vibrational energy, and in rotational energy.
But in a laser-driven reaction, you can choose a particular amount of vibrational energy
or a particular amount of translational energy
and provide that selectively to the molecules you're interested in.
This not only can increase the efficiency of energy consumption by a chemical reaction
by targeting the specific transformation that needs to occur
to allow specific products to be produced,
but it can also substantially reduce the number of side reactions that occur
in normal high-temperature environments.
That reduces the production of contaminants or pollutants from a lot of chemical reactions.
The study of laser-driven reactions is really in its infancy even now,
but future possibilities are really extraordinary.
Another use of laser-driven reactions is that because lasers can be polarized,
in other words, their electric and magnetic field vectors can be localized
to point in specific directions in space,
reactions that result from an excitation from a laser
can give extraordinarily detailed information
about how a reaction proceeds through its transition state and to form products.
For instance, we have discussed the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in the past.
If you study the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide as a gas
and you initiate the decomposition by exposure to a laser radiation
rather than by heating or the addition of a catalyst,
you can cause the oxygen-oxygen bond to break
and observe the rotation of the hydroxide radicals that are produced.
The peroxide molecule itself can be described as having the two oxygens along the spine of a book,
while the two hydrogens lie on opposite pages of the book,
one at the top of the book page and one at the bottom.
When the OO bond breaks, the oxygen component of the OH bond
experiences a kick, if you will, from the breaking.
The OH product ends up rotating when it's released from the molecule in space.
The use of lasers, both to initiate the reaction
and to investigate the behavior of the hydroxide product,
allows chemists today, molecular dynamists, they're called,
to correlate the rotational motion of the OH product
with the structure of the potential energy surface
that describes the peroxide precursor.
This degree of control of chemical reactions may seem excessive,
but it gives us a window to see how to reduce side reactions,
to reduce the pollutants that currently accompany lots of our combustion processes.
There's one other application of lasers that is really revolutionizing modern chemistry.
Lasers can provide the fastest picture we have of chemical reactions.
And in the early part of the 21st century,
femtochemistry was a hot topic among molecular dynamicists.
In femtochemistry, an extremely short pulse of light,
less than 60 femtoseconds in length, is used to initiate a chemical reaction.
It's as if you could turn a light on and off in a 60 femtosecond time scale.
Remember that femtosecond is 10 to the minus 15th of a second.
The first report of femtochemistry was the illumination of the gas-phase species
iodine cyanide, ICN, with ultraviolet light.
And the ultraviolet light provided enough energy to break the ICN bond.
The question was, how fast does this bond break?
And the answer was, the ICN bond breaks within 200 femtoseconds.
If you look at the vibrational properties of molecules,
this means that the ICN falls apart in one vibrational cycle.
And so the random motion of the ICN provides the time scale on which the bond breaking happens.
We don't see that in very many chemical reactions.
Usually it takes a little while for the energy that you provide to a chemical reaction
to end up through its random oscillations, where it needs to be
to initiate the breakage of the critical chemical bond.
But in ICN, a single vibration is sufficient to allow the molecule to fall apart.
You might ask how we could possibly distinguish behavior that happens on a 200 femtosecond time scale.
And the answer is, we use another laser, specifically tuned to interact with the cyanide group from the ICN,
only when it is free of the iodine.
In the presence of iodine, the CN electronic structure is modified
because of its bonding interactions with the iodide.
And that shifts the energy levels sufficiently to be distinguished from those when the CN is free.
If you provide an ultraviolet photon at 308 nanometers with a time scale of 60 femtoseconds to ICN,
and then you look at the CN product at 388.9 nanometers, a little bit closer to the visible spectrum of light,
you can only see the CN absorb that radiation when it is completely free of the iodide.
And so the scientists who observed this first experiment were able to report that the CN appeared 200 femtoseconds on average
after the 60 femtosecond pulse had initiated the dissociation of ICN.
In contrast, if we look at the compound NAI, which we would have said according to our initial discussion, was an ionic compound,
we see that NAI does not fall apart on its first vibrational mode.
The excited state that results after the electrons in NAI absorb a photon of laser radiation
is written as a mixture of the covalent interactions between NAI and the ionic structures.
And only the covalent form can fall apart into free sodium and iodine atoms.
If you use a 310 nanometer 60 nanosecond pump and probe at 589 nanometers in the visible,
which is one of the two lines of the sodium doublet, you don't see free sodium until about four picoseconds
after the 310 nanometer pulse has excited the sodium iodide.
But the most exciting thing about the sodium iodide decomposition is that as you watch the signal over time,
the signal oscillates, and the scientists who first observed this said that the oscillation
was showing that the sodium iodide was actually able to dissociate along its ionic pathway.
So two different ways of dissociating sodium iodide are possible.
One, the conventional one that we would have expected separates sodium into sodium plus and iodide minus.
But the other produces a neutral sodium atom and a neutral iodide atom.
The chemistries of these two different pathways are substantially different,
and figuring out how they work gives us a window in controlling future chemical reactions using laser radiation.
We have said before that there are two primary reasons for doing chemistry in the modern era.
One is to produce chemical products that have the properties that we want,
whether those are pharmaceutical products or a new kind of fabric for clothing
or a new kind of coating to protect iron from rusting.
And the other is to produce heat.
Unfortunately, the production of heat from the combustion of predominantly hydrocarbons
is not a particularly efficient process.
And so that transformation is gradually being replaced with more efficient processes.
One of the more efficient processes that we take advantage of every day is the use of microwaves to heat solvents.
In a conventional heating, boiling begins at the surface.
The surface molecules evaporate first from the bulk.
And that keeps the temperature of the sample pretty uniformly at the boiling temperature of the liquid.
So for instance, if we boil water and the bubbles begin to come off the surface,
we can be pretty confident that the temperature of the water all the way through from the top to the bottom is 100 degrees centigrade.
In contrast, and you may have experienced this for yourself,
microwave heating provides heat in a different way to water.
The microwaves actually interact with the rotational motion of water molecules
and are absorbed by the quantum levels associated with rotation of water molecules.
When you heat a sample of water in a microwave,
the heat is absorbed most efficiently not at the surface, but in the center.
And since the walls of the container containing the water are usually not sensitive to microwaves,
the walls stay cooler and the water at the edges of the microwave container stays cooler as well.
Because the bulk solvent is hot,
you sometimes see an explosion of superheated water when you remove a sample from a microwave oven.
This superheating of water is dangerous to you and your kitchen,
but is a tremendous benefit to chemists who are trying to do synthetic work.
When the bulk of the solvent is hotter,
that means the rate of reaction is faster in the center of the sample,
and it's easier to overcome activation barriers.
So it turns out that microwave heating has actually facilitated a substantial increase
in the rate of many synthetic chemical processes.
Of course microwaves only work for polar solvents.
You can't microwave cooking oil very efficiently.
But for polar solvents, say propanol or water or alcohol,
microwaves are an excellent heating source in a chemical environment.
One of the first examples of an effective chemical synthesis
conducted with microwave heating took 1.6 grams of benzoic acid,
10 milliliters of one propanol, normal propanol,
and a tenth milliliter of concentrated sulfuric acid.
It was sealed in a Teflon bottle and put in a microwave for six minutes.
The temperature increased to 135 degrees centigrade,
and propylbenzoate, an important species in chemical manufacture,
was produced in a 79% yield.
In contrast, the conventional method of running the solution with a Bunsen burner or a hot plate
required that the reaction be heated to 97 degrees centigrade for four hours to give the same yield.
The microwave method, which was much faster, was also much more energy efficient,
and the cheaper energy motivates the use of microwave heating in industrial chemical situations.
One of the interesting sidelines about microwave synthesis is that it's very effective
when you're trying to manufacture radiopharmaceuticals for cancer treatments.
We've seen that radioactive isotopes can be effective against cancer
when the isotopes are attached to molecules which preferentially assemble in cancer environments,
and you sort of kill the cancer from the inside out.
But a lot of radiopharmaceuticals have half lives on the scale of a day or less than a day,
and so a synthetic route which requires several days worth of work
is a ridiculous thing to try to do when your radio label has a half life,
which is shorter than the time period over which you expect to synthesize the radioactive pharmaceutical.
But microwaves are fast, and microwaves have been used and are currently in use
for generating radiopharmaceuticals without producing a lot of extra radiation outside of its medical application.
Another alternate heating strategy is the use of ultrasonics.
Early in the 1990s, some scientists proposed that ultrasonic excitation
was actually able to induce nuclear fusion processes on the benchtop.
This is a little different than the cold fusion that you might remember hearing about,
but was equally disproven or at least has not yet been proven as having occurred.
But what is inultrably true is that ultrasonic heating can produce extremely high temperatures.
Ultrasonics are just what they sound like.
You take a couple speakers, you put sound in that is above the hearing range of humans,
and the sound interacts with a condensed material, like water.
Sound causes cavitation processes, where local heating causes the conversion of a sample to gas,
and the bubbles collapse with the cycle of the ultrasonic waves.
Ultrasonic excitation appears to be a promising route for recycling fluorinated polymers.
Fluorinated polymers like Teflon are some of the most chemically resistant compounds
that have been synthesized so far, and there is no known way to chemically degrade them,
even after long exposure, to aggressive chemicals.
But in an ultrasonic environment, the fluorinated polymer can be converted
by replacing the fluorine with either bromine or chlorine,
and the bromine or chlorine substituted polymers are soluble and are easy to recycle.
This application of a modern technology using a focused heating technique
to degrade fluorinated polymers promises to show the way to allow technologies to be developed
to recycle many other long-lived polymers that have been produced over the past 50 years.
Another area of interest in modern 21st century chemistry is so-called green chemistry.
The principles of green chemistry are that you search for 100% atom economy in every synthetic process.
That means all the atoms that come in as raw material are produced as desired products,
and there are no side products or pollutants produced as part of the process.
Another principle of green chemistry is to reduce the use of energy,
and so ultrasonic and microwave heating are an essential component in green chemistry.
A third principle is to reduce the use of volatile organic compounds, VOCs.
VOCs have been shown to have negative health effects and to provide pollutants into the atmosphere
and also produced primarily from petroleum products, which of course we would like to conserve
to use as energy sources and not use in raw materials necessarily.
The explosion of green chemistry has produced an interest in compounds called ionic liquids.
Ionic liquids are different from the ionic solids we have discussed so far.
Ionic liquids are composed entirely of ions, but unlike the ionic crystals we've discussed so far,
ionic liquids consist of ions which are too large and flexible to form rigid crystal lattices.
A whole variety of ionic liquid solvents have been used for chemical synthesis, for catalysis,
and in fuel cells as well as other applications.
Ionic liquids are considered to be green and to support green chemistry,
not only because they're very versatile, but also because they don't evaporate,
they don't have a vapor pressure, and so they don't escape from an industrial container where they're being used.
Ionic liquids also have a different interaction with chemical reagents that dissolve in them
than do standard molecular solvents.
Ionic liquids can also be used in microwave synthesis because the charge species
allow them to absorb microwaves, but since they're not volatile,
you don't get the explosion that you can get from superheated water.
Some examples of ionic liquids being commercially used today have the anion as the molecular anion BF4
and the cation as one of several substituted imidazoleum ions.
Imidazoleum is a cyclic structure containing two nitrogens and three hydrogens,
which carries a positive charge and can have different substituents attached to the two nitrogens in the ring.
In the same way that functional groups can be attached to hydrocarbons,
different functional groups can be attached to the nitrogens,
and the ionic liquid that results has a different property depending on the properties of the cation
and the anion in the liquid.
Another area of interest in today's chemistry has to do with superconductivity.
We've said that the conductivity of materials is the ability of them to transfer electrons,
and among the most conductive natural materials are pure metals, copper, aluminum, silver, gold.
In the classic definition of metallic conduction,
we've said that a metal is a material where the valence electrons are freely shared among all the atoms in the metal.
As we cool the metal off, we might expect to see a reduction in the conductivity of the metal
because the electrons will settle into an environment closer to their home atoms.
In fact, there are materials that demonstrate this kind of behavior
and whose conductivity goes down as temperature goes down.
Early on in the development of quantum mechanics,
the application of Schrodinger's equation to metallic materials
was interpreted to mean by some that all the electrons in a metal are free to move across all of the atoms in the metal,
and that the wave function that described those electrons was an oscillating function
with the period or the length of the wave defined by the crystal structure of the material.
In this formulation, other materials which we call insulators have only local orbitals
and keep the electrons constrained to small regions of the material.
In addition to the metals of the periodic table that exhibit high conductivity,
chemists have over the past hundred years produced some materials that behave like metals at room temperature
but increase their conductivity as the temperature drops.
These are the materials that we call superconductors.
And among the first of the important materials that were found to superconduct
were oxides of some transition metals, including NaWO3, a tungstenate, ReO3, ruthenium, and chromate, CrO2,
as well as some sulfides containing those same metals.
The compound sodium WO3 and rhenium O2 appear lustrous just like metals
and have partially full metallic orbitals like metals, enabling their high conductivity.
These metal oxides, however, maintain their conductivity at low temperatures.
Surprisingly, in the quest for low temperature conductors,
several materials that we would think of as insulators at room temperature
have been shown to become metallic and have high conductivity at low temperature.
For instance, liquid hydrogen, which converts from an insulating fluid at moderate temperatures,
can be converted to a metallic phase with a very high conductivity
when held at sufficiently low temperature and sufficiently high pressure.
Even sulfur, lowly sulfur, a yellow solid at room temperature and a good insulator,
can be converted to a superconductor at sufficiently low temperatures and high pressures.
And so our picture of a metal and a non-metal that exists from the beginning
stages of the periodic table and the behavior of elements and how they form ions
is starting to break down here as we get to extreme temperature and pressure conditions.
The search for a superconductor is motivated by the fact that if we could find a superconductor
that worked at the temperature above the boiling point of nitrogen,
so liquid nitrogen boils at about 77 Kelvin,
and if you've ever played with liquid nitrogen, you know that it looks like water.
It's a liquid, a clear colorless liquid, but of course it boils continuously
whenever you pour it out of its insulated thermos container.
And liquid nitrogen is used in scientific demonstrations sort of routinely
and can be used to make ice cream by mixing cream and sugar and milk and vanilla together,
vigorously mixing it with liquid nitrogen.
You can turn a batch of ice cream out in about 30 seconds
because of how cold the liquid nitrogen is and the amount of energy it takes away
when it evaporates at its boiling point.
Liquid nitrogen is relatively easy to make from our atmosphere
and would be available economically for large-scale industrial applications.
So if we could develop a superconducting material that worked at a temperature above 77 degrees,
then we could surround electrical transmission lines in the liquid nitrogen housing
and we could increase the efficiency of our electron transmission to virtually 100%,
because superconductors are materials that have zero resistance to electrical flow.
Right now, the best superconductors known are complex oxides containing a variety
of different metal and non-metallic elements.
So one of the compounds is a mercury-barium-calcium-copper-oxide,
and that compound superconducts up to 110 degrees Kelvin.
The next best is a bismuth-stronium-calcium-copper-oxygen compound,
commonly called BSCCO, which superconducts below 90 degrees.
And the third is the first of the so-called high-temperature superconductors
is a yttrium-barium-copper-oxide compound,
which superconducts at temperatures below the boiling point of nitrogen.
It's interesting that the quest for superconductors, again, takes us away
from our standard understanding of the periodic table as it existed at the beginning of the 19th century.
The behavior of materials in extreme environments is considerably different
than their routine behavior at the standard conditions under which we typically find them,
and exploiting these extreme behaviors is definitely going to be a focus of 21st century technology.
On the energy side, the movement away from the combustion of materials to provide heat,
or energy, towards more direct strategies is certainly underway.
According to the Stanford University Global Climate and Energy Project report from 2006,
there are three primary strategies being used to develop modern energy technologies.
The first involves converting photons, solar photons, to electrical energy directly.
And this kind of material happens in solar collectors,
and we're starting to see more and more solar collectors be present as the price of petroleum products rises.
Direct conversion from photons has one disadvantage, which is that it only works when the sun is actually shining,
and so many direct photon conversion systems now are being coupled with advanced battery technologies
so that when the sun is shining, you charge up a rechargeable battery,
when the sun isn't shining, you can draw the power out of the battery and continue to run your electrical apparatus.
Recent advances have increased the efficiency of solar collection to above 10%,
and that's a little bit of a threshold for making solar energy economically viable.
Other strategies are to take photons and convert them to heat.
If you've ever used a solar oven or burned up a bug using a magnifying glass on the sidewalk,
you've seen the photon to thermal energy conversion in action.
The third is a photon to chemical energy conversion,
and there's two strategies really for converting solar energy to chemical energy.
One is to use an appropriate catalyst to enable the splitting of water,
like the electrolysis of water we discussed previously, into hydrogen and oxygen gas.
The combustion of hydrogen gas as opposed to the combustion of petroleum products
has the advantage that the only product is water,
and if we have a system where we can split the water using solar energy,
we have an essentially endless loop of non-polluting energy sources.
Chemists are actively engaged in finding improved catalysts
to support efficient conversion of solar photons to hydrogen and oxygen from water,
and that might very well become an economically viable source of energy over the next 100 years.
The other implementation of photon to chemical energy conversion
is trying to develop a methodology that will mimic biological systems,
where many coupled electron transport processes happen in conjunction with one another,
ending up with the ability to store energy in a chemical form so that it can be used later.
That chemical storage happens essentially spontaneously as a consequence of Le Chatelier's principle,
and therefore is a highly efficient strategy if we can figure out a synthetic way to reproduce it.
So we see in the 21st century that chemistry continues to evolve,
that we continue to refine our understanding of the elements and their behavior,
and that we continue to expand the conditions under which we can control chemistry.
Eventually, the goal of modern chemistry is not just to understand the elements of the periodic table
or the compounds that we produce from them, but to make safe products to use energy efficiently
and to reduce pollution in our modern environment.
The improved competitiveness of chemical manufacturers and their customers that results
is a key to continued economic growth in the West and around the world in the next 100 years to come.
Call 1-800-636-3399 or visit www.modernscholar.com for a complete listing of available courses.
This course, produced by Ian McCulloch, directed and edited by Stephen Bartolome and Mark Avila,
is copyrighted 2011 by Recorded Books LLC.
The lecture text is copyrighted 2011 by Deborah Sotter.
