Thank you all very much for coming to this notable event, it's my honor as well as my
pleasure to very briefly introduce the lecture we're going to have from Peter Thiel and to
then be in conversation with him after that presentation. I should say that Peter, to me,
is interesting, is one of the most deeply reflective thinkers of our time and also in
some respects one of the most prophetic. In 1993 he published a book, The Diversity Myth,
on trends in academic thought based on his experiences in Stanford which aside from a
few changes in minor changes actually in vocabulary is as fresh today as it was then or indeed
fresher because much of what he has written about has come to pass since that time. But I
think what's distinctive and important for me and I believe Peter will talk about it tonight
is the way in which he tries to dig into the deeper causes and sources and roots of present
intellectual and cultural as well as economic and political trends and to unstick our thinking
because to unfix it because just as this book I think illustrates we've not moved on, we live
in a perpetual groundhog day in terms of discourse and political thinking. In my smaller way I found
that myself, I'm still sometimes writing what I wrote in 1989 not simply because I'm not very
original but also because it still seems true or sometimes truer. So I think to dig into this
as deeply as Peter does is very very rare or unique and so I myself am enormously looking
forward to hearing what he has to say tonight and also talking with him after he said it. Thank you
very much. Thank you very much. It's a tremendous honor to be here this afternoon. I was involved
in a lot of these culture wars, campus wars in the late 1980s, early 1990s at Stanford University.
I started one of these alternative conservative newspapers and a lot of these debates had the
quality of these various crazy campus hijinks that then at the same time occasionally would
escalate into things that might be of some larger or even cosmic importance. One of the
Stanford debates that really was pivotal in the late 1980s involved a debate around the
core Western civilization class, Western culture. It was a protest in 1987 where the chant at the
protest was, hey, hey, ho, ho, Western cultures got to go. And it was in one sense about this
year-long freshman class. On another level of course it was about a repudiation of the
entire civilization that was being studied in that class, something somewhat more cosmic.
And then I covered a lot of these things and then a friend and I ended up writing a book,
The Diversity Myth, a few years later. I'll start by reading an excerpt from that and then I want
to give a little bit of a retrospective of where I was right, where I was wrong, where I was not
even wrong. And so one of the books that replaced Shakespeare was a book by Aimee Césaire,
A Tempest, replaces The Tempest and it's all this inverted anti-colonial hierarchy where
Caliban is a revolutionary hero, Prospero is an evil colonialist. And so the final indignant
trade by Caliban and A Tempest. Understand what I say, Prospero, for years I bowed my head,
for years I took it, all of it, your insults, your ingratitude, and worst of all, more grading than
all the rest, your condescension. But now it's over. Over, do you hear? Of course at the moment
you're still stronger than I am, but I don't give a damn for your power or for your dogs or your
police or your inventions. And do you know why? It's because I know I'll get you. And you lied to
me so much about the world, about yourself, that you ended up by imposing it on me, an image of
myself, underdeveloping your words, incompetent. That's how you made me see myself and I loathe
that image and it's false. And I know that one day my bare fist, just that, will be enough to crush
your world, the old world is falling apart. And by the way, you have a chance to get it over with,
you can fuck off. You can go back to Europe, but in a pig's eye you will. I'm sure you won't
leave, you make me laugh with your mission, your vocation, your vocation is to give me shit. And
that's why you'll stay, just like those guys who founded the colonies and who now can't live
anywhere else. You're just an old colonial addict, that's what you are. And then this goes on for
250 pages where we go through things like this and sort of the somewhat pretentious idea that
David and I had in writing this book was we were speaking truth to power, that all that it took was
to sort of expose this and then you could ask questions. Well, is this new, is this an improved
version of Shakespeare or should one prefer the original? Is this really about multiculturalism
and non-western cultures or is it just all sort of an anti-western thing that drives it?
And then there were parts of it that felt a little bit contrived at the time where
we had to somehow make it relevant to the larger thing. And so we had the sort of
somewhat contrived construction where ideas have consequences and what happens in the university
will eventually spread beyond it. And then of course when you fast forward 30 years, there are
all these ways, a lot of this has held up quite well. And of course there are also ways where
it feels like it didn't matter at all. And so I don't know, I can brag that the book was prophetic
and that a lot of it came true. And then I can say that somehow all this effort in writing this
seemingly did not really matter and that on some level it was not about the logic of the ideas
at all. And what I want to reflect about is, and so even though I think the specific arguments
I would still defend is almost all right, I want to focus maybe a little bit more self-critically
on the places where I was not even wrong, where in some ways I didn't even understand what the
real issues were and think about a little bit what those were. And I think one piece of the book
that has held up relatively well is the title, The Diversity Myth. It's an ambiguous title. It can
mean on the one, you can put the stress on the word diversity in which case you can then have
debates of, you know, what does diversity mean and if it is some sort of celebration of difference
and then you can sort of debate what kinds of diversity should one have. And then there are
all sorts of libertarian and conservative critiques where, you know, you don't have real diversity
if you have a group of people who look different but think alike, you know, diversity in that sense
probably should involve more than just hiring the extras from the space cantina scene in Star Wars
or something like that. But there's a secondary, maybe somewhat deeper meaning of the title
where you put the stress on the word myth. And if you put the stress on the word myth,
you realize that diversity or multiculturalism or any of these words are extremely poorly defined
and that's the point. They're not supposed to be defined. They're sort of a, it's sort of like a
false god, idol, chivalrous, but it can never be really defined and it works maybe mostly as a sort
of diversion or divertissement, distraction from the things that are truly important. And it is
kind of like a, I don't know, it's a hypnotic magic show where you don't notice the gorilla jumping
up and down the back of the stage. You're just narrowly focused on what the tricks the magician
is doing. And I want to try to explore with you tonight is a map of the things that we've been
distracted from by focusing too much on wokeness, anti-wokeness, all these kinds of debates,
what were we missing? So three main ones, I'm going to go through
my brief comments tonight. The first one broadly is a category and this would be a libertarian
critique of diversity. It would also be a Marxist critique is that, is that when you focus on all
these forms of identity politics, you're not focused enough on economics. When you focus on,
you know, race, gender, etc., you're not going to focus enough on class. And so I think there is,
you know, and there is, even though I'm not a, not a communist or a Marxist, I find that even
the Marxist critique probably has quite a bit to it where if you had a, you know, what would be a
Marxist analysis of a diversity administrator? And if you had Karl Marx or Rosa Luxemburg here,
I think they would, they would suggest that these people are roughly in the same category
as a bank robber or a prostitute because they're sort of a, it's a form of crony capitalism.
It's sort of a reactionary class that's somehow taking advantage of the system. And then if we
actually sort of look at the history of this where, you know, in some ways cultural Marxism
replaced real Marxism, you know, in the 1970s, it roughly at least correlates with the period when,
you know, inequality grew massively when the economy started to stagnate. And so when we,
when we stopped thinking about the economy, there are sort of various perspectives from
both the left or right economics perspective, where something there ceased to work all that,
all that wealth. And, and then of course, even, you know, economics is sort of somehow
in a libertarian or Marxist form, it grounds you into, into substantive material type things.
But maybe the, the sort of libertarian Marxist synthesis that I would want to explore a little
bit more is the Henry George, the late 19th century economists to in the late 19th century was seen as
pretty socialist today he's seen as pretty libertarian, which I think doesn't simply
reflect sort of a way in which our society has changed. But from the Henry George perspective,
the economic relation that one always needed to look at was land ownership, real estate,
distortions in real estate. And this is the the key driver. And I want to submit that
if there is an area of economics that we should pay more attention to it is, it is something
like that that there's something about a georgist analysis of real estate that is
extremely suggested of some very crazy things that have happened in the last 50 years in our society.
One of the, one of the numbers I've seen on this and if you look at real estate in London,
it has an elasticity of minus two, which means that if you were to increase the supply of housing
by 1%, the average price would go down 2%. And if you multiply in a 1.01 by 0.98,
you get a smaller number. And this leads the paradoxical result that the more housing you
build in London, the less it is collectively worth. And, and so when you have a market that is
this strangely dysfunctional, some, you know, extremely odd sorts of things start to happen.
It, and, and, and you have to sort of ask questions whether there is a kind of
crony capitalism racket that, that, that starts to happen in a lot of different ways where,
you know, if you think about the, the, the immigration debates in the UK or the United
States, that there are all sorts of, you know, extremely politically correct and extremely
politically incorrect arguments on immigration. But, but the sort of basic George's economics
argument is, you know, if you add 2%, 3% a year immigration to the UK and the inelasticity is
two to one, then, you know, London house prices will go up 4% to 6% a year. And, and then this is
basically an extremely regressive tax on the half of the population that doesn't own houses.
It's an extremely regressive tax on young people. And it's basically a formula for left-wing
radicalization of the population over time. And that's, that's what we need to be able to now
analyze. And I would be probably open to, you know, unrestrictive immigration. If you could
build more housing, I think, you know, Elon will get to Mars before that happens in the UK.
And then if we, you know, if we, if we look at something, you know, even more prosaic like,
like at Oxford, one of the news items I was, I was reading was, I think the, you know,
relative to incomes, the cost of housing is, is among the worst in the UK. And it's like a,
you know, mini London or a hyper London or something like that is, is Oxford.
The J.R.R. Tolkien house is for sale for 4.5 million pounds. And I would submit to you that if a,
if an Oxford professor were to buy that house, probably the university would be justified in
starting an inquiry into where the professor got the money to do that. And, and you have to,
you have to sort of ask, you know, what, what are, you know, and then of course, if you can't
have single family housing, if there is no family formation possible for anybody in academia,
you know, is it really any wonder that you get this kind of nihilistic proletarianization of,
of the faculty of the students of the younger generation? And where if you do not solve this
sort of problem, you know, it doesn't matter what you do with all these other debates.
To use, to use an American example, you know, 2007, San Francisco, New York, you know,
I thought we were at a ridiculous housing bubble. Prices were, you know, completely insane. The
rents were out of control. And the same thing in London 2007. If you had told me, you know,
we'll fast forward to 2023, the prices are going to double. So this is just completely
impossible. How would this, how could this possibly happen? If people would move, they moved to a
different place. And, and, and if you had said, well, but, but just, just assume they doubled,
how, how, you know, what would have happened? And I would, I'd be tempted. I don't know if I
would have predicted this, but retrospectively, one might say, there must have been some crazy
ideology that infested people's minds. And, and so, you know, if you're, you know, if you're a gay
person living in Manhattan, maybe you're told that if you move to a suburb, you'll be beaten up by
people with bats. And so you have to pay a gay tax and live in a big city. Or if you're a woman
living in a rat infested apartment in San Francisco, and you fantasize about a nice
suburban house in Reno, Nevada, maybe you will be told that, well, if you move to Reno, Nevada,
you're going to be chained to your bed until you are forced to carry a baby to term. And,
and that sort of all of these kinds of things would have intensified. Now, I don't have to,
you know, so, so, you know, if we analyze wokeness in terms of real estate, you don't have to,
you know, you don't have to go the full conspiracy theory. So I'm not, you know, I'm not arguing
that something like Roe v. Wade being overturned was a conspiracy by left-wing urban slumlords
in the U.S. or something like this. But, but if you have a negative in the elasticity of the
sort I described with London, the kinds, you know, where this creates trillions of dollars
of value that gets distributed, redistributed, shifted in a sort of socially toxic way.
Isn't it even odd for us not to ask the question, maybe not a full intentional conspiracy,
but at least it's an emergent property. It's the kind of thing that we, we tolerate. I will
leave it as a politically incorrect exercise to you in this room to think about the craziest
woke excess in the U.K. of the last 10 years or so. And then, and then think about how it
increased aggregate housing prices in the U.K. And again, not, not saying it's causal, but just
saying that maybe, maybe if you could stop the housing racket, you'd start to get to the roots
of, of this woke, this woke disease. Now, now when we move beyond this sort of very,
very stuck economy, one of the other, a second, a second big area where this, this focus on
identity politics, diversity tends to focus us on all these debates within the humanities. And
this is, this was also the, the direction of, of the diversity in this book. You just go through
all, all these things that go wrong in the humanities and in the sort of, in the liberal arts,
things like that. And the, the, the, the, the, the sort of idea that I've come to over the last
15, 20 years is that perhaps just as broken as the humanities are the sciences, broadly speaking,
that they are not, they are no longer progressing. They are, for the most part, pretty stuck. It's a
harder case to make because science is a harder thing to understand. And, but, you know, when I
was, when I was an undergraduate in the late 1980s, most of the science fields or
most of the engineering fields one could have gone into would have been the wrong fields,
you know, nuclear engineering, aero astro engineering, terrible ideas already in the late
80s, mechanical engineering, chemical engineering, physics, chemistry, all these sort of science areas
somehow ended up being dead end. I think electrical engineering still barely worked for a while.
And then really the only thing that, that, that, that had some sort of a future was, was
computer science, which was in the late 80s, kind of a, sort of a, a field of people who couldn't
handle the, the hardness of electrical engineering or math, sort of dropped out of
electrical engineering and became a computer programmer. But, but the, you know, the rough
picture of, of scientific technological progress I have is that, you know, for maybe the last 50
years, we've had, you know, a narrow cone of progress around the world of bits, computers,
internet, mobile internet software, but that the world of atoms, you know, where, which is the
world we are embedded in, in some sense, matters more to us as human beings has been strangely
stuck. And this is, you know, this is even in the word technology, which, you know, in some ways
technology is just that, that's, that, which is progressing. And today technology has been
collapsed to IT, information technology, because it is just this world of bits. If you use the word
technology in 1973, it would have meant computers, but it also meant new medicines. It was meant the
green revolution in agriculture. It would have meant, you know, supersonic aviation. It would
have meant space travel. Technology was advancing on many, many different fronts. And, and, you
know, in a, in a world where this is stuck, and we can't even, we're not even paying attention to it,
that, that surely is, is a, is a big defect. The sort of US analogy that I've used on this is that,
you know, if you ask the question, you know, are the humanities or the sciences less healthy,
the sort of governmental analogy would be, is the Department of Motor Vehicles
better or worse run than the NSA, the National Security Agency, or maybe the,
maybe the British version would be something like the post office versus GCHQ. And the,
the seemingly straightforward answer is obviously the post office is not well run, or the DMV is
not well run in the US, and everybody can see it, just like the humanities are quite obviously
sort of broken. But, but surely the more plausible answer is that the things you don't understand
and can't see are more corrupt and that where you have, you know, these ever narrower groups of
guardians guarding themselves, the string theorists guarding the string theorists, the cancer researchers
telling us about how great they all are and how they're all going to have these breakthroughs in
the next two years. That's surely the thing one should be more suspicious about. One of my,
one of my friends worked for, was, was in the PhD physics department at Stanford, his advisor,
Bob Laughlin, got a Nobel Prize in physics in the late 1990s. And Laughlin suffered from the
supreme delusion that once he got a Nobel Prize in physics, he actually had, he finally had academic
freedom and he could do whatever he wanted. And he decided that he was going to investigate these,
you know, some areas in science that were truly taboo. And, you know, there's obviously stuff you
can't ask questions about climate change or evolution or, you know, even stem cell research is
probably, you know, allowed to ask too many questions about that. But he decided to go into
something far more taboo than any of those things. And it was, he started with the premise that most
of these scientists were actually just defrauding the government. They were engaged in semi fraudulent
research. And they were, they shouldn't, you know, he worked on high temperature superconductors.
He told me once that he thought, you know, there were 50,000 papers written in that field and only
about 25 of the 50,000 deserved to be published. And, and they started with, you know, they started
with an inquest into the Stanford biology department, where he basically believed that most of these
people had, you know, effectively stolen money from the government. And there's been since then
a sort of a replication crisis in science that people have made more of. But the replication
crisis, it always gets narrated in the slightly politically correct way, where we don't actually
mention the specific names. Lawful inside, no, I'm just going to mention the names of all the people.
And here's the list of people who are stealing money. And as you can imagine this, you, I don't
tell you how it ended, but he got promptly defunded. His students couldn't get PhDs anymore. And
he at least got some kind of education about academic freedom from this process.
And so, so, and so I think that, that, you know, I think in a, in a debate,
if you have an argument, there maybe are always, I think, two fundamental ways one can try to
make a case. And you can go after your opponent, you can go after the enemy at the weakest point,
which is where you're most likely to score a tactical victory. Or you can go after your
enemy at the strongest point. And, and if we, if we criticize the universities for the humanities,
that's in some sense, what, I don't know, the central left, the law of administrative establishment
wants us to do, we can, we can occasionally win some tactical victories. But, but, you know, the,
where, where they get, you know, their sense of validation, their sense that everything is still
healthy and great is the sciences. And if you can, if you can show that the sciences are more
corrupt than the humanities, it's harder to do. But if you can do that, you will win game set match.
And it's something, you know, I'm not, you know, it's always very difficult to do this with something
like, the way I, I would attempt it to make the argument is something like, you know, the string
theorists and physics are the smartest physics people, and they've been stuck for 40 years.
And, and the physics people are the smartest people. And so by some principle of transitivities,
string theorists have been doing nothing. There for everybody else has been doing nothing as well.
And something, something like that would be the rough way, the rough way I would, I would make
this, this sort of argument. Now, if we combine these, these two, two big things we're being distracted
from, we're being distracted from the economy, even in its most basic forms, like real estate,
we're being distracted from, from science. You know, and then in some ways things have
not been healthy in the economy and science, they've not been progressing, the GDP has not
been growing in a balanced way for quite some time. There's always a question, you know, could we,
and the wokeness is distracting us from, from these things, from going back to these things.
If we, if we focused on them, would we be able, would we be able to solve, you know, all of our
problems and sort of as a, as maybe a little bit of an aside here, I, I think, I think the, the
temptation has always been to find a straightforwardly economic solution to, you know, my, my version is
broadly science and tech have been stagnant for something like 50 years. And the temptation
is, has been to find some kind of economic fix where we don't, because getting science and tech
back on track, it does sound pretty hard. And I think the reason we haven't been transparently
stuck for 50 years is there were actually two one time economic fixes that did not involve science
and tech that were done. There was a, you know, there was a right wing Reagan Thatcher fix in the
1980s. And there was a one time solution where you could cut taxes, deregulate, allow lots of
murders and acquisitions to happen. And you could one time gain enormous, an enormous lift for the
whole economy. But it doesn't continue. If you rate lower taxes from 70% marginal rates to 28%
percent, like they did in the US. But that's a one time lift. It worked from 1983 to 1989. And
then by the late 80s, it was exhausted. And we went back to the cultural war debates that
from the 1970s, they came back in the early 90s. And then there was a one time Clinton Blair
solution circa 1995 to 2007, which was globalization. And it was also a way to increase GDP. It was
probably a far more ruthless, ruthless way to do it than capitalism. It created far more inequality.
The genie coefficient went up way more under Clinton than under Reagan in the United States.
But it also, you know, there were some gains from that. Probably were some long term costs from
that as well. But they both seem really, really hard to do. The probably there's a way in which the
center right isn't a healthier place in the center left, because on the center right, we don't really
think we can go back to to Reaganism. On the center left, there's still some idea that they can go
back to Clintonism or, you know, you know, going back to that through the UK seems hard. Going back
to Blair seems like maybe that's a mistake we still have to have to make in the UK. But I think
but certainly if we if we can't think about the economic issues more clearly, the real estate
issues more clearly, and probably if we can't think about the science and tech issues, we don't
even have don't even have a hope to get back to a genuinely progressing society. Let me let me
say something about maybe a third category that's sort of maybe even bigger than let's say the economy
or, you know, science writ large. And that is that is something like, you know, the biggest,
you know, I don't know, the biggest possible topic that one could have would be something
like God. It's something like Anselm's ontological proof is that there's nothing that you can imagine
that's bigger than God. And if and if these debates have distracted us from the economy
and from science, they probably also have distracted us from questions of religion
of God of the Christian God. And and so that would be sort of my my candidate for the biggest
thing possible that we've been distracted from. And as with the sciences and with the economics,
it also it's an odd thing for us to be distracted from because it is so suggestive and has so many
different ways that this kind of debate should be reframed. And in particular,
you know, I want to do too much on metaphysics or things like that, but maybe just focus a little
bit on on a survey. What would Christianity tell us about history? And then what does this history,
you know, does that tell us something interesting about our current historical moment and
some of these some of these debates that that that we we've been touching on over the last
half hour here. And basically, the basic thesis I would have would be that
frames a little bit provocatively would be that, you know, perhaps the the original progressive
was simply the Christian God. You know, the New Testament supersedes the Old Testament,
that's the original idea of something like progressivism in in theology, the New is better than
the Old, the New transcends the Old, there's some sort of progress in history. And and of course,
there you know, there is sort of a a Jewish or pagan critique of Christianity that those of
sort of Christian need to take very seriously, which is, you know, you know, once you have this
principle of the of the New Testament superseded the New superseding the Old, is there a limit?
Do you is it just a slippery slope to communism, to wokeness, to to ultra Christian, to some kind
of antichristic parody? And and if you and if we had to concretize this even even more,
you know, there is something about, you know, there's there's one sense, of course, in which
what, you know, what the Bible says about the founding of the first city in the history of
the world is the same as what mythology tells us about the founding of the greatest city
in the history of the world. It starts with madness and murder. So Cain kills Abel, Romulus
kills Remus. But the difference between the biblical account, and the, let's say, the,
the, the conventional religious account is that the conventional religions take the side of the
city. It takes the side, Rome takes the side of Romulus, the Bible already, already at the beginning
in Genesis takes the side of Abel. And there's, of course, there's, you know, some sense in which
the entire biblical tradition is from the point of view of the victim, you know, the Jews, you know,
the normal way this the story of Exodus would be written would be from the point of view of the
Egyptians, or these troublemakers, and they, they got removed to be like the Oedipus myth,
where you get, you get rid of Oedipus, or something like that. And, and then, and then, of course,
there is, there is something like this in, in, in the, in the Christian story itself, where
it is a sort of inversion of perspectives, and this, this, you know, elevation of, of victimhood,
this idea that this is central, surely was, was, was one of the, one of the key pieces of it. You
know, it's, I think it's sort of a, the late Nietzsche, when he was, you know, when he was sort
of going, going mad, sort of had this, it was always, you know, we need to, we need to go back
to the strong classical world, where, you know, the victims don't complain, and all this stuff is,
you know, is sort of healthy and robust, and, and, but he sort of had some sense this was not the way
history was going, and sort of the, you know, sort of in his, towards his madness was sort of,
God of the Jews, you have won. He sort of has sense that the 20th century, we're about to go,
you know, into overdrive on victimology, and things of this sort. And, and if, if I had to
sort of differentiate, maybe, you know, if I had to ask, if I had to ask the question, how is,
the Christian view different from, let's say, the neo-pagan view, or the, or the, the woke hyper,
the woke ultra-Christian view, something like that, the, you know, and I find a lot that's
extremely tempting in a classical neo-pagan thing, I don't know, there's Bronze Age pervert, or,
you know, all these sort of online people where it's, why can't we just forget about the history,
and just move on, or, you know, just, or go back to nature, where, you know, nature,
nature as a word does not occur once in the Old Testament, and, you know, nature is bare,
red, and tooth, and claw, but if you take your bearings from nature, if you set nature as a
standard, then you don't, there's nothing that's really naturally evil, nothing that's naturally,
morally wrong, and that is sort of always the, let's say, the right-wing, pre-Christian,
neo-pagan, I don't know, Nietzschean, Renaissance, humanism, all these different versions,
temptation to, to sort of go back to that, and then on the, on the other side, I would say something
like the, let's say, the woke, liberal, you know, post-Christian, maybe ultra-Christian,
temptation, is that we are going to be more Christian than the Christians. We are going to,
we're going to, you know, you know, the poor shall inherit the earth, and we're going to have a
communist revolution, and we're going to accelerate the process, and we'll make it happen even faster,
we're going to accelerate the history even more, and there's always, you know, this question,
is it possible to be too Christian? And I think the answer is, in theory, no, but in practice,
surely yes, and that in practice, if you, you know, if you try to hit the accelerator on this,
you don't end up somehow finding a way to deal with the past, but you simply end up creating some
kind of eternal recurrence, some kind of perpetual motion machine that generates nothing but violence
and never-ending cycles of revenge. It is sort of another version of the Nietzschean eternal
recurrence. And so the, you know, the Christian, the Christian perspective on this is always
some paradoxical combination that, yes, there was original sin, yes, in the beginning was madness
and murder, yes, there was incredible injustice in the past, and then you need to forgive people.
And if you go with the neo-Pagan alt-right, whatever you want to call it, version,
and you say there was nothing bad in the past, I think that somehow doesn't stand up against the
historical pressure of Christianity against the working out of the Christian revelation in history.
If you, and then if you go with the woke thing, there's some sense in which it also doesn't
work for these opposite reasons. It's always hard to transpose this into these different
categories, but the political categories I'm always tempted to use are something like these 20th
century categories, fascism, communism, Christian democracy. And, you know, there's always sort
of a debate between fascism and communism. Are they equally bad? Is communism, is fascism
worse? And there's always a sort of conservative argument that they're roughly equally bad,
they both killed millions of people, and they're sort of in some ways just copies of one another.
But the sort of perspective leads me to think that we should very squarely say that something
like fascism was generally much less bad than something like communism, because fascism was
the past. And it was just, okay, fascist, the fascist claim was the victims were all guilty,
and it's the historical victims from middle ages, we're going to go back to them, and we're going
to victimize them. And then communism was sort of, it was like always like sort of more in the
future, and it was, we're going to go after the victimizers, we're going to victimize the victimizers,
we're sort of too clever by half. And that was always the far more powerful, the far greater
temptation in our world. And that's why, you know, even if someone like Bronze Age pervert or
Iron Rand is somehow wrong in their sort of whitewashing of the past, it's probably,
it probably is always at the end of the day, the more innocent mistake to make,
because we're in this in this world, we're something like the hyper-Christian
wokeness, the original sin with no hope of forgiveness is the greater temptation.
You know, let me end with maybe one thought, I've given you three very big things that we've
been distracted from the economy, science and tech broadly, you know, the Christian God.
But you know, there's always a sense which you say, well, the more immediate thing is still
always these political questions, and we're in this political question. And so maybe if you have
to have a political answer, what are we being distracted from politically? Where is wokeness
distracting us from more important things that are immediately political? I would suggest maybe
one way to start is to think about the etymology or the sort of the word of the term political
correctness, where political correctness, you know, by the 1980s, it already was this
conservative term that conservatives used to criticize sort of intolerant liberals.
But if we go back to the 1970s, political correctness was actually a term liberals used to describe
themselves, where they were sort of like really, really progressive and really politically correct,
and that it was a term of self-congratulation. And if you went back to the 1950s, the original
meaning of political correctness was that it was you were a politically correct comrade because
you were following the orders directly from Moscow and you were following the party line of the
Communist Party. And so if we, you know, if we go back to the original meaning of political
correctness and sort of think that, you know, the real problem is something, you know, something
like communism, even though it's, you know, communism fascism in the 20th century were youth
movements and we're sort of dealing with a gerontocratic version of this. So it's different,
demographically it's very different, but something like ultra-Christianity communism,
this set of things is the real problem today. And so this is a great simplification,
great reduction, but you could do much worse than whenever you hear the term DEI to just think CCP.
Thank you very much.
Well, let's begin to explore these
very deep questions and profound thoughts that have been put before us. And I think we should
recognize that they're all attempts, I think, Peter, to shake us out of our distraction.
There were three types of distraction here. The beginning one was the first one was the way in
which debates about woke and anti-woke about culture very often lead us to turn our thoughts away
from fundamental contradictions in economic life. And this is a way in which
Peter's way of thinking combines certain aspects without being a libertarian or a Marxist of
libertarian and Marxist critiques of our current economic regime. The second was,
which I found particularly fascinating, was the way in which the kind of paradigmatic
contrast which many people including I myself have made between ethics and politics as not being
highly progressive and science and technology as being highly progressive, as being prototypically
progressive is not, in fact, substantiated by the actual evidence that sciences and technology,
except in a few narrow fields, have been stuck in the same categories of thinking in the same
theoretical frameworks and even the same types of technology for about 50 years. And then the third
type of distraction that this talk was trying to rid us of or shake us out of was a distraction in
which questions of religion or of theology or of not exactly metaphysics but of the way we
ultimately think about good and evil and how human beings are in the world have been pushed
on one side and yet they continually reappear with woke, not actually being at all, as some
people have said on the right, a repaganization of the world but as being a type of hyper-Christianity
emptied of transcendence and forgiveness. And that leads to, I guess, a question, my question
to you, Peter, is, is there some way out of this? Because in a way, I think one of the things you
said which was most interesting was the attempt to, in the 20th century, in fascism and other
types of thinking were now in interesting writers like Bronze Age, Pervert, or earlier on in Iran.
What they were doing was, I would think in your terms, Peter, it was actually very interesting
but impossible because you can't, would you think this is true, you can't actually get back to a
classical or pre-Christian view of the world in which energy and vitality empower what matters
and victimhood is contemptible or unimportant. Once Christianity is there, so we can't go back.
And that's true of the other, the previous two. We can't go back to earlier forms of science,
we can't go back to earlier forms of economic thinking, although I thought what you said about
Henry George was very interesting. Are we really stuck? Can we actually, can you actually, is it
possible to unstick us? I think it is because I think you're already unsticking us tonight.
Where would you think that there's the best chance of unsticking us?
Well, my very fast answer is always the first thing you have to do to solve problems is to
talk about them. So I think that as long as we have this, as you described, Groundhog Day of
Wokeness, we are not going to be unstuck and we're going to be in this sort of zero-sum
somewhat malthusian, ever nastier political kind of a context. I think there are,
there certainly are ways, there probably are ways all three of them could be
ways we could get unstuck in all three dimensions. I think there's some way that the
pure capitalism, pure globalism things probably don't quite work in economics.
I do think one could probably do something about the real estate problem. It's so
extraordinarily distorted. And so that's that, that there probably are things one can do. It's
very hard because you would destroy trillions of dollars in value in doing it. But that probably,
it has to give at some point. Maybe it's a technological fix. The way the Henry George
thing was historically solved was you had an open frontier in America. And then the frontier
closed in the late 19th century. So the railroads were the technology to open the frontier.
Eventually the frontier is populated, it gets closed. And then late 19th, early 20th century,
the cities start to have this gorgeous runaway real estate price effect, rising inequality,
and you get progressivism as a response to the closing of the frontier. And then in the 20th
century, in a way, another frontier got opened with the automobile and the highways and the suburbs.
And that relieved the pressure on the runaway costs. And then that technology has also run its
course. And there's a question, is there some way to reopen a frontier in real estate? And
probably the one where I think the jury is very out and doesn't look that promising in 2023,
it would be something like, could one really get remote work to work? Could the internet
be a way that people are not stuck in these cities? And that would reset all these real estate
values tremendously, because even in a rather densely populated country like England, there is
plenty of space if you're not forced to be in within the green belt of London itself. And
certainly the United States even more so. And then I think within the technology area,
my hopeful sense is that there is always a question, why did the technology slow down and
the science slow down? And the thing I'm hopeful on is that it was not that we just ran out of
ideas. It's that there were these deformations of culture, we became too risk averse, too bureaucratic,
too much peer review in the sciences. And I think we could be making a lot more progress
in a lot of areas. It's regulated, people are scared of technology. We don't want to minimize
or trivialize their fears. But I think you could have a very different balance there.
And then certainly the questions about the larger meaning of life or the meaning of history
are, you know, are ones that I think would all do well to confront more.
To take in a way what might be the most immediate part of what you've just said and said before,
I guess it implies, which I think is absolutely true, that the so-called consensus that prevails
between say, Sunak and Stammer is far more consensus on what we're not supposed to think about,
that it is on to anything positive. Because the big problems you've mentioned, the problems
stagnation in science, the problems of real estate in London and Oxford and throughout the
country, the problems of generational inequity in which young people can't find any way to live and
so they're all hardly addressed at all. There's a bit of commentary in the newspapers and so on.
But in terms of thinking about active solutions, there perhaps maybe some dim, subliminal awareness
among these politicians that the solving them would involve big losses for somebody.
Yes, or certainly big losses for them in the election. There's the felt sense. And so,
yeah, and it's certainly not limited to the UK, but certainly an outside perspective,
I would have it, because it seems to me that, yeah, there's a secret agreement between Sunak
and Stammer, let's say, to talk as much as possible about culture wars, take various
sides on those issues. And then if you have even basic economic questions like a runaway deficit
spending, and do you solve this with higher taxes or lower entitlements? And then they both have a
look ahead function where if we talk about that, we'll lose 10 or 15% of the voters.
I mean, maybe not quite as many for Sunak since it's hard to lose 10 or 15% of the voters.
But there's some kind of a look ahead function where we shouldn't touch that. But then
when everybody does that, when all the solutions are outside the Overton window,
we end up with, yeah, we're confined in this very narrow box and the Groundhog Day will
continue until at some point something really breaks. So there won't be a Nietzsche and Groundhog
Day, it won't really be eternal. It's going to break down, isn't it? I mean, that's one way or the
other, even if only for economic reasons, but we don't know when or how. Sure. Yeah, I think
there certainly are all kinds of dimensions one could point to where it is not simply stable.
The demographics are not stable. The deficits are not stable. We had pseudo stability and deficits
for 40 years in the United States and much of the Western world where the deficits were too big,
but the interest rates went steadily down. And something around that seems to have broken in
the last year or two. So I think even something as basic as deficits financed at 0% interest rates,
it seemed like the 2010s could go on forever and that seems over. And they haven't.
Yeah, ended with the 2020s. Yeah. Does that bleed back into the segue back into the cultural and
the religious questions you discussed? Because I guess part of the resistance to your analysis
of science is a kind of quasi religious conception of the salvific possibilities of science,
that science can do what religion hasn't done, which is to actually change worldly life in a way
which reads it of its deepest contradictions. And I guess if for some people, if they gave up that
faith in science, they would be left with nihilism or left with despair or left with unbearable
anxiety. Yeah, although it's sort of a, obviously there's a very complicated history of science,
and it was in some ways maybe a byproduct of Christianity and so it was an opposition to
Christianity. And certainly in its healthy, ambitious, early modern forms, whether it was
a substitute or a compliment to Christianity, it was supposed to be, it was somehow supposed
to be a vehicle for comparable transformation and sort of the indefinite prolongation of human life
was an early modern science project and people still believe very much in the 17th, 18th century.
And there was a sub movement within sort of the revolutionary Soviet politics. It was still very
healthy in the 1920s called Cosmism, where a part of the project of the revolution had to be to
physically resurrect all dead human beings. And because if science didn't do that, it would be
inferior to Christianity or something like that. That's sort of one of their slogans. They had to
adapt themselves, the cosmos to the Soviet and Bolshevik reality was, debt of the world unite.
Because they wanted to bring back not only not only that, everyone in the present generation
would live forever, but that all the people who'd ever died would come back.
And so there is this, let's say, anti-Christian or riveted from Christian, you know, a very
ambitious version of science. And of course, there is also a more defeatist version of science,
where science actually just tells us about limits and things you cannot do.
I don't know, I'll use a literary example when Hamlet's evil mother, Gertrude, says that all
that lives must die. The question you have is, is that a law of nature? Or is this just a
rationalization for the rottenness that is Denmark? Certainly, the early modern conception
was that you wanted to transcend this both in a Christian or a scientific form. And then,
yeah, late modernity, it's probably attributed more as a decay of science that this sort of ambition
is more a fringe science thing than a mainstream science thing.
And I guess there's also a kind of nihilistic version of science, a sort of brave new world
version in which sees itself as pacifying the spiritual and mental anguish and doubts of human
beings by giving them access to drugs and pornography and all kinds of things which
distract them forever from these fundamental existential questions, the religious questions.
What would work to exterminate religion wouldn't be, or to terminate the need for religion,
wouldn't be persecuting, and that obviously has never worked, but to try and put everyone asleep
with dreams of drug dreams, drug highs. And of course, drugs are a tremendous feature of our life
at the moment, aren't they, in many countries? I wouldn't even go that far. The line I was using
this is just the iPhones that distract you from your environment will distract you from
fact, you're in a 100 year old subway in London or New York or the environment hasn't changed.
And then again, I don't think one should make it fully intentional, but there is something about
certain narrow forms of technical progress that have more of this retarding effect elsewhere,
or this making us oblivious to what's going on effect. But yeah, I think most of it is not,
it's not supposed to be ambitious, world transforming. It is not at all early modern
science. It's much more, I don't know, probably the strongest science and one of the stronger
science and politics themes is always the climate change debate. And if you take climate change
seriously, there are all kinds of progressive science things one could do. You could be pushing
for the construction of hundreds of new nuclear reactors, you could be pushing for fusion. There's
sort of all kinds of ways that you could be concerned about climate change and lean into
rapidly progressing science. And then in practice, it's much more that maybe you should just ride
a bicycle or something like that. And so it's somehow a lot of science has this Luddite feel,
even though it's obviously, you can find lots of different things.
Or start eating insects rather than beef, because beef, but one, I mean, that thought
one of the functions of smartphones is to distract us from the fact that we're living in a
Victorian environment still with Victorian sewers and Victorian subways and Victorian buildings
is I think a very profound word thought because it suggests that one of the functions of technology,
which is something that affects the material world is to supplant the material world in our own
lives so that we live in a virtual world more and more of the time. Of course, it's got physical
roots, this virtual world. So if something goes wrong with the physical roots, if there is war or
terrorism or climate change or whatever, then it's all disrupted. But that's part of the way it works,
isn't it? Well, certainly, that's the part of technology that's been healthiest has been
still the most progressive is this narrow cone around this virtual world. I keep thinking that
you could do a lot more in these other areas. If I, again, come back to something like the real
estate housing version, this seems the furthest from technological innovation. I mean, there are
new building designs, you can build 100 story buildings that you could not build 20, 30 years ago.
There are presumably some new things one could even do there. But if too much of the economy
is anchored on things that are hard to improve or change, that is also a way in which progress
slows. So if we have an economy in the UK, and I'll make these numbers up where it's
50% real estate and 10% computers, then even if the 10% that is computers is somehow getting better
and better, if 50% that is real estate is very stuck, that is going to be at best a slowly improving
economy. And then the most important thing is somehow not going to be changing it. And then
that probably creates all kinds of weird side effects and incentives. So the hyper progressivism,
the hyper accelerationism that we are told we have by politicians and others by Blair, for example,
that we're accelerating in. It does not show up in the per capita GDP numbers. It does not show up
in incomes rising faster than rents. I just think the rebuttal is simply on the real estate side.
And then you can be told that people don't want to live in houses anymore. They don't want to
have families. They're conscious. You shouldn't have children because you're just beating insects.
But at some point, again, at some point, this is really a parody, not really progressivism.
I didn't attend it, but there was a meeting in London of Blair and some of his disciples at many
parties, including the Conservative Party, in which, for him, the next phase of acceleration was
precisely the one in which your analysis suggests there's been the most the largest and most neglected
stagnation in the technology, which is that all globalization might not have gone far enough.
We've retreated from it. We shouldn't have, but we have. It's still going to go on, but
we're going to try and we're resisting it. So how can we cope with the situation in which we're not
and getting enough acceleration from globalization, where we'll accelerate the technological side?
And yet, if what is accelerating, if it's going to be AI and the virtual world, I guess,
he thinks that we can solve our problems in medical care by AI, that's the solution for him.
Look, it's always dangerous for me to comment on too much on British politics, but my senses
that Blair occupies is very, very strange place where it is. It is this past. It obviously does
not work. We obviously cannot go back to the sort of globalization that he represented or doing more
of it. In some sense, doesn't work, but it never gets articulated. And so it has a very different
quality than, let's say, thatcherism where there's, you know, and again, I was in some ways very
sympathetic to Liz Truss, but there's some sense in which it didn't work. And somehow it's clear
that we somehow can't go back to thatcherism, or doing more of thatcherism isn't going to be a
solution. Whereas on the left, it's in this very strange in-between zone where somehow Blair is
not being run as a candidate for prime minister. Officially. Well, again, I'm just going, if he
ran officially, one suspects it would work very badly. But then, you know, if you're someone
like Starmer, you know, what labor leader do you want to emulate? Do you want to emulate Atlee,
which probably is not that, that doesn't work. And then maybe Blair is the only other one on offer.
And so that's sort of the default idea even though it never gets articulated, which tells you it's
probably not very good. Absolutely. I mean, I guess the difference is that when there's trust
wing of the Conservative Party wants to go back to Thatcher, because they see that as a radical
moment and they want to repeat the radical moments. But because radical moments are very hard to keep
repeating all the time. They're hard to repeat by doing the same thing. Doing the same thing.
So it's certainly, there was a one-time move to deregulate and lower taxes. And then not clear
what one can do. Doing it the second time does as much good. You know, McKinsey. McKinsey was a
real thing in 1985 in the United States. If you hired a consultant, they actually helped you improve
your company, you know, because the companies were badly run. At this point, McKinsey is a total
racket. It's just all fake. And so if you have a Reagan, you know, the Reagan Thatcher administration,
they empowered McKinsey because they allowed more companies to be acquired and more M&A
activity to happen. And it was a, you know, a somewhat brutal, but very powerful reorganization
of society. And that was possible. And that was the right thing to do in the 1980s. You know,
at this point, McKinsey is not ever going to be anything other than a super corrupt fake racket
in 2023. And so we can't go back to that specific thing, you know. It's fascinating the way in
which the product of these revolutionary changes in the economy and society and thinking produces
a proliferation of rackets in science too. And I guess that's connected with
fakery. Fakery, that's to say, so many of the phenomena around us are fakery.
I don't know if it has to happen that way, but one of my colleagues, maybe this would be another
link, the sciences to the wokeness problem, is that institutions have embedded growth
obligations, egos, in short, EGO, embedded growth obligations. And so a healthy institution,
in some sense, is one that has this exponential growth. And if you have exponential growth,
there will be more jobs and everyone can get promoted. And there's sort of a way that if a
company has exponential growth, that's a healthy company. And there are other versions of this in
different forms. And then at some point, maybe the growth stops. And when the growth stops,
you have a choice. You can maybe become more honest and say, well, you know,
the university isn't growing anymore, there'll be very few faculty slots available.
If you're in a PhD program, we're going to make sure that 80% of the students
drop out of the program within six months, so they don't waste their time.
And we're going to be honest about the fact that there's no growth. Or the thing that I think
unfortunately happens a great deal is you just lie. And the institutions become sociopathic,
where they pretend that the growth is still going on. And then it's only years and years later
that people figure out that there are no jobs. And the wokeness was just,
it's just a distraction. It's sort of like, if you have 10 graduate students in a chemistry
program, and there's a job for only one of them, and you're having fist fights over beakers and
Bunsen burners, and you're in the sort of Malthusian struggle, and there's one person who says
something slightly racist or slightly inappropriate. I mean, it's such a relief,
you can throw that one person off the overcrowded bus, right? So these are natural things to
happen, but surely we would do better to find ways to get back to growth in as many places
of our society as possible. Indeed, because what you just said is that the solution to
non-growth is persecution. You can eliminate various people from the competition by
canceling them, pushing them out. They're not there anymore. They're what was termed in the first
Constitution of the Soviet Union back, I think in 1918, 1919, former persons. So if you make
these people former persons, at least they're not competitors anymore, they're out. So that's a very,
again, unless we grow in certain ways in knowledge and technology in a genuine way,
we're going to have this persecutory mentality. It has a function, it has a role,
even an economic or a career structure role and so on.
But it's always important to understand the persecution is not as ideological as it's
dressed up to be. So because if it's actually driven by scarcity, you will just have scarcity.
The US academic version of this, when I wrote the diversity myth book in the early 90s,
I was thinking to myself, academia discriminates against conservatives, libertarians like myself.
I think that was true for one cohort of baby boomer academics who got PhDs in the 70s and
couldn't get tenure in the 80s in the US. But by my generation, where I would have gotten a PhD in
the 1990s, it was obvious there was no job because I was conservative. And so the conservatives were
actually not discriminated against. It was the liberals that were discriminated against who were
Gen X, millennial, because they all had the delusion that it was, yeah, it was kind of zero
sum. But as long as you've told the correct party line, yes, we're safe. And that was, of course,
also the delusion that the party line communists had when they were disproportionately targeted
by the Stalin show trials in the 1930s. The Soviet term for it was always section 58 of the
Soviet penal code was that you were guilty of counter-revolutionary activity. And I think the
key to understanding that was that everybody was guilty. And there were just some people who
were not being prosecuted for the time being by the government. And so in this world of extreme
scarcity, eventually everybody gets somehow deplatformed or ejected or something like that,
just about. I mean, the Soviet analogies are very rich. I think it was another Soviet term,
which was telling lies that no one believes in. And that was seen as an essential thing,
because one of the things, if you're surrounded by lies and every single person, including the
people who tell them, know that they're lies, know that it's not the truth, then it sort of hinges
you to some extent. And it makes you scared. And also because the party line, what determines what's
a lie and what's not, changes inexplicably all the time. And I think in a way we've progressed
beyond the Soviets now in that respect, because we've really got to the point where no one really
knows what the party line is, but everyone's terrified from deviating from it. It's the
postmodern version of the party. Yeah, I think it's always so hard to know exactly what's going
on. We're in this strange postmodern world. I think people are generally quite cynical.
They don't believe all the lies they're being told. It gets discounted pretty heavily.
But nevertheless, it has this effect where somehow we can't focus on the really important
things that are going on of the sort that I talked about. And so it does have this. And
I'll come back to this metaphor that it is like this hypnotic magic trick. And the important
thing is not what the magician is doing, but what the magician is distracting us from.
And maybe even the magician is taken in by the sleight of hand. Maybe it's easier to
live with oneself as a magician, a political magician, a technological magician,
if you really think there's something in it, although you can never quite see what it is,
because the trick is almost bigger than you. There's a whole division among magicians between
the ones, there's a class that claimed that it's real and there's a class that claimed that it's
fake. And so yes, that is, that is, I believe the sociology of magicians is they're those two
competing camps. How far is there just social science fit into this? There was a wonderful book
about 70 years ago by, not 70 years ago, in the 70s, 1970s, by the sociologists,
poly sociologists, I knew, there was a marvellous book in every way, but the very best part of it
was that it was called Social Sciences as Sorcery in 1970s. And he was arguing that the whole
80 or 90, not that there's no social science or that there can't be, didn't think that, he thought
there was and there could be more of it, but that much of it was just the kind of magical
transposition of terms, forms of distraction from real problems that you're talking about,
that actually a lot of it was, it was theorized and systematized distraction. So if you talk about
identity struggles, you're missing out very profound structural inequalities, economic
and temperature. He took examples of plagues and even of syphilis in which people talked about in
all sorts of complex ways of power structures, but the basic thing is the thing itself, the
material thing. It's just a way of avoiding contact with the material world, isn't it?
Yeah, I wouldn't, it feels like that's slightly too strong since I think I gave, I'm not sure it
was, I wouldn't want to call it a social science speech today, but some kind of attempt to analyze
these things in terms of the history, politics, sociology, psychology of our of our societies.
Yes, I think a lot of these soft fields do have this quality that they are, I want to say that
they are in theory extremely important and there's something about them that is an extremely
important way at getting at things and then for that reason they're also extremely prone to
politicization of various sorts. One of the things I always like to say is that any field that has
the term science in it should always be suspicious because it's sort of, it's exaggerating, it's
social science, political science, climate science, even computer science, it started as computer
science because it had a very serious inferiority complex to math and electrical engineering.
And it's not, I think, accidental, and though it's often forgotten that both of the great
terrible movements, the 20th century communism and Nazism actually, which is often seen as
anti-scientific, but was in fact often defended in the 30s and 20s and then 40s by biological or
racial science that just as dialectical materialism, diamat as it was called then, was the greatest
science that ever been. So these repressive movements, murderous movements, movements which
killed millions of people but also killed off thought wherever they could, well all advanced,
they all thought it very important to call themselves science.
Well, it's, I don't know, this may be sort of a philosophy of science thought I have is that
I think in theory what science is supposed to do is fight a two front war against excessive
dogmatism and excessive skepticism. And if you're, and so excessive dogmatism is like, I know, the
decayed Aristotelianism of the medieval church and that was what science was in some ways fighting
in the 17th and 18th century. And then excessive skepticism, if I can't trust my senses and I
don't know whether I'm sitting in front of you, if you're too skeptical, you also can't do science.
And then these two front wars intention, it's actually hard to get that balance,
it's very hard to get that balance right. Probably the early modern version I would say was
more anti-dogmatism than anti-skepticism. If we fast forward to 2023 and there are all kinds of
things where I know the scientific establishment, the leading scientists would caution us against
being too skeptical, not supposed to be vaccine skeptics, we're not supposed to be climate science
skeptics, we're not supposed, it's fighting skepticism in all its forms. And then I'd be
hard-pressed, I could maybe hold a gun to my head, I might be able to come up with one or two things,
but I'd be very hard-pressed to come up with a single instance where a scientist would say,
this is an area where science is too dogmatic today in 2023. The string theorists wouldn't
say we're too dogmatic about string theory, but just very, very hard-pressed to say where it's
too dogmatic. And that surely tells us that somehow it has degenerated into something that's
more dogmatic than the medieval church. If you're just fighting skepticism, it tells you
you're a dogman. That's probably there was some version of this with the totalitarian science
of the early 20th century, where it leveraged the term, so it was somehow still pretending to
be anti-dogmatism, anti-supernatural, anti-that sort of stuff, but in reality the anti-skepticism
dominated. Which leaves us in a situation with the near impossibility of empiricism
in the sense of a way of thinking which tries to connect with facts in the world. So if you say,
well actually racism in certain contexts is less prevalent than these claims which have been made,
suggest someone will say, you think that because you're a racist. You're neglecting the systematic
structural hidden subterranean patterns, the occult patterns of racism, so to speak, which are
there. So and this by the way is trying to me as a feature of liberal thought in even in its attempt
to prescribe solutions, which is that if a liberal experiment doesn't work, say liberal experiments
in drug legalization or drug decriminalization, the solutions are not to say they've been falsified,
it's to say double up, triple up, quadruple up, do it three or four times and then it will work.
So can we get, I mean I wouldn't say get back to empirical thinking because I guess science was never
that closely empirical, but closer to it than we've been in which someone will accept that
we aren't too dogmatic about XYZ. Maybe we don't know the answer, maybe we've actually got to go
out and check things to see what's happening. Well you know there's empirical thinking, there's
analytical thinking. I would like us just to get back to thinking. The hardest of all. Let's try to do that.
I'm wondering if that might be the moment on which I can thank Peter for stimulating,
stirring and stimulating, fertilizing my thinking on all of these issues and whether we can all
thank him for coming here and enabling us to receive his thoughts and start thinking.
