Hello there, today we're looking at self-supervised learning, the dark matter of intelligence.
This was written by Jan LeCun and Ishan Misra of Facebook AI Research.
And it is not a paper, it is more a blog post shared on the Facebook AI blog, and it outlines
the current state of self-supervised learning, what it is and what it can do, why the authors
think it is important. It goes over things like BERT, goes over things like contrastive
learning, energy-based models, GANs, and so on. And at the end, it gives a bunch of recommendations
for the way to go forward. On a high level, the main recommendation is that we should
build latent variable prediction models that are not trained contrastively. And we'll
go through all of what this means in this article. So we'll go through the article,
I'll switch over to here, where it's a bit of a more legible format. And as always,
if you like content like this, if you enjoy it, share it out, don't hesitate to tell
a friend about it. All right, let's do it. They say in recent years, the AI field has
made tremendous progress in developing AI systems that can learn from massive amounts
of carefully labeled data. So the key words here are massive amounts. Yes, we got that,
but carefully labeled data. Of course, we all know that supervised learning has worked
very well if you have enough labeled data. And that's exactly the problem. In order to
push machine learning to more to higher abilities, it seems like what we need is first of all,
bigger architectures, which we can do by just building bigger computers. But we also need
more data. The problem here is that we need orders of magnitude more data. And labeling
that data is going to be very, very expensive. And therefore, we're looking for methods that
can do without labeled data, that can learn most of what they learn from non labeled data,
and then apply that to a little bit of labeled data in order to learn a task. But this is not
the only thing. So the need, the expansiveness of labeling is not the only thing that they
criticize here. They say this paradigm of supervised learning has a proven track record
for training specialist models that perform extremely well on the tasks they were trained to
do. So this is another criticism right here. Namely, that if we train something in a supervised
fashion with labels, it will become or it might become very good, but it will be very good at
that particular task. And it won't be super good at other tasks, such as, you know, tasks that
are relatively neighboring to the field that we're concerned about. They go on, they say that
supervised learning is a bottleneck for building more intelligent, generalist models that can do
multiple tasks and acquire new skills without massive amounts of labeled data. This is into
the direction of François Chollet, who defines intelligence as the efficiency with which you
transform new data into new skills. And this is reflected here in this article by Yann LeCun,
and I'm sorry Ishan, but Yann LeCun just has the big name. And unfortunately, you're a bit in his
shadow here. But I'm fairly confident these that Yann LeCun is not just on this for the name,
because the arguments in this article he has raised in many talks that I've seen of him in the
past few years. So it is it is really kind of a condensing of all of these talks in this here.
But back to the paper, this acquiring new skills without massive amounts of labeled data, they
say that has to be our goal, because it is impossible to label everything in the world. And
there are also some tasks where there is not enough labeled data, like translation systems for low
resource languages. So they make two observations right here. First of all, they say, look,
here, for example, if we show just a few drawings of cows to small children, they'll
eventually be able to recognize any cow they see. By contrast, AI systems trained with supervised
learning require many examples of carmages, and might still fail to classify cows in unusual
situations such as lying on a beach. What are you doing silly cow? Don't lie on a beach.
So this is another point, right? These these AI systems, they take so much more data than humans
to learn new skills. And they ask why the short answer is that humans rely on their previously
acquired knowledge of how the world works. So they make this, they make this argument here that
there is a thing like common knowledge about the world or common sense forms the bulk of
biological intelligence in both humans and animals, humans are animals, like, okay, this common
sensibility is taken for granted, but has remained an open challenge in AI research. Common sense,
they say, is the dark matter of artificial intelligence. So they point out that you have
this common sense that you learn simply by interacting with the world, they say as babies,
we learn how the world works, largely by observations, you form predictive models about the world.
You learn concepts such as object permanence and gravity. And later in life, you you even act in
the world. Now they're not going into this acting in the world. But their point is that
throughout your life, you just observe the world and you build these predictive models. And
that's how you will learn about how the world works. I'm not entirely sure that things like gravity
are learned in this way. I think there's some evidence that at least part of it is biological or
at least you're extremely biologically predetermined to learn about things like object permanence and
gravity. But the point is taken that there is something built into you either from experience
or from biology that allows you that is kind of this common sense and that allows you to acquire
new tasks with extremely few additional samples because you bring in this knowledge about the world.
So their core claim here is that we believe that self supervised learning is one of the
most promising ways to build such background knowledge and approximate a form of common
sense in AI systems. They say the way we're going to get AI systems to also have this common sense
knowledge is by doing self supervised learning, right? So they give some examples of self supervised
learning. They also contrast it with unsupervised learning, where the difference that so they say
unsupervised learning is a bit of a misnomer. Learning is never really unsupervised. Self
supervised learning specifically means that you generate the label out of the data itself. So
what could that be? You know, for example, in in BERT, the language model, you might have a
sentence like this is a cat. And this is a sentence from the data set. Now in self supervised
learning, you would somehow need to come up with an input sample and a label for that input sample
just by just using this text, right? In a supervised, in a supervised data set, you would
have some label associated with this. And this could be anything depending on what the task is,
like this could be labels could be annotations for what kind of words these words are label could
be whether or not the sentence is a positive or negative sentence. But in self supervised learning,
you can do something like this. And here's what BERT does. They cross out a word like this A.
So this now becomes the input sample x. And the label is going to be whatever
is missing here. So the label will be the word A. Now, the task of the machine learning system is
given x, figure out what is why. Okay, so figure out that at this particular place in the sentence,
there should be the word A. Now BERT does a bit more sophisticated things like it also replaces
tokens and so on. But ultimately, what you want is for any for any corrupted input to for the system
to output the uncorrupted output. And thereby, the system will learn about the world, it will
maybe not about the world, but it will learn about language. If it wants to do this task correctly,
it needs to learn that if you have a this is construction, there should probably be some
kind of specifier for what comes comes next right here. And then cat is some sort of an object or
animal. So given all of this evidence, you only have very few possibilities like a or my or this is
a one, this is two cat, no, this is your cat, something like this, but all the other words in
the language cannot be. So they formulate self supervised learning as obtaining supervisory
signals from the data itself. That's why it's not unsupervised, it is self supervised, because you
create the label from the data. And the important part here is, and I think that's often neglected
in the self supervised things is that the way you create the label from the data,
that is human specified, right? This, this step right here, that needs, can I draw a light bulb?
That needs a human idea, like how could we create a label and an input data point given a data point.
So we shift the burden of the human from labeling the data explicitly to simply saying,
to simply constructing the method of how to obtain labels from data. This is still building in
substantial human bias, but it is much more scalable. If I have one method to create labels,
I can apply it to an entire data set. Whereas if I create labels myself, I have to go through
every single data point. But it's not unsupervised because the supervision is in the process that
creates the label. So they say leverage the underlying structure of the data. The general
technique of self supervised learning is to predict any unobserved or hidden part or property
of the input from any observed or unhidden part of the input. So the general recipe or one,
I would say one general recipe, because it's not the general recipe, even though they claim it here,
I would say one general recipe is that if you have an input, you just hide part of it,
and then you have the model predict that hidden part. They give a bunch of examples here. This is
quite a cryptic drawing, I think. So these are three examples of what you could do if you have
data and this time or space, I would claim it's easiest if you think of this as a video sequence.
So this is a video sequence and the frames are all, they're stacked like this. Frame, frame,
frame. Okay. And it goes up until here. So what you're going to do, what you can do,
option one is, you simply take the past, you define a time point T right here, and you take
the past, and that's the observed part, and you take the future, which you have in your dataset,
but you don't show it to the model. So the model is supposed to predict the future from the past.
This in video, you can understand it, this is also what, for example, the GPT models do,
like GPT three does exactly this, it takes in a past words so far, and it predicts the next word
or the next few words. The second part is, you don't have to necessarily predict the future.
You can also just leave away a bunch of frames in the middle somewhere at different parts.
Now, what the model has to do is has to reason about a part, let's say this part right here,
it has to reason, given the surrounding evidence. So it takes all the evidence into account,
and it reasons what kind of frames could have been left out there. In again, in video in NLP
land, this would be something like BERT. So BERT is trained in this objective as a mask language
model. And then the last one is really quite specific, I think, to something like video,
maybe also different modalities, but doesn't apply super well to NLP. Maybe you could though,
but this is where if you imagine this being your frames, you not only do you leave away
these frames right here, but you also would leave away part of the frames that you observe. So in
these frames, you would simply only observe the bottom right thing right here, and you would not
observe everything else. So not only do you have to reason about what goes into the missing slot,
but you also have to reason about what goes into the parts of the frames you don't observe. And as
you can see here, these can be different parts throughout the video. So I think it's just,
it just makes a point that this can be quite general. So in general, you just hide parts of
your input, and you re predict them from a model. And that means the model, if it can, for example,
if it can predict the future of a video from the past, given, you know, certain input, it will
necessarily have to learn something about how the world works, or at least about how the world
looks through a video lens. If it does this task, well, it has a lot of pro captured a lot of
properties of how the world looks in video. And that is much more rich information than simply
giving a label to train on. And the hope is that by learning all of these different things that
are necessary to predict the future well from the past, the model will learn such a useful
representation that adapting this model to solve any labeled supervised task is going to be really
quick because it also it already has very, very good representation of the data. And the common
thing here is that, okay, in order to predict the order from the past to the future,
there can be there can be numerous features that are helpful, right, there are all of these features
that are very helpful to predict the future from the past. Now, if I have any supervised task, right,
I have, for example, the past, and then I want to determine if I don't know, what can we determine
from a video, if this is a happy video, right, is this a happy video or not.
The core assumption here is that since, you know, predicting the future from the past has
sort of the structure of the world built in. And since our supervised task is probably a function
of a subset of that structure, like, whether or not it's a happy video, probably depends on whether
or not in the future, someone will fall off a cliff or not, right. So sub a subset of these
things in combination are going to be relevant for that task. So they can be adapted. Since the
representation is already there, they can be adapted pretty rapidly, while the ones that are not
important can maybe be overwritten and relearned to get some additional signal from the from the
input that was not learned in the in the self supervised training. So the goal is, again, by
learning to predict the hidden inputs from the non hidden inputs, you learn about the structure of
the data. By learning about the structure of the data, you get useful representations. And by having
useful representations, you can adapt very quickly to new tasks. That's the, that's the sort of
argument here. So why don't we do this all the time, every time, everywhere?
They go into self supervised learning for language versus vision. So in language, this is
uber duber successful, while in vision, I think in vision, it's fairly successful too. But there
is a challenge when you think about language versus vision, specifically in terms of this
hiding, hiding parts of the input, and then reconstructing them. So there are two,
there are two different things that we need to consider here. The first thing, the first problem
is dimensionality, dimensionality. And the second thing we need to consider is uncertainty.
Okay, so dimensionality in NLP is what's our dimensionality. If you think of this problem again,
this is a cap, this thing right here. How do we do it in Bert, like we mask out the word,
and then we feed this sentence, we feed it through a big neural network that is Bert.
And then at the end, at this position, we attach a classification head. So this is a classifier
that classifies into the whole vocabulary. So what we end up with is we have our whole
vocabulary. So there is the word a, there is the word is, there is the word cat,
there is the word dog, there is the word mom.
There are all these words, right, we can actually enumerate all of these words. And because we can
enumerate them, we can let the model output a distribution. So maybe it says, well, the word
a is, you know, super likely, the word is not so likely, the word cat, it appears in the sentence,
you know, the observed sentence, so might be a bit like the word dog, the word mom, not really,
and so on. So what we get is a discrete probability distribution. Note that the dimensionality,
even though it's sometimes large, so this can be something like 30k, it's still countable,
we can still do a classification into 30,000 different classes, especially if we use word
pieces, we don't have out of vocabulary, we can actually choose our vocabulary size.
Second of all, we can actually represent our uncertainty. Notice that not all the weight
here is on the word a, especially if there is also like your, which is also possible,
but in this case not correct, the model can express the fact that it thinks that both words
could fit into this thing. So if there is, this is zero, this is one over here, probably adds up
to more than one, in any case, you can see that the top prediction here is only maybe 0.4
in probability. So the model can represent uncertainty by simply not allocating all of the
classification mask to a single thing. So these two things are solved pretty well, dimensionality
is not too high and uncertainty can be represented. Now what about computer vision?
And that's where they, they have this diagram right here that sort of is supposed to sort of
detail what I just said, in that NLP tasks, these masked prediction tasks, they have,
they are rather discrete. Okay. They have relatively less, well, they're relatively
low dimensional and have less uncertainty. I'm not really sure if the less uncertainty and
they have a better, I would say they have a better way of representing uncertainty. And then the
fact that they have less uncertainty simply comes from the fact that they are more discrete and
low dimensional than other problems. So what do I mean by more discrete, lower dimensional and so
on? If you look at vision problems, if you think, what do I need to do to predict a video, right?
And let's, let's even go, let's even go simpler than that. Let's take a common task in self supervised
learning. So I have an image. The image is of a cat, let's say, like, I know, you're surprised.
Ears, eyes, let's, that is a cruel cat. Okay. So that is one cat. Okay.
And I mask away part of an image. So I simply cut out this part here. And my model is supposed to
reconstruct the part from the known parts. That is a self supervised task is exactly in the category
of what they suggest here. Now, can we do the same thing as we do in the NLP thing? Remember,
in the NLP thing, we made a model that output a classifier over all the possible things that
could go in there. Like, no, we cannot. Well, first of all, how many things are there that can go there?
Well, infinity, because this is a continuous problem, right? So if I give you a patch, and you
know, the here is a part of the head, this and maybe the whiskers, you can see this,
it could technically be right, but it could also be that the cat here, because we don't know,
right? And equally likely continuation is that the cat is like holding a wine glass right here
that is filled with wine. We don't, we don't know, right? And equally likely continuation,
like there are infinitely many likely continuations for this for filling in. And that's a bit the
same as in the NLP task, because there are multiple words that could fill that slot, but way less.
Plus, we can, we will never be able to enumerate all of the different patches that could and could
not go in there, right? We can't even enumerate all the ones that could go in there. And it's
completely impossible to list all the ones that are both possible and non-possible, so we could
build a classifier on top of it. So we simply cannot, like this, this, we cannot build a classifier,
this is not possible in the vision case. So it is too high dimensional. And also, there is no good
way of representing uncertainty. There's much more. And I get it. Well, well, I think the
dimensionality has a direct effect on the uncertainty. So what people do, or what people
can do is they say, let's not build a classifier, let's actually just predict what is there,
right? Because I can do a neural network like a CNN, something like this, layer,
layer, layer, layer, layer, layer, layer, like a unit with some skip connections right here,
right? And I can actually try to train my model to just reconstruct that part, right? Like,
how hard is this? Like we said at the beginning, instead of, this is a, this is a very terrible
cap. But you know, the model is not trained super well. So it only has one eye.
The model isn't help me. The model isn't trained super well. So I can just program or I can train
my model to reconstruct. But now, all my model can do is it can output one thing, it can only
output one completion. If I don't have a classifier, where I can represent my probability
distribution, I can only output a thing. And since there are many, I have no way of representing
many. And I can't really output the mean of them because the mean of these two pictures is going
to be not a real picture because it's like a half transparent wine glass, right? So that's
certainly invalid. So you can, as you can see, the fact that we can't build an explicit classifier
means we have to predict directly. But then since we can't predict directly, we have no way
of representing uncertainty. So I wouldn't call this more uncertainty. I would call it
that computer vision has less of a possibility to represent uncertainty directly. I think that's
something they say in the text, actually. So that is the problem with computer vision. Now,
what do people do to tackle this? And the answer is going to be contrastive learning.
But they go there in a bit first, they make an excursion to energy based models. So here they
say a unified view of self supervised methods, even though I thought this hiding part of the
input was already the unified view, but in any case, they say there is a way to think about
self supervised learning within the unified framework of an energy based model. Now, short
pre thing here from me, I know this energy based model, and you'll see what it is in a second.
I think that is just kind of a, it doesn't tell me anything like the term energy based model,
it can just be applied to anything like any problem, like energy based model simply means
loss function, right? But yeah, let's, so an energy based model is a trainable system that
given two inputs x and y tells us how incompatible they are with each other. For example, x could
be a short video clip, and why another proposed video clip, the machine would tell us to what
extent y is a good continuation for x. To indicate the incompatibility between x and y,
the machine produces a single number called an energy. If the energy is low x and y are deemed
compatible. If it is high, they are deemed incompatible. So this is kind of a physics
approach to the thing. So if you again, think of this as your video, and you want to predict
the future from the past, what an energy based model would do is it would, it had two components.
So the main component would be this energy function right here, and the energy function
would tell you how well x and y fit together. So now it's, you can actually put both frameworks
in this. So if you predict y, right, if you if your model actually predicts the continuation,
then your energy function could simply be something like the L two loss between the actual true,
between the true continuation in your data and the one you predicted. However, if you do,
if you could, if you could do the classifier approach, and you could actually list all the
video sequences that are possible, then your energy function could be something like
could be the classifier loss. But you know, again, so if you think about this, then anything
is an energy based model, right, a classification problem is an energy based model. Because if
I have an image here of my trusty cat, and I have the label cat, right, my f of x and y
is simply if I define my energy function as my cross entropy between, you know, as my
classification cross entropy of cat, given all the other labels, that is an energy based model,
right, it's so I don't see why we need to frame this as energy based model if we can simply say
loss function, like beats me. But in any case, I guess the sort of physics approach here is just
another way of thinking about it. But I dare anyone to bring me a thing that is not an energy based
model in machine learning. I might have just summoned some demons here. Okay, so they go back
and say, Well, look, the the an early example of this are these Siamese networks that have recently
become fashionable again. And that is where you do the following. So now we switch away from predicting
this hidden part from the unhidden part, and we go more into the predicting a hidden property part.
So here you can see you have two different crops of an image. And this is the most popular
self supervised task for computer vision. You have an image of something like the sun.
And you crop it twice in different locations. So you crop it here, you crop it here. And
what your what your model needs to do is it needs to figure out that these two patches come from
the same image. If it can do that, then it will have learned some good representation. And if you
regularize correctly, then it learns an even better representation. So here it needs to figure out
that these two chess looking things actually come from a similar picture. And the hope is so, okay,
what do they do? They feed each of the ones through the same encoder, right? And the W in the
means that the weights of the encoder are shared. So you obtain two hidden representation. And then
this here, this could simply be, you know, like the inner product between H and H prime, or like
the negative inner product, if you want to actually make it as an energy. So, or maybe one over the
inner product, however, you formulate it. But what this will do is it will tell the model if two things
come from the same image, you better have representations for them, these H that agree
with each other, which means that they are close in the inner product space, they have a high inner
product. If this is the case, right, then it means that you have learned something useful
about the world, because you can tell me when two crops are from the same image. And the hope is
that the model will learn that, oh, wait, if, you know, if the model wants to do this well,
it needs to learn, aha, there are chess pieces in here, it can't simply compare, maybe it can
compare these pixels, okay, that will work. But if you compare this pixel and this pixel,
that won't work. So it needs to learn something more sophisticated, actually needs to learn
that our chess pieces in here, if it wants to do a good job and differentiate representations from
those with crops from different images, like if we have a crop from the sun right here,
what we want is that the inner product between these two is high, but the inner product between
any with anyone with the part of the sun picture is low. Okay, so we train it like this, and this
is exactly where the contrastive learning goes. So these Siamese networks, they look fun, but
without the part I just outlined without the contrastive part, they fall into danger of collapse.
So if I only ever input two crops from the same image and say, please make the hidden
representation such that the inner product is high. What I what I will end up with is a model
that simply collapses and always gives me the same hidden representation for every single image
because that satisfies the constraint, right? And that's what they point out here. This phenomenon
is like then the network could happily ignore their inputs and always produce identical output
embeddings. This phenomenon is called a collapse. When a collapse occurs, the energy is not higher
for non matching x and y than it is for matching x and y. So they say the, the easy part is the
easy part is that when vectors, when x and y are slightly different versions of the same image,
the system is trained to produce a low energy. Okay, so now that's easy. The difficult part
is to train them all so that it produces a high energy for images that are different. Now what
counts as different and non different here again is much of human supervision. So this task of
cropping that has fundamental assumptions that, you know, for example, in one image,
there is largely one object or one topic that we're interested in, right? If this is a map,
and we actually want to differentiate the places, it's a pretty bad task to do this cropping.
Also, what people do a lot is color jittering, color inversions, brightness modifications,
all of these is human intuition, human supervision that the color shouldn't matter,
the brightness shouldn't matter and so on. And the more things you give to the model like this,
the more you bake in your assumptions. So again, we, we move from supervised learning,
where we tell the model, here's the correct label, here's the correct label to self supervised
learning, where we tell the model sort of, we tell the model what, what kind of transformations
should and shouldn't matter. And the model has to figure out itself, how to create the
representation such that these constraints hold. So now they go into the solutions for collapse,
they say there are avoid, there are two techniques to avoid collapse, one is contrastive methods,
and the other one is regularization methods. So contrastive methods, they actually have this
graphic right here. As you can see, so their point is that if we talk about energy based models,
we want energy to be low on x, y pairs that we as humans define match. So this could be because
we crop them from the same image, or we actually, it is the same image, but slightly distorted
in different ways. So we as humans, we simply determine these two things match, or it is the
uncorrupted and the corrupted version of the same sentence and birds training. And these here are
represented by the blue points. So we want the energy to go down on the blue points, but we want
the energy to go up everywhere else, right, everywhere where it doesn't match, we want the
energy to be high. Now, what could we do, we could simply, you know, push down here, because we can
create lots of examples, right, we can create lots of samples, where x and y match, because we don't
need labels anymore, we can create the labels ourselves. So we can create lots and lots and
lots and lots of image crop pairs that match, right. So the pushing down isn't the problem,
the pushing up is the problem. Now, if you see this graphic, you might say, why don't I just,
you know, enumerate, kind of go through here and I push up on all the green places, right,
I push just up and up here and up here, up here. The problem with that is that the higher
dimensionality, the less possible that is, and here is where the graphic tricks you into thinking
that it's a good idea when it's actually not like, you will not be able to enumerate all the green
dots, even around the blue dots, like it's just not possible because the dimensionality is so high.
If you have a dot in 512 dimensions, that is a vector with 512 entries, right, 512 entries. Now,
you would need to, let's say, if you were just to look around a data point, you would need to jiggle
the first dimension, maybe to the left and to the right, and the second dimension and the third
dimension. And you need to do this all combinatorically. So you would need to do this one to the right,
this one to the left, this one to the left, and then this one to the right, this one to the right,
this one to the left, and so on. You need to do it in different magnitudes here. Sometimes you need
to keep them constant. It's just not possible. So what do people do in these contrastive methods?
They say, well, we can't push up on all the points. But what we can do is we can sample. And that's
why you see the green things epileptically jumping around in that we can sample the green points.
Instead of enumerating them, we simply sample them. And that's where we push up. And that is
a difficult task to do. So it is difficult to come up with examples with sense with
meaningful negative examples. Because so what people do in this task right here is what I just
said. Well, here are two images that fit, right? This is a blue point. And here are two images
that don't fit. So this is a green point. However, as we already saw, there are many,
many more green points than blue points. And most green points are really far apart from the blue
points. If I just take any image right here, it might be way too easy for the model. So the best
thing would be to give the model sort of a curriculum, or at least what we call hard negatives.
But that is computationally very expensive, because we have to go search for hard negatives like
images that are close, but not, but still different would be best for the model. But we
don't have that. All we can do is sort of randomly sample crops from other images, because we don't
have labels, we have no clue if you know, two images are the same or not, we just scrape them
from Instagram, come on, all looks all the same to me. So the problem here is that if we just
do it randomly, then most of the green points will actually be pretty far apart. And that means
we just have to train for a long, long time. So contrastive methods, they work in computer vision
right now. However, coming up with incompatible pairs that will shape the energy in a suitable
way is challenging and expensive computationally, at least in vision systems, right? The method
used to train NLP systems by maxing or substituting some input words belongs to the category of
contrastive methods, but they don't use joint embedding architecture. Instead, they use a
predictive architecture. Okay, so that's saying that the, if you look at what, you know, Bert does
with this, it does this, the masking one thing out, and then classify directly, that is technically
contrastive. Because what you do in a classification model is you push up like these are all the
possibilities. And what you do during training is you push up on the class that is correct,
and you push down on the classes that are not correct. That's what the cross entropy loss does.
So technically, it is a contrastive method. However, you do this in this sort of predictive
framework, you don't do it via this method of having shared embeddings. And that's because you
can actually enumerate all the things that you could do. So with the contrastive methods for
vision, we can do the same thing. Now, what we can do here, if you think about this problem again,
of we cannot possibly enumerate all possible pictures that go here. But what we can do is we can
enumerate a couple, and then simply classify which ones are are good and which ones aren't.
And that's exactly what these contrastive methods do that we just looked at, right? So we sample
the green points, we sample also the blue points. And then we simply either classify between the
green and the blue points, or, you know, we make their inner product go high at the end. These are
not so much different objectives, whether or not it's really a classification loss or not.
The point here is that first, they obtain shared embeddings, they obtain some sort of embedding
right here. And then they make the embedding agree or not agree. So they quickly go into
what BERT is. BERT is usually called a denoising autoencoder. So what you have is you start off
with a data point with the uncorrupted version, you corrupt it. And that's the part where you
mask out some parts, you can see this right here, you mask them out. And then you have
a prediction for what should go in the blanks. And the loss here is simply the classification
loss. This is just your cross entropy loss that goes here. A vast language model, which is an
instance of a denoising autoencoder itself, an instance of a contrastive self supervised learning.
However, there is another way, there is another. So here they talked about, there are two ways
where we, in which we can combat this, right? There are two categories. Sorry about that.
There are two categories. So this is category one is contrastive methods, where we classify
some against others, either all of them or a sample of them. However, the other one
is what they call this predictive architecture. Oh, sorry. No. Predictive architecture of this
type can produce only a single prediction for a given output. Since the model must be able to
predict multiple possible outcomes, the prediction is not a single set of words, but a series of
scores for every word in the vocabulary for each missing word location. So that's still BERT.
BERT, which can give you uncertainty by simply telling how likely each word is.
And here they say we cannot use this trick for images because we cannot enumerate all
possible images. Is there a solution for this problem? The short answer is no. There are
interesting ideas in this direction, but they have not yet led to results that are as good as
joint embedding architectures. One interesting avenue is latent variable predictive architectures.
So that's what you see down here. This is a latent variable predictive architectures. So
it goes down. This is the description that goes down here. Latent variable predictive models
contain an extra input variable Z. It is called latent because its value is never observed.
With a properly trained model, as the latent variable varies over a given set, the output
prediction varies over the set of plausible predictions compatible with the input X. And
they name generative adversarial models here. So this is a bit confusing, but so up here is
the loss. This is a loss. And here you have this new variable Z. And this Z comes from a domain
right here where it can move around. And by moving around Z, you actually move around the output Y
right here. So they represent this as this curvy boy here. So maybe Z is here, and that represents
a point here on the manifold. But as you move Z to the right, then you move along this manifold
right here. So this is a way in which a model can for a given X, you can see here X is mixed with
Z X is first you obtain a representation for X, then it's mixed with Z. For a given X, you can
produce many different outputs by simply varying Z. And if you sample a bunch of these Z, and then
calculate sort of an average loss over them maybe, or just a loss per sample, then eventually, you'll
train your model to not only, you know, handle this one prediction, but handle many different
predictions. Now, you might know GANs. So GANs are simply when you do not have so when you
again, simply cuts off this here. So GANs only have the Z variable. And then they produce this set
of outputs. And the this is the discriminator right here that decides between the real image
and the produced image, of course. The last thing here is that this R is the regularization
on Z. I believe they never I don't think they ever pointed out what the R is. But they also
don't think they ever point out what this regularization is, they talk up here about. So I'm
going to assume that refers to the R right here. And now it gets a little bit, it gets a little
bit confusing. So they say down here, they say, first of all, they say a non contrastive methods
applied to joint embedding architectures is possibly the hottest topic in self supervised
learning for vision at the moment domain is still largely unexplored, but it seems very
promising. So non contrastive methods, which means they don't need negative samples, but they still
do joint embedding. So they take two different things that come like from the same image,
they jointly embed them, but they don't have negative samples like the original Siamese
networks. But you need to avoid collapse. And these models right here, for example, there's
Bior, which I have made a video about, you can check that out. The I think they argue that batch
norm, for some reason, avoids this collapse if they build in batch norm, but also there are other
architectures, right? But they all, they, they are in the beginning. And so they say, rather than
doing non contrastive joint embedding, maybe we should do essentially what Bert is doing,
but for vision. So perhaps a better alternative in the long run will be to devise non contrastive
methods with latent variable predictive models. So predictive is, you know, we predict the output
directly like Bert does, but we can't envision because we can't enumerate all the possibilities.
So we can't represent uncertainty. So what we should do is we should do this latent variable
thing, where we deterministically predict, right? This is deterministic, we deterministically
predict the embedding. And then from the embedding, we construct fozily, like with the by sampling z,
like we sample z from this ground distribution, we construct this entire set of outputs, and that
will represent our possibilities, like our uncertainty, that will represent all the things
that could fill the gap that we're trying to predict. So they say that maybe the way forward.
And then I say something confusing, the main obstacle is that they require a way to minimize
the capacity of the latent variable, the volume of the set over which the latent variable can vary,
limits the volume of the outputs that take a low energy by minimizing this volume won't
automatically shapes the energy in the right way, which sort of means that, yes, if I have to limit
this capacity of this latent variable, right, because otherwise the latent variable could contain
all the information, like in a game, the latent variable contains all the information. And it's
only actually limited by the by the generator, right, by what the generators weights are. So
the latent variable contains all of the information. So technically, again, something
like a style gun could happily ignore the input right here. And it could still produce pretty
good images. And you have to do tricks in order to make the model actually pay attention to the
input and not only pay attention to the latent variable. So you can regularize, you can constrain
this latent variable, such that the model pays attention to the input. And why do we want the
model to pay attention to the input? Because the entire reason is that we want to use this
embedding right here, then for future supervised learning, like this embedding, that's actually
the goal of self supervised learning. There you see why GANs probably cannot give us super good
embeddings, because GANs just have the part on the right. But something like an info GAN,
or like as we said, like a style GAN that takes an input could technically already give us is
technically a model about something like this. Though here, they say,
so so that's, you know, you limit the BKD, you limit the capacity of the latent variable. But
then they go on and say, a successful example of such a method is the variational auto encoder,
the VAE, in which the latent variable is made fuzzy, which limits its capacity. Okay, and here
is where I, I was I was confused. But the VAE have not yet been shown to produce good representations
for downstream visual tasks. Okay, another successful example is sparse modeling, but its use has been
limited to simple architectures. No perfect recipe seems to exist to limit the capacity of the latent
variables. Now, I get that limiting capacity. However, in a variational encoder, it is not
exactly the latent variable that is made fuzzy. It is actually the embedding, right? If you think
here, in a in a variational auto encoder, what you do is you have whatever your image, and then you
have your encoder, and then you predict in the latent space, you predict Gaussian distributions,
like you predict the mean, and you predict the standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution,
and then you sample from that Gaussian, that is a horrible Gaussian, you sample from that Gaussian
distribution. And due to the reparameterization trick, you can actually simply sample from a
standard Gaussian down here, like that is at zero and has standard deviation one,
and that will be your Z variable. And then you can simply do Z times, sorry, Z times sigma plus
mu, and that will be sampling essentially from the, that will be sampling from that respective
Gaussian. So in this way, the variable Z is not made fuzzy. What is actually made fuzzy is this
here. And this here comes from H, right? This is H, this is the embedding gives rise to these mu and
sigma. And these are made fuzzy, because they're multiplied by a stochastic variable. So I'm a
little bit confused about this paragraph right here, because a VAE, I don't think they limits the
capacity of the latent variable, and the fuzz is the latent variable, but I might be wrong, or
they actually mean something else by latent variable, they actually mean the embedding
here. In that case, it might make sense again. However, then it doesn't make super much sense
to limit its capacity. And I've also looked at the sparse modeling, which simply seems to be
kind of sparse encoding of images. It's a really old paper from 69, but sorry, 96, 96,
not that old. Yeah, but okay, I'm simply going to interpret this as in order to obtain a meaningful
representation H down here, we need to limit the capacity of the latent variable right here,
because otherwise, the model will simply ignore the input and not build a good representation for
it. So they argue that an architecture like this, an architecture like a VAE, like an infogan,
or something like this, could potentially be the next step, if we can make it work.
The challenge in the next few of the next few years may be to devise non contrastive methods
for latent variable energy based model that successfully produce good representation of
image, video speech and other signals and yield top performance in downstream supervised tasks
without requiring large amounts of labeled data. So in German, we have a saying that what they want
is the, which means the egg laying wool milk pig. So it can do anything and everything,
and it costs nothing. So that's what they mean. Again, some of these things like energy based
model, like anything is an energy based model, I just, I just don't find this to be super
discriminating in its, in its meaning of what that, of what that is. Lastly, they talk a bit
about their new model called SEAR, which, you know, is a self supervised model, but it's just
like a giant convent trained on a billion images, like, Oh, but you know, they open sourced it.
Thank you. You open sourced the code. So I can totally train my own billion parameter on a,
on a billion random public Instagram images, because, you know, my Raspberry Pi just
technically has that capacity. So thanks. But, you know, no, but I'm, I'm joking a little bit,
at least better than open AI. And at the end, they go into how they use other ways of self
supervised learning at Facebook. All right, that was my overview over this article. I hope you got
at least something from it as a high level overview. They first say self supervised learning is
maybe the way to get this common sense into AI systems. Then they go into what is self supervised
learning. They define it first as predicting hidden parts from on hidden parts. And later,
they say it can be viewed as a energy based model that they point out that there's a crucial
distinction between tasks like language and vision, because vision is much more high dimensional,
gives you much less of a way to represent uncertainty. Then they go on and say, well,
the contrastive methods handle part of that they handle this, not they handle this
part of the dimensionality that you can enumerate all the possible things. However, they are prone
to collapse. Sorry, no, the, the Siamese networks are prone to collapse, the contrastive methods
fix that, however, because you have to sample from such AI dimensional space. And that is really
hard. It takes a lot of data. And what we could do is we could do this predictive models that
directly classify the output, or directly predict the output, right, you predict the missing frame,
you predict the missing word. But we do it in this way, where you not only do you predict a single
thing, but you predict an entire set by means of these latent variable predictive models. And that,
they say is maybe the way forward, even though it doesn't work too well yet, like via his work.
But the problem is, they don't have this ability to generate good representations for supervised
learning, that just doesn't work too well yet. All right, that was it. If you liked it,
leave a like, subscribe, share doubt, tell me what you think in the comments, and bye bye.
