These lectures are part of the great courses on tape series.
The great courses on tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled No Excuses, Existentialism and the Meaning of
Life.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Solomon.
Professor Solomon received his undergraduate degree in molecular biology from the University
of Pennsylvania and his master's and doctoral degrees in philosophy and psychology from
the University of Michigan.
He has taught at Princeton and the University of Pittsburgh and is now the Quincy Lee Centennial
Professor of Philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin.
Professor Solomon has been awarded the Standard Oil Outstanding Teaching Award and the President's
Associates Teaching Award.
He has published dozens of articles and more than a dozen books in philosophy and psychology.
Each of Dr. Solomon's lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these
tapes.
The course guide also includes a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and bibliography.
You may find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 1, What is Existentialism?
Hi, my name is Bob Solomon.
I teach at the University of Texas in the wonderful city of Austin.
This is going to be a lecture or a series of lectures on a very exciting and still vital
philosophy called existentialism.
I call it no excuses because the idea is that one of the main themes is taking responsibility.
Existentialism might be conceived of as a movement, not a sensibility, not a series of
doctrines to be sure.
One can think of it in many different ways.
But in the literature that has come out in the years when existentialism first became
popular just after the Second World War and ever since, it often has the connotation of
being a particularly gloomy philosophy, one that's obsessed with the notions of anxiety
and dread.
So the first thing to say perhaps is that I find existentialism actually a very invigorating
and positive-minded philosophy.
And the no excuses idea in part says we do have control over our own lives.
It's often thought that existentialism is an atheistic philosophy.
And it's true that some rather notorious atheists were existentialists, most notably
Jean-Paul Sartre, who gave the movement its name.
But Soren Kierkegaard, whom I'll be talking about shortly, was also an existentialist.
In fact, one might say the first existentialist.
And he was devoutly religious, one might even say in today's terms, that he would be counted
as a Christian fundamentalist.
And he's not the only one.
Martin Buber, the Jewish existentialist, some of the more recent Christian existentialists
like Carl Bart, one finds the entire spectrum.
And one can put the nature of God well within the existential tradition.
One can trace the movement as far back as one likes.
I've often heard it traced back to Socrates, who after all said famously, one should know
thyself and took great responsibility for his own behavior, defended the virtues, and
was very much the individual.
I've heard it traced back to Heraclitus, before Socrates, a philosopher who defended
the impermeability of life and who often delighted in contradictions and dark sayings.
I would say St. Augustine was sort of a proto existentialist, because again, his confessions
are so inward looking, and he's so concerned with the questions of who I am and what I'm
to do.
But for our purposes here, I'm going to restrict our attention to five figures.
I'm going to begin out of sequence with the philosopher Albert Camus, possibly because
he's the easiest to understand, but also because I think he captures the sensibility that represents
existentialist thinking and explains why so many students over the last 50 years have
become enamored with the movement.
Then I'll go back in chronology, and I'll pick up the first existentialist, as I said,
Soren Kierkegaard, a Danish philosopher who worked roughly in the middle of the 19th century.
I'll talk about Friedrich Nietzsche, who while he has some differences with Kierkegaard
and with some of the later philosophers, nevertheless clearly fits into this sequence.
I want to talk about Martin Heidegger, a German philosopher at the beginning of this
century, although he didn't die until 1976, as someone who was actually very influential
in terms of setting up the kind of philosophy, both existentialism and what is today called
postmodernism, that still rules many universities today.
And finally, Jean-Paul Sartre, who as I said, gave the movement its name and is probably
the single most famous existentialist, and typically when people talk about existentialism,
it starts ideas they have in mind.
Nevertheless, it's not a school, and there are all sorts of differences.
Just to start with the obvious, I mentioned that Kierkegaard is devout Christian, Nietzsche
is famously a rather vitriolic atheist.
So you're going to get, as I said, a whole spectrum of views coming from religion and
so on.
In the same way, if you consider politics, existentialism is often considered a kind
of left-wing conspiracy, but the truth is that while Sartre was a Marxist, Nietzsche
was, if anything, a kind of reactionary, and Kierkegaard was completely apolitical.
And Heidegger, by contrast, was a fascist.
So when we talk about existentialism, I think it's very important not to try to pin it down
too much to begin with, not to try and define it in terms of this or that doctrine or this
or that set of beliefs, but rather, I'd like you to keep your mind open and see what these
various very individualistic figures have to say about themselves and about life and
will come to some conclusions.
The movement is defined, probably best of all, by Jean-Paul Sartre.
Sartre died really just quite recently.
He had a very long career in which he changed many of his ideas.
But I think one of the things he said in a very late interview captures very much what
we're going to be talking about comes down to.
He says, I have never ceased to believe that one is and one makes oneself of whatever is
made of one.
Now language is a bit convoluted, as you'll see.
Many of these figures tend to enjoy rather difficult language.
But the idea of, as he put it in his earlier writings, we make ourselves that there's a
sense of self-creation here is going to be very important throughout.
I also want to expand the idea of existentialism to include not just philosophers properly
speaking, and of course Nietzsche, Sartre, and Camus were also rather accomplished literary
authors as well.
But I'd like to include at least a couple novelists and poets.
I'm thinking in particular of Dostoevsky and Kafka and a few others as well.
There are three themes I'd like to talk about.
The first is the emphasis on the individual.
All of these characters were, I think we can say with that insult, truly eccentric.
Kierkegaard defined himself against the reigning passions and doctrines of the age.
In particular, when Kierkegaard was philosophizing, much of Danish society and certainly the whole
idea of Christianity was wrapped in the idea of a kind of collective consciousness, sometimes
summarized as the Holy Spirit, or in the secular realm summarized by the term bourgeois.
Kierkegaard by contrast defined himself as the individual.
In fact, he said on his tombstone what he would like written is simply the individual.
Nietzsche, of course, is another great eccentric.
Nietzsche wrote pretty much in isolation.
In fact, he lived in isolation for most of his mature life.
He sometimes would reach out to an audience, but it's always very interesting that it's
a very select audience.
And in fact, he dedicates his books to the very few.
In fact, one of the tricks that Nietzsche uses quite effectively, and I would say this
is true of Kierkegaard as well, is he writes as if.
If he's writing for you, a singular reader, alone, he really has a kind of mini conspiratorial
tone that makes us think it's just us, we're different, and we're especially different
from all of them.
This notion of individuality takes different forms too.
Camus, when he was in Algeria, where he was born and spent most of his life, found himself
very much at odds with both the French population, of which, of course, he was a member, and
also the Algerian population, who were fighting for independence.
And he gained his reputation as a courageous individual, in part, by taking a very independent
stand, one which he continued when he moved to France and was in southern France during
the occupation by the Nazis.
John Paul Sart takes individuality in a different direction.
Individuality basically comes down to the idea of individual choice, and it's the heart
of Sartre's philosophy, that we are always making choices.
We make them as individuals.
It doesn't matter if the whole society or the whole world makes them at the same time,
but the responsibility that he talks about is always.
The responsibility of the individual for making his or her choices and accepting the consequences
that flow from it.
The second theme is the importance of the passions.
If you look back through the history of philosophy, one of the things that I find striking is
the fact that the passions are very often the whipping horse.
Philosophy is defined as reason, or the love of reason.
Wisdom is often considered to be a version of reason, being reasonable.
Well, there has always been a kind of undercurrent of opposition here.
I would mention Heraclitus, again, as someone who fully recognized the power of the passions.
Of course, the Greek playwrights before him, the great Trididians, they were very keen
on the power of the passions, which they sometimes demonized, but nevertheless were
very clear that these are very important elements in human life.
Moving up to our area here, you might note that Chikagard is going to define what it
means to really exist, that special notion of existence, which is going to give rise
to the term existentialism.
What to really exist is to be passionate.
In particular, it's to passionately commit oneself to a way of life, and in Chikagard's
case, to passionately commit oneself to Christianity.
He talks about passionate inwardness.
So we're not talking about passions here fully expressed and exploded on the stage.
So much as we're talking about passions that one might oneself feel but not show, and Chikagard
makes a good deal out of talking about the truly passionate person isn't the one who
is dramatically visible for everyone else.
The truly passionate person is the one who is quite inwardly contained and defined by
his or her passions.
We often have the idea that the passions take us over, the idea that the passions happen
to us, the idea from the ancient world that the passions are often intermittent bouts
of insanity, but for the existentialists, it's very clear that to live is to live passionately.
Nietzsche is well known as a very passionate philosopher.
When you read his works, as I hope you do, it is filled with all sorts of excitement
and enthusiasm, put it in a rather trivial way.
He uses more exclamation points than probably any other philosopher in the history of the
subject.
He is always expounding and enthusing.
He's always praising, condemning, but in his life itself, it's very clear that while
he was a very quiet and courteous man.
His philosophy and his life were defined by some really exciting, dramatic, grand passions,
and he encourages us to live according to our passions.
The third theme, possibly the most famous, and certainly for some of the philosophers,
Kierkegaard and Sartre in particular, the most central, is the concept of freedom.
Now what freedom means is something, of course, which has been highly debated.
It's one of the ironies of history that virtually every regime in every country, from the most
authoritarian to the most anarchistic, has defended freedom.
Freedom of course gets defended in many different ways.
There's a distinction in philosophy between freedom in the political sphere, freedom from,
for example, restraint by government, freedom from restraint by other people, say the majority,
and freedom in a more personal way, or sometimes freedom in a more metaphysical sense.
There is a so-called free will problem that philosophers are well concerned with.
There's a sense in which neither of these is the kind of freedom that the existentialists
are primarily concerned with.
As for political freedom, well certainly Sartre in particular comes out as a vigorous
defender of freedom, but it's really parasitic on a much more basic notion of freedom that
lies at the heart of his philosophy.
And as for metaphysical freedom, whether there really is freedom, free will in the very nature
of things, this is a question that none of these philosophers address directly except
in the negative.
Nietzsche, for example, makes fun of it and says that the very idea of a free will, the
very idea of a subject who is detached from the causal nature of the universe is really
just a kind of illusion.
The kind of freedom that they do talk about, and the kind of freedom which is I think absolutely
essential for understanding what we're going to be doing, is that sense of personal freedom,
which is neither political nor metaphysical, but has very much to do with how we think
of ourselves, how we behave, how we think about our behavior.
Kierkegaard has a nice little aphorism that sums up a good deal of this.
He says with reference to the semi-revolution in Denmark in 1848, he says, people hardly
ever make use of the freedoms that they do have, like freedom of thought.
Instead, they demand freedom of speech as compensation.
The idea is that freedom has to do with making choices.
It has to do with deciding how you're going to live your life.
Freedom also has to do with taking consequences.
Once you've made your choice, you can't just say, I didn't anticipate that, I don't take
responsibility for that, having chosen, you're then responsible for what follows as well.
Freedom is often connected with reason in much of the history of philosophy.
To be free is to act rationally.
What we find in the existentialist is a very different kind of thesis.
In the ancient Greeks, it was often said that acting in accordance with reason makes us
free.
Acting according to the passions makes us a slave.
The Enlightenment philosopher David Hume, who will pop up every once in a while in these
lectures, had a very interesting reversal of this ancient wisdom.
It was the ancient poet, storyteller, Isab, who once said that the passions should be
the slave of reason.
Hume in the 18th century said instead, reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions.
He was one of the eccentrics in the history of philosophy talked about.
There are quite a few who did want to say something like, the passions are not really
the monsters that they have often been portrayed to be.
It's rather that passion motivates us.
Without passion, there's no motivation.
It's passions that give the meaning to life.
Without passions, life is meaningless.
So instead of talking about freedom and reason as necessarily conjoined and passions as equivalent
to a kind of slavery, what the existentialist suggests is that we think of our lives in
terms of passion.
This doesn't mean stupid passion, although that certainly has its place.
But Kierkegaard, for example, when he talks about passionate commitment, is onto something
I think very important.
But basically it's that passions give life meaning, and it's through passionate commitment
that we give our lives the particular meaning that it has.
Another thesis that we find is based on that notion of existence that I very quickly mentioned,
and I said that it is really the base of the word existentialism, and there's a sense in
which all the philosophers will talk about, put a very heavy premium on it.
It starts with a distinction, and so a distinction which, of course, some people will find offensive.
It's the distinction between really existing, or what I think we would call living your
life to the fullest, and just what Kierkegaard calls so-called existence, sort of just getting
through, getting by, going along with the crowd, doing what you're supposed to do, being
what is very blandly called a good person.
For Kierkegaard again, existence consists of passionate commitment.
Nature who doesn't use the term much, nevertheless, has a very clear idea about the same concept.
For nature to be truly existing, to really be a person, has to do with taking hold of
your own life, realizing what your particular talents and virtues are, falling in love with
yourself in a very important way, and understanding that what your life is about is manifesting
those virtues, manifesting those talents, passionately throwing yourself into the work
you do, and as he puts it, again, borrowing from the ancient Greeks, becoming the person
that you really are.
There's also a thesis of contingency, and this is something that I think most of you
have probably thought about at one time or another.
It's the idea that our lives are, in a way, happenstance.
They could be very different, and we can play games.
We do this all the time.
If I lived in the Middle Ages, what would my life be like?
And of course, any philosopher will quickly jump in and say, if you lived in the Middle
Ages, of course, you wouldn't be you, because you would be so different, your culture would
be so different, your language would be so different, your very physical being would
be so different that it doesn't make any sense to make the comparison.
But we do this all the time.
You're driving down the street, and you have a very close call in your automobile, and you
say, if I had just arrived one minute earlier, or 10 seconds later, there would have been
a horrible accident.
So too, you might ask the question, what if I had been born five minutes earlier?
Would I still be the same person, or would suddenly the contingencies of the universe
be such that I would be someone quite different?
This kind of question is very important.
Martin Heidegger has a rather dramatic notion, which he calls throne-ness, and the image
is that we each get thrown into the world.
We don't choose the century that we're born.
We don't choose our parents.
We don't choose the language we first learned to speak.
We don't choose our early friends.
And in fact, if you look at a good deal of your life, you realize that it's not something
you choose, but something you're thrown into.
All of this is going to have to be weighed against this notion of existence, the idea
of passionate commitment, the idea of personal choice.
What we'll find in all of the existentialists is a very delicate balance, where I think
better you might say a dialectic, a kind of active tension between on the one hand
this sense of contingency, and you are what you are because of things that you had no
control over, and on the other hand, you are what you are, or you become what you become
because of your personal commitments and choices.
And that theme is going to run all the way through.
One Paul Sartre, for example, is often misunderstood.
He talks about something he calls absolute freedom, and people often think, that means
you can do anything you want to do, regardless of circumstances.
Well, let me begin the lectures by saying this is nonsense, and it's only people who
have an axe to grind, perhaps against the French, who say such things.
The truth is that Sartre is very well aware of the fact that people are born in his generation
into a world that's filled with war and filled with ethnic violence, and the real question
is, having been born into such a world, what do you do with it?
That notion of contingency is perhaps best exemplified by one of the literary authors
we'll talk about briefly, and that's Franz Kafka.
He has a wonderful short story called Metamorphosis, which begins with the rather startling sentence
that Gregor Sampse, the hero, wakes up and finds himself turned into a giant insect.
Sort of standard interpretation, think cockroach, since it's about the most noxious insect
we can think of.
Sampse is born and finds himself a cockroach.
In fact, before that, he was a very bourgeois, I think we could say, little man.
He had his job, he had his family.
He dutifully went to the job every day, he dutifully supported his family, and suddenly
he wakes up and he's completely different.
It's a horror story.
I've never seen it adequately filmed, I don't know how he would film such a story, but reading
it, what makes it so horrible is the fact that Gregor Sampse does not wake up thinking
like an insect, whatever that would be.
He wakes up thinking like a clerk and a family member, and is somehow trying to cope with
the impossibility of his new body.
There's a sense in which existentialism takes us through such metamorphoses all the time,
at least in the thought experiments that it presents to us.
The idea is that we find ourselves sometimes in very strange, even absurd situations, and
in those absurd, strange situations, we have to figure out who we are and what we're supposed
to do.
There's a sense in which you might trace existentialism back to one of the keynotes
of modern philosophy, and that is the French philosopher René Descartes, who said rather
famously, I think, therefore I am.
Descartes said this as part of a rather lengthy argument, and this was, in fact, a premise
that he was to use to prove all sorts of things, but that's not of interest for us here right
now.
What's important is that the very statement I think therefore I am is sort of an emblem
of a certain kind of philosophy.
First of all, notice that the emphasis is on thought, and as I've been stressing, for
the existentialists, your existence is not so much bound up with your thinking.
In fact, Nietzsche, for example, will say you never exist quite so much as when you're
not thinking, but also that idea of I am and I am as a thinking thing is something that
is going to be challenged.
For the existentialists to exist is very much to be a being in the world, to be active,
to be engaged.
The very idea that I think therefore I am somehow summarizes our self-identity is
to make it sound much simpler than it is.
We don't find out who we are just by reflecting on ourselves and say, aha, here I am, but
rather you find out who you are, among other things, by looking to see what you've done,
by looking to see how other people think of you, by looking to see how in fact you think
of yourself in concrete terms.
Because what existentialism is really all about is how we live our lives.
The reason why I'm so attached to it is because it seems to me of all philosophies, it is
the one that is most geared to our very real concerns, our very real passions, our very
real decisions, and if it's complained that existentialists don't really give us enough
advice about precisely what we should do, they really just say things like take responsibility
for your actions, then I think one might conceive of that not so much as a weakness, but rather
as the great strength, and in fact very central to the idea of existentialism itself.
You don't tell people what they should do.
What's central to all these figures is what you should do, how do you live, it's up to
you.
It's up to you to make the choice, it's up to you to gear up the passions, to commit
yourself to the choice, and in someone like Nietzsche, it's up to you to discover in yourself
who it is you really are, what your real talents and abilities are, the sorts of things that
you love, and then commit yourself to those.
Existentialism originated as you can tell from these five figures, Kierkegaard's Danish,
Nietzsche and Heidegger are German, Camus and Sartre are French, Camus case French-Algerian,
but I would argue that existentialism really has its greatest impact and its greatest power
in contemporary America.
The fact is that we've always been a society which has prided itself on our sense of responsibility,
but I think we've all noticed with a certain amount of despair that in the recent decades
it's all shifted into a kind of sensibility of victimization, a sense that the world is
moving too fast for us, a sense that for example in politics we don't make a difference, a
sense that religion has gotten somehow superficial, a mere facade, a kind of sham, and we're
looking for something deeper, we're looking for something that we can call our own, we're
looking for a sense of empowerment to use, a greatly overused contemporary word.
The truth is I think existentialism can give us that, because what existentialism talks
about and constantly hammers away is the idea that we are responsible, we do have choices,
no matter how complicated or fast moving the world is, and no matter how superficial those
around us might be, we are in charge of our lives, we have to make the choices, we have
to understand exactly how dark life can be and figure out what to do with that, as well
as figure out where joy lies and pursue that too.
So in the lectures that follow, I'm going to be running through these various figures
starting with Camus, and I'd like to give you basically two dozen different kinds of
illustrations about how these theses play out in practice. Thanks.
