Lecture 2, Albert Camus, The Stranger, Part 1
Good place to begin our discussion of existentialism.
This with Camus very well known novel called The Stranger.
It captures in a bizarre kind of way some of the strange shifts in mind, in consciousness
that existentialism is going to highlight.
But I should add don't take The Stranger as a kind of exemplar of the existentialist standpoint.
Rather he's a kind of thought experiment in which many of the features of human nature
are brought into focus.
Camus was counted as one of the existentialists virtually from the 40s when Sart invented
the term.
He and Sart were in fact quite good friends for some time.
They both hit the literary scene in Paris at the beginning of the war and consequently
they were two young men on the make and they were both involved in the theater in Paris
and so on.
They broke off around 1955 for reasons we'll get to later.
But basically there was a sense in which Camus never really felt comfortable with the existentialist
label and at one point later in his career actively repudiated it.
For one thing Camus wasn't the Parisian that Sart was.
Camus was born and raised in Algeria as opposed to Sart's rather well to do middle class upbringing.
Camus was brought up in poverty in fact rather dire poverty and he talks about that in some
of his novels and his letters.
Algeria at the time was in a state of civil war.
The Algerian civil war in fact went on for decades and it wasn't a very comfortable place
for a French colonial especially one as sensitive and as politically egalitarian as the young
Camus was and Algeria figures in one way or another in almost all of his novels.
The novel itself The Stranger really has to do with the fate of a dull young man who is
like Camus a French Algerian Pied Noir.
Strangely the turmoil in Algeria is never mentioned throughout the entire novel.
What we get is simply a kind of biography or autobiography or more accurately what we
get a kind of stream of consciousness first person report of this young man Merceau as
he goes through his daily routines.
Unfortunately his daily routines culminate in his committing a rather senseless murder.
He is arrested, he is sent to prison, he is put on trial and he is finally condemned execution
and the novel ends as he is sitting in his cell thinking about his impending death and
becoming philosophical as a consequence.
Merceau himself is kind of like a blank screen when writers give us a first person narrative
very often it is chock full of reflections, moralizations, interpretations.
What we get from Merceau through Camus is really just a very flat matter of fact description
of what his world looks like.
Because he is such a blank screen I have often found in the 30 years that I have been teaching
this book to undergraduates it provides a perfect Rorschach test just to sort of give
you some of my conclusions very quickly.
When I started teaching this book back in the 60s and you all remember the 60s most
of my students thought that this basically blank character was really cool.
He wasn't involved with anything, he never got upset about anything, he wasn't deeply
engaged, he just sort of let life flow and so he was a kind of a hero.
In the 1980s by contrast the kind of go-go Reagan years my students read this book and
they all thought he was as they put it a nerd, he had no ambition, he didn't want to do anything
with his life, he didn't take advantages of the opportunities he had.
When I've done the same kind of survey in the 90s I'm getting much more mixed signals,
I don't have anything interesting to report.
But I do want to generalize that the nature of this novel is such that when one reads
it what one comes away with probably has as much to do with oneself as it does with the
character that Camus gives us.
Why is he strange?
What makes him an outsider?
Well there are quite a few things actually and just from my description to begin with
you can already infer, if you haven't read the book, that this is a character who is
deficient in some basic human ways.
He doesn't think, in fact there are very few thoughts that ever appear in the book until
the end.
When a thought does occur it's something like a piece of onion grass that pops up through
the crack in a sidewalk.
It's really out of place, it's very particular and most of the time it's completely unoriginal.
For example one of his recurrent thoughts is what his mother used to say.
In fact one of the ways that Camus sets up the novel to indicate that this character
is not everything that we are, is he begins with the death of his mother.
Now I should say if you're writing a French soap opera, if you want to tear jerker and
you want to jerk some tears, there's probably no better plot gimmick that you can use than
have a young man lose his mother.
But the novel starts with Marceau reading a telegram which says, mother died today and
he thinks, from the telegram I can't tell whether it was today or yesterday.
That little bit of chill indicates what's to happen for the next 30 pages.
He goes to his employer dutifully asked for the day off for the funeral and finds himself
kind of apologizing to the employer and saying, well it's not my fault you know.
Thinking about his mother he realizes that he doesn't really miss her and his explanation
is they haven't seen each other for a while anyway.
She's been in a home for old people to the south.
He reflects on the fact that we really don't have much to say to each other anymore.
At the vigil itself he orders cafe au lait and sits there pretty clearly restless, obviously
not moved and at the funeral he's more affected by the heat and the flies than he is by the
idea that his mother has died.
In short, where any of us, whatever our particular relationship with our parents happens to be,
where any of us would feel shock, at a loss, in some sense abandoned in the universe or
just quite simply grief, we don't get it in Marceau.
The strangeness just to start is he doesn't feel the emotions that we would feel.
He has no morals.
Morality requires a kind of consciousness, a kind of perspective on the world that Marceau
just can't muster.
I mentioned the Algeria which was exploding with violence at the time.
There's no political opinion that appears anywhere in the book.
He also has some neighbors, I would almost call them friends, who are from Camus the
picture of them, utterly disgusting.
He has a neighbor called Salamano who has a little dog.
Salamano is pictured as the kind of guy that we would envision as we're in a trench coat
but nothing else.
He's really a kind of sleaze.
The dog looks the way he does.
One point Camus describes this character and he says, I shook his hand, Marceau is talking,
I shook his hand and it was kind of reptilian.
The dog is covered with mange and the relationship between the two is the old man drags this
little dog along and the dog is choking and whimpering.
He gets angry at the dog for making noise.
He kicks it and the dog of course yelps in pain.
Now you imagine if this was your neighbor.
I suspect you would be on the phone to the SPCA in a minute but Marceau just takes it
as a matter of fact.
He's not repulsed.
He has no moral qualms.
He just kind of at one point muses about the funny relationship between the two of them.
He has another neighbor called Raymond.
Raymond is actually a key figure in the novel.
Raymond not to be too polite is a pimp.
He basically sells Arab girls and has affairs with them himself.
He treats them very badly and in one of the early scenes of the book he beats up his girlfriend
rather viciously.
Marceau is present at the time, does nothing, gives us no indication of any moral repulsion
and when his girlfriend whom I'll introduce in a second says why don't you call the cops.
Marceau's only response is I don't like cops.
He has no ambitions.
He works in an office in Algiers and at one point his employer calls him in and asks him
if he would like a promotion and transfer to Paris.
Now you don't have to be too aware of French politics or French literature to know that
Paris is the place.
There's a young man with ambitions, a young man who wants to get on with the job.
If he's given a transfer from not just the provinces but the colonies into Paris to a
better job, would jump at it.
So he says, nah, why?
Well you live one way, live another way, doesn't make any difference.
Mr. Maddox perhaps is his response to his girlfriend whom he meets very early in the
novel.
In fact he meets her on the day of his mother's funeral and begins an affair.
Her name is Marie and of course she's not described in the book in any detail.
No one is described in any detail.
But we get the impression that she's a quite lovely Algerian woman, French-Algerian woman
and she's quite fond of him.
They go to a Fernand Delphine film, French comedy, they have a few laughs, they spend
time together, they go swimming.
The image we get is that it's kind of a delightful period.
Well somewhat into the relationship, Marie turns to Mirceau and asks, do you love me?
Now I suspect all of you have been on the receiving end of that question at some point
in your lives and I think to anyone with blood in their veins it suddenly raises a certain
kind of excitement whether it's a chill and oh no what am I going to say now or perhaps
it's oh I've been waiting for it to hear that so long let me answer in kind very quickly.
Mirceau?
No response.
He expresses a certain kind of confusion like what a silly question and then when he
thinks about it he says well I guess not.
When you ask what is love, an important question for all the existentialists and for all of
us, there's a huge variety of answers of course that are on the table.
One answer rather simple-minded actually is that love is a kind of feeling, a certain
kind of affection.
What I think a more detailed and perceptive answer is love involves decisions, commitments,
it involves a keen sense of yourself, in fact I would argue, what love really comes down
to is learning to conceive of yourself in terms of another person but Mirceau understands
none of that.
So to the question do you love me?
All he can think to say is I don't know what you mean probably not.
Some pages later Marie raises the M question and if you don't get nervous with the L question
I think all of us get nervous with the M question.
Do you want to get married?
But the response again is just kind of blasé.
Basically Mirceau says if you want to but he doesn't have any conception of what marriage
entails, doesn't have any conception of marriage as a commitment, doesn't have any sense of
marriage as the culmination of love since he doesn't understand what love is.
So he comments and of course this is all through Mirceau's eyes, he comments that suddenly
Marie got a little quiet, we get the picture of her sulking, he doesn't quite understand
this but then they both start laughing and everything's okay again.
He isn't empathetic, he has no idea what other people are feeling and throughout the book
there's this general sense that other people are just kind of there for him.
He fits in, in fact one of the curious things about his personality is he always takes the
path of least resistance so when Marie asks do you want to get married he says sure if
you want to.
When Raymond the Pimp asks him if you'd like to be pals and one can imagine this sleazy
character asking you you want to be friends and I suspect you would run the other way
but Mirceau says sure if you want to.
So there's a sense in which this is a really empty character, he has no emotions, he has
very few thoughts, he never does what I think we would call thinking, he doesn't reflect
his no moral sensibilities and the net result is that we have a character who is really
kind of a vacuum and a vacuum through whom we learn to see his world.
This culminates at the end of the first half of the book in his murdering a man and I want
to talk about that in some detail in a moment.
What's curious about the murder scene is it doesn't look like any murder scene you've
ever read before.
There's a sense in which what bothers Mirceau is the fact that it's hot, he has a pistol
in his pocket and in front of him is the Arab who in fact has stabbed his friend Raymond
a few hours ago and he kills the Arab really because he's hot, that doesn't seem to make
much sense.
In response to having killed a man, of course he is immediately whisked away to prison and
so on, what he shows again is an absence of emotion, he doesn't feel regret, he doesn't
really understand what that means, he certainly doesn't feel any guilt, he doesn't understand
what that means, he doesn't understand what is happening to him.
Prison takes away his freedom but he comments at one point in prison, why are they taking
away my freedom and the jailer explains this is part of your punishment and again he just
accepts it.
He has no concept of the future, not just when his employer offers him this nice job
in Paris, he doesn't take it but when Marie asked about getting married it's really just
a question of doing something now, it's not a question of a lifetime together.
He doesn't think about the consequences of what he does, when he puts the pistol in his
pocket as he goes for a walk on the beach, it doesn't occur to him as it would certainly
occur to any of us that this is a dangerous piece of machinery, one might be called upon
to use it, one could hurt oneself, one could certainly hurt other people, he doesn't make
any plans, he really lives day by day, one might almost say moment by moment and that
of course is part of the point that Camus is trying to give us, he has no regrets about
his killing, he has no feelings of almost any kind, well let me take that back, he has
no feelings in the general sense of emotion, he doesn't feel grief at his mother's death,
he doesn't feel repulsion at his rather sleazy neighbors, he doesn't feel anything that we
can recognize his love with his girlfriend Marie, although you might say there's a certain
kind of animal affinity there or perhaps even affection, no more than that, he doesn't have
any feeling about the people he meets all the time, he doesn't have any feeling about
his job and in the murder itself think about how most authors would describe the scene
immediately leading up to a killing, there's no tension, there's no fear, no anxiety and
afterwards no regrets, but Merceau very richly feels another kind of feeling, what I think
we could call physical sensations, he appreciates, in fact Camus prose here can be very lyrical,
he appreciates the warmth of the sun, he appreciates the cool of the ocean, he appreciates the
smell of brine that Marie leaves behind on the pillow, he has all sorts of physical sensations
which he actually is very involved in, the taste of coffee, his favorite treat, but nevertheless
he doesn't have any emotions and I would say the link between emotions and thinking here
is very important, philosophers often talk as if these are two opposed matters, occupying
different mental faculties or different parts of the brain, but I would argue and I think
this novel bears it out rather nicely that people without thoughts are often without
feelings too, people without feelings are often without thoughts, if you don't have emotions
what is there to think about?
And finally the oddity of the murder, let me talk about that, the basic story is that
Merceau goes off to the beach with his friend Raymond, because Raymond has already been
stabbed in the arm by in fact the brother of the Arab woman he has beaten up, he gives
Merceau his pistol and says you better carry this just in case, now why you would walk
on the beach alone after an incident such as that is already of course a question, but
Merceau approaches what turns out to be the same Arab on the beach and the Arab pulls
out a knife which flashes in the sunlight and Merceau complains what about, the heat
of the sun and describes again very lyrically the way the sun was scorching his eyelids,
the way the rays of light, especially the light reflected from the blade of the knife
were gouging his eyes and scarring his eyelids and so on, it's a very interesting literary
discussion because what it has is kind of all the metaphors of the knife, but all translated
into the effect of the sun.
Merceau takes a step forward which he comments to himself, it's probably a foolish thing
to do, not because he was coming one step closer to somebody who was armed and out
for him, but because he wouldn't get out of the sun by stepping one step forward, anyway
he approaches the Arab and the description is very graphic, his body tenses up, he says
like a steel spring, the trigger gave, notice he didn't pull the trigger, trigger gave,
the butt of the gun hits his palm, notice he doesn't fire the gun, he's rather the victim,
the bullet hits the Arab, the butt of the gun by Newton's third law hits his palm, the
picture is that the killing just happens, he's there, he happens to be holding the
gun or the gun is in his hand, but there's a real sense that there's no agency here,
Merceau doesn't do anything, in fact the first act of sentence indicating that he's doing
something is he shook off the sweat that had accumulated on his forehead and then he shoots
rather pointlessly four more shots into the inert body of the dead Arab, it's a frightening
scene and it's frightening because none of the emotions, none of the thoughts, none of
the anxieties and certainly none of the moral qualms that we would certainly feel ourselves
are there, but that's the end of part one and with that we move into the second part
of the book which is entirely concerned with his imprisonment and trial.
Now let's ask a question, is Camus politically naive?
One of our best political writers who has written on Camus, Connor Cruz O'Brien, says
how could a man who was raised in Algeria have concocted such an absurd story, let me
give you an analogy, imagine a story in Faulknerian Mississippi set say in the 1930s and here's
the plot, a black man stabs a white man and later on the white man or one of his friends
comes across the same black man who is still armed, shoots him, kills him, then he's arrested,
he's arrested, he's sent to trial, he is found guilty and condemned to execution, it
would never happen.
You don't have to see too many Rod Stegner movies to realize, he might end up having
coffee with a sheriff and then the whole incident would be quickly forgotten.
That's what Algeria was certainly like in the 1940s.
There was vicious racism, there was violence all around and it is one of the less obvious
parts of the book that Camus who is writing in the midst of all this never once mentions
any of these political racial tensions, never once talks about the cafes that were being
bombed and so on, when he describes the trial we're given this rather absurd picture in
which a Frenchman is condemned to death for killing an Arab in self-defense.
Well Camus was not politically naive, he wrote voluminously on the Algerian situation
and always held out for a kind of humanity as he put it in one of his essays, the idea
is to be neither a victim nor an executioner, but then the question is what's the point
of the trial, why is there a trial here and I think to look at it as a kind of political
show or to look at it as many of our modern American dramas would have it as a kind of
added suspense to sort of bring a story together, it's not that at all.
I think the analogy here and it's a very close analogy because it's one of Camus' favorite
authors is with the novel by Kafka written just several years before.
Kafka's novel The Trial has often been interpreted in a rather dense kind of way as a kind of
parody of the Czech legal system, it's terribly inefficient, it is often obscene, in any case
it is not fair, but I think to understand that novel as nothing but a political parody
is to miss it entirely and of course most perceptive readers and commentators have noted
that what Kafka is really doing is capturing something basic about the human psyche.
The novel begins with a young man, not too unlike Marceau, who is arrested apparently
for no reason, he tries to find out what am I being arrested for and he spends the entirety
of the book trying to find out what the charges are and how he can defend himself against them,
he never succeeds and at the end of the novel he too is put to death never having figured out
what the problem was. It's a novel about guilt and innocence, it's a novel which says even those
of us who seem to be innocent are in some profound sense guilty and try as we might to figure out
what that's all about, we're not going to, but more generally to be human is to be guilty and what
Camus picks up too is something very much like that theme. So the reason for the trial in The
Stranger is that here is Marceau who up until this point has shown no signs of emotion,
no signs of any moral sensibility and he's put into a situation where he is being judged by
his peers, where he is being put into the spotlight of moral judgment in particular and the point
of the trial is to put it very bluntly to turn him into a human being and that means in part to
teach him what it means to feel guilty. Thanks.
