Lecture 7, Soren Kierkegaard on Becoming a Christian
I introduced the lecturers with Camus because it seems to me that he sets the sensibility
and raises many of the questions that we're going to be answering for the rest of the lectures.
But in a way Camus is more a writer, more of a literary fellow than he is a philosopher.
His ideas are often thrown together in what in the French is quite simply an attempt, an essay.
But when we turn back to Kierkegaard, back in the middle of the 19th century, the proper beginning of existentialism,
we start getting into some really solid and I would add difficult philosophy.
Kierkegaard was an extremely intense individual like most of the people we'll talk about.
He had a life that I think by any lights was not in the usual sense a happy one.
He was crippled both physically and emotionally.
He was burdened by guilt.
There was a story he told about his father who at the tender age of something like 13
did something that these days 13 year olds do as a matter of routine.
He uttered a blasphemy. He cursed God.
But what Kierkegaard tells us is that for the rest of his life he was burdened by guilt
which he passed on quite intact to his young son.
Kierkegaard was Danish. He lived his entire life in Copenhagen.
He really just spent one semester away going to school in Berlin.
Copenhagen was perhaps the most bourgeois of the cities of bourgeois Europe.
In 1848 when much of Europe was bursting into revolution,
Copenhagen had its version of revolution which Kierkegaard lampooned
as a bunch of people getting into the Sunday best and walking to the town hall.
He was not sympathetic with his countrymen.
He was not sympathetic with the climate and I mean here the intellectual and cultural climate of Denmark.
He was very disconcerted with what he called the present age
which he called an age of reflection and repose something that was absolutely lacking in passion.
And he comments that even a person who commits suicide does it out of over reflection
and doesn't do it because of despair.
I mentioned that he spent one period abroad, slightly abroad anyway.
In Berlin his best friend, Hans Christian Andersen, the great writer, was with him.
According to Kierkegaard's own account it was a year of what we would probably not call
but he would, libertinage, he enjoyed himself or tried to enjoy himself thoroughly.
But in truth he found that pleasure didn't work.
Hedonism, the life of pursuing pleasure, didn't work for him.
In a way he rejected pleasure, he rejected the life of friendship,
he rejected the general life that most of us would aspire to or enjoy
because he, I think we can say personally, psychologically, was certainly not suited to it.
Now there's a comment in Nietzsche which I've always found extremely revealing
and of course many people believe this, especially if they're not philosophers.
But what a philosopher tends to argue, however abstract or obstruc, it might be,
what a philosopher tends to argue typically has to do with his or her personal problems.
There's a sense in which philosophy is personality rendered explicit in some rather difficult words.
And Hegel, whom I'll talk about in this lecture, also had the theory that this is true not just of individuals
but it's true of entire ages, that philosophy really is nothing other than the mentality of the age rendered explicit.
Now with Kierkegaard what we find is certainly an illustration of the first, he would not deny that for a second.
Perhaps the most important word in his entire philosophical career is the word subjectivity.
And Kierkegaard would argue, of course my philosophy is subjective.
Of course it is an expression of my problems, my suffering, my interests.
Whether or not it affects you, whether or not you accept it as true really has to do with you and your life and your problems.
In general, I think we can say that what begins as an unhappy year in his late teens culminates in a philosophical outlook
which takes the whole question of happiness, of pleasure, of a life lived according to enjoyment and fulfillment.
All of this becomes a problem, what Kierkegaard will refer to using a very popular term at the time, the aesthetic.
Subsequently, he rejected what promised to be a very successful career in the ministry where he was studying.
He was also engaged to be married to a quite lovely young woman who later married another philosopher
but he broke off the engagement and his reason was that he couldn't serve a marriage, a ministry
in the way that he felt he would be obliged to serve and at the same time serve himself.
This very, at this point still incoate sense that he really wanted to be a religious man
but he at this point wasn't quite sure what that was.
Part of his campaign was to understand Christianity.
Now, I think we should be careful here, Kierkegaard often talks more generally about the religious life
but what he almost always refers to is very specifically the Christian life and more narrowly
something that really has to do with Protestantism, Lutheranism, the sort of religion that he certainly learned in Denmark.
What he said at several points in his career, most famously when he started his serious Christian writing in the late 1840s
was that his whole mission in life and philosophy was to redefine what it meant to be a Christian or slate variation,
redefine what it meant to become a Christian.
There's a sense in which to be a Christian is itself a subjective projection.
It's based on the fact that one suffers, it's based on the fact that one is not happy
and some people have used this as an argument against Christianity saying it's just a kind of psychotherapy.
Kierkegaard would probably agree but that of course is no argument against it.
But is that what it is to be a Christian just to apply therapy to oneself by believing in some doctrines
which somehow rationalize or make you feel better about your problems
and that's for Kierkegaard clearly not the case.
The question is what is it to be a Christian? It's a very difficult question.
On the one hand he looked around and he saw that most of the people in his society simply assumed they were Christians
because they were born of Christian parents and they were raised in a Christian society.
They were taken to church once or twice a week. They learned certain prayers.
They learned to assent to certain beliefs.
So Kierkegaard noted that to be born a Christian seems to give this presumption of being a Christian
and he wants to say that's utterly insufficient.
It's also true, Kierkegaard noted, that people think that they're Christians just because they have a certain set of beliefs.
Or perhaps having a belief is too strong if you ask a good many Christians what exactly is it that you believe?
They would have a hard time answering. They would find in fact the doctrines incomprehensible.
Kierkegaard tells us that belief or assent to belief is again not enough to be a Christian.
You can imagine a philosopher for example and I've met quite a few myself
who can work very interestingly with various Christian doctrines, develop certain arguments
about why these doctrines might be true, but nevertheless they have not a bit of faith about them.
And for Kierkegaard whatever else Christianity is going to be, it's about faith.
In fact he says in one of his more dramatic statements that it's much easier to become a Christian
if you aren't already one than if you were born one.
And as you'll see what he has in mind here is that Christianity is a kind of commitment.
It is not something to be taken for granted. It is not something to be simply understood or comprehended.
And so when he looks at people who consider themselves Christians just because they've been raised that way
or he looks at Christians who think of themselves as Christians just because they hold certain beliefs.
He wants to say those people in a sense are hypocrites that what we really want to talk about is what it takes to become a Christian.
When he talks about Christians in general he is often abusive.
And let me be very clear here that when he does this he is perhaps being offensive,
but he would say he is trying to be true to what he considers the true faith.
It is not a question of attacking Christianity as for example we will see Nietzsche do,
but rather it's a question of what is it to be a true Christian and that's the question that plagues him throughout his life.
To the many people who consider themselves Christians he charges that they are hypocrites,
that their beliefs are empty, they think they understand what in fact they can't possibly understand
and that what they consider their Christianity is really a kind of banal social membership.
They belong to a church, they hang out together, but it doesn't have anything to do with Christianity.
So what is Christianity about?
I mentioned commitment but perhaps the first thing to say is it's about passion.
To be a Christian is to believe fervently in one's heart to the point where one experiences
what Kierkegaard rather nicely calls fear and trembling.
It is an emotional relationship, it is not simply a set of beliefs and it is not simply social membership.
Most Christians, Kierkegaard tells us, it's really a herd phenomenon,
a kind of cattle notion that he anticipates Nietzsche in using.
People hang out together, they believe and assert what other people believe, they don't think about it
and most importantly they don't feel about it, but he wants to say Christianity is not about doctrines,
it is only minimally about rituals, it is not about social belonging.
In fact, it turns out that it's only a contingent matter that there are other Christians in the world.
That to be a Christian, it's something that one does all by oneself and he adds,
it's not as if it necessarily shows, you can't tell a true Christian by looking at him or her.
He talks very often about it being completely a matter of inwardness.
It is an individual, passionate commitment which has or need have no external manifestations.
As for the doctrines of Christianity, Kierkegaard points out, rather dramatically, that Christianity makes no sense.
Christianity is a paradox.
For example, in his day there were a great many theologians and philosophers
who worried about the question how God could be both eternal, which means outside of time,
and present on earth, in particular, present on earth at a particular time as Jesus.
I find when I talk to people these days, even devout Christians, that doesn't strike them as such a problem.
But here's another one that we've already talked about in these lectures that goes back many centuries
and I think anyone would have to be quite insensitive not to take it very seriously.
It too is a paradox.
It's the idea of the problem of evil.
The problem of evil is the idea that God is, first of all, very good.
He loves us.
Second, God is all-powerful.
Third, God is all-knowing.
So if there is evil suffering going on in the world, God certainly knows about it.
God can certainly do something about it and because he cares, he will do something about it.
And yet we look around and we see that there is suffering and evil all around us.
And so the very difficult paradox that philosophers have struggled with now almost for two millennia
is how is it possible to have such a God and at the same time to have evil and suffering on earth?
There have been many ingenious attempts to solve this problem, of course, but nevertheless,
it is one of those questions that a true believer really must get stuck on.
And the question is how can you continue to believe in such a God in the face of what is the undeniable state of the world?
That for Kierkegaard is a paradox.
It's a paradox that any believer must face.
It is something that all the explanations fail to explain.
It is something that many people have tried to deny in various ways.
Something awful happens. They say it's God's will.
Philosophers defend this as the best of all possible worlds, even if there's a lot of evil.
You couldn't have a world with less evil and so on.
But the truth is whatever your philosophical position, it gets stuck in your mind.
And that's the idea for Kierkegaard.
If Christianity said something that was simply commonsensical, if it said something we could all readily believe,
take the example for instance, 2 plus 2 equals 4.
I have never seen a student get passionate about 2 plus 2 equals 4.
It's simply true.
On the other hand, if you tell somebody to believe 2 plus 2 equals 5,
and for some reason you make it clear that this is something they really must believe,
then you'll see some very interesting behavior,
because it's not going to be just a matter of filling with the mathematics,
but it's going to be a matter of trying to believe what is incomprehensible, what is impossible.
Now that's not a terrific example.
Certainly the problem of evil, or in Kierkegaard's time the problem of how God can be both eternal and timely
is much more rich in its connotations and so on.
But the idea is that Christianity invokes passion precisely because it is something that can't be simply accepted.
You can't say to Christianity, oh yeah, that makes sense.
But quite the contrary, it requires what Kierkegaard very famously coins as a leap of faith.
You can only understand so much, and in the realm of religion actually not all that much.
And at that point you have to make a jump.
You have to say, I'm going to believe this even if I can't understand it.
And so there's a sense in which the paradox itself, the doctrines of Christianity,
become in a sense secondary, or merely a kind of trigger for the kind of passionate commitment that he talks about.
Kierkegaard has a target in many of his works, and certainly as a philosopher, this target takes center stage.
The target is a philosopher we've mentioned casually so far.
He's the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, who was a philosopher in Berlin,
and in fact died just 10 years before Kierkegaard made his own sojourn to Berlin and studied at the same university.
At that time Hegel was really the figure in philosophy.
He was studied everywhere.
He was interpreted very widely as a Christian but a heterodox Christian,
someone who defended Christianity but in terms that Orthodox Christians couldn't or shouldn't accept.
Consequently, when he was lectured about after his death in Berlin,
there was a very strong tendency to give him a kind of dual attention,
on the one hand acknowledging that he really was the great philosopher of the early 19th century,
at the same time to lament the fact that his philosophy in some critical way left out the essence of Christianity.
Or in the words of a man named Schelling, who at one point was his roommate in college and later became his philosophical antagonist.
Schelling was giving lectures in Berlin.
Kierkegaard in fact took those lectures.
And Schelling made a big point of saying that Hegel's philosophy was negative.
And this has a number of interpretations, but let me try to explain it in the terms that Kierkegaard took away with him.
First, Hegel's philosophy, which is famously difficult and obscure, can be presented, I think, in two doctrines.
The first doctrine is that there is not just a bunch of individual selves that populate the human world,
but there is ultimately a single self, something which Hegel called spirit, or geist, or world spirit.
The idea is that, first of all, people are all united in a very profound way, and individuality, in a sense, is an illusion.
There were quite a few philosophers around this period in Germany who were arguing similar theses.
Hegel perhaps made it the most concrete and certainly became the most famous for defending it.
But the idea is that the individual doesn't really count.
I sometimes illustrate this by talking about Hegel's own life.
He was alive and he was just beginning to teach, in fact, when Napoleon invaded Germany, or what we now call Germany.
And those were back in the days when you could sort of watch a battle from a safe hilltop retreat.
And Hegel, who was teaching at a town called Jena, watched Napoleon in battle in the rather famous battle of Jena,
which was really Napoleon at the height of his powers, and one imagines watching a field of hundreds of thousands of young men
in brightly colored uniforms, attacking, retreating, killing each other.
And what you see from your safe distance is a mass of red coats moving one way, and a mass of green coats moving another way,
and perhaps a mass of blue coats sort of on the hill prepared to attack.
And you get the sense that the individual in such an encounter really amounts to very little, almost nothing.
Hegel's notion of the world spirit was, in part, an attempt to capture that sense, that the forces of the world,
and we're talking about the human forces of the world, were at this point so massive that individuals no longer really counted.
But there was a more positive sense too, which I think one should make clear, Kierkegaard didn't pay much attention to it,
and that is that this idea of the world spirit was also one of the first philosophical attempts to be truly international.
Not just to say there are many cultures, and not just to talk about the possibility of world government,
but rather to say that for all of our cultural differences and our social differences and so on,
we are ultimately all one humanity in a quite literal way.
One of the first implications of this is that if there is such a world spirit, and if we are all part of it,
then talking about God as a separate spirit stops making sense.
The world spirit is all-encompassing, and all-encompassing includes God.
It was a thesis that had been argued some years before by the great Dutch philosopher Spinoza,
but Spinoza at the time, as worth noting, was pretty much banned in almost all of Europe, even in fact in Holland, as an atheist.
Because to say that God does not exist apart from his creation is indeed a rejection of the traditional notion of God
as an independent, all-powerful, all-knowing, just-and-benign entity.
Hegel denied this, and it was only with a good amount of fancy dancing and some very obscure language
that he managed to not be condemned in his life as also a kind of Spinozist.
But that first thesis, that there is a world spirit which encompasses us all, which includes God,
is really the hallmark of Hegel's philosophy, and it is one of the things that is ferociously rejected by Kierkegaard,
and it's rejected on at least two grounds.
First of all, on religious grounds, Kierkegaard rejected Hegel's notion of spirit and its equation with God.
Kierkegaard felt that you had to defend, if you were to be a Christian at all, the idea of a God who confronts you,
a God that is separate from his creation, a God that is something other than simply the spirit of humanity.
In fact, Kierkegaard gives us a picture of God as a personal encounter,
and this is something I think a great many people don't quite understand about him.
It's not just that he insists that God is the Orthodox God, the God of the Jewish people, the God of Christianity,
but rather it is the idea of a very personal God.
It is the idea of confronting some really humongous being, someone who is so powerful, so great that you can't comprehend, but you can't step away.
That's the origin of the fear and trembling he talks about.
But in order to have such a confrontation, of course, you have to consider yourself separate from that God.
You have to consider yourself face to face with that God, opposed to that God in a sense, and this is exactly what Hegel denies.
Hegel's conception of God also is something that supposedly could be rationally comprehended.
The idea of rational comprehension is something I've already pointed out that Kierkegaard rejects.
But the very idea, for example, of proving God's existence, which was a very popular activity among medieval theologians
and also among some modern philosophers, struck Kierkegaard as utter nonsense.
He gives an analogy. Suppose you went to see the Emperor Napoleon, and this would be Napoleon III, not the first one.
But suppose you went to see the Emperor Napoleon and said to him,
Sire, I am going to do something remarkable for you. I am going to prove that you exist.
That would be ludicrous. And in fact, if you say to God in effect, as St. Anselm had some centuries before,
God, I am going to show rationally that you must exist.
It's ludicrous that there's a sense in which to believe in God is to be face to face with this wonderful overpowering being.
And it doesn't work if what you're trying to understand is this as a principle.
This is something which is rationally demonstrable.
Second, of course, Kierkegaard rejected the collectivity of Hegel's notion of spirit.
Throughout his life, Kierkegaard makes a great emphasis on philosophy as a way of understanding how you personally are to live.
And the idea that one can simply look at history as Hegel suggests and come to understand the trajectory of world spirit as Hegel argues
gives no clue whatsoever to how one is supposed to live one's life.
In his journals, Kierkegaard writes as a young man,
what I seek is a truth for which I can live and die.
He says a bit more morbidly. On his tombstone, he would like it to be inscribed the individual.
For Kierkegaard, everything comes down to the individual.
And where Hegel minimized the individual, rendered him insignificant in the scope of the wide forces of humanity and the world,
Kierkegaard wants to refocus and say, it's really the individual that is everything.
When he was in Berlin, Kierkegaard, as I said, studied with Schelling.
Let me fill that in a bit because it's a fascinating story in itself.
Schelling and Hegel had been roommates in college.
Schelling had been famous, got famous much before Hegel did, who was pretty much unknown for a good chunk of Schelling's career.
And then Hegel threw one really spectacular book.
Skyrocketed to fame and left Schelling in the dust.
Schelling was extremely jealous.
And when he gave the course in Berlin that Kierkegaard took,
what he was doing in many ways was expressing his own envy and resentment.
Nevertheless, the idea that Hegel's philosophy was negative, the fact that it left out the critical core of Christianity,
was obviously something that Kierkegaard was very ready to pick up.
I should add as a fascinating historical footnote that in the same class were two other visitors from abroad.
Friedrich Engels, later to be known as one of the Marx Brothers,
and Mikhail Bakunin, who would become perhaps still one of the most elegant anarchists of all time.
I sometimes imagine a dialogue in the lunchroom at the University of Berlin
between Kierkegaard with his sort of beginning super religious sensibilities,
Engels with his early socialism, Bakunin with his anarchist tendencies,
and I wonder what they would have talked about.
But anyway, it was Hegel who was the paradigm of this collectivist, rationalist notion of spirit,
and consequently in contemporary Christianity.
He stood for everything that Kierkegaard rejected.
Because to be a Christian for Kierkegaard was through and through an individual decision.
It was a commitment that you made and it was something you passionately threw yourself into.
To try to understand Christianity in any other way, to try and make it rational,
to try and make it something that is collective, to try and make it simply something social, something comfortable,
is absolutely wrong.
Kierkegaard faces head on the idea that this is really just a rationalization of his own suffering.
He was, as I said, an extremely unhappy individual.
His response is interesting.
He says in one among many, many aphorisms that Christianity is not melancholy,
but rather it's glad tidings for the melancholy.
In other words, it is a kind of rationalization,
a rationalization that must be understood and appreciated in terms of individual choice and commitment.
This leads to a dichotomy which has become familiar to us through our discussion of Camus.
On the one hand, there is what we might generally call objectivity.
Things that can be known, the world of science.
And in Kierkegaard's case, I think it's important to point out that he respected this world,
but he never, in fact, argued against it.
What he argued against was the intrusion of the scientific method and so on into the other realm,
the realm of subjectivity, the realm of individual choice.
When, for example, people argue in scientific terms that the miracles in the Bible literally might have happened,
or when creationists argue that creationism, in fact, is a scientific hypothesis,
what they do is they confuse those two realms.
And what Kierkegaard is all about is adamantly wanting to keep them apart,
wanting to keep religion on the side of subjectivity,
and as he says, all power to the sciences, but that's not what I'm doing.
