Lecture 9 Kierkegaard's Existential Dialectic
Kierkegaard's rejection of Hegel might be viewed along two different dimensions.
On the one hand, there is Kierkegaard's thorough rejection of Hegel's collective notion, the
idea that the individual is unimportant.
But second, Hegel's notion of spirit was distinctive in that it was firmly historical.
One has said that Hegel invented history.
This is, of course, an exaggeration, there's a sense in which, of course, there was history
back among the Greeks, Herodotus and Thucydides, and of course people have been writing history
for thousands of years.
But there's a sense in which Hegel developed an idea which only really became manifest
in the 19th century.
And it was the idea that history has a purpose, that history is the evolution of something.
This of course manifested itself 50 years later in Darwin.
But in Hegel, it pretty much was confined to the human, and the idea that the human spirit
was something that evolved over huge amounts of time, and Hegel went back to the ancient
Greeks, even went back to the Chinese, and talked about how this human spirit developed
over history in this kind of massive, non-individualistic way.
It rejects the second dimension too, and for many of the same reasons that He rejects
the first.
He rejects the emphasis on spirit as opposed to the emphasis on the individual, because
it leaves out what He, and many people following Him, would say is most important, and that
is, philosophy should tell you how to live your life, you personally.
And that means ultimately it comes down to the ethically existing individual.
But second, the idea of understanding this purpose of history, something which Hegel
very dramatically developed, and the idea is that history has evolved to the point where
we understand ourselves as universal spirit.
That historical dimension is something that Kirkgaard also wanted to reject, because after
all, wherever we are on the historical trajectory, that really doesn't help us make the kinds
of decisions we have to make.
Hegel called this historical development, this purposiveness, by the rather exciting
Greek name, dialectic.
And one might say that Hegel's philosophy is, among other things, about a historical dialectic
that shows us where we've come from, where we're going, and where we are.
Kirkgaard, by contrast, also takes the notion of a dialectic, but he makes it strictly personal.
He calls it an existential dialectic.
And the idea is that, while there may well be the kind of interplay that Hegel had talked
about in great detail in history, there is also, and more importantly, a kind of interplay
within each and every individual.
The notion of dialectic itself is fascinating, it gets traced back to the Greeks, it's a
Greek word, Plato and Aristotle talked about it, and it is often said that dialectic is
in one, rather, banal translation, simply a conversation.
But in its sort of proceeding through history, through philosophy, dialectic takes on a much
more dramatic sensibility.
It's not just a conversation, but it's a confrontation.
And in particular, Hegel's thesis was that history proceeds through one mode of consciousness,
one way of thinking, one way of living, in conflict with another, until the conflict
itself produces a kind of offspring, which may be a synthesis of the two antitheses,
or it may be something else entirely.
But the idea is that history develops, and it develops in particular through conflict.
It's an idea which was picked up by Kirkgaard's exact contemporary Karl Marx, who turned
Hegel's historical intellectual dialectic into something that was much more material
and sociological.
But in Kirkgaard, the idea of a dialectic has to do not with warring forces in history,
it has to do not with warring ideas as such, but rather it has to do with what goes on
in a subjective individual, as he or she tries to make the decisions that are going to define
his or her life.
The personal dialectic is one that is existential in precisely the sense that it has to do with
this notion of existence, taking a hold of one's life, making commitments, passionately
throwing oneself into one way of life or another.
Kirkgaard talks about modes of existence, or we might even say, and he uses a term like
this, that they are lifestyles, except that term is a little bit corrupted from California
over use.
But the idea is that there are different ways of living, and in addition to making the particular
decisions we make about what to do or how to act, we also make some very general broad
decisions about how we're to live.
Just to take a kind of homey example for us, deciding to join the Marines would be choosing
a lifestyle, choosing a mode of existence.
There's a sense in which one simple decision can get you in, but no simple decision can
get you out.
There's a sense in which once you've entered into this lifestyle, you are truly committed,
and once you enter into the lifestyle, of course, there are all sorts of structural and
institutional reasons why you stay in that lifestyle.
Getting married, and let's think of it in the 19th century context rather than the 20th
century context, but deciding to get married is to choose a lifestyle.
As you can guess from what little I've told you about Kierkegaard's autobiography, it's
going to be the major examples of his notion of a dialectic, whether or not to get married.
It's not simply a choice of what do we do for the next few years, but it really is a
question about what kind of person do I want to become.
The important point here is that there is no rational standard for such choices.
In other words, it is strictly in the realm of subjectivity, not objectivity.
In Hegel, the dialectic was, in an important sense, objective.
It was rational.
And so that by understanding this trajectory of history, one would understand not just
the way things have been, but one would understand the way things, in some sense, have to go.
There is no such notion in Kierkegaard.
The choosing between lifestyles, choosing whether, for example, to be a religious person
or an atheist, choosing whether or not to be an ethical person or rather an immoralist.
All of this is a matter of choice.
And in fact, what he gives us, perhaps over simply, are three different modes of existence,
three different lifestyles.
And the important point is, again, that there is no rational way of choosing among them.
It is simply a matter of subjective choice.
The three styles, very quickly, are something he calls the aesthetic.
And as I indicated in the first lecture, the aesthetic for him refers primarily to the
life of pleasure.
It refers to the idea that one lives for satisfaction.
And I want to talk about that in some detail in a few minutes.
Second lifestyle is called the ethical.
And the ethical life is basically the life of, as you would guess, morality.
It's doing your duty, fulfilling your obligations, keeping your promises, being a good person,
caring about the welfare of others as well as yourself.
And the third lifestyle, needless to say, is the religious life.
And Kierkegaard juxtaposes these against one another and says that it is a choice that
we have to make.
With regard to the aesthetic, one might argue that this is not a choice.
It's simply natural.
There has certainly been a great many philosophers, the utilitarians who are more or less Kierkegaard's
contemporaries would be one example, who would say that pleasure is the natural end or purpose
of human activity or, on the other side, avoidance of pain, which is sort of negative
pleasure, is the purpose, the aim of human activity.
This is true not only of human beings, it's true of virtually all creatures, certainly
all creatures of any sophistication.
And consequently, to talk about it as a choice really doesn't make any sense.
It's just what people do.
And lots of philosophers would say that it is simply a matter of logic, a kind of conceptual
truth, that people do what they want to do.
People do what will give them satisfaction or think will give them satisfaction.
People do what will give them a pleasure or help them to avoid pain.
It's just natural.
It's not a choice at all.
But thinking about Kierkegaard's own life, we realize what it means to say that it's
a choice.
True, Kierkegaard discovered in his year of libertinism with his friend Hans Christian
Andersen, that the life of pleasure was not for him.
But that wasn't just a recognition.
It wasn't just saying, I'm a person who is anhedonic, I'm a person who doesn't enjoy
enjoying himself.
But it's rather making a decision that you are going to live one kind of life rather
than another.
One can imagine Kierkegaard, and certainly one knows lots of people who are similarly
anhedonic who don't enjoy themselves very much, resolving to learn to enjoy themselves,
taking all sorts of great steps, often overstepping boundaries, precisely in order to enjoy themselves
when they do not now.
Kierkegaard, of course, takes the opposite tact and says, I'm not enjoying myself.
Maybe this is telling me something important about myself and what I'm supposed to do.
And so he decides, and it is a decision, not to pursue pleasure.
The aesthetic life in general can be defined in terms of not so much the pursuit of pleasure
and the avoidance of pain, although that's an important part of it after all the very
word aesthetic essentially comes from the Greek having to do with feeling.
But it also has to do with something broader, and that's the notion of satisfaction.
One might say that the aesthetic is a life devoted to personal satisfaction.
It is not necessarily ethical, although I should add it's not necessarily unethical.
It is not necessarily unreligious either.
It's a question of priorities.
And to choose the aesthetic life is to decide that your personal satisfaction is the most
important thing for you.
Kierkegaard has an example, rather controversial example of the aesthetic life.
One of his favorite operas was Don Giovanni, Mozart's great opera.
I'm often fascinated by the thought that before you had record players and CDs and cassettes
and Walkman and so on, that people would hear their favorite piece of music perhaps a half
dozen number of times in their lifetime.
That's really kind of striking.
Anyway, Kierkegaard saw Don Giovanni every chance he got, he loved the opera, and there's
a sense in which the character of Don Juan plays a role throughout his philosophy.
When he writes for example about seduction, with reference for example to seducing his
readers, but when he writes about seduction in a rather straightforward sexual sense,
it's Don Juan that he has in mind.
Now if you think about who was Don Juan.
The short answer is he was a man who pursued his own pleasures, quite to the exclusion
of any real consideration of other people.
According to the libretto, it was a thousand and three in Spain alone.
Well he couldn't have cared that much about any one of them.
They were simply used, and of course thinking of the opera, you realize that not only is
he callous about the women he sleeps with, but he is in a way indifferent to human life
when he has to sacrifice the father of one of his conquests.
He does so without even a pang of conscience.
As I said, it's not necessary to be immoral in order to be aesthetic, but nevertheless
as a question of priorities, it is a matter of when the chips are down, choosing your
own satisfaction over anything else.
The aesthetic life isn't necessarily quite so vulgar, and as a kind of contrast to Don
Juan, let me take as an example Mozart himself.
Mozart was also an aesthetic, and here we move from the early 19th century meaning of
the word aesthetic, having to do with feeling, to the later 19th century meaning of that
same word, where it has to do with art and artistry.
Mozart was aesthetic in the latter sense, and if you accept the story in Amadeus, let's
exclude Mozart's behavior under the piano, just talk about his behavior on top of the
piano, but basically Mozart was someone who lived for satisfaction too.
But his satisfaction wasn't the conquest of women.
His satisfaction was, in each case, the composition of a perfect piece of music.
It may well have been that it also satisfied the standards of the time, that it was in
fact in tune with the culture, but the truth was that Mozart was satisfying himself.
If he wrote an imperfect piece of music, he was the one who would toss it away.
If he wrote a perfect piece of music, he was satisfied and often quite irregardless of
how it sort of played for his audience.
So you might think of Mozart too as aesthetic in the sense that he lived for satisfaction.
The problem Kierkegaard says is that the aesthetic life, like any life, has its own liability,
and that liability is most obvious in the question of boredom.
Don Juan is a good example.
There's a sense in which one imagines what it would be like to have so many sexual partners,
and there's a point where one wants to say, how can you tell them apart?
Isn't one just like the others?
And many writers on the Don Juan problem have come up with some rather extravagant metaphysical
ways of expressing this.
For example, the fact that Don Juan didn't love women, what he loved was woman writ large.
Well, all of this is a way of dancing around the real problem.
And the problem is that when it's simply desire and satisfaction, there's a point where satisfaction
becomes more and more difficult, where it becomes more and more all the same, where repeating
something an indefinite number of times becomes inevitably tedious.
And here, of course, we go back to Sisyphus, and Kierkegaard is very concerned with his
question of repetition.
He writes actually rather extensively about it, and the ways in which one can prevent
the repetition of the same from becoming totally boring, totally tedious.
And what he says is that essentially, what Camus is later to say, one has to commit oneself,
one passionately throws oneself into one's activities themselves, and by so doing evades
boredom at least for a while.
But the truth is, one can't do it.
And here, Kierkegaard is presenting this with something that might sometimes be taken as
a kind of objective psychological truth.
But I think that would be misreading him, since he so strongly wants to emphasize the
subjective side of this, and certainly it was true of him, it was certainly true of
most of the people he knew, and even without making it a point of scientific psychology,
one can easily understand the logic of becoming jaded.
One becomes tired of the pleasures which one is here to enjoy, or put it in a different
way.
One is never really satisfied.
The great German poet Goethe in Faust writes, from desire I rushed to satisfaction, but
from satisfaction I leap to desire.
Every time you satisfy a desire, a new one takes its place.
So if the aim of the aesthetic life is satisfaction, there is a sense in which this is impossible.
There is always frustration, there is always dissatisfaction, and in the end there may
well be only boredom being jaded, at which point one who has chosen the aesthetic life
faces a crisis.
And the crisis is to continue in this self-defeating way, or to choose something else.
Now again, that all-important point, this is not a matter of logic, this is not a matter
of rationality.
It is simply a matter of trying to understand what one is feeling, what one feels that one
needs out of life, and making the appropriate choices.
But one could, and one knows such people, stay in the aesthetic mode of existence even long
after.
One is well past the possibility of satisfaction, even past the possibility of pleasure, where
it is just a life of jaded cynicism and nothing else.
However, there is an alternative.
Most immediate alternative is the ethical mode of existence, the ethical lifestyle.
Now I said in the last lecture, perhaps a bit cryptically, that the ethical mode of existence
is also on the side of subjectivity.
That's an objective uncertainty.
It is something that must be chosen and passionately committed to.
And it is not simply something that can be proven by a philosophical analysis.
Of course, such proofs abound in philosophy.
The most famous is by the great German philosopher Immanuel Kant, who tried to show that morality
was nothing less than rationality itself.
But then that still leaves an interesting question which Kant himself didn't want to
face.
Why should I be rational?
Why should I choose the ethical mode just because it is the rational mode?
Couldn't I rather choose against rationality?
Or could it be that the ethical mode is just, as one philosopher has put it, a moral point
of view, but it's one point of view among many.
The idea that ethics is somehow objective, that there are truths about the world or truths
of human nature that make it a compulsory choice is something that Kierkegaard wants
to reject, which isn't to say that he rejects rationality in ethics, but rather what he
wants to say is the choice of being ethical itself is not a rational choice.
One can choose to be ethical or one can choose not to be ethical, and ethically there is
nothing much to say.
The ethical lifestyle can be rather simply defined in a number of ways.
It can be defined as the life of duty and obligation, and in one sense that takes us
all the way back to ancient times, the idea in Aristotle, for example, that one has to
do what one is supposed to do.
Or Kant has a much more vigorous and rationalistic idea that what defines morality, what defines
the ethical lifestyle, is definition by universal moral principles, principles of reason.
And Kierkegaard in fact accepts this as his definition, and when he talks about morality,
when he talks about ethics and the ethical style, what he's usually talking about is
either directly or indirectly, ethics, morality, as defined by Kant, categorical imperatives
which tell us what our obligations, what our duties are.
Conscious of reason not matters for Kant of subjectivity at all, but very interesting.
They may be moral principles which are universal by way of reason, but reason is here construed
as internal to the ethical life.
It is not something which transcends it in such a way that we can choose the ethical life
as such rationally, rather to choose the ethical life is to choose to be rational, which means
to follow the moral principles such as Kant set them out.
One might also say that the ethical life as opposed to the aesthetic life is other directed
in the sense that it is defined by concern for others.
And one example that Kierkegaard gives here is Socrates.
Now Socrates is an interesting case here too, because there's a sense which Socrates like
Kant was not particularly devoted to the idea of the well-being of others.
So much as he was concerned with the kinds of virtues or in Kant the kinds of moral principles
which are essential to morality or ethics itself.
The idea is that to be a good person in Socrates case is to be concerned with doing the right
thing with being virtuous above all else.
And of course the most dramatic single case in the history of philosophy, Socrates when
his virtue was challenged, when he was condemned to death by the Greek jury and essentially
had a choice between violating his obligations or dying, what he chose was death.
Again, the idea of ethics here is something which is rational within, but not necessarily
rationally chosen.
But let's take an example and the example is one that is absolutely essential to Kierkegaard's
own life, consequently plays a large role in his philosophy.
Suppose you're deciding whether or not to get married and again I ask you to put yourself
back in the middle of the 19th century instead of the much more casual notion of marriage
we seem to have today.
To decide whether or not to get married for Kierkegaard is to decide between two things.
On the one hand there is the aesthetic, the idea of trying to be happy, trying to get pleasure
out of life, trying to be satisfied, on the other hand there is the ethical where it has
to do with obligation and duty.
Now one might draw this in a very different way and Kierkegaard in fact himself tends to
fudge this when he actually writes in detail about it, but suppose you saw the life of
a male bachelor as a life of satisfaction, a life of aestheticism in the sense of just
going after pleasure and satisfying your desires.
And by contrast you saw marriage as a kind of realm of ethical duty and one talks I
think rather horribly about the idea of conjugal duties, something that is done quite willingly
as a bachelor seems to be a matter of obligation when you're married.
But anyway this distinction between the aesthetic and the ethical plays a rather large role
in this instance and one might say that when one chooses whether or not to get married what
one is really choosing is a lifestyle, a mode of existence.
To choose to be a bachelor is to remain more or less unconstrained without obligation,
free to do what one wants to do.
To choose to get married by contrast is to choose a life of obligations and a sense in
which there are all kinds of principles and rational ways of thinking about what one is
obliged to do.
Kierkegaard himself would say there is no rational way of making this choice.
You have to look at yourself, you have to figure out what you want out of life, what
kind of person you are and then you have to make a leap and as we all know getting married
no matter how passionate to begin with is always a kind of leap of faith.
One never knows exactly what's to follow and one does it and takes one's chances.
Kierkegaard has a lot of powerful things to say about the ethical life and as I said in
a way he cheats a bit with the marriage question by in the end having the spokesperson he invents
to talk in favor of marriage conclude with the discussion of marital bliss which of course
is basically an aesthetic notion to begin with and of course here what Kierkegaard is
saying is you can have your cake and eat it too, you can get married and if it's a happy
marriage you can be satisfied and get lots of pleasure and at the same time fulfill
your duties but as I said the important point is priorities and I guess the sort of sad
question here is what are your obligations when the marriage goes sour and certainly
in the 19th century there was a very strong sensibility that you have obligations and
your personal happiness and satisfaction is secondary.
But the ethical life too has its liabilities and in this case it's not going to be dissatisfaction
that's still an aesthetic notion but it's going to be a kind of frustration and we've
all faced this, it's the idea that there are more wrongs in the world than can be righted
and we ourselves are very often helpless in the face of injustice.
There's a notion that's been circulating the last several years, it's called compassion
burnout and it applies to those of us who give rather heavily to charity but basically
it has to do with receiving notice after notice.
I find, I get, I'm only guessing maybe 500 solicitations a year, many of them from outfits
which are essentially serving the same causes, for example I'm on about 10 different wildlife
preservation lists and there's a point where you get tired, you get tired of making the
decisions, it's not so much that you're unwilling to give but it's just realizing you can't
help everyone who needs help and one of the consequences in the larger society seems to
be that at least for a period people were not giving anymore because they were getting
tired of the solicitations, they were getting tired of doing something but not doing enough
and that's the problem with ethics, that if you really devote yourself to the rational
life of morality, if you devote yourself to the well-being of your fellow human beings,
you are always going to be frustrated by the fact that things don't usually work out right,
precisely what Camus would later describe as the absurd.
But of course there's another choice and again it is not a rational choice, it is a choice
that one must make on the basis of one's own subjectivity and that's the religious way
of life. Again what Kierkegaard has in mind here is Christianity, more particularly Lutheranism,
more particularly his own personal interpretation of what that amounts to in terms of internal
inwardness and subjectivity. But there's a sense in which you might say in what sense
is this an exclusive choice. I mean after all isn't the whole Judeo-Christian tradition
about ethics or isn't the ethics just as important to it as the religious part? In
fact there have been some recent philosophers, in fact people who follow Kierkegaard who
have said in effect that we don't need the theology, you could be a good Christian if
you just lead an ethical life. So there's a question here in Kierkegaard in what sense
is the ethical and the religious to be opposed? He gives us a story. The story is the story
of Abraham and it involves what is probably the most terrible commandment in the entire
Old Testament. It is when God tells Abraham that the son for whom he has longed so far
so long and the son whom he has now brought up as a healthy young man must be sacrificed
as a proof of his faith. What is Abraham to do? On the one hand there is no moral commandment
more important than the commandment which says in effect you don't harm members of
your family. At the same time what could be more a violation of the religious way of
life than not obeying a direct order from God. Of course God makes it come out okay
he stops the sacrifice before it takes place. But Kierkegaard says here's an instance in
which the religious and the ethical go firmly against one another and in the name of faith
what Abraham has to do is what he calls a teleological suspension of the ethical. In
other words the religious has priority the ethical does not. Abraham like Kierkegaard
had made the leap of faith but so too Kierkegaard says must we.
