Lecture 10 Friedrich Nietzsche on Nealism and the Death of God
Friedrich Nietzsche, who died in the summer of 1900, might well be considered as the prophet
of the 20th century. He anticipated much of what today is called postmodernism, and
a great many people have cited him as the end of the period of classical philosophy.
Nevertheless, Nietzsche is misunderstood. The watchword of his philosophy in one sense
is nealism. Nealism is a fairly new word and concept in 19th century philosophy. It came
from Russia, where it essentially referred to the rebellion of the younger generation
against their elders. But nealism in Nietzsche is a very important concept. He sees it as,
as he puts it, a specter that's haunting Europe, a phrase which we hear elsewhere as well.
He defines nealism in his notes as the highest values devaluing themselves. The mistake that
people make is they assume because Nietzsche talks about nealism so much, because Nietzsche is so
well known as an attack philosopher, a negative philosopher, that Nietzsche ends up defending
nihilist thinking. The truth is that Nietzsche really is against nihilism. He sees it as the
great danger for modern culture. He is worried about the 20th century because he thinks that
nihilism at that point could very well take over. But oddly enough, where he identifies the
nihilist tendencies in society is precisely in those realms where many thinkers, including today,
would say that we find the bulwark against nihilism, namely in religion and morality. It's not
Nietzsche says as if religion and morality give us values. But quite the contrary,
religion and morality take our values away. Or to put it in a different way, the traditional values,
the values of the Judeo-Christian tradition, are themselves nihilistic. How are we supposed to
understand this? Throughout Nietzsche's works, there is without a doubt the assertion of value.
Nietzsche is defending values. He says we can't live without values. And there is one value which
has absolute status, and that is the value of life itself. Now what he means by this is something
that has to be interpreted in a number of different ways. It doesn't just mean survival is the only
important thing. Quite to the contrary, there are many things more important than survival for the
sake of life. But what works as a theme throughout all of Nietzsche's works, and what explains his
rather rabid attacks on Christianity and religion in general, is the attack on what he calls the
otherworldly, the idea of some other existence which is better than this one. Nietzsche's philosophy
is very much a philosophy of aggressive acceptance, acceptance of this world, acceptance of yourself,
acceptance of your faith, and for example the Christian notion of the otherworld, the heaven to
which we can aspire, is to him a notion that utterly subtracts from the importance of this world
and this life. To take a different kind of theme, the socialists who were very active around Nietzsche's
time, who promised a different kind of otherworld, this world in one sense, but a distant future in
which things would be much better than they are now, that too is a kind of rejection of this
existence and its attempt to escape life. For Nietzsche, the ancient Greeks were a kind of a
touchstone. As a student, Nietzsche showed great talent in the classics and he ultimately did a
degree and taught as a professor in the classics. He greatly admired the ancient Greeks, but in
particular it's important to note that the Greeks that he so admired were not the ones that are
the idols of most philosophers, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. To the contrary, Nietzsche often
attacked Socrates and sometimes rather viciously. What he admired were the philosophers that came
before Socrates, the so-called Presocratics. In particular, he admired the philosopher Heraclitus,
who with his dark sayings gave a kind of inspiration to sages over the years. He said of the Greeks
in general, how much they must have suffered to become so beautiful. Nietzsche's conception of the
Greeks was they didn't have a notion of the afterlife. They really didn't have much of a notion
of the future in the sense that we since Hegel have had notions of the future, but rather they
accepted life with all of its suffering. And in that, what they became was a people who were
immensely admirable. To talk about them as happy is in a way to miss the point. The notion of an
aesthetic existence, the idea of there being a beautiful people, is for Nietzsche the highest
praise. He goes back to the early Tragedians, people like Sophocles, and he goes back to Homer,
and Homer's two great epics, the Odyssey and the Iliad. He goes back to Heraclitus, and from
the more he pulls an interpretation of early Greek life and thought, which is very much at odds with
Plato and Aristotle. He says in his first book, which is about the ancient world, called The Birth
of Tragedy, he says, only as an aesthetic phenomenon is the world justified. One can easily
appreciate how this would run against many of the religious notions that were prevalent in his
time, and also against many of the more ethereal philosophical notions, such as the philosophy
of Hegel, which were also very well known when Nietzsche was writing. Now a couple words about
Nietzsche himself. He was a man who came from a family of, interestingly enough, all Lutheran
preachers. His father died when he was still a child, and he was raised by his mother, and some
maiden aunts, and eventually by a sister, all of whom were rather devout Christians. He was
surrounded by Christianity. He grew up in a small German town, and there's a sense in which the
kind of bourgeois pomposity and righteousness of that kind of Christianity, I guess stuck in his
craw. He often talks in very, well, belligerent, but I would say downright bloody and often cruel
images. He is, again, known as the great attacker and so on. But the extent to which he says that
his heroes are, in some cases, the most renowned warriors of ancient times, and other times some
of the more infamous tyrants of modern times gives Nietzsche a kind of picture, which I think is
very often misleading and distorting. He says, for example, perhaps his most famous line today,
that which does not kill me makes me stronger. Well, the context in which he says that, in fact,
what he's referring to is his own very frail health, and he's referring more importantly to the state
of his ideas. But of course, it's often taken in a kind of cone in the barbarian sense. In fact,
I think that quote is quoted in the movie. But basically the idea is that we have to sort of
separate. On the one hand, Nietzsche's very enthusiastic, excited, sometimes overbearing
prose, some of the most beautiful prose ever appearing in philosophy, and his philosophical
ideas, which in fact are much more benign. One of the most famous of Nietzsche's many outrageous
statements is the claim that God is dead. It's often lampooned and parodied. But I think to
put it in perspective, we should understand, first of all, that Nietzsche didn't make that up.
Hegel, who is known as a religious philosopher, had in fact said God is dead in some of his early,
not very respectful writings. Martin Luther had said God is dead as a way of talking about the
state in which Christianity had to be understood. To understand it simply as a religious statement,
or an atheistic statement, is I think to misunderstanding the profundity of what Nietzsche
is getting at. First of all, God is dead refers not to a theological proposition, but rather to the
moral state of the modern world. One looks at the world and what becomes evident, and here Nietzsche
joins forces with Kierkegaard in many ways his opposite. One sees that much of what is called
Christianity in these small towns and so on, really is a kind of stale hypocrisy. It's force of
habit. It's mere to use a word that both Nietzsche and Kierkegaard love, herd behavior. It's going
along with everyone else. In Kierkegaard's term, it absolutely lacks passion and commitment. In
Nietzsche's terms, it really lacks any moral sanction. It doesn't do anything. People can consider
themselves good Christians and nevertheless go out, cheat and steal in business, and feel as if going
to church for an hour a week somehow makes it all better. The truth of it is God is dead in the sense
that we don't believe in him anymore, even if we claim to. But contrary to Kierkegaard's aspiration,
which is to reinvent and reinvigorate Christianity in his own terms, Nietzsche would just as soon
be done with it. And God is dead then also becomes a kind of statement about the future of the modern
world. In one of his best and most encompassing books, The Gay Science, he has a madman appear in
the marketplace who announces, not only God is dead, but we have killed him. And interesting,
the people who there watch him with amusement, actually laugh at him, make fun of him, say,
where is God? He got lost, what happened to him? But of course, the point is that God is dead in
our world. And nevertheless, we are yet incapable of understanding what we have done. In his most
famous piece of fiction, a kind of very, well in a way, I would say excessive, quasi-biblical
parody, which is called Zospok Zarathustra. Nietzsche reintroduces a character from the ancient
world, the founder of the religion of Zoroastrianism. Also, the character who in many ways was responsible
for an important piece of the Judeo-Christian tradition, namely the division between good and
evil, a dichotomy that Nietzsche is going to be much concerned with his philosophy. Zarathustra
essentially invented that along with the Manicheans, and he essentially said that the world is the
battle of two different sets of forces, put it in a different way. It's a way of saying that
morality really requires a metaphysical picture, that it isn't just a matter of subjective feelings,
it's not just a matter of culture or opinion, but the difference between good and evil is
something that is true of the world, and Zarathustra in this long book essentially urges us to get over
that dichotomy, which he himself once introduced. He also urges us to get rid of these ideals of
the otherworldly, and if Zarathustra has a philosophy, it's Nietzsche's style, it's Nietzsche's philosophy,
namely it is this world, and this life, and this world, and this life only that really count.
The notion of God as dead has a much more general meaning though, and this is where I think it
becomes particularly important philosophically. There's a sense in which the monotheism of
Judeo-Christian tradition is of a piece with a kind of monistic obsession that the ancient Greeks
shared as well. The beginning of philosophy in the West, often attributed to the first philosophers
in the 7th and 6th centuries BC, is basically the search for the one basic element, or using
Aristotle's term, the one basic substance which makes up everything. You find this metaphysical
obsession not just in Greece, but also the place where much of Greek philosophy may have originally
come from towards India and South Asia, where the notion of Brahman, for example, in Hinduism
is also this emphasis on the oneness of the world. There's this rage for unity that we have,
and that rage for unity manifests itself, among other places, in our belief in the monotheistic
God. It's interesting to note, for example, that in the Old Testament, it's not as if there is only
one God. The ancient Hebrews pictured their God as opposed to other gods, and for example,
some of the most famous stories in the Old Testament. It becomes a kind of a contest to see
which God is bigger and tougher and stronger than the others. But with the kind of monotheism that
has certainly come to define the Judeo-Christian tradition since, what we find is not just the
emphasis on one God, but a kind of emphasis on one world which Nietzsche wants to overcome.
It's a metaphysical picture that has all kinds of manifestations. It's in science, after all,
Einstein, this century, died looking for a unified theory, and it has always been the aim of science
to give us not just truths or true theories in this realm or that, but to give us, ultimately,
a single picture which would tie it all together. This is tied to Nietzsche's rejection of the other
worldly, and this explains, too, why Nietzsche is so concerned to reject the great philosophers of
the ancient world, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Socrates, in particular. Nietzsche's relation
to Socrates is rather complicated. I would say, ultimately, Socrates is his hero and he envies
him. Nevertheless, he bitterly attacks him all the way through. And the reason is because it's
really Socrates who invents the notion of the other world. Now, that might sound a little strange
because you think of the Egyptians and you think of the earlier Greeks with their concept of Hades
and so on, but there's a sense in which it's really Socrates who gets the idea of the soul in
another world, which is still robust. I mean, Socrates fantasizes, for example, in one of his
early dialogues, that he could go on doing philosophy forever as a pure soul. What Nietzsche
wants to say is, it's Socrates because of his own hatred of life, and he goes into that in some detail.
It's Socrates who insists that we think about other possibilities, other worlds. And Plato,
of course, follows him and turns this into one of the more sophisticated metaphysics in our tradition.
But the basic idea of the other worldly, which leads quite directly into the Christian notion
of heaven and hell, is something that Nietzsche says now has to be put aside. And what we have to
do is understand our world in a different way. He accuses Socrates, among other things, of a kind
of tyranny of reason, introducing another plot, which is going to be very essential to Nietzsche's
philosophy. I mentioned with Kierkegaard in particular that to understand his concept of
existence and understand his concept of subjective truth, what was important was to particularly
understand the importance of the passions. It's really the passions that make life meaningful.
It's the passions that define us as who we are. And it's an interesting question with that as a
backdrop to ask where the emphasis, one might say, the obsession with reason in philosophy comes from.
And Nietzsche thinks he's found the source. It's Socrates. Socrates was very unhappy,
according to Nietzsche, with his world. He was very unhappy with certainly the political state of
Athens. But perhaps more personally, Nietzsche says, outrageously, he was unhappy with his looks.
He says in one of his last books, quite bluntly, Socrates was ugly. And ugliness among the Athenians
was virtually a refutation. It's an outrageous claim, something I'll talk about a bit later,
that very idea of an ad hominem argument in philosophy. But the idea is that Socrates was
looking for an escape. And consequently, what he did was essentially he constrained his passions.
He constrained himself and instead took everything that he spoke as a matter of reason. It was all
in defensive reason. And Nietzsche thinks that, although this sounds perfectly secular and so on,
after all, the Enlightenment was a rejection of religion in the name of reason. Nevertheless,
Nietzsche comes to say that reason itself can be its own kind of escape from life,
its own sense of the otherworldly. As he says in one of his Pythior aphorisms,
Christianity really is just Platonism for the masses.
All which leads to the question about what Nietzsche himself really believes and what he thinks is
true. I said that he defends life as the ultimate value. But nevertheless, he is so thoroughly
skeptical, so thoroughly challenging, so thoroughly concerned with nihilism as a problem that one
might very well ask what room is left for truth. And especially once you reject the idea of monotheism
and that image of the one reality behind all of the appearances, there's a very real question
whether we can ever get beyond the appearances. Whether we can ever, in fact, get something,
it's true. Well, there's a sense in which Nietzsche adopts something which we might call,
with some caution, epistemological nihilism. To put it in a blunt phrase, it's the idea that
there is no truth. Now, this could be taken as a kind of total skepticism of the sort that we've
seen in other philosophers earlier in history. But that's not Nietzsche's intent. In fact,
I think one way to put it, rather banally, is to say there is no truth, but there are lots of truths.
What we call truth, in particular what we call that special notion of truth that philosophers
are seeking and that religious thinkers find in God or in Brahman. What we call truth, in fact,
are just our interpretations of the world. He says, for example, that there are no facts,
they're only interpretations. He says that what we call truth are just those errors that we cannot
give up. With reference to someone like Kant, he wants to say, when Kant talks about necessary
truths, a priori truths, truths that are essential in the very structure of the human mind, Nietzsche
wants to say, no, these are simply schemata that we can't throw off. Now, you might think of him
as a classical skeptic, and certainly he does have something in common with, say, David Hume
or the ancient skeptic Piero. But in a way, it's more radical. Hume, for example, makes a big deal
out of the distinction between reality and appearance. And his skepticism basically says
that all we can ever know are the appearances, namely our experience. There is no way we can get
behind the experiences to the world in itself. And in fact, perhaps there is no world in itself.
And it's not coincidental that one of Hume's empiricist colleagues, Bishop George Barkley
in Ireland, actually argued that we don't need the notion of a material world. It's enough to
believe that God puts our ideas in our heads and that would give us the coherence of the experience
we have. We experience a world, but that doesn't mean that there really is a world. Nietzsche, by
contrast, rejects the very distinction between appearance and reality. He has much to say about
the origins of that notion of reality. And of course, he ties it back to monotheism and the
insistence on one God. But he says, once we have learned to reject that notion of a true world
behind this one, what we're left with is not nothing by any means. But we reject the true world
and we reject the notion of appearances at the same time. Because after all, what sense does it
make to talk about appearances if we're now talking about appearances of something? So Nietzsche's
nihilism here is really rather benign. It has to do with the idea of rejecting what gives rise to
skepticism and what gives rise to these illusions of the otherworldly and in so doing, plant our
feet very firmly on the earth and say, this world and this life is what counts. What takes
the place of these ancient and modern theories? Well, two things, and they're very closely tied
together. The first is a view which has been called, although Nietzsche does not call it this,
perspectivism. It's the idea that we always see things from a perspective. We never see things
from a God's eye point of view. We never see things objectively. In fact, objectivity is just a set
of constructions that we put on our experience from our perspective and there can be very different
perspectives using different kinds of constructions. For instance, there's the idea that science gives
us the truth, but science just gives us one perspective and it has one set of rather rigorous
standards and techniques to assure that we get the truth from that perspective. But whether or
not science is the perspective we ought to take up, as we said in Kierkegaard's existential
dialectic, that is not itself a scientific question and you can't just say to be scientific is to
be rational because even if you were to accept that equivalence, you can still ask the skeptical
question, why should I be rational? Again, does that leave us with nothing? Not at all. Nietzsche,
in fact, was quite fascinated with science and he spent a good deal of time reading it
and very often couched some of his theories in terms of it. But he realizes that science itself
is just a perspective. In fact, the virtue of science, which in his early work he greatly praises,
is precisely the fact that it completely accepts this, that science doesn't deal in dogma,
science deals in hypotheses, science deals in experimentalism, science deals in evidence and
consequently within science what we see is that we are urged to take first this hypothesis or
perspective and then that hypothesis or perspective and Nietzsche is perfectly happy to say that the
more perspectives we adopt and the more evidence that we gain from different perspectives, the
closer we are to having a good perception of whatever it is we're studying. He will still not
say the true thing because he thinks there is no true thing. It's always the thing as perceived
from different perspectives. But nevertheless, the more perspectives, the better. But this means not
just scientific perspectives. There are also ethical or moral perspectives. There are religious
perspectives. And of course, there are aesthetic perspectives. And in Nietzsche, using Kierkegaard's
way of breaking down the world into three different basic choices, I think we can say without any
hesitation, with Nietzsche it's always the aesthetic way of thinking of things and looking at things
that wins. So one can contrast, for example, the aesthetic perspective and the scientific perspective.
There's an image that I sometimes use, a friend of mine who was a poet. We were sitting in a cafe
once and there was a flower on the table, essentially as he would put it, stretching its pedals towards
the sunlight. And I thought, wonderful. But I was a biologist. I knew about Terger and all these other
things that would explain why the flower was doing what it did. And I thought, here's my scientific
explanation. And here's his poetic explanation. Which one is better? And obviously, it depends
what we need them for. But in the context of having a cup of coffee, I was perfectly happy to say
the aesthetic was preferable. Nietzsche very often plays off perspectives against each other.
And in particular, he's going to play off moral perspectives against aesthetic perspectives,
against scientific perspectives, and most importantly, against each other.
What does this add up to? What essentially determines what perspective we adopt and what
doesn't? Well, here the second influence comes in. And one has to be very careful about describing
this because Nietzsche himself describes it in such mixed ways. When Nietzsche was writing most of
these works in the 1880s, he's coming only a few decades after what is one of the most powerful
books published in the 19th century. And that is Charles Darwin's Arjun of Species.
Nietzsche knew the argument of this book quite well. It didn't have the kind of acceptance
in Germany that it had at this point already in France and England. But nevertheless, there are
Darwinist tendencies, which manifest themselves very powerfully in Nietzsche's philosophy.
And one can look at this kind of epistemological thesis from that perspective with great results.
Imagine, for example, a group of creatures who believe that the future will be unlike the past,
which means in practical terms, if something has happened, it is highly unlikely that it will
happen again. Now, this is a question which many great philosophers of modern times had grappled
with because it really is right at the basis of science. I mean, if you don't believe the future
will be like the past, if you don't believe the experiment you did yesterday is repeatable tomorrow,
if you don't believe the hypothesis that you established last week is going to continue to
be true of the world in the future, then it's hard to imagine how you could have any science at all.
So there's a sense in which this basic claim, the future will be like the past,
has been defended by philosophers, especially again by Kant, as one of the basic necessary beliefs
which lies at the very foundation of all possible knowledge. Nietzsche has a different view.
Imagine this group that believes, contrary to that, that the future will not be like the past.
And you imagine now two groups, the group that believes the future will be like the past,
the group that believes the future will not be like the past. You imagine lightning strikes the lone
tree in a clearing and the group that believes the future will be unlike the past takes hiding
under the tree to be the safest place to escape from lightning. It's not hard to imagine which
group will survive and which one will not. In other words, the things that we believe,
even those things we believe at the very foundations of knowledge, even those things we believe as a
matter of utter necessity as proven by the philosophers, in effect it's a matter of
contingency. We are a certain kind of creature living in a certain kind of world and as those
creatures we are going to believe some things because to use a different kind of language,
it's practical, it's pragmatic. And in fact I would argue that Nietzsche's view of truth here
is very much akin to the one that's defended about 50 years later by some of the American
philosophers, John Dewey in particular, that what is true has to do with what works in a certain
context and that's about as much as you can say. The idea of the truth that lies behind it all,
that's something on which we should remain respectfully silent.
