Lecture 15, Husserl, Heidegger, and Phenomenology.
In this and the following lectures, I'd like to move firmly into the twentieth century.
The two philosophers we're going to be talking about are Martin Heidegger, for three lectures,
and then Jean-Paul Sartre, for the rest of the course.
But I want to begin with a philosopher who is not an existentialist at all, but whose
philosophy so influenced both Heidegger and Sartre that we really can't understand what
they did without him.
I'm talking about Edmund Husserl, a Moravian or Czech-German philosopher who wrote at the
very beginning of the twentieth century, and what he did was he invented a method.
The method is called phenomenology, and both Heidegger and Sartre began their careers as
phenomenologists.
Phenomenology is a version of Cartesianism, and Husserl at one point traces it quite explicitly
back to Descartes.
It includes a very strong emphasis on subjectivity, on consciousness, and the idea is that whatever
we know about the world, whatever we know about objective truth, basically begins with
and is based in consciousness as such.
So phenomenology, very simply described, is the examination of consciousness, or literally
the examination of phenomena that which appears to consciousness.
One can summarize what Husserl had in mind by saying that phenomenology is the study
of the essential structures of experience.
What he was interested in was what makes experience possible, what makes our knowledge
of objects possible, what makes, in fact, most importantly, the necessary presuppositions
of experience possible.
So when he talks about the structures of experience, what he's talking about, among
other things, is how our acts of consciousness, as he puts it, relate to the objects of consciousness.
Now there is one concept above all that defines consciousness for Husserl.
It is a notion which is borrowed from the scholastics in medieval times.
It is the notion of intentionality, and let me explain it just very briefly by saying
intentionality is the thesis that consciousness is always about something.
So if you believe, you believe something or other.
If you perceive, you have to perceive something or other.
If you have an emotion, say anger, you have to be angry about something or at someone.
For Husserl, all consciousness is intentional in just this sense.
But this is also a notion which lends itself to a certain kind of move, which of course
in Descartes is absolutely central.
Descartes talked about examining what we might call the ideas in consciousness.
But with a kind of problem that surrounded this, then on the one hand you examine your
own subjectivity, and then the question is, how can you infer on the basis of your subjectivity
to the reality of the world outside of you?
This is sometimes referred to as the problem of solipsism, the idea of being caught in
one's own consciousness.
And Husserl very often comes dangerously close to the same problem, except that whereas Descartes
insisted that he doubt all of his objective beliefs until he could prove them on the basis
of his subjectivity.
Husserl says that's going too far, that the things of our experience are in fact the things
of the world, and it would be absurd to deny that.
But for the purposes of phenomenology, we are interested in them just as objects of experience
and not as objects of the world.
Or to anticipate what I'm going to say about Heidegger, Husserl thinks that phenomenology
is one thing, ontology, a study of the things of the world, is something different.
In order to carry out his method, Husserl suggests that we make a couple of key philosophical
moves, and the first and most important of them is what he sometimes calls the bracketing
of the natural world.
The idea here is that instead of simply taking our experience as the perception of things
in the world.
Here what I do is I suspend any judgment about the reality of things, and I simply describe
the objects of experience as such.
For example, I might think that what I see is a horse, but on the other hand, I also
can imagine a horse.
I can also dream of a horse, and perhaps under some very strange conditions, I might hallucinate
a horse.
Even though the status of the reality of the horse is very different in those different
cases, in each of them I can describe what it is to experience the horse.
So phenomenology wants to talk about my experiencing of the object, and not particularly talk about
what it is for that object to exist as a thing in the world.
But Husserl, as I say, was not an existentialist.
He was interested in none of the questions about the meaning of life and so on that we've
been discussing.
He came into philosophy from mathematics, and his interest in phenomenology grew out of
a concern for the philosophy of arithmetic and the status of mathematical truths.
What is it that makes 2 plus 2 equals 4 true?
Is it simply a matter of convention?
Is it a truth about some platonic realm and some very peculiar entities?
Is it simply a matter of logic?
Well, what Husserl says is none of these, and basically phenomenology is a way of talking
about mathematical truth in terms of necessity, a very key element, and necessity in terms
of the structure of consciousness.
What Husserl seeks as de Descartes is a kind of certainty, and he thinks it's simply impossible
to do what most philosophers have tried to do, which is somehow to derive certainty from
our experience of the world.
Rather, we have to understand certainty in terms of certain intuitions, which are basic
to those particular experiences of the world, and you'll see a move like this very much
in Heidegger too.
In order to get the necessity that he seeks, what Husserl needs is what we might call an
Archimedean point.
Archimedes said, give me a place to stand and I'll move the earth.
What Husserl wants is a place to stand in philosophy and to understand the nature of
perception and mathematics and all the other things that we do.
That place turns out to be what he calls the transcendental ego, or more generally consciousness,
and he shifts between consciousness and the transcendental ego for much of his career.
It's a method in its basic outline that as I said greatly influences first Heidegger
and then Sartre, but the ways in which they use it are going to be very far afield from
the concerns and the introduction that Husserl gave it.
Martin Heidegger was born at the end of the 19th century.
He was a theology student as opposed to a mathematician, so we can guess right from
the start that his concerns were going to be very closely tied to the concerns of human
existence and the meaning of human life.
The theological background is not insignificant and there's a sense in which religion is going
to permeate all of Heidegger's philosophy and he writes very much in a kind of theological
mode.
His writings are notoriously obscure and difficult and in the various interpretations that have
been advanced of this very difficult work, one of them and certainly one that predominates
is that there is something by way of a theological background, not necessarily the traditional
notion of the monotheistic Judeo-Christian Islamic God, but rather something more innovative
and Heidegger often says in his work such things as only a God can save us and what
we must do now is invent new gods.
Heidegger is often referred to as an existentialist and certainly I think that this is to a certain
extent true and that's why he's included here, but I should emphasize that it's really
only his first great work, a work called being in time, which he never actually finished.
He gave it up and started turning in a new direction, but nevertheless I think being
in time is so central to existentialist thinking that although Heidegger himself rejected the
term, I think we need to characterize Heidegger as one of the great existentialist thinkers
of the century.
The concept that concerned him most and in fact what being in time is all about is what
he calls the question of being.
Right away we get the sense that we're talking about something very profoundly philosophical.
We get the sense that what we're talking about is something that is all embracing and that's
exactly what Heidegger intends.
He distinguishes between being and beings or entities and he says through the history
of philosophy philosophers have worried about entities and what it is for them to exist and
what they're really made of and how they relate to each other causally, but what they haven't
sufficiently pursued is the question about what is the ground of being which makes the
appearance of entities to us even possible and this is the question that he wants to
ask and even though as I say he changes his philosophy after being in time it is something
like the question of being turned into later what he calls the history of being which predominates
in his philosophy.
But being in time isn't really about being.
It is a kind of preliminary work, a kind of preparation for asking the more serious questions
that he simply anticipates.
What goes on in being and time in fact is the examination of a very particular kind of being.
What Heidegger refers to as the being through whom the question of being comes into question
that is us and here is where he first of all moves from what he calls the ontic dimension
namely the study of mere entities to being more generally and the concern with being
more generally which he calls ontology a very well-worn ancient philosophical term.
Ontology is the study of being as such but also it includes the study of the being through
whom beings come into question and that is ourselves and like Husserl he approaches philosophy
from the first person standpoint.
Phenomenology as I just discussed it is the examination of our own subjectivity.
With Heidegger it takes on an added religious dimension and there is a sense always in Heidegger
which increases with his philosophy that there is a sense in which we are not so much active
in the world much less producing the world but rather it's a sense of passivity and Heidegger
is fond of using words like the world disclosing itself to us and the question of being becomes
under what conditions can things disclose themselves.
It is phenomenology in the sense that it begins with our immediate experience although let
me say right now and I will say many times again Heidegger will not use at all words
like experience or consciousness or mind but if we begin with what I will call because
I don't have a substitute without using Heidegger and jargon what I call my basic experience
it's a very different sort than what we find in a great many philosophers.
In particular the idea is that when I look at my experience the first premise the first
realization is not as Descartes suggested that I recognize myself as a thinking thing
my first experience is what Heidegger simply refers to as being there it's the sense
of here I am in a world this sense of being here in a world Heidegger gives the name
Dasein and Dasein is really the central feature of the whole of being in time one might say
that Dasein is us and Heidegger says that Dasein is in each case mine suggesting the
first person standpoint that Husserl and later Sartre would refer to but he also suggests
that Dasein is an important substitute for any such notions as say human consciousness
and I think this is actually an ingenious move Dasein literally translated means just
being there being here in the midst of the world but there's a presumption in phenomenology
and a presumption throughout the whole of modern philosophy maybe back to ancient philosophy
too that when we examine our own experience our own perceptions of the world what we are
very prone to do is to generalize very quickly and say this is the truth about perception
this is how all people perceive and perhaps even this is how all rational creatures or
all creatures perceive phenomenology has this very real problem that if what I'm doing is
studying the essential structures of my own consciousness what grounds do I have for generalizing
what I say and presuming that everyone else has the same kinds of conscious structures
or to be a bit more pushy about it why should I assume that as many 18th century philosophers
would say that what I'm studying is human understanding or human experience or the human mind I mean
couldn't the same structures be shared say by the great apes or perhaps by dogs how far
down the phylogenetic ladder does consciousness and its essential structures go and on the
other hand thinking multi-culturally why should I assume that the essential structures of
my experience are in fact the essential structures of any homo sapiens experience cultural differences
may make an enormous difference and in fact Heidegger especially in his later works is
perfectly willing to say that there are very different ways of perceiving the world and
some of them are much better than others ours in fact is not among the best so this coinage
does sign is a very nice way of trying to do what Husserl wanted to do namely get back
to the basic primordial experience and say in what it consists but whereas Husserl like
Descartes thought our basic experience was an experience one might say of the experience
or our experience of the objects of experience what Heidegger wants to say is no our basic
experience is a holistic unified experience of our being in the world and that phrase
being in the world is the first important characters of design the second which in many
ways precedes it is the idea that we are ontological that is one of our essential traits to say
that we're ontological here is to say that we ask questions and in particular that we
ask questions of being but this doesn't necessarily mean asking the grandiose philosophical questions
of being that Heidegger pushes us ultimately to ask but rather every time we question who
we are every time we are dissatisfied with the way we're performing every time we are
unsure about our place in a society or a place in a group every time we are unsure about
the world and we ask scientific questions say we are being ontological asking questions
of the world and not just very particular questions but questions which have as their
basis some very global kind of conception or question Heidegger doesn't use the notion
of human being for the reasons I just stated but also he doesn't use any of those notions
which I just hinted at as prescribed he doesn't talk about consciousness he doesn't talk about
subjectivity he doesn't talk about the transcendental ego or the mind and it's very important to
see why he does not because as soon as you use that language the question is consciousness
versus what transcendent ego as opposed to what and in Husserl we get this picture of
on the one hand there's consciousness and then the objects of consciousness and even
if the objects of consciousness are in some sense in consciousness then we raise the question
well what about the objects out there in the world to which the objects of our experience
presumably refer and Heidegger thinks this whole way of thinking is utterly corrupt and
utterly hopeless the centerpiece of his philosophy is to reject all of this Cartesian tradition
and say basically the whole distinction between being in the world and something else between
consciousness and the world outside of us between the phenomenological world with its
intentional objects and the possibility of the objects to which that refers all of that
way of thinking leads us to nothing but paradox the truth is Dasein and the world are a unified
phenomenon to understand Dasein is to understand the world understand the world is to understand
Dasein and furthermore quite the contrary of the idea that permeates a good deal of
Western philosophy that in some sense the self or the mind or the soul could exist independently
of the physical world in fact philosophers have gone so far as to say there may be no
material world that all there is is in some sense our minds which are informed by God
and that gives us the experience that we have but any suggestion of that sort simply leaves
us in an impossible situation what Heidegger wants to insist on is there can be no Dasein
without the world and same time there can be no world without Dasein so what he's saying
here is in a way it's a return to what used to be called idealism but to call it idealism
would be really to miss the point because the whole distinction between realism the idea
that there is a reality which in some sense we can know and idealism which is we know
only in some sense the products of our own minds really ignores the very bold mood that
Heidegger is trying to make which is to say that Dasein already is being in the world
and being in the world cannot be separated into components our being on the one hand
in the world and the other rather we should think of being in the world as sort of like
being in philosophy it's not a spatial being in it's rather I am engaged in the world and
that's the first starting point of phenomenology the idea of being ontological and the idea
of being self questioning is of course nothing new in philosophy it certainly goes back to
Plato and Descartes and Aristotle and virtually every other philosopher you can think of but
the idea of rejecting consciousness puts all this in a new light because one of the ways
in which we tend to think of ourselves in philosophy not surprisingly is we think of
ourselves in terms of consciousness but the idea of rejecting consciousness means that
a whole way of thinking about ourselves for example Descartes thinking of ourselves as
thinking things or John Locke's thinking of ourselves in terms of our particular memories
and so on all that now goes out the board and the question then is where are we to find
the self and self identity because the old way of thinking about self and self identity
in terms of consciousness has now been displaced I emphasize that when we're being ontological
the questions that really push to the fore are the questions we raise about ourselves
who are we what are we but the nature of the sign as simply being in the world in a way
doesn't allow any easy answer to that question in fact it almost blocks it because the whole
picture of Dasein as nothing but engaged in the world raises the question whether Dasein
has a particular identity if so what that identity might be and as we'll see in the
next lecture what Heidegger wants to suggest is that what we think of as our self identity
in fact is a false self identity that what we think of as Dasein in fact is something
very different from the individual self that we normally ascribe to ourselves but talking
about identity crisis raises a question which to me is the most uncomfortable question talking
about Heidegger's philosophy and I guess the simple way to put it is who was Heidegger
on the one hand Heidegger was an indisputably brilliant philosopher however obscure who introduced
some bold new ways of thinking into philosophy at I think just the right time. He was a young
man coming out of theology who was very ambitious and in fact he started succeeding in those
ambitions at a very early age being in time was published in 1927 and he was already on
his road to fame but another man who was born not in Germany but in Austria the same year
that Heidegger was 1889 was also now on his road to fame and that was Adolf Hitler. The
two came together in the 1930s. Heidegger at this point was a successful academic with
ambitions. Hitler was just about to become the Fuhrer of Germany and in 1933 Heidegger
was made rector of the University of Freiburg with the support of the Nazis. What's more
Heidegger himself joined the Nazis. He gave many speeches in favor of the Nazis and the
National Socialist Program. He characterized it as the great new move in the world not
just in Germany and it wasn't just German society that was besaved but Heidegger perceived
Germany as literally the center of the earth and it was from Germany that the entire earth
would be reformed by way of the Nazi party. In fact Heidegger quit the Nazi party by
1934 and in that sense it was clear that he was already becoming disillusioned with some
of its policies but the reason why this causes me so much trouble and anyone else who reads
and especially likes Heidegger is that following the war he never repudiated the Nazi program
at all. While he was still in the university and during his life during the war he never
questioned Nazi policies and at the end of his life the most that he really said was
that the Nazi movement never achieved its potential greatness. That it became too much
like the other technological societies America and Russia. This raises some very serious
questions. One of them is this what do we think of a philosopher who has billion ideas
but nevertheless has what I will simply call a despicable past. Nietzsche said the philosopher
should be an example and in particular he should be an example of the philosophy. In
Nietzsche's own case as we saw there's some question about how well he fulfilled that
role. Nevertheless I would argue that Nietzsche's writings and his personality were very much
in tune with the sorts of things he wrote however polemic and overstated they may have
been. With Heidegger it's a more difficult problem. It is often said that Heidegger's
philosophy prefigures his Nazi enthusiasm. That perhaps has some basis in the sense
and I will in the course of these lectures say something about how that linkage might
be made but I think in general it's greatly overstated. Heidegger's philosophy is so abstract
and in many ways so abstruse that it's very hard to pull out a specific political program
to which that philosophy was directed. On the other hand there are philosophers who
say the philosophy is one thing the ideas can be defended independently and Heidegger
the man, hateful as he might have been, is really a side issue. It has nothing to do
with the philosophical issue. But here I want to go back to Nietzsche and take him very
seriously. The idea is that when we understand a philosophy we have to understand the philosopher
and who the philosopher is has a lot to do with what the philosophy is. And I don't take
this to be the kind of translation between ideas written down and ideas put into practice.
So much as it's a holistic picture, something that Heidegger would certainly endorse. The
idea that to understand the writings we have to understand when they were written, the
context in which they were written, the personality that produced them and to understand Heidegger
therefore is to make some sort of connection between his Nazi sympathies and his actual
writings. It raises a more general question too about ethics and this is particularly
difficult with Heidegger because Heidegger greatly enjoyed making fun of ethics and making
fun of those who fished in the muddy sea of values. He claimed that being in time was
in no way an ethical work nor did it have any ethical implications. Well the truth is
it is impossible to read being in time without seeing that it has some very powerful ethical
implications and tells us in a very special way how we should live our lives. But Heidegger
would reject this and because he rejects that one also has to ask the question how much
the stance of not doing ethics and not even implying ethics has to do with his own sense
of not wanting to come to grips with the implications that his philosophy actually has. In talking
about Heidegger what I'm going to be trying to do is to simplify a very difficult philosophy
and let me give you one concept in particular which I think is going to rule much of what
he writes including being in time. It's a distinction that comes back from the 19th century especially
and one thinks especially of Hegel. It's the idea of alienation. What bothers Heidegger
from his early days in theological school is this problem of alienation although he hardly
ever talks in those terms. The terms he uses is the idea, the ideal of feeling at home
in the world. The truth is Heidegger did not feel at home. The truth is that he claims
that modern man doesn't feel at home, that mass consumerism and technology have made
it impossible for us to feel at home on the earth and somehow making good this concept
and this notion of feeling at home is going to be in many ways the motivating force behind
Heidegger's philosophy and it's not surprising that in his life in the black forest after
he finished with his professional career he often emulated the life of a simple German
peasant which by the way is how he interpreted the Nazi party as well. And to use that as
an image behind this very difficult thinking I think will give us a handhold on a way of
understanding Heidegger that is not always evident in the prose itself.
