In no exit, each character wants to impose his or her desires and self-conceptions on
the others.
Garcin, in particular, is torn about who he really is, a hero or a coward.
But to confirm the way he would like to think of himself, he has to turn to Estelle or Inés
to agree with him.
He turns to Estelle and she suggests a kind of a swap.
He makes love to her and gives her the recognition she craves as a woman, and she in turn will
tell him, basically, whatever he wants to hear.
But as we all know, hearing what we want to hear from a person who tells us just because
they know, that's what we want to hear, is deeply unsatisfying and often suspicious.
So Estelle's deal won't work, and Garcin turns his attention to Inés.
But Inés, who has no great respect for Garcin's manliness or his worries, won't give him the
answer he wants, and as the play ends, we get the sense that they're going to be playing
cat and mouse with his identity for all of eternity.
But of course, also in this play, there is an underlying, quite intentional, sexual element.
The fact that Estelle needs Garcin to want her, the fact that Garcin is a very macho
man who would, in fact, want her very much if he didn't have other things on his mind.
Inés' own desire for Estelle, and of course Estelle's repulsion for Inés' advances
in turn.
All this adds up to a literally diabolical sexual intrigue, and Sart wants to play on
that to illustrate a number of basic truths.
Now notice that even if these three characters are to be in hell for all of eternity, nevertheless
they are strangers when we meet them in the play, and they are just meeting each other.
The extent to which we have these sorts of identity struggles between us really depends
in many ways on the degree of intimacy.
Intimacy is very often thought of as a very desirable thing, but as you can guess, in
Sart's shift from being with others to being for others, intimacy itself is going to be
a kind of a threat, a very dangerous situation.
We tend to think about intimate relations in terms of their desirability, in terms of
their completeness, in terms of their comfort level.
What Sart wants to suggest, perhaps perversely, but I think very profoundly, is that even
such intimate relationships as love and friendship, in fact, are struggles.
They are not simply being with but they're being for, and very often in a similarly diabolical
sense.
First of all, we might look at love as a kind of struggle for authenticity in Heidegger's
sense.
In other words, we might look at love as a struggle for being one's own person.
But of course, the very concept of love, in a way, undermines this.
This is something that people in love have often struggled with, of being in a lover
relationship and being with one another and yet maintaining their own sense of identity
and independence.
There's a sense in which we use a very ugly term today to talk about when love relationships
overstep this boundary and take away mutual independence.
We could talk about codependency, which is viewed as a quasi-pathological condition.
But the question is whether dependency, something like codependency, isn't present in all love
relationships and consequently not just psychologically but ontologically is something to be avoided.
When we look at Sart, who talks about love not as a kind of benign relationship but as
a struggle.
What we see is that it extends not just to love between lovers and spouses but also it
extends to all relationships.
Let me work my way into love from something that is in between, a relationship between
strangers and mere acquaintances and something which is a full-blown intimate love affair
or marriage.
And that's friendship.
I often remark to my students that their friends are rarely such a matter of circumstances
they often suggest, namely this is a roommate that I happen to be put in with when my freshman
year or this is someone I happen to go to high school with because of course there are
many colleagues in high school and only some of them turn out to be friends.
And even if you are assigned to a roommate, you still have a number of basic choices.
For example, whether to like or despise that person, whether to hang out or avoid them
completely.
People choose their friends and it's very interesting to ask on what grounds they choose
them and I think the answer comes through fairly quickly.
We choose our friends on the basis of, among other things, our conception of ourselves.
That's not to say that friendship is narcissistic, it doesn't fall that we choose people like
ourselves, in fact we might choose people very different than ourselves.
For example, if I'm not very intelligent and I'm concerned about my lack of intelligence,
I might take up with an extremely intelligent woman precisely in order to have her intelligence
in some sense radiate on to me.
Or if I'm not very physically adept, I might well go out with an athlete and make friends
with athletes as a way of being part of a crowd which is athletic.
Very often we pick people who are contrasts, who are opposites, rather than just like us
as friends.
But the idea is that in friendship what we do is we pick people who are going to reinforce
in some sense our own conception of ourselves.
So if I think of myself as intelligent or I want to think of myself as intelligent,
whether or not I pick a partner who is also intelligent, what is going to be essential
is that it's going to be a partner who somehow expands my notion of my own intelligence,
either by telling me all the time perhaps how intelligent I am, or maybe by always contradicting
me in such a way that I can prove my intelligence with her or him.
In other words, friendship is not just falling in with people whom you happen to like, that's
a very superficial characterization.
Friendship is a kind of agreement, a kind of contract in American terms.
The idea is basically I will approve of you in your terms, if you will approve of me in
my terms, and consequently we form a kind of partnership in which the shared aim is
to mutually improve each of our self-conceptions.
Now the thing about friends is that most of us have many friends.
One can make a kind of exception here, there is something which in the 19th century was
referred to as romantic friendship, and of course among the Greeks there were stories
about friends, primarily male friends, who were just as exclusive and intimate as any
pair of lovers.
But for the most part, we certainly talk about friendship in a very general way, in fact
I would say a promiscuous way.
We often refer to someone as a friend, meaning we've had dinner with them once, or talked
to them once.
But if you think about what it means to be a friend, what you understand is that friendship
involves a kind of mutual identity.
First of all, the mutual identity as friends, but also the sense in which we identify ourselves
through our friends.
But the fact that we have many friends, or at least several friends, means that there's
a sense in which this identity is diffuse, and we don't depend all that strongly on
any one friend for how we think of ourselves.
On the other hand, when we're talking about lovers, the picture becomes very different.
Whether or not this is a universal necessity, it is surely clear that in the western tradition,
love is conceived of as a more or less exclusive relationship.
Of course there are people who have many lovers, Sartre was one of them, and by distributing
one's identity among many lovers, one weakens the power of being for others, with any one
of them.
But by the same token, because that's true, lovers tend to be very defensive exclusivity
and incomes a kind of double standard.
We want to expand our own sense of options and identity by dealing with many lovers,
but at the same time we want to be for each of them, their only one.
And the reason for that is because with this kind of intimacy and exclusiveness, we get
a kind of control, well control of what?
We tend to think of love as I said in a rather benign way.
Sartre introduces love as a seductive strategy.
When we fall in love, and love of course can succeed or fail, and with it we can succeed
or fail, what we are concerned with is how we can win over the other.
For example, how we can get the other to think of us as we like to think of ourselves.
And of course again, there's a kind of bargain, a kind of contract.
The other thinks the same of us.
Remember back when you went on your first date, or in any given relationship, the first
date.
What is it like?
Well, let's leave aside all the anxiety and the rest of it, and just to talk about the
kind of social dynamics.
First you dress and talk in such a way as to present yourself not only in the best light
possible, but the best light as you conceive of it in terms of the kind of person you want
to be.
And we all remember back in our teenage years when we weren't sure what kind of a person
that was, or the kind of person was actually quite at odds with the person we were prone
to be.
But nevertheless, we presented ourselves in a certain way in order to get the person
we are out with to think of us that way.
The other person of course was doing the same thing.
As the conversation proceeds, probably on fairly safe grounds to begin with, where do
you go to school, or what do you study?
There's a sense in which we're kind of feeling our way and trying to find new openings, new
ways of presenting ourselves which appeal to the other person.
To talk about seduction here might sound a bit sinister, but there's a sense in which
to think of it as a seduction is really just to say it's not direct that what you do is
simply present to the other person all the evidence and considerations that he or she
needs in order to think of you in the way that you like.
It's seductive, not in that it's secretive, much less that it's sinister, but rather
it's trying to win the other person over in a very basic sense.
But as I said, love can fail.
And when you think about failed love, it doesn't just result in the end of a relationship,
but rather it turns into something else, and Sartre discusses many different possibilities.
And if what we're trying to do when we are in love with another person, when we are in
a relationship with another person, is win them over to our way of thinking, to take
control of them, then one natural result of a failed love is to take that attempt to control
and simply make it explicit, and what we get is sadism.
Sadism here doesn't necessarily refer to cruelty, and it doesn't necessarily refer
to any kind of physical abuse.
But sadism, as Freud also argued, is really a kind of latent tendency in all relationships,
because insofar as love is an attempt to gain control, sadism is a kind of desperate, explicit
attempt to take that control.
But I'm talking really about love just in one of its dimensions.
That's the dimension in which we talk about love in terms of dominating the other person
or manipulating the other person's view of you in a kind of straightforward way.
But of course, we don't always do that.
Sometimes in a love relationship, we take a much more submissive position, and in fact,
one might even say that love is essentially not so much the dominating position as so
much as the submissive one.
But here what we run across is a very different kind of tendency, because when we take a submissive
position, it's not as if we are saying to the other person, make of me what you will.
But quite to the contrary, we're putting the other person in a position where he or she
must please me.
When this fails, again, it becomes explicit, and what we find is masochism, which again
should not be confused with cruelty or physical abuse, but rather it is a manipulative attitude
towards the other which replaces the much more subtle mechanism which love tries to
bring about.
We might also talk here about indifference, and here we mean not just not caring, but
the kind of profound and very annoying indifference that one finds, for example, in an ex-lover,
someone who just now won't pay attention to you, won't acknowledge you even as another
human being.
And that of course can lead to hatred, which is a more extreme form of the same kind of
hostile attitude.
In short, what we find is that love, contrary to the kind of ethereal way that we think
of it, is a kind of dynamic in which a kind of mutual manipulation is essential.
Now all of this is talking in a rather abstract sense about love.
When we talk about intimacy, what we often have in mind, in fact some people would even
define it this way, is a sexual relationship.
And as we saw in No Exit, there's a kind of sexual subtext which is in many ways definitive
of the relationship between the characters.
It is not just a matter of happenstance that one of them is a macho male, one is a coquette,
and one is a lesbian, but rather it's this kind of sexual dynamic which really makes
the play move.
What are the dynamics of sex?
What is sexual desire?
We've all been taught in this society that it's something wrong to turn a person into
a sex object.
Feminists for the last 40 years have complained bitterly about magazines and the male gaze
for doing this, but there's a sense in which sexuality is essentially reducing the other
to an object.
So it points out that when you make love to a person and the parts of a person which
become most attractive in sex are precisely those parts of a person which are in a way
the least human, the most fleshy, the least dynamic, breasts, buttocks, thighs, and so
on.
Now what starts pointing out here is something that on the one hand is a bit perverse, but
at the same time I think it's something worth dwelling on.
When we love someone for their personality, their intelligence, their charm, why is it
that sex itself tends to treat them in a way which really doesn't leave much room for
all of those traits, except in perhaps the very unusual relationship?
Why does sex in fact so focus on something which is in one way of thinking a very basic
animal activity?
And of course there are all kinds of pseudo-biological explanations of this, some of which of course
have a lot of truth behind them.
But Sart wants to say it's all besides the point.
I mean there are many biological acts that we perform, eating for instance, but of course
we dress it up in an enormous variety of ways, depending on our culture and depending on
what the ethics and customs of the culture happen to be.
How about with sex?
We often talk about sex is cutting underneath culture in a return straight to our animal
nature, but Sart thinks quite the opposite.
It's part of what is most human about us.
It's often been commented that people have sex in a way that virtually no animal has
sex, and this is not true just by virtue of the biology and the difference between the
way we have courtship rituals and so on.
But it's a more basic sense, and of course what it comes down to is the fact that we
in having sex are conscious, and we are self-conscious, and we are conscious of the other.
We are conscious of the other's consciousness of us.
And so sex like love turns out to be a kind of strategy, a kind of manipulative strategy
in which what we try to do is win over the other to our own self-conceptions.
What does this have to do with reducing the other to an object?
Well here we enter another of those very tricky dialectics that Sart likes to talk about.
Because on the one hand, what we want to do is we want to put the other in a position,
possibly by giving him or her so much pleasure that he or she will tell us whatever it is
we want to hear like a stellar no exit.
But at the same time, if we succeed, on the one hand we have just produced somebody who
will simply tell us whatever we want to hear, and they are not therefore trustworthy.
Or on the other, we might give them so much pleasure that they won't tell us or see us
as anything at all.
They will stop making judgments altogether.
That of course is one of the possible aims of sexual activity, in a way to simply shut
the other person up.
But of course, again this is only half the picture.
Because what we also see in sex is a kind of submissiveness, but not a kind of submissiveness
which is simply, do what you like, I'm just here for you, but it too is or can be very
manipulative.
It is a way of getting the other person to exercise all of his or her efforts towards
pleasing you, and in that way controlling what they are thinking, and in particular
what they are thinking of you.
By reducing the other to a vehicle of pleasure, what you do is you manipulate.
But this is to say that pleasure is not the aim of sex, but rather pleasure is a kind
of vehicle which you use to control the other person.
If you take too much pleasure in it yourself, the pleasure gets in the way.
And what you do in fact is you eliminate sex as the vehicle for just the power that you
are trying to attain.
Because make no mistake for Sartre, sex is about power, it's a very Nietzschean view.
And the aim is to see our relationships, not as a simple being with others, but rather as
a kind of power play, and romance is a kind of play of wills.
Now what I've been saying sounds very perverse, and in fact it sounds very perverse to me
too.
But nevertheless I think what Sartre's doing is something incredibly important.
What he's doing is he's taking something which has been buried in so much nonsense over
the last 2,000 years, and giving us a very realistic, a brutally realistic view of the
kind of psychodynamics, or he would say ontological dynamics, that are really at stake.
It goes back to an earlier philosophical picture given to us by Hegel, which I've anticipated
several times.
And it has to do with his dialectic between master and slave, or between domination and
submission.
In Hegel's story, two people essentially fight it out, until one becomes master of the other,
and the loser becomes the slave.
Unfortunately, it's not a stable relationship, and through various attempts to either alter
the relationship or escape from it, both parties leave essentially quite unhappy.
The same kind of vision is what Sartre wants to give us in his view of sex and love.
We think of it as a kind of benign coupling, something that brings great satisfaction to
everyone, and what Sartre wants to point out is that sex and love, in fact, are much more
complicated and much more threatening and dangerous than we usually like to admit.
Perhaps he would say that there's no satisfaction to be gained from them.
I think, in fact, that's an oversimplification, but nevertheless, I think what he does is
he opens our eyes to complexities that have been buried under an avalanche of nonsense
over the last 2,000 years.
Philosophers, especially, have talked about love in very ethereal, even heavenly ways,
and the metaphors that we think of when we think about love are such that they really
distract us from any kind of critical attention.
I know watching young people, they almost always say something like, on the one hand,
love is wonderful, beautiful, the thing I really want to live for, at the same time
they complain about their own love relationships, and say that in a profound sense which they
don't understand, they're unsatisfying, or they're threatening in a way which they
can't handle.
Well, it seems to me to understand what Sartre's trying to combat.
I should look at some of these traditional myths and glosses, and let me pick one which,
in fact, is one of my favorites.
It's a piece of Plato's Symposium, and it's a tale told by the playwright Aristophanes,
and it's supposed to characterize the true nature of love.
What Aristophanes tells us is that love is the product of an ancient history in which
what we call human beings were much different creatures than they are today.
We were, in fact, double creatures with two sets of arms, two sets of legs, two heads,
and we were so intelligent consequently that we offended the gods, and Zeus essentially
threatened to split us in two, and he did.
Ever since, Aristophanes says, we've been running around the world trying to find our
other half.
What love is, what sex is, is a kind of completion.
The idea of completing ourselves through the other, on the one hand jives rather nicely
with Sartre's conception of being for others.
That is, we are not, in a sense, independent of other people.
Being for others is an essential part of our own being.
But the idea of completing ourselves in the sense that Aristophanes suggests making ourselves
complete with another person, with whom we perfectly fit, is quite at odds with Sartre's
rather perverse view of love and sex.
Just to say the obvious, there is no such perfect fit.
The people we meet, the people we fall in love with, are quite different from ourselves.
The analogy that Aristophanes uses in his little story is cut in half like an apple, but if
you take the two halves of an apple and press them together, of course they fit quite perfectly.
On the other hand, if you take two halves of different apples, which have been split
rather crudely, what you find is it takes a good deal of grinding to get them to fit
together.
And the truth is the people that we meet have been brought up differently, perhaps even
in different cultures, different religions, different ways of thinking, different sets
of habits.
And any relationship, as we all know, doesn't just fit together, even in the sort of vernacular
if we were made for each other, but we have to develop a relationship over a period of
time in which there's a good deal of adjustment and compromise, which goes into fitting together
so nicely.
But of course, Sartre means something deeper than this.
It's not just a question of the amount of time and energy that it takes to fit, but
rather there is no such fit, because even in the best relationship, what we find is
that there's a kind of struggle going on.
And while we might, at the beginning of a relationship, distract ourselves from this
with sexual excitement, people often make an awful relationship, but don't see it for
sometimes even years, because they managed to so distract themselves.
Or later on in a relationship, we might find all different mechanisms of distraction and
denial, getting lost in our careers, or friends on the side, or not paying attention to the
relationship, just sitting and watching television.
But if you pay any attention to your relationship, and especially in times of crisis and trouble,
what becomes very clear is that there is a kind of struggle going on, even though there's
an adjustment and a commendation that can take place over the years that makes it seem
less and less like an actual struggle.
And again, the picture is going to be the same, that we are trying to maintain our own
conception of ourselves in the face of the judgments of the other person.
Now I would say, in correction to Sartre here, that what he doesn't take seriously enough
is the fact that very often our conceptions of ourselves are not only in the face of the
other, but there's a kind of cooperation that can take place on the level of actually
trying to think of ourselves in mutual terms, something which Sartre alludes to, and I'll
come back to that in a moment.
But the idea that the way we think of ourselves is something which is always at risk because
of the other person is of course true.
You can think without much trouble, but with a great deal of pain, of the person with whom
you have spent much of your life turning to you suddenly one day and issuing the kind
of criticism that never allows us to think of ourselves the same again.
Or we can imagine ourselves in a fit of rage or whatever, saying the sort of thing that
not just hurt feelings, but destroys relationships precisely because we see that we have found
the fault or the fault line in the other person's way of thinking about themselves and we have
driven a wedge in it.
The point again is that relationships, however stable they may seem, are never truly stable
just as in our conceptions of ourselves, we are never fully at peace with ourselves.
There's a word that Sartre here borrows from chemistry, it's the word metastability.
And it refers to a situation which at a given moment appears to be perfectly in balance,
but nevertheless a slight disruption causes the whole system to fall into disarray.
The example I like here is the idea of a waiter carrying say five or six cups of hot coffee
and if he balances them well, he can probably get to the table with no trouble at all.
On the other hand, if there's some slight mishap, a small trip, perhaps a little hurl
on the rug, or if just one drop of hot coffee hits his skin, then of course he'll flinch,
he'll react, and that's the end of it, suddenly all six cups of coffee go flying into the
air and we've got a catastrophe on our hands.
So too, our conceptions of ourselves at any given moment might seem to be stabilized and
fairly fixed.
We know who we are in our career, we know who we are in our friendships, and in a relationship
we might feel perfectly comfortable that we have now accommodated ourselves, adjusted
ourselves to a life together, but it's metastable in the sense that one hot drop of coffee might
nevertheless throw the whole thing into catastrophe.
Once again, I don't want to endorse Sartre's picture so much as I think it's very important
to present it, and to present it in all its brutal completeness, because what he does
again is he opens our eyes to the complexities of our relationships in a way that our established
oftenies, for example, seems to deny, yet two things should modify this view.
First of all, Sartre himself had a lifelong relationship with Simone de Beauvoir and despite
many infidalities on his part, a few on hers, and a good deal of things that I think most
of us would think are at best eccentric in a relationship, such as the refusal to get
married over all that time.
Nevertheless, they really occupy a place as one of the premier couples, certainly the
premier philosophical couple, in the 20th century.
One might contrast it with Bertrand Russell, who despite all of his words of praise for
love, nevertheless managed to go through quite a few marriages and by his own admission
found none of them satisfactory.
So the Beauvoir relationship is one that I would hold up as a kind of counter example
to Sartre's own philosophy.
Granted, it has filled with tensions and complexities, but nevertheless, Sartre showed that he was
capable of, in some sense, the real thing.
And the second thing to say is that Sartre did in fact find a mode of being with others
as opposed to being for others, but I guess as we can predict from his plays and his writings,
it wasn't to be in the realm of romance, rather it was in the realm of politics.
And what Sartre claimed was that true being with others was something that one found in
the mutuality of being under threat on the battlefield, or more to the point, behind
the barricades of a Parisian revolution.
So Sartre does want to say that there is something as being with others, but it's only in fairly
extreme circumstances.
And once again, we go back to that question about human nature.
Where do we find its measure?
Well, not in ordinary bourgeois life, which Sartre despised, but rather in the extremities
of politics and political crises.
