Now that we understand what we're looking for, the Higgs boson, and how it interacts,
how you might produce it, we also understand the basic features of particle accelerators
and colliders and detectors that we'll actually find the things.
We're ready to go out and build the machine that we'll actually find the Higgs boson,
what we now know as the Large Hadron Collider.
Except of course, we're not nearly ready to build it because no one has ever been ready
to build the Large Hadron Collider.
It's hard to emphasize exactly what kind of undertaking we're talking about here.
The LHC is the most complicated machine ever built by human beings.
So by construction, no one was ever trained to do it because nothing like it had ever
been done before.
Now this sounds a little trivial, of course, that people who built the LHC had built other
particle accelerators, had been involved in the design, but when you build something
of this scope and magnitude, there will always be challenges that you hadn't quite foreseen.
These are the kinds of challenges they don't train you to deal with when you're a physics
graduate student getting your PhD and writing down Feynman diagrams and calculating the
answers.
There's a lot of human wisdom and ingenuity and gumption that goes into actually achieving
something like this.
So let's go back to what we might think of as the prehistory of the Large Hadron Collider,
and it really goes back to the 1980s.
It was in 1984 that the first concentrated working group got together and said, what
kind of machine could we build that ultimately led to building the LHC?
Now in the 1980s and the early 80s, CERN had discovered the W boson and the Z boson in
1983, and then they won the Nobel Prize the very next year in 1984.
The Nobel went to Carlo Rubia, who was the leader of an experiment at CERN called UA1,
who had found the W and then the Z soon thereafter.
He shared the Nobel, by the way, with another physicist at CERN named Simon Vandermeer,
and Vandermeer interestingly didn't win the Nobel for discovering a new particle.
He received it for inventing a technique known as stochastic cooling.
Remember from last lecture, we have these beams of particles and the particles in the
beam are closely bunched together, but if you think about it, all these particles in
any one bunch, they're either protons or antiprotons.
So in other words, they all have the same electrical charge, and that means that every
proton in the bunch is repelling all of the other protons, the bunches want to grow.
So there's quite a technical accomplishment in getting the bunches to remain small and
dense so you get many, many collisions.
That technique of stochastic cooling invented by Vandermeer made modern particle accelerators
possible.
So after Rubia found the W particle and the Z particle, they were on to find the next
thing.
Every particle physicist is instantly looking for the next discovery.
So in the early 1980s, there were two very obvious candidates.
There was the Higgs boson and there was the Topquark.
Plus that, of course, we knew that there was particle physics beyond the standard model.
Maybe there was supersymmetry or something new and exotic.
Now eventually we found the Topquark at Fermilab, not at CERN.
It was the Tevatron that finally found the Topquark in 1995, but CERN was definitely
looking for it and they definitely wanted to find the Higgs.
When we talk about CERN, we're really talking about a gigantic operation.
CERN is the European Center for Nuclear Research.
Letters are in a different order because it's originally in French.
And these days, most of the research is particle physics, not nuclear physics.
But the organization was established back in 1954.
It was part of rebuilding European science after World War II.
Right now there are 21 member states of CERN.
That is the actual states that govern the operation.
By states we mean countries, of course, so England, France, Germany, and so forth.
But there are 70 countries that participate in one way or another.
So countries like the US, Russia, India, and Japan are called observer nations.
They're welcome to work at CERN and they do.
They're certainly welcome to contribute money, but the 21 member states are the ones who
actually run the operation and contribute most of the budget.
If you go through that budget, obviously building something like the Large Hadron Collider costs
a lot of money, but it works out to no more than about $2 per person per year for people
in the actual member states of CERN.
One of the great things about CERN is that it is a model of international cooperation.
Many physicists who you will talk to will say that if the United Nations worked together
as well as CERN did, we would have world peace.
You will see Israeli physicists working with Palestinian physicists.
We all want to find the Higgs boson.
And it's a big, complicated arrangement.
If you fly into Geneva on an airplane, chances are that about one in 16 people on your flight
are associated with CERN one way or another.
So after Rubia's experiment in the 1980s to find the W boson and the Z, the next thing
that was already in the pipeline for CERN was what we already mentioned, something called
the Large Electron-Positron Collider, or LEP.
LEP ran from 1989 to 2000 and it was certainly looking for the Higgs boson.
It was colliding electrons and positrons.
They created Z bosons and W bosons at an enormous rate, but look as they would.
They could not quite find the Higgs.
Their limit, the heaviest mass that they could really reach at LEP, was about 114 GeV.
Now it turns out, if you were around and paying attention to particle physics in the year
2000, you would have noticed that there were hints that there was a Higgs boson at about
115 GeV, just beyond the reach of LEP, but we had to make a decision.
Should we shut down LEP and start building the Large Hadron Collider, or should we keep
pushing and maybe find the Higgs there at 115?
Roughly speaking, the CERN management ran LEP for a few months past its due date, its
expiration date, I should say, and then they decided to finally turn it off.
They did not find the Higgs at 115 GeV.
But meanwhile, of course, the United States was not sitting still.
We had the Tevitron at Fermilab, but we were planning to build the superconducting supercollider.
This would have reached 40 trillion electron volts, 40 TeV of energy, and the Europeans
said to themselves, if the U.S. is building this giant Hadron Collider, there's no reason
for us here in Europe to do that, we don't have the resources to build a 40 TeV machine.
But Karla Rubia, who was at that time a professor at Harvard, said, you know, I know these Americans,
don't trust them, don't believe that they will actually do this machine that they're
planning on.
And in fact, he was right.
The SSC, the superconducting supercollider, was canceled by Congress in 1993.
It was a very acrimonious debate.
Some physicists who were not particle physicists actually argued against building it, and the
sort of bad blood over that debate still lingers in physics circles today.
So because of that, Rubia argued that CERN should go ahead and design its own Hadron Collider,
which we imaginatively named the large Hadron Collider, the LHC.
It was a Welsh physicist named Lynn Evans, who was picked in the 1980s to head the project,
and he only stepped down very, very recently in, I think it was 2012, that he finally retired
from that job.
Lynn Evans was the person who guided the LHC from conception to design to building to
ultimate operation.
That's a job.
Again, they don't train you for it in graduate school.
There is as much politics involved as there is physics.
You have to keep 21 member nations in CERN happy.
And for example, in the year 2001, it was discovered that the LHC was about 20 percent
over budget.
Now by standards of United States particle physics and space and big science projects,
20 percent over budget is nothing.
Students routinely go double the budget, but the Europeans are a bit more persnickety and
Evans was almost fired when it was learned that he was 20 percent over budget.
But he persevered.
He stuck through it and ultimately he guided the LHC to a successful completion.
The target was 14 trillion electron volts for their energy.
Remember, the SSE would have been 40 trillion, but the LHC was constrained because they were
saving money by building it inside the same tunnel that LEP had been built in.
The LHC underground didn't have a tunnel dedicated to it.
We took out LEP from the tunnel and we put the LHC in.
That means we knew what the size was.
We knew what the maximum energy we could reach was going to be.
It's going to be 14 TEV.
That's still quite a bit higher than the previous Hadron Collider at CERN, the superconducting
proton-antiproton-sacrotron.
That was less than half of one trillion electron volts.
Because we could build the LHC inside, obviously I'm using we in the very, very royal sense,
because CERN could build the LHC inside the preexisting tunnel, they saved money.
They had a 27 kilometer ring underground beneath the French-Swiss border.
Part of the LHC is in Switzerland.
Part of it is in France.
It's 100 meters underground and if you're above the LHC, you could be in someone's living
room.
There are people who live right on top of the LHC.
There are cow pastures and so forth.
It's actually quite a scenic arrangement if you go to visit CERN.
But what you have to do is fill up that tunnel 27 kilometers around with some of the highest
tech, most expensive equipment that human beings have ever made.
Most of that length consists of superconducting magnets to collimate the beams to focus the
beams of protons to a very, very tiny amount and to steer them around the ring.
Remember, we said that the actual acceleration of the particles is done by a radio-frequency
cavity, but if you think about this ring that is the LHC, we don't accelerate the protons
all over the ring.
There's one little segment that they go through and get accelerated.
The entire rest of the ring is just dedicated to steering and focusing the protons.
All told, there's about 1,600 superconducting magnets linking together underneath that ring.
27 tons each is how much each of those magnets weighs.
It's quite a bit of operation going on.
Now what you're doing inside these magnets is you're steering beams of protons and there
are two beams.
You're bringing the beams into collision.
If you had protons and antiprotons, you could push them in the same beam pipe because they're
going in opposite directions, but they're also oppositely charged.
But if you have protons going both ways, you need two different beam pipes.
So in every one of those magnets, there's two little tubes.
Protons going one way, more protons going the other way.
Inside the tubes, it is almost empty space because you don't want the protons bumping
into the air.
The atmospheric pressure inside these vacuum tubes is less than you would feel if you were
standing on the surface of the moon.
And of course, they're also very, very cold because the magnets themselves are superconducting.
If you think about what a magnet is, the easiest way to make a magnet is just to run an electric
current through a wire.
The problem is if you run a lot of current, the wire heats up and melts.
The solution to that is to cool it down so much that the wire becomes a superconductor.
There is no more electrical resistance, and therefore you can run as much current in it
as you want without heating it up.
So the trick to making the LHC magnets not heat up is to keep them very, very, very cold.
That's when you get superconductivity.
So the LHC magnets are less than two degrees above absolute zero.
They're literally colder than interstellar space.
Through these magnets, of course, we're zooming protons.
They're moving at a speed these days of about 99.99999% the speed of light.
That doesn't mean very much.
So therefore, what we care about is the energy in the beam, and that's where we're aiming
for this target of about 14 trillion electron volts total.
That means that the protons going one way have 7 trillion electron volts each, and going
the other way, you also have 7, and you bump into each other.
There's about 600 trillion protons in the beams at any one moment of time.
That sounds like a lot, 600 trillion.
But one gram of protons has over a trillion, trillion protons.
So really, there's not a lot of protons by weight in the LHC beam at any one moment.
These are all collimated to a very thin pencil beam.
When I say pencil, that's exaggerating the size.
The actual size of the beam is about two thousandths of a centimeter across.
You bring these two beams into collision, and you get literally about a billion collisions
per second.
Every one time that a bunch crosses, you get tens of collisions.
Now, obviously, this gives you a lot of data.
As we've already discussed, you have to throw away a lot of the data through a trigger.
But even once you've thrown away all but one in a million events, you're still left with
about 30 petabytes of data every year.
A petta is a million billion.
So a petabyte is a million billion bytes compared to gigabytes, terabytes or a thousand gigabytes.
A petabyte is a thousand terabytes.
So 30 petabytes a year are created at the LHC.
Before the LHC came online, the world's largest database was the World Data Center for Climate,
six petabytes total.
Every year at the LHC, we make five times the biggest amount of database that we've
ever had here on Earth before that.
But all of these gigantic numbers come from one tiny little proton source, which is basically
a flask of hydrogen that looks kind of like a fire extinguisher.
It's a little tiny thing, but it has many, many, many hydrogen atoms in it.
You strip off the electrons from the hydrogen atoms, then you get protons, you send them
around the beam.
It's very nice and reassuring to think that even this gigantic machine has the humble
beginnings in this little canister full of hydrogen.
Once we have our protons moving around the ring in both directions, at certain points
around the ring, we're going to bring those beams of protons into collision.
And that's where we want to build a detector which will watch what happens when the individual
particles smash together.
At the LHC, there are four large detectors.
There are several smaller ones, but four whopping big detectors.
And of those four, two of them are general purpose.
They look for everything, and two of them are more specialized.
The general purpose ones are called ATLAS and CMS.
ATLAS is the boring acronym, namely A toroidal LHC apparatus.
If you've seen pictures from the LHC, there's a very good chance you've seen a picture of
ATLAS.
It looks like a piece of alien technology.
There were great pictures taken before it was completed, and you see this gigantic thing.
All of the LHC detectors are huge on a human scale.
ATLAS is 25 meters across, but 46 meters long, half of a football field.
And it weighs 7,000 tons.
If you're standing next to ATLAS, it's very difficult to see you because you're swamped
by the technology.
And the way something like ATLAS works is it's a collaboration.
Many people from many different countries, over 3,000 physicists are associated with
ATLAS, but someone needs to be the boss.
So they take turns electing what is called a spokesperson for the collaboration.
When the whole collaboration publishes a paper in a scientific journal, all 3,000 members
are authors of that paper.
But it's the spokespeople who get the nice job of giving the seminars when you discover
the Higgs boson or something like that.
For ATLAS, the original spokesperson was Peter Yenny from Germany.
He was followed by Fabiola Gianotti from Italy, and she was fortunate enough to be the spokesperson
when they got to give these seminars announcing the Higgs discovery.
And today a British physicist, Dave Charlton, is leader of ATLAS.
The other major general purpose experiment at the LHC is called CMS for compact muon
solenoid.
Of course, CMS is only compact when you compare it to ATLAS.
It is over 21 meters long, 15 meters across, and weighs over 12,000 tons.
If you think about it, that's smaller in size than ATLAS, but it's actually heavier,
12,000 tons versus only 7,000 tons.
That's because CMS really is much more densely packed.
The muon detector in ATLAS is mostly empty space.
It's these big rings that make it so photogenic, whereas CMS is more or less solid metal throughout,
including the muon detector.
CMS, because it was literally smaller, lost the drawing to be way on the other side of
the ring.
The ATLAS detector has a location right next to the main CERN campus.
CMS is all the way on the other side in a little town called Cessie in France.
And if you go to Wikipedia to look up the city of Cessie, it was clearly a Wikipedia
article written by physicists working at CMS.
It will tell you things like, this pizza place serves really, really good food, but don't
go there if you have a meeting in the afternoon because they take a long time to serve you.
The spokespeople for CMS, we have a list of spokespeople just like for ATLAS.
The first one was a guy named Michel Della Negra from France.
The second one was Tejinder Verdi, who was a UK physicist who was born in Kenya.
Then there was Guido Tonelli from Italy.
And finally today it's Joe Incandella from the United States, even though they're an
observer state, they're still full partners in the experiment.
And it was Joe Incandella who was the spokesperson when the Higgs was discovered.
I like to list these names, not only to emphasize that physics is a human endeavor, but to show
you there are many different countries making absolutely central contributions to making
the physics that comes out of the LHC.
In addition to these two major experiments, ATLAS and CMS that look for everything they
can find, there are the dedicated experiments, one called ALICE and one called LHCB.
ALICE stands for A Large Ion Collider Experiment, I told you the acronyms were not that colorful.
What ALICE is doing is looking not at protons colliding, but at lead ions.
Remember we said that when we went down the list of all the things you could accelerate,
we found that not only could you accelerate individual elementary particles, but also
the nuclei of atoms.
So for one or two months a year, the LHC stops accelerating protons.
It puts the protons away and it puts the nuclei of lead atoms into the accelerator and accelerates
them around.
The difference is when lead atoms smash together, when the lead nuclei smash together, you get
a tremendous mess.
If you were looking for a new particle like the Higgs boson, that would be bad.
You don't want a mess, you want something clean that you can analyze.
But at ALICE, we're intentionally making a mess because we want to make a plasma.
By colliding together these tremendous collections of protons and neutrons, we create the quark
gluon plasma that was basically what the early universe was like.
ALICE is literally recreating the conditions that we had in the Big Bang.
It's not a good way to look for new particles, but it is a good way to understand the physics
underlying the interactions of many, many quarks and gluons.
Finally, we have LHCB, where LHC stands for Large Hadron Collider and B stands for Beauty.
What the LHCB detector is looking for is CP violation using bottom or beauty quarks.
So what is CP violation?
C is charge conjugation.
That's the symmetry, or at least the transformation, that exchanges particles for antiparticles.
So a C transformation takes an electron to a positron and vice versa.
It leaves a photon unchanged because photons are their own antiparticles.
And of course, P is parity, which we know that is violated in the weak interactions.
So the weak interactions violate parity, but they come very, very close to conserving the
combination of parity and charge conjugation.
That's called CP.
So what do I mean by that?
I mean that the fact that the weak interactions violate parity means that the weak interactions
only couple to left-handed fermions, not to right-handed fermions.
That is to say, if a particle is moving toward you, the weak interactions couple to particles
that are rotating clockwise if they're coming toward you, but not particles that are rotating
counterclockwise if they're coming toward you.
However, that's for fermions.
For antifermions, it's the other way around.
For antifermions, the weak interactions only couple to right-handed particles, not to left-handed
particles.
So even though the weak interactions violate parity because they couple to left-handed
fermions, not right-handed ones, if you do parity, switching left with right, and charge
conjugation, switching fermions with antifermions, you get back to where you started as far as
the weak interactions are concerned.
So CP is almost conserved by the weak interactions, but not quite.
Two physicists named James Cronin and Val Fitch discovered that there's a tiny amount
of CP violation in the standard model of particle physics and they won the Nobel Prize
for that.
These days we know there's a tiny amount of CP violation, but we also know that if there
are new particles, if there are particles we have not yet detected, those new particles
could very easily increase the amount of CP violation we could observe.
So if you're looking for new particles for new physics, the most direct way of doing
it is just to make them, make the new particles, and watch them decay into something.
That's how we discovered the Higgs.
But there's also an indirect way to do it.
Remember when we talked about Feynman diagrams, we had virtual particles and loops and there's
all these little particle lines that could appear inside a diagram, but not on the edges,
not on the ones that actually escaped to be visible in the real world.
So if there was some tiny little particle that exerted an influence but only inside
the Feynman diagram, that could increase the amount of CP violation.
If we measured that, it would be evidence for new physics from a completely different
method.
That's why at a place like the LHC you want to have many different experiments because
you want to look for new physics every single way we can.
So that's the LHC that we have.
We have two beams going in opposite directions colliding and being detected at detectors.
That's the design, let's go build it.
As you might expect, it's the largest machine ever built.
There were challenges during construction.
For example, because CMS is located on the far side of the ring far away from the home
base of CERN, you actually have to move the pieces of detector that you've built all the
way across the ring.
So you move them on the surface, which sounds fine, just put them on a truck and take them
down the road, except that this particular part of France and Switzerland that you're
driving through is full of tiny little medieval villages, very small streets.
Parts of the detector had to be designed, keeping in mind that they need to fit in between
the buildings on the roads of these streets.
It's this kind of practical challenge that they don't teach you about in graduate school.
Then you have to dig the tunnel.
You have the tunnel was already there.
We have to dig a hole to lower the detector and lower all the magnets down into the tunnel.
You can actually construct the LHC ring and the individual detectors.
Of course, when you do this, when you start digging down deep, you can be surprised.
It turns out when they were digging the hole in which they were going to put the CMS detector,
they found an ancient Roman ruin.
They found a village from the 4th century AD that had jewelry and coins from the Roman
Empire from as far away as London.
So sadly for physics, they kicked out all the physicists and the engineers and they
brought in the archaeologists.
The whole project was delayed for six months while archaeologists went through this wonderful
new discovery they had made.
It really is quite fascinating, despite the fact that it was delaying the physics.
The streets of the village from the 4th century AD are actually parallel to the streets of
the same farms and villages in the same region today.
Through the centuries, the streets sort of maintained their structure, which is a fascinating
little bit of history that we wouldn't have known about if we hadn't built the LHC.
So you do this for a long time, remember.
1984 was when we started imagining building the LHC.
1993 was when construction really started in earnest.
It was September 10th, 2008, that it finally turned on.
I remember very, very vividly because the whole physics world was very excited about
the LHC starting.
It was starting in the morning, Geneva time, which worked out to midnight, California time.
But there were news crews that were visiting Caltech and we had a little party.
We had pizza and popcorn that we were giving the TV reporters.
They all wanted to know what the big excitement was about the Large Hadron Collider.
I remember the reporter, Hal Eisner, was holding up a piece of popcorn in front of me on camera
and was saying, if it weren't for the Higgs boson, would this popcorn explode?
And you know, in some sense it would.
Without the Higgs boson, the electrons that hold together the atoms in that popcorn would
fly away at the speed of light.
But it's not really the message I wanted to send about what the LHC was doing.
So September 10th, it worked.
The LHC turned on, protons moved around the beams, champagne was popped, people had a
good time.
September 19th, nine days later, it exploded.
Not the whole LHC, not the whole 27 kilometer ring, but there was a part of the machine
that basically blew up.
If you had read the press releases from CERN on September 19th or 20th, they would say
they had a little bit of a leak.
But it was actually much worse than that.
Six tons of liquid helium were splashed across the floor.
All of the control room computers lit up with bright red.
Even Evans, the boss of the LHC, described it as carnage.
He had never seen something that was that bad.
What had happened is something called a quench.
Remember, in those superconducting magnets, you want to keep them cold so they will be
superconducting because if they are not superconducting, they heat up.
So you imagine there is a danger here if just by some random fluctuation, the magnet heats
up a little bit.
It stops becoming superconducting, and then it heats up more.
So it runs away.
That's exactly what happened.
That's what we call a quench.
One of the magnets was not made perfectly well.
It basically blew up and the problems spread to the magnets nearby.
Fortunately, there was nobody standing nearby.
It certainly would have been a fatal accident if that had happened.
This was very depressing in September 2008, but to their enormous credit, all the physicists
who had devoted their lives to building the LHC picked themselves up and got right back
to work.
It took over a year to fix things, but in November 2009, the LHC came roaring back to
life.
They only went to half of the design energy.
The first LHC run had a total energy of 7 trillion electron volts, not the 14 they were
aiming for, just because they're being cautious.
But nevertheless, it has been working enormously well since that date.
Since November 2009, the LHC has been going great guns.
It wasn't always perfectly smooth.
There was a famous incident in November 2009, just as they were ready to start up, when
there was a power outage.
They eventually traced the power outage to a little piece of baguette, a little piece
of French bread that had fallen into a power station.
They think that a pigeon was trying to carry around its piece of bread and it dropped it
as it was flying over.
So the Telegraph, a newspaper in the United Kingdom, had a front page picture of the Large
Hatteron Collider and a pigeon, and the subtitle was Large Hatteron Collider on the left and
its arts nemesis on the right.
But that was only a blip on the radar.
That's the kind of thing that happens all the time.
People were more nervous than usual, but it was fixed almost right away and again.
Since 2009, the LHC has been going great guns.
It's very, very important that the run be smooth.
When you're colliding these protons together, most of the time, the interaction that you
get is not going to be interesting.
It's just going to be another example of standard model physics.
If you want to discover new particles, you have to have many, many, many collisions.
That's the luminosity we talked about.
You have to have as many collisions as you can possibly collect together in as short
a time as you can possibly collect together.
And that's exactly what we've had.
If you imagine plotting the number of collisions the LHC has witnessed, there's enormously
more in 2011 than there was in 2010, and enormously more again in 2012 compared to 2011.
The LHC, since it's been running, has been doing a bang-up job.
They were running at 7 trillion electron volts for a long time.
Then in 2012, they got a little bit cheeky.
They went up to 8 trillion electron volts.
That was exactly what was needed to finally discover the Higgs boson.
At the end of that run, they discovered the Higgs in July 2012.
They announced the discovery.
They couldn't help themselves but run for a few more months because they had a new toy
to play with.
They wanted to study the Higgs as well as they could.
But at the end of 2012, they shut down.
And throughout 2013 and 2014, the LHC was not running.
It's basically that they wanted to upgrade it.
They turned it off.
They went in there with their soldering irons and their screwdrivers.
They're fixing everything.
They've learned a lot about how it works.
When it comes back on in 2015, the LHC is going to go at its design energy.
It's going to be hitting that 14 trillion electron volts.
We're hoping that that extra energy is exactly what we need to discover particles beyond the
Higgs boson, beyond the standard model of particle physics.
