I am so glad you convinced me that the family car
should be the Defender 110.
It is so beautiful inside, it's so comfortable,
and it just feels indestructible.
Yes, it really is.
I've been waiting a long time for the new model to come out.
The Defender 110, I'm telling you,
it's my favorite car of all times.
It's my third one.
You know, I have stories of going off road.
The guy managed the group.
He was like, what are you doing in this beautiful car?
I'm like, I'm going off road.
He's like, are you sure?
Because you can use one of ours,
and then they look like Mad Max cars.
I'm like, no, no, no, we're going to do this,
and he was shocked.
Wow.
Well, it's great because the Defender
has been reimagined for 21st century adventure,
and its unparalleled off-road ability,
as well as its robust interior, are invaluable,
whether you're headed towards uncharted territory,
or just a weekend of exploration.
The Defender 110 tackles challenging surroundings
with absolute confidence.
The SUV conveys strength outside and in,
featuring peerless technology,
like an intuitive driver display,
and an award-winning infotainment system.
That's my favorite part, to keep you connected,
no matter where the journey takes you.
Adventure is unique to everyone, and so is the Defender.
Choose from the two-door Defender 90,
the four-door Defender 110, or the larger Defender 130,
with the ability to seat up to eight passengers.
You'll find uncompromising performance in all three.
So pack up and go even further with the Defender 110.
Learn more at landroverusa.com forward slash defender.
Capella University is rethinking higher education.
With its game-changing, flex path learning format,
you can earn your degree on your schedule,
and fit your education seamlessly into your life.
Imagine your future differently at capella.edu.
This isn't your average business podcast,
and he's not your average host.
This is the James Altiger Show on the Choose Yourself Network.
Today on the James Altiger Show.
In many ways, permission to be an imposter
is something you have to take for yourself.
So if you're hearing this podcast,
and if you feel like an imposter,
instead of trying to fight it,
just try experimenting when you're in the quiet of your own room.
What if I am an imposter, then so what?
Maybe the idea is that my faking it would be as good or better
than somebody else's earnest attempt.
So I think it's very appealing to stop fighting your fear
of being an imposter,
and saying that's no excuse for staying on the couch.
You know, for any area, it seems like there's a set path,
there's a set formula to become the top of that area.
And I think, would you say being an imposter
is when there are people who come into the area
without taking that traditional path?
Right, yeah.
But never discount what somebody can do
completely on their own.
And I think when you first make a decision
to burn the boat so there's no returning home, right?
I think that's when things get really exciting
because it's sink or swim,
and people become incredibly inventive
once they become isolated and terrified.
When do you think you've burned boats?
What was your first experience with it?
So, I don't even know how to introduce you.
You're Eric Weinstein,
you're managing director of Weinstein.
I keep forgetting that.
Weinstein, Eric Weinstein,
managing director of Teal Capital.
You got your PhD in mathematical physics at Harvard.
You've done, you're like a Renaissance man, I feel.
You're kind of, I've listened to a whole bunch
of excellent podcasts with you.
Let's start off with Ben Shapiro, Joe Rogan, Tim Ferriss.
I highly recommend people listen to you on those podcasts too
because to get the wide range of your knowledge,
what other things should people say about you?
How do people introduce you?
You've done like a million things.
Well, I don't know, I'm just a guy
who's interested in canonical structures in the universe
and try to find them wherever we can.
So, what do you mean by canonical structure?
And then I'll actually continue the intro.
Well, just, I guess what I'm fascinated by
is things that are extremely elegant, very powerful.
There's an idea, I think, due to Richard Dawkins
that you measure the power of an idea
by what it explains divided by what it assumes.
And so the most powerful ideas assume very little
and tell you a tremendous amount when you unpack them.
So, in general, if you're gonna try to get through life,
you wanna find the most powerful ideas by that rubric.
Okay, but let me unpack that a little bit.
I've heard that before and,
but with the addition that also
it should have some predictive ability.
So, a theory might explain a lot,
like let's take Richard Dawkins in evolutionary psychology.
It could explain a lot, but does it predict a lot?
And would you include that in something
that's an important mental model?
Sure, I mean, I think it does predict a lot
and I think a lot of it can be quite surprising.
Before we get to evolutionary psychology,
because that's always gonna be fraught
as people don't want to imagine
that their thoughts and behavior patterns
are somewhat systematized.
You just take something like the four chord song from music.
I guarantee you that within the next year,
someone will release a version of the four chord song
that will go one, five, six, minor, four.
And they'll have a worldwide hit with it.
And it's predictive because that is a formula
that is known to underlie all sorts of hits.
And it's clearly not by accident or...
So, have you read The Head Factory
about these group of Swedish guys
who basically produce every hits on
and they basically use that structure,
like Taylor Swift, Ariana Grande, like every hit?
That's usually a bit more complex
than simple four chord songs
that can be strummed around the campfire.
But yeah, I think that there are formulas
and very often the formulas are sort of hidden
as if they're machine tools that make the tools.
So the idea that you have some Scandinavian group
that has figured out the DNA of music
and knows how to pump out hits at will is fascinating.
Why should anyone have that power?
And the idea that there is,
well, that there are formulas is what's fascinating.
So when I talk about canonical structures,
I'm most interested in ways in which the world
seems incredibly complicated,
but in fact reduces to a very small set of assumptions.
So what's another example?
Well, the famous ones that people all know
would be, for example, the periodic table,
but maybe despite the fact that that tells you all
about the chemical elements
and gives you a lot of indication of how they'll combine,
most people have never seen the left step periodic table,
which makes clear the relationship between symmetries
and orbitals and chemical elements.
So that would be an example of a design innovation
where just the presentation of the information
lays bare the underlying structure.
Or if we were talking music or not music language,
the international phonemic alphabet
is something that most people don't even know it exists,
but it has to do with the mapping of the structure
or our speech apparatus into a universal notation
so that you can understand
how to pronounce something in any language.
And so I've heard you talk about that
on Joe Rogan and Tim Ferriss.
I think it's fascinating, but it also underlines,
all these things underlined how much of a kind
of polymath or renaissance person you are.
Like, you have your PhD in mathematical physics,
you have results there,
but you've gotten from that to economics,
to obviously a deep understanding of music and language
and economics and finance
and you're managing director of Teal Capitals
who are involved in the investing world.
And the way I know more about you
as I actually heard you speak a few months ago in New York,
Dave Rubin was on the stage, Melissa Chen was on the stage,
and it was about this, you know,
the so-called intellectual dark web,
a phrase you coined,
which is kind of about, if I was to describe it,
basically the limitations on free speech
that has polarized the US or even the world on both sides,
but I would say maybe a little bit more
since Trump got elected,
the limitations of free speech
are happening a little bit more on the left side, and...
Just not a little bit.
All right, not a little bit,
but and to note, you're from the left side,
I've been a Democrat all my life,
but suddenly I find you cannot even,
unless you agree with all 50 things on one team,
you're ruined.
But that's not even true.
There's no way to agree with it
because it's self-contradictory.
Tell me what you mean.
If you are men and women different
or are men and women the same?
So this new movement asserts
both of those things at different times
in order to make two different sets of points.
If you want to make the point that leaving women out
is a problem because you don't get
the benefit of diversity,
you say, do you have any idea
how differently women think from men?
You're losing all of that perspective,
which is an interesting argument.
And then when you see, let's say a workplace
with a lack of balance between men and women,
they'll claim will be men and women are exactly the same
and the failure to hire women has to do
with bigotry and prejudice.
And so it's very interesting.
You're making two separate arguments.
Both of them are individually interesting.
Then you say, well, look,
I've heard you make two different arguments.
Let's try to figure out how they combine
or whether there's a contradiction
or there's something to explore.
And then people get very, very angry.
They get very angry in it.
The way you just put that
kind of reminds me of arguments in relationships.
So it's when two sides,
the man and the woman say, disagree about something.
And usually the way you resolve arguments is,
okay, why do you disagree?
Why do you disagree?
What are all the options?
And then you discuss what's the,
what option is best for the unit
kind of in the middle of that spectrum
between one side and the other.
But here we've come to a place societally
where people are not willing to acknowledge
that there are options in the middle.
Yeah, I don't think it's really about options in the middle
or compromise or common ground.
I think that for some reason that we don't understand
and interesting that both of us identify
with being lifelong Democrats,
something has gone completely insane inside of the left
with respect to logic and reason.
Just even to the point where bringing up logic,
reason, contradiction,
I'm told these are tools of power and oppression.
And I don't even waste time
within any argument that stupid.
It's just, it's so far outside the bounds
of what civilized people should be discussing,
whether or not logic and reason,
I mean, are we gonna be discussing
whether arithmetic is biased?
I have no idea where these people are going.
Well, I wondered about this
when thinking about this podcast,
you're obviously involved in at least questioning
what's going on with free speech.
People like you and Jordan Peterson
who's also been on the podcast and others.
And my first inclination was to think,
why do you care?
Because I just avoid people who don't let me talk.
But I guess in the workplace and in,
if you're out there trying to make other points
that you want people to consider what you're saying
and value what you're saying,
then there's some Twitter mob
or just some societal mob in general
that says, no, he said this 15 years ago,
so we can't listen to anything else he ever says.
I guess it is important to this.
I mean, it's not even close.
What we are potentially going to do
in terms of our ability to destroy our institutions,
suppress thought, descent,
completely weaken ourselves
and our scientific enterprises
by creating a climate in which no one knows
what the rules are from moment to moment.
And anyone can come out of any nook of your past
and accuse you and you feel like you have to answer.
I think it's really important
that people stop answering all of the accusations
with information about their lives.
Very often somebody will be accused and they'll say,
well, actually I was here and I was there
and I was doing this other thing.
Why are you telling people?
I mean, just if people want to accuse you of something,
have them do it through the courts
and have it be done with presumption of innocence.
There's something that's going on
in which we are now attacking people's ability
to earn a living as a second judiciary process.
And the idea is that if we can destroy your reputation,
we may not be able to get you into a court of law,
but we can keep you from feeding your family.
And that is what I've been calling left cartheism.
And because I come from the left,
we learned to hate McCarthyism during the 1950s
because it was used against us
and it was used very specifically
to destroy progressive families.
The idea that people calling themselves progressives
have rediscovered the tools of ruin
that were previously used against progressives
by an out of control anti-communist movement
in the United States is beyond ridiculous.
Well, it's interesting
because it didn't just start now,
although maybe it's at the peak that it's ever been.
I mean, there's always been this notion of PC culture
and you always kind of had to be careful around it.
But it's just maybe it's gotten,
I think since the election of Trump,
it's gotten much more intense
where you're either on one team or the other.
And like you say, it's even hard to say what the team is
because both sides could be construed with the same hate.
But that sounds reactive to Trump.
My claim is that Trump was called out of the vacuum
and installed as president largely because of this madness.
The reason I'm so against this madness
is because it's going to elect us Trump or worse
in the eyes of the left.
In other words, if you start going after
the bedrock of American labor,
let's say famously Hillary's comment about deplorables,
I believe that deplorables are democratic apostates
who left the Democratic Party
when it started abandoning labor
and tried to make up the constituency deficit
by embracing identity politics.
And the claim is that labor
was a super expensive constituency
and identity politics is incredibly cheap.
So the donor class wanted to swap out labor for identity.
This is my wife's theory, Pia Milani's.
But I think that-
Although labor is a huge voting constituency.
Well, it is, but if you have like white former coal miners
in their 60s or something,
and then you're making fun of them as deplorables
because their church going, rifle owning,
speak your mind, American bedrock.
I think that it just shows
that we're completely cut off from our own history,
our own base.
And you should never antagonize a group of people
that's taken a really serious hit like this,
which is in some sense,
just a bedrock constituency in this country.
You're opening the door of Pandora's box.
I can't imagine anyone smart wanting to do that.
Why do you?
I mean, Hillary's obviously not the most successful
campaign in the world,
but she knows what she's doing enough to get nominated
to be almost president.
And why do you think she did that?
I think that Hillary is part of a very long slide
into middle brown nonsense that was used
to blow out the genie coefficients,
create a tremendous amount of income,
inequality, and asset inequality in this country.
I think that when Bill Clinton figured out
how to finally stop the 12 year Republican juggernaut in 1992,
he largely did it by copying so much
of the Republican playbook that you have two versions
of the pro inequality party.
And I think that definitely the idea
that Republicans remain the party of millionaires,
but Democrats have become the party of billionaires
is an interesting critique.
Well, it's interesting because in 1992,
I mean, at the time he was head of the,
I think it was the Democrat National Caucus
or Southern Caucus,
some part of the Democratic party,
that was kind of the conservative wing
of a Democratic party.
And the fact that they're now signaled to be so on the left,
it was kind of an interesting.
Yeah, but I don't even know what these words really mean.
I think that we have two parties, Democrat and Republican,
we can call them left and right, if you will.
But to me, it's two faces of the looting party.
Of the looting party.
Okay, what do you mean by looting?
Well, that we've been,
we have this country with a tremendous amount of wealth.
We have a problem with growth
and that we're not really honest
about confronting our problems with growth.
So just like any family that has a family business
that has made it wealthy,
where the business starts to begin sputtering,
you have a very interesting period of time
where you can use the wealth of the family,
you can take loans against the assets,
you can sell things off,
and you can live in the style to which you become accustomed
as you try to figure out how to restart the business.
Well, that's, I think, what we've been doing
for almost since the beginning of the 70s,
certainly since the beginning of the 80s,
is that we've been buying time,
but not actually figuring out
how to really restart hyper-aggressive growth.
Where do you see that?
How do you see that playing out?
Well, I don't think we're as invested
in real science and technology and Mavericks.
We're not interested in employing
the super disagreeable people
who are strong enough to hold positions
that no one agrees with them on,
but are in fact necessary to overturn incorrect orthodoxies.
We're interested in this kind of consensus,
communal structure that's going to choke our ability
to find new sources of economic growth.
We want dangerous, difficult people,
people who you don't necessarily feel safe,
trusting your cat to.
I mean, people who are aggressive.
And I think often about Jim Watson.
Jim Watson chooses to be incredibly unpleasant
in many ways as the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA.
On the other hand,
he's been fantastically productive over his life.
And he's a great example of someone
who gave himself permission to dominate areas of science
or innovation where he wasn't necessarily
the expert or that informed in those areas.
And I think that's part of what makes someone dangerous,
is to be able to step into an area, say things out loud,
and yet not kind of challenge the top of the pyramid.
Well, but he's also,
he's offensive almost for the sake of being offensive.
So I'm not saying,
boy, this is the way to conduct yourself at a party
or what a wonderful way to treat other people.
I'm trying to say,
if you want somebody who is balls to the wall
and trying to break into new territory
and do things at the highest level of human ability,
you're gonna have to put up with some people like that.
So let's talk about that for a second,
because, and I think this is a little
out of the intellectual dark web discussion,
but I'm really fascinated by skill acquisition
and the so-called 10,000-hour role of Anders Erickson,
popularized by Malcolm Gladwell.
You've succeeded in many different areas.
You're an expert in many different areas.
Obviously, you're super intelligent,
but it seems like you've made conscious decision
and permission in the same way that Watson might have
to say, okay, I'm gonna become knowledgeable and an expert
and even an investor in other areas
other than differential geometry,
which you studied and got your PhD in.
But even there, I'm an imposter.
Why is that?
Well, I don't, for example, have a thesis advisor.
You didn't have a thesis advisor?
No.
What happened?
You were at Harvard.
Yeah.
You had some ideas.
Nobody liked them.
I think people were interested in the ideas,
but I think that they were pretty radical in a lot of ways.
I'm afraid to ask what the ideas were
because they're gonna be way beyond.
Look, I can say words around them.
You're not gonna understand what the words mean,
but let's imagine that you had some set of equations
that was thought to only occur
in particular sets of dimensions, whatever dimensions are.
Okay, so you would have an assertion
that these equations are peculiar to dimension four
and don't exist anywhere else.
And so maybe I try to show that, well, actually,
versions of those equations exist in all dimensions.
So that shibboleth or that perspective was challenged.
And if I wanted to try to relate
the kind of work we were doing in geometry
to actual guesses about the world of particles
and particle theory, that could cause a problem.
And so in many ways, permission to be an imposter
is something you have to take for yourself.
And in particular, young women.
So young women have confidence problems
that I think are more severe even than young men
because young men will often decide that they're capable,
whether or not they are capable,
whereas young women tend to be very acutely aware
of all their imperfections.
So evolutionary or cultural?
I think a lot of it is evolutionary
because I think women, females are purposed
for child rearing in ways that males are not
because maternity is certain and paternity
was never certain before genetic testing.
So I think that females tended to be
the low variance version of a strategy
where males tended to be the high variance version
of that strategy because women couldn't afford to mess up.
If you know about the rigors of early childhood,
it's a really super demanding work.
And so I think a lot of it is probably innate.
And it's good that we have a high variance
and a low variance version of these strategies.
I think you'll find that women in general
are much more reliable than most men on average.
Now, with that said, I think one of the terrible things
is that we don't give women permission to be imposters.
So if you're hearing this podcast
and if you feel like an imposter,
instead of trying to fight it, just try experimenting
when you're in the quiet of your own room.
What if I am an imposter, then so what?
Maybe the idea is that my faking it
would be as good or better than somebody else's
earnest attempts.
I have a friend who taught herself forms of dance
that she didn't have any formal training in,
but it certainly looked like she knew what she was doing,
but anybody who was actually trained
in those forms of dance would know
it was just completely made up.
So I think it's very appealing to stop fighting
your fear of being an imposter
and saying that's no excuse for staying on the couch.
You know, it's, you know, for any area,
it seems like there's a set path,
there's a set formula to become the top of that area.
Do you succeed in that area?
Politics was one example.
You know, you supposedly needed to be in the house,
in the Senate, and maybe a governor,
then vice president, then a president.
That was considered the typical path
and with some variation,
that's the path that many politicians have followed.
With mathematics, you go to graduate school,
you get a PhD, you become a professor,
and now you're a mathematician.
And I think what you say being an imposter is when,
and this happens in every area,
there are people who come into the area
without taking that traditional path.
Donald Trump, of course, became president
without taking the traditional path.
I'm sure there's mathematicians who have not,
don't even have a PhD, but have discovered some solution
to some theorem or whatever.
The guy who came up with Green's Functions,
which is a way of inverting a differential operator,
if you will, I think was a miller in the middle of England,
and he sent off a solution to Cambridge
to some famous problem,
and they wanted to appoint him to a professorship.
And then he said, well, really, I didn't even go to college.
And so they forced him to get a BA
before they could make him a professor.
That's fascinating.
So was he just reading like math papers all his life?
I think it was kind of unclear,
but never discount what somebody can do completely
on their own.
If you think just like about Jimi Hendrix's strange
stringing of his guitar from the right-handed guitar plate
upside down and backwards as a left-hander,
it immediately took him out of an ability
to like watch what somebody else was doing
and just copy it because it was so different.
So in some sense, it's not that surprising
that he would sound that unique
because nobody else was even
in his same universality class,
or Stanley Jordan tunes the guitar,
I think, uniformly in fourths,
which is a very uncommon thing to do.
And so it puts you in just a different class.
And I think when you first make a decision
to burn the boats, so there's no returning home, right?
And like this is what the people did
when they had the mutiny on the bounty
when they hit Karen Island that they burned the bounty
so nobody could leave.
I think that that's when things get really exciting
because it's sink or swim
and people become incredibly inventive
once they become isolated and terrified.
So when do you think you've burned boats?
What was your first experience with it?
Oh, geez.
I guess asserting that I was not good in math in high school.
I'm calling bullshit on that.
No.
What was your SAT score on math?
It's really not very impressive.
I mean, I don't wanna talk about my SAT scores at age 53,
James, what are we doing here?
No, but you're saying that you weren't good at math?
I can't believe that.
It seems like you're like over math.
Let's talk about learning disabilities
because I'm sure that you have a decent podcast size, right?
Yeah.
All right, there are a lot of parents out there.
Hey, I see you out there in radio land
who have kids who they know are smart.
They know are sharp and bright and creative and getting it.
And those kids are bringing home grades
that are just so depressing.
And the parents are tearing their hair out
because they're like, I can't get you into college.
You're not doing your homework.
Everything's coming back screwed up.
Okay, that population is probably learning disabled
in the standard parlance.
But I think they're probably supposed
to be our future innovators.
I will make the gambit that I believe
that most of the innovation or a lot of the innovation
is always going to come from people
who are going to be written off as learning incapable.
And so be of good cheer.
There's lots of ways to be smart
and underperform like crazy.
And I would much rather be appointed king of the losers.
There's so much brain power in loser nation
compared to winner nation.
It's unbelievable.
So you just have many more opportunities
to unlock unused brilliance in the loser community
or the learning disabled community
or the people with low self-esteem.
These are my people.
And this is where I get really super excited
because they're sitting on top of gold
and they just can't get it together to convert.
Well, so what would you say?
So again, so maybe you burn bridges by going into math
and saying, I'm gonna do this.
I have some insights.
So I committed to a program whereby I didn't think
I was gonna finish college
because there was a language requirement.
I was doing terribly in French and I just...
I had the same problem actually.
Really?
In French, I took five years
and I got a D minus in college French
after my fifth year in it.
All right, so you're one of us.
Look, but if you'd learned Indonesian
you actually would have been in great shape.
Why is that?
Because the orthography is the same as ours.
So they use the same Latin letters.
It's not inflected for gender.
It's not inflected for tense.
It's not inflected for gender number K.
It's just perfect.
It's the most wonderful language to learn super rapidly
and it's about the most beautiful place on earth.
It might be the most beautiful place on earth.
So it's okay.
So you decide I'm gonna go into...
I have these ideas about the universe and math.
So I stopped taking required classes, I guess.
I started taking all graduate courses.
I loaded up like crazy in math
and a little bit of advanced physics or something.
And I didn't think I would graduate.
And I just said, look, at least I wanna find out
what the universe is all about while I'm here.
And that turned out to pay out.
So...
So after you...
So you got the PhD, you didn't have advisor
so who kind of approved the PhD?
Formerly a guy named Raul Bot
who would be my, you know,
he was formerly appointed as my advisor.
The person who came closest to being my advisor
was a guy named Dror Bar Natan
who just helped me explain what I'd done
to people who couldn't understand it.
And, but it's, you know, it's very rare
not to have an advisor in a subject like mathematics.
And then, what was the first?
So maybe you took some fellowships.
You, but when did you start to branch out of mathematics?
Well, I mean, I think I was always interested
in anything that could be sort of systematized
and explained that had a lot of power to it.
I did some work in economics with my wife, Pia Malani.
And we found a way to apply the geometry
that is underlying particle theory
to neoclassical economics.
And we had a backwards compatible reformulation
of neoclassical economics in a way that could solve
something called the changing preference problem.
What's the, what's the changing preference problem?
Well, if you know that question
that you get asked in politics,
are you better off now than you were four years ago?
Well, if your tastes change over that period of time,
there's no way in economic theory,
as it's currently practiced,
to compare your welfare between two points in time
where your tastes were different.
It's only if your tastes stay exactly the same
that you can make welfare comparisons.
And since-
So, like as an example, maybe four years earlier,
you liked living in a house in the suburbs,
but then suddenly you wanted to live in an apartment
in Manhattan, it might not seem you're better off.
It's hard to measure-
Well, let's do kale and beef.
Okay, so at some point you're thinking vegan is healthy,
then you start reading a lot of stuff
that maybe you think paleo is healthier.
So before you put a huge premium on kale
and a low premium on beef,
and then five years later,
you value beef more and kale less, okay?
So any particular basket of goods,
which has both kale and beef in it,
gives you some level of happiness.
But the problem that you find
between periods of time where your tastes change,
you don't know how to compare your two forms of happiness,
because in some sense,
you're too different as two different people.
Right, but when someone says,
are you better off than you were before,
they usually mean probably income plus assets,
adjusted for inflation.
Well, if everything's a financial asset-
Just in terms of economics, though.
I understand, but if the idea is
that you have cheaper airfare,
but you're spending more on healthcare,
and how much do I value travel versus health,
it's not an easy question.
So we solved the puzzle of how to do that
at a theoretical level.
Using the knowledge you gleaned
from differential geometry or physics.
Exactly, infinite dimensional gauge theory.
So I love the idea of this,
because I'm a big believer in,
we were talking before the podcast,
you had just tried doing stand-up comedy.
Obviously, you had never done it before.
There's a certain amount of skills involved,
but you've done public speaking before.
You've had a vast array of experiences and knowledge
that you were able to bring onto the stage with you
that maybe other comedians didn't.
So in a sense, you did the same thing.
You borrowed from other categories you were expert in
that the audience maybe wasn't,
and you were able to use that to perform like an expert
on the stage that time.
So in this case, you borrowed from physics and math
without necessarily having an economics PhD,
and were able to do something interesting.
Yeah, I think nature has very few games
that she knows how to play well.
And so if you learn those games, you're quite correct.
You can't necessarily just take them wholesale
from one field to another, but you can port them
in that you have to make certain adaptations
to use them in a new place.
So for example, jokes, pattern recognition.
How many jokes, you have an incident that happens,
you have a tiny variation on the first incident.
So two incidents sets up an expectation.
The third one treats the first two formally,
and then does something completely absurd,
which you didn't realize also fits the pattern.
That doesn't sound like a joke,
but the number of Jewish jokes
that that unpacks to is enormous.
These days, we're all investors,
trying to be smart with our money
despite our worst impulses.
But at iShares, we believe that deep down inside
of every investor is a better investor.
One that's just waiting to be let out.
Explore iShares ETFs and insights,
and let your best investor out.
Visit iShares.com for more information.
You know what I love about fantasy sports?
Is that even though I'm not gonna be a great basketball player
or a baseball player or a football player or whatever,
I feel like I get to participate and make decisions
and use my knowledge of these different leagues too,
or these different sports to compete.
So it's like I can pick my team
or I can pick my favorite players,
and I could use my knowledge to make predictions
and maybe even make money.
So with the basketball season here,
you can now pick combo projections
across football and basketball
from the Specials League on prize picks.
This is a league created specifically
for combo projections that include two or more players
from different sports or leagues.
Want to play alongside some of prize picks' favorite players
like rapper Meek Mill and comedian Andrew Schultz,
who's also been a guest on this podcast,
and I've been a guest on his.
You can now find community plays
under the promos tab of the app to view entries
for some of the biggest names
in the prize picks community each week.
Look, prize picks even offers a reboot policy
so that your entries stay in play,
even if one of your players gets injured.
For football and basketball games,
if you have a player who exits the game
in the first half and does not return in the second,
that player is rebooted.
Prize picks is the only daily fantasy sports platform
with an injury insurance policy.
What?
So I love playing it.
I love anywhere where I can use analytical ability
with my interests to demonstrate some skill
and maybe make some money.
And I like the game-like aspect.
I do wish they had chess as a category on prizepicks.com,
but I'll set up for what they've got.
Maybe I should make my own fantasy chess league.
But in any case, I love prizepicks.
Go to prizepicks.com slash James,
use code James for a first deposit match up to $100.
That's the easiest hundred dollars you're ever gonna make.
So that's prizepicks.com slash James and use code James.
Daily fantasy sports made easy.
The future of learning is definitely online.
Like it's such BS that you have to spend $200,000
or take $200,000 in loans and go to some fancy school
when it's useless.
It doesn't guarantee you a job.
Most employers, including me,
do not care about degrees or grades or anything like that.
We wanna care that you love what you're doing,
that you know what you're doing,
in some cases that you have experience
or that you're rolling to learn.
But people in general love learning and are curious.
Like the key to success is curiosity.
And I think masterclass.com is the perfect model
for online learning.
I'm really happy they're sponsoring this episode.
If you're gonna give a gift, give the gift of learning.
Masterclass makes a meaningful gift this season
for you and anyone on your list
because both of you can learn from the best
to become your best from leadership
to effective communication to cooking.
Let me tell you some of the classes I've taken.
I've taken comedy from Steve Martin.
I mean, can you believe I can take a class
from Steve Martin on comedy or Judd Apatow,
my favorite comedy director.
I could take an actual class from him on writing.
Wolfgang Puck on cooking, Dan Brown on writing
or Judy Bloom who's been on this podcast on writing.
By the way, Wolfgang Puck also has been on this podcast.
It's such a pleasure.
I try to take classes all the time from masterclass.com.
And whether you're watching masterclass on TV
or listening in audio mode in the app or on their site,
the quality speaks for itself.
It's like these masterclass instructors
are your own personal mentors that are going to help you
reach the next level.
How much would it cost to take one-on-one classes
on comedy from Steve Martin
or on chess from Gary Kasparov?
You just wouldn't be able to do it.
But I mean, it would cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.
With a masterclass annual membership,
it's $10 a month.
Membership started $120 a year for unlimited access
to one-on-one classes with all 180-plus
masterclass instructors.
So it's not just $120 for one instructor.
You get all 180-plus masterclass instructors.
Boost your confidence and find practical takeaways
you can apply to your life and at work.
And if you own a business or a team leader,
use masterclass to empower and create future-ready
employees and leaders,
that's the real education in today's world.
So this holiday season,
you can give one annual membership
and get one free at masterclass.com slash J-A-S.
J-A-S, of course, stands for the James Altucher Show.
So right now you can get two memberships
for the price of one at masterclass.com slash J-A-S.
Masterclass.com slash J-A-S.
Offer terms apply.
So on the one hand, you could be a classic stand-up 20 years
writing down jokes and getting that formula,
or you could have lots of experiences in life
where this actually happens and you just say what happened
and that also works.
Right, or like particular words or sounds
have more humor value.
So people have commented numerous times
that the word pants or pickle or igloo,
these things are funny, they shouldn't be.
But if you have a choice of which word to use
and what cadence and there are all sorts of techniques
that I guess if you can talk to somebody
who really appreciates craft,
they can give you a huge leg up where a joke
that's sort of an okay joke that you might tell at a party
can be really souped up by somebody who's fantastic.
I just saw Joe Rogan rework the same joke
about wrestling four times, it's the same joke,
but you'd never recognize the thing,
he just mutates it until he gets it right.
There's a great example of Jim Gaffigan
telling on stage the very first joke ever,
there's some joke in hieroglyphics
from thousands of years ago and it's a fart joke.
And Jim Gaffigan retells the joke in his style
and of course it's very funny,
but it has the same kind of structure.
But so it's interesting, so what are,
in terms of this meta learning,
like how do you take one area of life into another?
Do you think there are kind of core principles
to understand when you're,
because there's a lot of people also take physics
and turned into garbage when they bring it
into self-help or whatever.
So what's maybe some core ways someone can look at being,
taking something that they're expert in or interested in,
bringing it into some other area
where they're in the beginning an imposter,
but they make the jump.
So I'll give you a weird example.
The neutrino was discovered by noticing
that when a neutron is left alone,
it sort of morphs into a proton
after I don't know, half-life of about 12 minutes
or 18 minutes, can't remember.
When you look at the electron that gets shot out
of this neutrino, if you add up the energy
of the proton and the electron,
it doesn't have as much energy
as the neutron did to begin with.
So it would seem to violate conservation of energy.
Wolfgang Pauli had this crazy idea.
He said, I bet there's a secret particle that we can't see
because it's electrically neutral
that's carrying away the missing energy
and we just don't have any ability to trap it.
That was a crazy audacious statement,
but it was necessary to save the principle
of conservation of energy and momentum.
Okay, let me give you a different puzzle.
Tower Records on Sunset, where I grew up in LA
and it was the record store that I used to learn.
It was a music education for me.
So it closed at some point.
Now, my claim is very often that the invisible world
is discovered by the visible world's failure to close.
That is, in the neutrino case,
there wasn't enough energy in the proton and the electron
which are the decay particles
that you can see from the neutrino.
So something invisible was happening to carry it on.
Somebody failed to follow the law.
There's some missing force, right?
So in the case of Tower Records, what killed Tower Records?
I don't know, maybe it was a file sharing network.
You couldn't see it, but that file sharing network
might have been what took Tower Records down
because otherwise it should have been a thriving music store,
right, or a bird slamming into a glass pane repeatedly.
It knows that if that was just air,
it should be able to proceed,
but something is causing,
like that window is part of the invisible world
to the bird.
So the fact that I'm trying as a bird
to fly in a straight line and not progressing
is the visible world's failure to close.
So Tower Records, though,
could be argued, the internet brought Tower Records.
So that would be, the internet would be,
if you couldn't see it otherwise,
it would be an invisible force
which caused Tower Records to go the way of the dot over.
So when innovation comes,
when you start to see Tower Records sales going down
and there's no, and Tower Records has run,
let's say, magnificently, there's some missing force,
and then you could say, oh, the missing force,
if you could figure out the missing force.
Where's the neutrino?
Yeah, you could start an online business selling CDs,
then that's how you could take advantage.
So that would be a trick that I would learn from physics
that I would try to apply to commerce,
which is look for some visible system
that is failing to behave normally.
Assume that if it isn't behaving normally,
there must be some unseen thing
to go look in the invisible world
for what is causing the visible world
to no longer make any sense.
So for example, another case of this,
might have been on Twitter,
where originally all of these people
who were very influential were finding each other
and amplifying each other's voices
as a real challenge to the mainstream media.
And at some point, we noticed
that we stopped seeing each other's tweets.
Like we just didn't see them.
And sometime later, this guy, James O'Keefe,
who does this undercover stuff,
you don't have to love him, you can hate him.
But one of the things he recorded was people saying,
oh yes, we downrank the bad people on Twitter.
Like downranking?
What's that?
Oh, well, we use the algorithms to sort of suppress,
to downregulate their tweets
in favor of other people's tweets.
And so maybe you discover
that somebody's got their finger on the scales
because you know what the visible world should do
in the absence of somebody tampering
with the measurement equipment.
So I love this idea of looking for the missing force
or using this metaphor.
Where's the neutrino?
Yeah, where is the neutrino?
I love that.
So what's something?
Do you want another one?
Yeah, yeah, I want 10 more.
All right, so here's another one.
Whenever you have something that you think
is just going to be beautiful,
and it's a very naive hope,
almost always your hope will be dashed
because it's too naive.
So instead of just getting upset about it,
the next thing to do is to measure the failure
of your original hope to obtain in the world.
Like how badly did it go wrong?
How do I measure how badly it's off?
And then once you have that,
make that new object the centerpiece of a new theory
and you'll actually build something much more beautiful
than the original theory ever was.
So here's a simple example.
You're at the equator and you want to go north
and you notice that you have a compass
and the compass points north.
Well, magnetic north is an excellent proxy for true north
right up until you get to Canada
and then it starts to get lousy.
And you know, if you're up on Ellesmere's Island
or something way up in the north,
you can actually have magnetic north 180 degrees
off of true north, yeah?
So what is that object?
The object that measures that failure
is called the angle of declination.
So making the angle of declination,
the centerpiece of a magnetic navigation
is the right thing to do.
Or a different one would be,
you know, we were just talking about this on Joe Rogan.
If you have a normal staircase
and you go up one set of stairs
and you come down another set of stairs
let's say made by the same people at the same heights,
you might expect that it's the same number of stairs
going up as going down.
But in the Escher staircase,
if you have that in your mind or the Penrose stairs,
you can sort of see that you can keep going up
and then you get back to where you started.
Well, something is clearly wrong about that.
The idea that the number of steps up
is the number of steps down fails to be true
in that picture.
And the thing that measures that failure,
like how badly did my naive hope fail
might be called the holonomia or the curvature
in mathematics.
So you make the holonomia or the curvature
the centerpiece of your theory.
And in fact, in physics,
two of our three most important equations,
Einstein's equation and the modern version
of Maxwell's equations are based on a curvature object,
which is measuring this failure of steps to behave
in a regular fashion.
And the more they go towards the Escher staircase,
the more the curvature is intense
and that would be perceived by us in some system
as greater electromagnetic field strength.
So let me try to understand the Escher example
because what resulted, of course,
in one way of looking at it was Escher's works of art
is all based on this idea that you could look at something
that looks like it's following the laws of physics,
but it's not and that's what creates the beauty of it.
So do you think that was part of his creative process?
Is like, how can I break this law of nature
and create something beautiful as a result?
Well, he was playing at many different levels.
So for example, the stairs that he creates,
are they possible or are they impossible?
Well, you can actually create a model
and take a photograph of it
and it will look exactly like the Escher stairs.
So you can actually see the effect with real objects
provided the camera is positioned in the right way.
Now, does it have the effect that the system
is actually closed and it goes around and around?
No, but in a system where you actually have curvature,
like on a sphere, like normally you think
if I turn 90 degrees, walk a distance,
turn 90 degrees, walk a distance, same distance,
turn 90 degrees, walk the same distance,
I'd have to turn 90 degrees
and walk the same distance yet again.
But if I did it from the north pole to the equator,
then I turned 90 degrees and I walked along the equator
for about a quarter of its circumference
and I turned 90 degrees again and walked the same distance,
I'd be back at the north pole
and instead of having done a square,
I would have done a triangle, right?
So because of the curvature of the earth,
that naive rule about needing to turn four separate times
to get back to where you started is not true.
You only have to turn three separate times.
Now, in part what Escher was really doing
was playing with the curvature of a curve system,
the optical illusion in a flat system.
There was a lot going on in that example.
And so it's both an illustration of a real phenomena
that we see in electromagnetism.
It's an optical illusion, it's an invitation to curvature,
it's presenting curvature in a flat world.
There's so much happening there
that it's not easy to pull apart
and that's why it was fascinating as a subject.
And I think Escher was very knowledgeable about mathematics
and what he did was he used it as a source,
but he combined enough of our world and our imagination
that he really excited the human spirit.
He took something that was very austere
and perhaps forbidding and he made it warm and inviting.
So let's say I'm trying to figure out different ways
to make this functional.
Let's say, you mentioned earlier,
a lot of people create something
that they think is beautiful
and they're usually wrong.
So for instance, anybody who begins the process of writing
and they've never written before,
there's a certain arrogance that they think,
but they have to have this arrogance to write the book,
their very first book.
There's certain arrogance to think,
oh, I'm gonna write a book and it's gonna be great.
Because it's the first time they're writing it
and other people have written for far longer
and learned different skills and so on.
But how could someone beginning any skill acquisition
and let's just pick out writing,
use this idea of this neutrino metaphor
to kind of push the envelope a little bit
to measure where the value is.
Well, I don't know, it's a great improv challenge,
but let me try to accept it.
Let's take J.K. Rowling and Harry Potter.
Okay.
She wrote a book for the very first time
and it was the biggest hit ever.
Right.
So what was the missing neutrino that she sort of found?
Well, I don't think that that,
where was the naive hope that was dashed?
Well, she did write a book that her,
the first 20 or so publishers rejected.
So nobody thought it was good and...
Well, that's a different thing.
Yeah.
That has to do with anything truly new
will be compared to the old.
And if it's new enough,
it will always be found wanting by the standards of the old.
So this is the same problem with Bohemian Rhapsody.
It's like what we're gonna do
with like a seven minute fake opera song
to be played on rock radio stations.
Obviously it's either the dumbest idea of all time
or it's the greatest idea in rock and roll, right?
And so something new being rejected,
I don't think fits this,
but let me accept your gambit of the writer.
Okay.
So imagine that you say,
oh, I'm a genius writer.
I'm just gonna sit down
and the brilliance is gonna come
and first draft is always amazing.
Okay.
So you write your short story to a two pager, right?
And then you show it to your friend as a professional.
And your friend takes one look at it and says,
look, you're bloated over here.
You're anemic over here.
Let me do some stuff.
And she fixes it before she sends you back
and you do 18 revisions.
Now, the object that would be the thing
that measures the difference between your naive hope
and the reality that seems to be true
would be the diff file.
How much did the file change between the first offer
and the final product that everybody agrees to be good?
Well, you might notice that if you define the diff file
for each project,
that you always start off using the same crappy,
flabby words or lots of wiggle words
or way too poetic or way too anemic.
Who knows?
Once you start noticing what it is
that you always do at first,
you can then say,
I'm gonna try to write around my diff file,
which is I always use the word thoroughly too much
or basically,
that you notice how often people use the word
basically in their speech.
So, a public speaker might look at all of their ticks
and then say, I'm gonna create a file,
an audio file that just looks at all of my verbal ticks.
Once you start focusing just on your ticks,
you have something to minimize.
You could put it into an objective function.
Okay, and so...
So, that would be an example of,
I naively think I'm a genius at everything that I say
or write is instantly brilliant.
You notice that that's not true.
Then you figure out how things revise over time
as you go through that cycle.
Then you start studying the object
that measures the revisions.
And then you try to minimize that object
so you become a better writer from the get go.
And so, in your case with the writer,
and you've addressed this before,
the idea of somebody who is self-taught
than having something to be able to teach.
But in your example of the writer,
he still had to go to it,
or she had to go to an expert
who helped create that diff file for the first time.
Do you think that's necessary to find,
so this is deliberate practice?
You need feedback loops.
Sometimes you could manage your own.
And sometimes you need somebody to be on you
and to point out that you're actually avoiding
the negative in the feedback that you're getting
or that you're misinterpreting the positive.
And so, the other question is,
is that then is that person who's getting the feedback
just forcing you into conformity?
And so, okay, you know, this person's saying,
you know, you use basically too much.
Real writers don't do that.
And now you're moving back into conformity.
Well, hopefully the person is pushing you back
into conformity where you need conformity
and pushing you into brilliance where your edge is.
But the idea that you should either be brilliant
and different in everything that you do or not
is preposterous.
So, you know, I often give people the advice
that if their ideas are truly radical,
they should dress very conservatively.
Why?
Because, you know, you can't afford to turn everything
up to 11 without distracting the hell out
of whoever you're trying to reach.
That reminds me of,
did you ever see the Eric Andre show?
No.
Okay, so it's basically,
the premise is it's a late night talk show
in a bodega, in the back of a bodega.
And, but it's a spoof, but nobody knows it's a spoof.
So, celebrities have gone on this show
not knowing that Eric Andre is just gonna do
something completely insane that's gonna freak them out.
And what's fascinating is every component
of a late night show is in the format.
So, he's got a band, he's got a sidekick,
he's got a desk, he's got notes,
he's reading off the notes like David Letterman.
It looks exactly like the format of the David Letterman
or Johnny Carson show, but he changes this one thing
in that he's gonna make fun of the guest in some way.
And so, to what you were saying,
keep the format, change one thing,
and now you could have brilliance.
Sometimes it's one thing, sometimes it's several things.
If it's several things though,
it might be so far from the original.
Like, let's take the matrix.
So, the matrix when it first came out was very fresh.
What did it do?
Well, first of all, it used CGI at some level
that we hadn't seen before.
So, it was computer generated in the extreme for its time.
It used Hong Kong wire work on non-Chinese,
non-Asian actors.
It used the bullet time system of using a bunch
of still cameras arrayed in like a semi-circle
to give a movie sense of like a flip book
as you were going around the subject
of somebody who's in mid-air.
So, just take like those three things.
Those things were all so different from each other
that you could never tell what was happening exactly.
Was it some new photographic innovation?
Was it an acrobatic innovation?
Was it a computer innovation?
Other than that, the storyline was very much
in a kind of a revealed narrative arc heroes journey story.
Right.
So, I would say that was the exact heroes journey
and they changed one thing,
which is technically how we make the movie.
But what I'm trying to say is that one thing
had multiple components.
So, then I just gave you three.
In other words, it's not the case
that you can only choose one thing,
but you have to have it be balanced
between that which people expect
and that which confounds.
And I think I remember reading Leonard Feather,
the jazz writer, talking about studies that were done
that said that in improvisation,
the audience is always making a guess
as to what's about to happen next.
His claim was that if the audience guesses right
about half the time, they find it fascinating.
If they guess right all the time, they find it boring.
And if they guess right none of the time,
they think it's modern jazz and they couldn't care less.
Right, so you have to keep some of the structure.
So, Tower Records had to keep some of their structure.
They had to say, okay, we still sell music,
but now we're gonna do it online.
That was the missing-
Well, IBM would be a good example of something
that morphed over time to continue
to be a major player in tech,
whereas lots of other tech firms couldn't figure out
how to morph and change.
You know, what is the abstraction
of your former business in today's terms?
So, this idea of a missing force,
and of course you can't, on the surface,
the whole concept of this is missing,
you can't see it's a missing force.
Where else do you see this in entrepreneurship?
Where have you seen it successfully played out?
Well, very often, if you can notice
that there is a missing need
that people hadn't really.
And that's like an insight.
So, like Steve Jobs saying,
every home is gonna have a micro-computer.
You know, the missing force and computing for him
was why can't I have it all the time?
Or maybe the idea is that,
hey, I've also noticed that not only do I know
that there's going to be a computer everywhere,
but that it's going to be so integrated into your life
that the design feature of this,
that tech people never get right,
is my chance to add value.
And I'm gonna bring elegance
and canonical aspects of design
to something that has to be integrated
into the very fabric of your being.
So we welcomed Apple in in part
because it flattered our sense of ourselves
that we are elegant, we are spare, we are courageous.
We think different as they told us.
And still to this day, like kids get the iPhone
because culturally that look,
that's the coolest phone to get.
Although in post Tim Cook's chillings
or welly in speech about things having no home
on his platform, my God,
how many of the people that Apple has held up to us
when they told us to think different
would be reviled right now as being hateful to somebody?
I just don't know.
No, and it's scary when you're not a Tim Cook,
when you're not an Apple, when you're just yourself,
it's scary going up against the monster
of kind of this conformist group think somehow.
And I'll get to that in a second,
but I'm still very interested in this skill acquisition aspect.
What kind of core, you always talk about core principles
or first principles, what sort of first principles
or basics do you think someone needs
to develop that muscle of looking for the missing force,
the neutrino.
So obviously Wolfgang Pauley,
he had a background in physics.
He was able to kind of say,
huh, it didn't follow this law, something has to be there.
And Tower Records, they didn't have that.
Sales are declining, we're running the company great.
Sales should be going up before running the company great
and people are listening to music.
See, they somehow they missed the missing force.
Sure.
I mean, I think the one thing you could do
is you can just say, make a note to yourself.
I'm about to have a conversation with Jane.
I wonder what's gonna happen.
I think it's gonna go well.
And you have a conversation with Jane
and it ends up with Jane yelling at you,
get out of my office.
Okay, well, is that something that typically happens
that you think you're gonna go into a conversation
and you think it's gonna go great
and somebody gets really angry at you?
You could find somebody who repeats the same error
over and over again and never gets metacognitive or curious.
So one thing I would say is before you start trying
to do anything new, if you find that you're frustrated
in your life and that you can't get past certain objects
or obstacles, just learn how to do this thing
I call watching your robot.
So most of what gets you through a day,
you're not even thinking about it.
You don't think about how to put one foot in front
of the other because you learned to walk ages ago.
As you learn all of these things, they become automated.
So a really interesting activity is to just watch
your body and your brain make mistakes.
Like for example, I ordered a burger for lunch
and it came with fries and I said to myself,
they always give me fries and I always eat them
and I always regret it.
And then I watched myself eat the fries
after having that thought.
And instead of trying to get myself not to eat the fries,
I said, I'm just gonna watch myself being an idiot.
Isn't it interesting that my robot is just
in an automated mode making a decision
that I've decided to do the opposite of
and my robot is winning?
Well, that doesn't sound very encouraging at the beginning
but I guarantee you three times of having
that conversation with myself,
eventually I can't stand to watch my robot
take over the ship anymore.
So it seems like you're saying,
have a mental model, given a situation
and maybe it's a high-stakes situation.
Like you're gonna write a book or run a business
or run a particle accelerator and see what happens.
So given a high-stakes situation,
build a mental model beforehand
of what you think should happen.
Let's say you're going in to have a discussion
with your boss or your girlfriend or whatever.
See what happens if there's a difference
and if there's a difference and view that difference
as kind of a robot that you're observing from higher
and then you see that difference enough
and you're feeling bad about it,
the solution maybe is some innovation
or some beautiful solution.
Or just getting control of the situation.
Don't start off with the big meeting
or the big project or the big deal
because usually mostly what we're doing wrong is fractal
and if you're blowing big deals,
you're probably blowing little transactions,
buying a candy bar at the bodega.
You're probably screwing that up too at some level.
And maybe you're too friendly,
maybe you're not friendly enough, I don't know.
But definitely find the cheapest places to practice
because there's no sense learning
in the highest stakes environment possible.
So let's take this to you coining the phrase
the intellectual dark web.
You felt free to express opinions
among the select group of friends and colleagues.
You chose to be around you on a daily basis.
You feel comfortable saying what you think
because they don't slander you for it
or ruin your career for it.
I don't feel comfortable saying what I think.
I just can't stop.
The World of Technology
It's storming every industry
and literally billions of dollars are being invested.
So buckle up.
The problem is that AI needs a lot of speed
and processing power.
So how do you compete without cost spiraling out of control?
It's time to upgrade to the next generation of the cloud,
Oracle Cloud Infrastructure or OCI.
OCI is a single platform for your infrastructure,
database, application development and AI needs.
OCI has four to eight times the bandwidth of other clouds,
offers one consistent price
instead of variable regional pricing.
And of course, nobody does data better than Oracle.
So now you can train your AI models at twice the speed
and less than half the cost of other clouds.
If you want to do more and spend less like Uber,
eight by eight and Databricks Mosaic,
take a free test drive of OCI at oracle.com slash advance.
That's oracle.com slash advance.
Oracle.com slash advance.
