From pit lane to podium, the Las Vegas Grand Prix is providing fans a race day experience at the
speed they deserve. With the help of T-Mobile for Business, our 5G Advanced Network solutions
are powering race day operations with event-wide connectivity. From streamlined gate entry to
an immersive app, giving fans blazing fast access to the sport they love. This is accelerating
innovation. This is the Las Vegas Grand Prix with T-Mobile for Business. Take your business further
at T-Mobile.com. Okay, let's do some quick math. The less your business spends on operations,
on multiple systems, on delivering your product or service, the more margin you have and the
more money you keep. That's obvious. But with higher expenses on materials, employees, distribution
and borrowing, everything costs more. To reduce costs and headaches, smart businesses are graduating
to NetSuite by Oracle. Here's the thing. Information is power. Information is money.
Literally, the currency of today's world of entrepreneurship is information. And if you
could bring all of the information about your business into one dashboard, this is incredibly
valuable. NetSuite is the number one cloud financial system, bringing accounting, financial
management, inventory, HR into one platform and one source of the truth about your business.
With NetSuite, you reduce IT costs because NetSuite lives in the cloud with no hardware required,
access from anywhere. You cut the cost of maintaining multiple systems because you've
got one unified business management suite and you're improving efficiency by bringing all of
your major business processes into one platform, slashing manual tasks and errors. This is so
valuable. You just hit a button and you can see all the information about your business instead of
having to like call five different departments and get all these emails and put it all together and
make sense of it. Over 37,000 companies have already made the move. So do the math, see how
you're profit with NetSuite. Back by popular demand, NetSuite has extended its one-of-a-kind
flexible financing program for a few more weeks. Head to netsuite.com slash James net suite.com
slash James net suite.com slash James.
Oh my gosh, I've been wanting to have this guy on my podcast for literally 10 years ever since I
started this podcast. I am so impressed with him and he speaks about a subject near and dear to my
heart. So Salman Khan, Sal Khan is the creator of the Khan Academy, which was really the first big
online academy. It was to learn math, coding, all these things. And there was generating people who
really learned the topics as opposed to people who go all through 10 years of school and never
learned these topics at all or the schools failed to teach them appropriately. The Khan Academy
really seemed to understand education and it became this huge thing. 150 million students have gone
through the Khan Academy or use it every month or that number of registered users. Salman Khan,
Sal Khan, and he just wrote the book about how AI will revolutionize education. The book is called
Brave New Words. How AI will revolutionize education and why that's a good thing. And he addresses
how to use AI with education, whether you're a student, teacher, employer. It was so valuable in
terms of understanding not only education, but AI and how we can use AI on our lives. And it
addresses all the fears people are having right now about AI and its role in creativity and learning
and will it replace jobs or will it make it easier to get a job. So Brave New Words,
how AI will revolutionize education and why that's a good thing. I finally got to interview
Sal Khan about the Khan Academy and AI and I learned so much and I hope you will as well.
Sal, can I start off by asking you a question that is peripherally related to the book, but you do
mention this towards the end of the book, which is there was one line that I was curious about
and it was like a personal thing, but you brought it up in the book. Sure. So you mentioned that you
thought your dad, who you didn't really know, you met him. He left early, your parents separated
when you were very young and you only met him once. He passed away when you were around 14 years old,
but you said he probably suffered from depression and I was curious why you thought that.
You know, I don't have, no one told me that, so I don't have any strong, well, the evidence is
he kind of disappeared and when, the one time I met him when he was, when I was 13,
we briefly went to his place and let's just say it looked like he was down and then it seems to fit
with a lot of the narrative of what we've observed from my end.
What were the circumstances of the visit? Like why did you visit him?
You know, I was 13 years old. I don't remember. If I remember correctly, he had, I guess, a cousin
of mine who I don't know, my father's side of the family that well, a nephew of his, who really
wanted to put him in touch with us again and I forgot all the context. I think we were up in,
he was living in Philadelphia at the time, so we were up in that area anyway and so this cousin,
older cousin than me, you know, probably 20 years older than me, facilitated this, you know, us to
get together and to me and my sister and then we, you know, we spent an evening together.
Well, I was just curious about that particularly since you brought it up in the book, but
look, I've been incredibly impressed with everything you've done. The Khan Academy,
you know, 155 million users, you know, so many people have learned from
the videos on the Khan Academy, the educational style of the Khan Academy and I know people know
the story and it's not central to the book also, but maybe, you know, if you could spend a few
minutes describing how you started this, like it started, apparently, you were, you were tutoring
one of your cousins, Nadia, about math and then other cousins knew, hey,
Sol's available for some free tutoring. We'd, you know, we want to, we want to help and so you
started creating tools and technology and videos and this grew into the Khan Academy.
Yeah, that's generally right. It was back in 2004. I, my original background is technology.
By 2004, I'd gone to business school. I was a year out. I was now working as an analyst at a hedge
fund. I had just gotten married in New Jersey and I was living in Boston and my family from New
Orleans, which is where I was born and raised, were up visiting in the Northeast and they came to,
some of them came to Boston for the July 4th weekend. This was 2004 and just came out of
conversation that my cousin Nadia was having trouble in math. Her mom told me, my aunt,
and that's when I offered to, when I learned more about what was going on with Nadia,
I offered to tutor her and Nadia agreed. And as you mentioned, well, first of all, that tutoring
seemed to work with her. She was struggling with unit conversion, got her caught up even ahead
of her class. And, you know, I joke sometimes I became a tiger cousin at that point. I call up
her school, they let her retake placement exams. It really helped her. Then I started
tutoring her brothers, words, friends, and my family on the free tutoring, as you mentioned. And
before I know it, 10, 15 cousins, family, friends. And I've always been interested in education. So
this wasn't a complete fluke that I was doing this. I'd done tutoring in other times in my life.
And I have always, I had always dreamt of one day starting a school of some kind. So I was always
interested by the problem and I thought I could help my cousins. And I was always interested in
the intersection of, well, if you can solve a problem, can you use technology to help you scale
any solutions that you had? So that was always in the back of my mind a bit. But in 2005,
with that in mind, I did start to make some practice software for these cousins. That was
the first Khan Academy had no videos or anything like that. But it was just to help scale a solution
to a pattern I was seeing. A lot of my cousins just had gaps in their knowledge. They needed more
practice. I as their tutor wanted to make sure that they were getting that practice and I wanted
to monitor it. So that's, that's why I wrote that software. And once again, just as a hobby.
And then in 2006, a friend suggested that I help scale my lessons with videos.
I thought it was, I legitimately thought it was a silly thing to do. I thought it was very low tech.
I thought YouTube was kind of a place for entertainment, not a place for learning.
But I gave that a shot and my cousins famously told me they liked me better on YouTube than in
person. And what they were saying was they liked the pause, the repeat, always accessible, no
embarrassment if they had to review something from before. And so I kept going. And that was
obviously very discoverable by a lot of people as well. So I just kept working on that software
and kept working on those, those, those videos by 2008, 2009. That's where my brain was focusing
most of the time. And so my wife and I looked at our finances. We had some money saved up for a
down payment on a house. At this point, we had moved out to Northern California. But
you know, we felt like this, there's something happening here. There was about 50 to 100,000
folks using the nascent Khan Academy on a monthly basis. And there were some philanthropists that
were, there were actually both venture capitalists and philanthropists who are already signaling
that they were interested. In fact, the venture capitalists were more interested back then.
But it felt important that this would be a nonprofit organization, set it up mission
free world-class education for anyone anywhere. And yeah, 2009, I took the plunge to try to get that
philanthropic support to become a real organization. It was a tough year to be very clear, probably the
most stressful year of my life. Our first child had been born and I'd given up a good career.
But by 2010, we had our first real support. And you know, everything we've been doing since then
has really been that same pattern. How do we scale up that same personalization, that same
student-centered learning that you could do when it was just myself working with Nadia. And, you
know, most of our history has been improving on the software, creating more and more content,
exercises, videos, articles, teacher tools, working with school districts. And obviously,
more recently, it's been leveraging artificial intelligence on top of that.
Right. So your new book, Brave New Words, how AI will revolutionize education and why that's a
good thing. It's a really interesting book because on the one hand, your book is what the title says,
how AI will revolutionize education and you talk about developments in AI, developments that you've
contributed to AI. You were an early user tester and so on of all the versions of
ChatGPT. But the book is also, it almost could be titled, What Everyone is Afraid of in AI
and How We Can Solve Each Fear. And I noticed that is the flip side of AI. I was at a dinner
recently where there was a bunch of academics and journalists and scientists. It was all in the
science domain. And every single one of these scientists or writers of science were really
afraid of AI. They thought AI was dangerous. There was no positive thing said about AI except
when I pointed this out to all of them. Why do you think so many people are afraid of AI? And then
I want to hit how you address some of these things in the book.
I think AI is, it's interesting because it's especially, it's especially threatening to folks
who have always defined their identity by their ability to write and speak and think original
thoughts. So it's not a coincidence that the intelligentsia, so to speak, are the ones that
are probably most concerned about this. And it's not to mean that these aren't legitimate concerns
or a lot of them aren't legitimate concerns. But I think it is affecting folks with education,
folks who write. It gets awfully close to home in terms of identity. And so I think it immediately
puts people into a little bit of a defensive posture and a little bit of a fear-based posture.
And once again, I can't completely predict the future. We even saw that when we first got access
to the technology before the rest of the world did. And I would say half of our team was really
excited about it and want to go all in. And the other half had a lot of this trepidation. And
to your point, maybe your title of the book would have been a better one because you're
right. It really is this pattern that I probably have always tried to lean in this way, but it's
definitely accelerated with AI, which is, all right, we should write down fears. One should not
ignore fears and risks. But fears and risks are not reasons to not try to move forward and make
positive use of it. There are things to address and to deal with so that you can have a positive
outcome. Yeah, I mean, obviously the very first thing that comes up when you talk about AI and
education, and I have all my kids are basically college age or graduate school age. The first
thing that comes up is cheating. And I'll give a just transparent experience
one daughter was in the final stages of her finals on the year. And she had like one day
to write an essay. And she hadn't even read the text she was supposed to be writing the essay
about. And I said, look, there's this thing called chat GPT, just cheat and get it done and graduate.
Just do it. And I don't know if she followed my advice or not, but that was my advice because I
for me it was more important for her to graduate than for her to learn this one thing.
But that is a big concern of teachers and parents and everything because a lot of people don't
care about their education or they don't think that their college or high school or whatever is
giving them a good education. So they're willing to use it to cheat. Yeah, it's a real thing. And
you know, what I write about in the book is I always like to start from first principles,
like, okay, you know, what was the state of things even before chat GPT came on to the scene?
And it didn't take long to realize that cheating was already pretty rampant. And if anything,
there does seem to have been a cultural shift even since you or I were in college in terms of
probably more acceptance of cheating than ever before. And once again, before AI existed,
probably the internet software tools, their services that are happy to write essays for you
or do other types of problem sets for you, their quasi legitimate publicly traded companies that
will help you do your homework and help is I'm saying it very euphemistically, they'll essentially
do your homework for you. So this existed well before. And so I think the question is, in this
world, what are we hoping to get out of students when they do these types of tasks? And if part
of it is to make sure that it is their work. And in the book, I talk about, look, there's
certain cases where you probably want students to use the tools. In fact, these tools are going
to be part of their future. But there are certain cases where you definitely want to make sure that
it's the students own work, how you can, how you can address it. And you know, the AI actually
isn't, it can be part of the problem, obviously, with things like chat GPT. But in a lot of ways,
I'm optimistic that it can be, it can be a very big part of the solution that addresses not just AI
cheating, but cheating in general, where students won't have the work done by the AI, but the AI
can be their coach, an ethical tutor, ethical writing coach, and then it can make transparent
the process to the teacher. So the teacher doesn't just get the essay, they get the whole transcript
of how the student worked on it and the AI's analysis that it's similar to the student's
other writing or that they worked on it for four hours or they had trouble with the thesis statement
initially, but eventually got there and be able to give the teacher insights across the whole
classroom that, look, 15 of your kids are having trouble with thesis statements. Here's a lesson
plan that you might want to go on, go and do. So I'm optimistic on that front.
Take a quick break. If you like this episode, I really, really appreciate it. It means so much
to me. Please share it with your friends and subscribe to the podcast. Email me at AltaturaGmail.com
and tell me why you subscribed. Thanks. I have to say Airbnb has changed my life. I just love
staying in Airbnb's. Like in about a month, I'm going to Cocoa Beach, which is right next to Cape
Canaveral. I'm going to watch some rocket launches. I'm going to, of course, be staying in a very nice
Airbnb on the beach. And it's just such a great experience. Like the whole world is available
to us now because of Airbnb. But whenever I'm at an Airbnb, I always realize, you know, the home
that I left to come to this Airbnb, I could be making money on that right now by hosting and
being an Airbnb myself. So, and I've known people, I had a friend who basically,
you know, made a living from turning his home into an Airbnb. So if you have a home, but you're not
always at home, you do have an Airbnb there. And it can easily fit into your lifestyle,
and it's a great way to earn some money. Your home might be worth more than you think.
Find out how much at Airbnb.com slash host.
The famous Abraham Lincoln quote says, good things come to those who wait. I wonder,
did he really say it? Jay, did he really say that? Can you look that up?
Regardless of who said it, that's only part of the quote. The full quote is,
good things come to those who wait, but only the things left by those who hustle.
Well, if you're a business owner and want the best people on your team, the same applies.
And listen, I've interviewed 1500 people now and a lot of entrepreneurs. I can safely say
the one thing consistent among all entrepreneurs and CEOs, the successful ones, is that it's all
about the people you surround yourself. If you hire well, you're going to have a great business.
And you know, thankfully zip recruiter puts the hustle in your hiring. So you find qualified
candidates fast. This is so important. And I want you to try it. You could try it as a potential
employer or employee. You could try it for free at ziprecruiter.com slash James,
zip recruiters smart technology finds top talent for your roles right away.
Immediately after you post your job, if you're hiring, zip recruiters matching technology
starts showing you qualified people for it. And I will tell you that I signed up on zip recruiter
as a potential employee. You know, I just wanted to see how it works. And right away,
it started matching me with really amazing potential employers. So give it a try at zip
recruiter.com slash James, let's zip recruiter give you the hiring hustle you need. See why four
out of five employers who post in zip recruiter, get a quality candidate within the first day.
Just go to zip recruit.com slash James to try it for free. Again, that's zip recruit.com slash
James zip recruiter, the smartest way to hire. Right. So, and this isn't in general,
like a theme that runs throughout is that viewing AI or, or, or chat GPT like programs
as a collaborator or a partner rather than as a secret weapon is kind of the basic solution to
all of these fears. So, so for instance, teaching doesn't go away. But hey, if just like with the
kind of kind of people were able to watch the video. So now the T and learn basic math lessons.
So now the teachers can focus on more more discussions and interesting topics in the
classroom itself. So, so for instance, if you, if the teacher knows the student is using chat GPT
to answer questions about the great Gatsby, that might actually be a benefit to the educational
experience. Yes and no. I think the key is that everyone is going into it with eyes wide open
that the teachers and the educators know why they're asking students to do things.
They're very clear about certain tasks where it will be pedagogically valuable to use
the chat GPTs of the world and other things where you don't want to use them. But I want to be
very clear about use. There is the use of say a general AI platform like chat GPT that would be,
you know, that it could be used to do very productive things like do research, help understand a
concept. But those also could be used to write your essay for you or do things that a lot of
educators would find, hey, that's probably undermining what I was trying to get out of this.
There's other use cases of generative AI and this is where ConMigo, which right now is built
primarily on GPT-4, but it's a different application than chat GPT. But that's built explicitly to
support students and teachers in a, in a education framework. So it won't cheat, but it will
socratically work with the students. The bottom line is, I think we're entering this phase where
educators have to be more explicit about why they're giving certain tasks and
also explicit on the types of tools that are acceptable and aren't, probably with some
light oversight, potentially AI empowered oversight of what the students are doing.
And it's going to be more and more on the students also to be very clear of like, hey,
this is not something that I should do and this is something I should do, but also know
that they're going to be held accountable by it, that there are, that ConMigo, what we're doing
at Khan Academy, there are tools now to monitor what the student is doing, make sure it is their
own work, when the teacher wants to make sure that it's the students own work. Although it seems
like every time there's an attempt to, oh, this is definitely created by AI, humans are smarter
in this sense. They're always going to develop ways to override whatever tools are being used to
detect AI usage and homework. Yeah. Anyone who tells you that they have some type of an algorithm
or watermarking technology or statistical algorithm, whatever it might be that can detect AI generated
work is either significantly exaggerating or lying to you. There have been plagiarism detectors,
but for the most part, what AI is generating is novel, is novel text. So it's very hard to detect.
Now, the way that some teachers have detected it, just with their spider senses, they have seen
work that just seems different than what the student has turned in before, or it just seems
surprisingly cogent, or maybe a little bit bland compared to what a typical people would write.
Now, even those cases is usually because the student didn't use the AI artfully enough.
That if they really tweaked it a little bit, tweaked their prompts, maybe adapted some of
what the AI was writing to make it a little bit more personal, it would have been very hard to
detect. So our strategy here isn't to try to magically just read a paper and say this was
written by an AI or human or 5050 or some other percentage in between. It's to make the process
transparent to the educator. So with Conmigo, we aren't saying, oh, we ran some algorithm and
there's an 80% chance this is AI written. Instead, we tell the teacher, here's the transcript of the
student working with our AI, working with Conmigo on their essay. It took them four hours. Here's
the conversation. Here's a synopsis of the conversation. They had trouble with the thesis
statement. We worked on outlining in this way, etc. Maybe a comparison to previous writing that
it seems similar. So it's not trying to just detect based only on the output. It's more of giving a
very strong indication based on making the entire process transparent. If the student goes to chat
GPT or gets their sister to write the paper and it just shows up inside of Conmigo, Conmigo is
going to tell the teacher, hey, this just showed up. We didn't work on this. You should look into
it. And by the way, it's very different than what the student has written before. I think that's the
kind of lens that we need to really not only police cheating, but I don't want to make this just about
policing and making it punitive. I also think this is how we're going to better support students and
teachers because the students going to be much more supported as they write and the teacher is
going to get many more insights about where the students strengths and weaknesses are in their
writing. Yeah. So in that sense, the transparency that, hey, I'm using an AI tool and here's the
final output. Part of the final output is the essay I came up with. Part of the final output is
Conmigo's like your AI tool, Conmigo's analysis of our sessions together. That's right.
I think that I think that's very valuable. I think that's I think this idea of AI as collaborator
is an important reframing of the role of AI in our lives where just like we have a calculator now
to do math equations. Oh, I have kind of an intelligence assistant to help me with problems
so I could really focus on the bigger problems. That's right. You know, what we've been doing
when we do professional development with teachers is we tell them, look, imagine if
all of a sudden your school district discovered a few billion dollars and they want to use that
money to hire three or four super hardworking teaching assistants for you that will help you
do lesson plans, help you grade papers, help you write progress reports. They'll also analyze what
your students are doing on a regular basis to let you know. And by the way, they're also going to
be able to tutor the students. They're available 24 seven. These are amazing teaching assistants
and they'll be able to connect what you're doing in class to where the students need help and vice
versa. Every teacher on the planet would say, yes, sign me up for that. And that I truly believe
that's where it's going. This isn't about replacing teachers. Now, one thing we've always said at Khan
Academy, our ideal is let's raise the ceiling when a student does have access to a reasonably good
classroom and educators. But there are cases where students don't have access to a classroom.
It could be a developing nation. There's no school at all. It could be even in the U.S.
you're a rural part of the world or a country where there's not a calculus class within an hour
hour's drive. Then we want Khan Academy and Khan Mego by extension to help raise the floor
so that you can get more supports when there aren't any others.
You know, you talk about teachers being worried about they're going to be replaced by Ann. I
think this is happening in a lot of professions right now. And that's part of this. There's this
existential fear that we're all, you know, horse and buggy drivers and we're not going to need
it anymore once the cars are around. And so whether it's, you know, writers, teachers, other
professionals and so on. But maybe we don't need teachers. Maybe AI and Khan Academy with Khan Mego
can do the job. What is the role of teaching right now?
I'm not saying what I'm about to say just because it's the right thing to say. It's
what I genuinely believe. I wouldn't be saying it otherwise. I would just stay quiet if it wasn't
what I genuinely believe. I think any role that is about the human connection, about the human
motivation is going to be not only in very good shape in an AI world, but those are going to
be the roles, the jobs, the careers that are most enhanced in an AI world. So even though
historically, many people associated teaching with, oh, I'm going to write a lesson plan,
then I'm going to deliver this lecture, then we're going to have a quiz every two weeks,
and then I'm going to grade those quizzes, and then we're going to rinse and repeat for two weeks.
Any great teacher will tell you that's actually not their job. What's actually their job is on a
very human level to connect with their students, either individually in small groups as a whole
class, to motivate them to see the wonder in the world, to make sure that these students feel seen
and supported. And then on top of that, the teachers have to grade papers, write lesson plans,
progress reports, IEPs, prepare them for standardized tests. And because we're asking so
much of teachers and some of that latter half of stuff is more tangible and more measurable,
it's actually squeezed out a lot of teachers' opportunities to do those very human things.
Anyone who goes into the teaching profession, they dream of these moments where they're able
to have some time in a small group with some students or give that one student who was really
down and out of pep talk, and it changes their life forever. And it will change their life forever.
I think in my 12 years, 13 years in the K-12 system, I remember probably every moment
when a teacher did single me out out of the 30 kids and say, hey, Sal, can I talk to you about
something? I really liked what you did, or I really didn't like what you did. It affected me,
it changed who I am. And I think that's what, or a teacher ran a Socratic conversation with 10 of
us as opposed to all 30 at the same time, or we had a field trip where we ran a simulation. And
those are the things that I don't think the AI is going to be able to drive,
but I think the AI will be able to support it. But once again, freeing up the teacher to do more
of that. The jobs that I think will be under threat with AI, or there will be fewer of them,
are the ones that you are, if great writers should not feel threatened, but if you're the
person who writes the fairly generic text every day on the news sites about why the stock market
went up or down. I'm surprised if those aren't already written by AIs. I think a lot of them
actually are. They feel like it. They feel like they've been written by AIs for 10 years.
I think if you are, if I'm dealing with the education system, the registrar's office,
I think is going to be, you're going to see a lot of automation there. But once again,
as just a citizen of the world, I think the more resources that we can save on the non-student
facing thing and put it onto the student facing thing, that's a good thing. If you look at school
districts like New York City, they spend an average of $40,000 per student per year. There are 25
students in an average classroom in the New York City Department of Education. So that means if you
just took $40,000 and multiplied it by those 25 students, that means that there's a million dollars.
I guarantee you that no matter how good the teacher's benefits, pensions, et cetera,
they're getting a small fraction of that million dollars. Maybe a very senior teacher with a great
pension, et cetera, maybe with great health insurance, maybe it's $150,000. If you put all
the benefits in there, approaching $200,000, that's very, I think I'm already being overly,
no one's really making that much. So where are all the other resources going? It's actually
not going through the real estate in most cases. Where is it going? And it's going to all of this,
let's call it back office, administrative stuff that really isn't moving the dial with students.
And actually, I don't write too much about that aspect of it. That's probably less interesting
for a lot of folks. But yeah, register's office, scheduling, just a lot of the administrative
things I think will hopefully get much more streamlined.
You know, what about the current education system is an antique at this point? I mean,
I feel like the current, roughly the current education system's been around for 200 or so years
that you go to a school, you go to a location where there's a bunch of subjects taught throughout
the day. So every day it's like six different subjects. You go from class to class to class
and you get homework. At the end you get tested. So that's roughly the structure of the modern
education system. And what part of that you think is outdated now?
Yeah. And you know, my first book that I had written back in 2012, One World Schoolhouse,
it kind of goes into how did we end up with the system? And it really does, it's not a coincidence
when you say it's roughly 200, 250 years old. It came out of the Industrial Revolution. And for
the most part, it was a very utopian idea. For most of human history, we learned through apprenticeship,
we learned through following around, learning from our cousins or our parents how to hunt or how
to cook. Once society became more advanced and more specialized, we would hang out with the
blacksmith or we would hang out with the, I don't know, the carriage repair guy, whatever it would
be to learn or even things like law and medicine was an apprenticeship until about 200, 250 years
ago. But the issue with a lot of these is that they didn't scale. If you go back 300 years ago,
very, even in more literate parts of the world, you only had a 30 or 40% literacy rates. Most
of the world, you only had about a 10 or 15% literacy rate. And so when we had the Industrial
Revolution, we had a more abundant society because of technology. And a lot of these societies, and
it's not a coincidence that these were some of the first societies to develop a middle class,
the UK, what would eventually become Germany, Japan, the United States, they were the first
to say, hey, let's have a mass public education system. Very utopian idea. But they said the only
way we can afford to do that, the only way we can scale it is by leveraging the techniques of the
Industrial Revolution. We're going to bat students together, usually by age, move them together at
a set process, literally a bell will ring every hour. I mean, that directly comes from a factory.
We're going to have standards. We now take standards for granted in education, but this was
a thing that came out of mass production in a factory. We will assess periodically. But we're
not going to slow down that assembly line. Instead, we're going to assess and some of the quote
product is going to be said, okay, this is the product that's going to be the
doctors, lawyers, engineers, and some of it, well, the information or the knowledge doesn't seem to
be sticking. Well, these will be the less skilled laborers. So it kind of worked. We could talk about,
was it fair for folks? You could have been, and people have been talking about the inequities
of tracking for decades. When you're 12, something's not sticking and all of a sudden you're tracked
into a slower track and now all of a sudden no one expects you to go to college and people expect
you to be a lower skilled laborer versus becoming a doctoral lawyer. Is that fair? That's a very
big question. I don't think it is, but it kind of worked for society in that we didn't need a huge
number of people in the knowledge economy. And we did need a lot of people who are in either the
middle income or lower income jobs, a lot of the mid-skilled or lower skilled labor. We did need
it. But if you imagine the world that we are going into, we know what's going to happen to the
less skilled jobs, you know, or even the mid-skilled jobs. Obviously, we're talking about artificial
intelligence, which is all about kind of that mid-skill processing of information. Everyone I
talk to robotics is not far behind. I think a lot of folks are saying in the next five or ten years,
we're going to have a chat GPT type moment with robotics as well. So that also means that some
of the lower or mid-skilled labor is also going to be automated, probably in the next 10 or 20
years. And so where does that leave us? Well, it leaves the high-skill labor, the knowledge economy,
being a researcher, being an engineer, being an entrepreneur is where all of the productivity,
all of the wealth will accrue there. And so as a society, we have to decide, are we okay with
only right now 10% of people participate there? And then that's not a stable society, or we're
going to have to do redistribution, which to me is still pretty dystopian because people want to
have a sense of purpose. Or do we leverage the technologies that we have to get as many people
as possible into the top of that pyramid to be in the knowledge economy? Instead of having a labor
pyramid, you can have an inverted pyramid where most people are able to be in that knowledge
economy. And so I think that's where the imperative is. So how do you start making those changes in
the educational system? And also, I think there's some question as to whether people effectively
learn by taking six different subjects in a day. Like multi-tasking learning has been shown to me,
not the most effective way to learn. And you even mentioned this in the book, that the more one-on-one
more immersion is probably better for education. Yeah. The core ideas, and this is something I've
been preaching well before artificial intelligence came on the scene, is instead of a traditional
model, what we hold fixed is how long you get to work on something because that assembly line keeps
moving. And what's variable is how well you learn it. And we get that in the form of grades. You
and I take a class together, we're in algebra for this term, you got an A minus, I got a C plus.
All right, it goes in my permanent transcript and we move on. Somehow expecting me that I got to,
you know, expecting someone who got the C plus to now understand algebra two or understand
something more advanced. And so what I've all, what I've been advocating for the last 10 years
or more is let's do it the other way around. What should be, what we should, what should be variable
is when and how long you work on something and what's fixed is how well you learn it. And that's
what a personal tutor, when Aristotle was Alexander the Great's tutor, I'm sure that's what he did.
If young Alexander hadn't mastered a concept yet, he would have slowed down a bit or, you know,
given him a second chance to take that test to make sure that he really mastered whatever,
military strategy or, you know, governance, whatever, whatever was the, whatever was the
topic for the day. Now, if I said this, say 30 years ago, people would have rolled their eyes
or say, well, okay, it's easy for you to say, but unless you have a lot of resources to provide
that level of personalization, there's no way you can, you can have 30 different students learning
at 30 different paces. And if one student is falling a little bit behind for, for them to
have a second chance to take that test, that's just logistically impossible to do. Now, what's
changed over the last 30 years, even before artificial intelligence is you have tools like
Khan Academy, you have software that can let every student practice at their own time and pace,
give teachers real time information. If a student needs to refresh their knowledge on something,
they could watch an on-demand video, they could read an article, now they can have a conversation
with a artificially intelligent tutor. And once again, that tutor is also in contact with the
teacher. So constantly guiding the teacher on how they can be a conductor of this class of 30,
where they don't have to make every person play the same thing at the same time, regardless of how
bad the quality or how, how, how, how not ready for it they are. Now you can, you can, you can
personalize a lot more. And so, and a corollary to that is, you know, I talk about mastery learning,
which is, if you haven't learned it well yet, keep trying. And once again, this is how we've,
we've always instilled do, if you want to be an Olympic athlete, if you want to be a
musician, you are doing mastery learning. We just don't do it in our school system,
and you see the outcome differences between how good people can get us if they have a personal
coach. But, but a corollary to mastery learning is what I would call competency-based learning.
Right now, our entire credentialing system is based on seat time, for the most part.
Did you sit in a chair for 12 years, and kind of do what you were told, even though you don't
really understand a lot of it? Okay, we'll give you something called a high school diploma.
Did you sit in a chair for 12 hours this week for a term? Okay, we'll give you the 12 credit
hours or however they want to account for it for that course, and you kind of learned it.
We know in reality, very few people actually retain most of what they quote are exposed to
in school. 60, 70 percent of kids going to community colleges have to get remediation
not even at a high school level, essentially at a seventh grade level. So, they sat in these
classes called algebra one, algebra two, trigonometry, some of them even take calculus,
and the colleges are saying, you're not even ready to learn algebra yet,
go back, we're going to work on your pre-algebra. So, a corollary to personalization and mastery
learning is moving to a competency-based credentialing system. If you know it,
take some type of a rich assessment and we'll give you credit, even if it only took you two days
to learn it, but if you haven't learned it yet, that's cool too. Here are some resources to
keep learning. Come back in a month, come back in two months, come back in a year,
and I'll give you a second chance to actually learn the material.
There are over 75 million monthly 2B viewers. That's more people than there are influencers
on the internet, which means 2B is more popular than sponsored posts for digestive enzymes and
high coverage foundation, more popular than soft launching your boyfriend, more popular
than making boomers explode with rage when you tell them how much you make on a single post.
2B, it's more popular than influencers. See you in there.
So, now let's bring in AI. How would you use AI to who would decide, would it be the student or
the teacher or both or the AI, who would decide like, oh, James needs a little more work on his
algebra too, as opposed to Sal who got an A plus on every test. Who would decide how I,
you know, how much more time do I need and what would I be assigned to do? Like would the AI give
me tests or teach me or like what would happen? It's a little bit of all of the above where
even before we had artificial intelligence, we have these classrooms where students are working
on Khan Academy and we were able to give signals to teachers as to which students are moving ahead
and we want to encourage them to do so, where students are on track and where students are
maybe falling behind. But we did leave it all, you know, we did professional development for
teachers on how they might want to navigate that. Hey, for the kids who are ready to move ahead,
let them move ahead for the kids who are behind, why don't you do a focused intervention with those
six or seven kids. And a lot of teachers were doing that type of thing, but you can imagine it can get
pretty complex and pretty hard, even if you have some of these software tools.
What we're able to do now with the artificial intelligence is it really is acting like a data
analyst and or teaching assistant for these teachers. So, instead of a teacher every night
having to look at a spreadsheet like dashboard and say, okay, these are the kids who are struggling,
let me break them out or let me do another lesson plan, which is a lot of work for the teacher,
they can just ask the AI what's going on. And the AI says, look, here's what's going on,
these are the kids on track here, you know, if we do a differentiated lesson plan tomorrow,
I recommend these kids work on this task while you spend the first 20 minutes with these students.
And, and the teachers in charge, this thing is in support of the teacher, the teacher is going
to be able to say, no, I don't really like that activity. Can you, and we already have this where
they can highlight parts of it and they can say, let's come up with something that's a little bit
more fun or a little bit more engaging or gets the kids out of their chair. And the AI will say,
yes, sir, yes, ma'am, and do that. But as you can imagine, it dramatically lowers the amount of
analysis and prep time that a teacher has to spend in order to create these really engaging
and differentiated personalized education experiences. It's also going to all this,
all these other trappings of school that as students, we never saw as parents, we oftentimes
don't see writing progress reports, grading papers, you know, IEPs, which are these
plans you have to write for, for students who are, who need special supports, which are
increasingly a larger and larger percentage of the student population takes a lot of the teacher's
time. Teachers have to prep their own knowledge. If the AI can dramatically improve that time,
we've been getting signals from school districts that Kanmigo is helping the teachers with their,
with this non-student facing work, it's saving them five, 10 hours a week. And so you're going to
see it there. You're going to see, you know, there's this phenomenon called learning management
systems, which are increasingly the ways that teachers and students communicate with each other
and, you know, make assignments and submit assignments. And right now these are web-based
things. I see more and more the AI acts as that intermediary, where it's working with the teacher
on the planning, on the creation, it provisions it to the student, it works with the students on
those things, and then it's able to report back to the teacher. So, you know, we can, and I can
daydream more and more. You can imagine a world where an AI can start to even know what's going
on in a classroom and support even more. But even before we go into those more sci-fi use cases,
it, I think it's just going to be a, it's just going to be in the fabric of everything that the
teacher and the students do, and hopefully in a way that supports the students and the teachers
better and streamlines things. Do you think it will happen? Like, let's say, you know, AI is
moving pretty fast, and already there are tools like Kanmigo just, you know, what is it like a
year and a half after the first chat CPT was released? What, where do you see education five
years from now? Like in K through 12, and then I'll ask about other types of education.
Yeah, you know, I think there are certain trends that are going to happen that are not fully
technologically related, and there's going to be things that are going to be AI related.
The non-technologically related, I hope we do move, as I mentioned earlier, to a competency-based
system, less seat time, that we can go more to a mastery-based system. And that starts to involve
a little bit more technology, because if you're asking a teacher to say, hey, if a student got
to see the first time, they should have another chance at that assessment. Well, who's going to
write that assessment? That's work. Who's going to grade that assessment? That's work. And so,
I think that's where the technology plays into it. In terms of how the technology is going to
manifest itself, for sure, all of that support work that we used to bury teachers with, I think
is going to be dramatically streamlined. Once again, lesson planning, writing exit tickets,
grading papers. Teacher's always in charge, but I mean, imagine being a seventh grade English
teacher, and every two weeks, you literally have to sit there and read 100, 150 papers about
great expectations from seventh graders. I could imagine by the third or fourth paper,
it can get a little bit tedious. Instead, you had a reliable AI that can give analysis,
you can spot check it. You're the final arbiter, but it could take that thing that was ruining
your weekend to a task that might take an hour instead of 10. So, you're going to see that.
You're going to see the AIs get better and better at supporting the students, not just conceptually,
not just academically, but I think from an executive functioning, from a metacognitive. So,
one project we're working on, we call it Proactive Conmigo. It doesn't just act as a
Socratic tutor. It's going to start messaging students. Where are you? The things I used to do
at Nadia back in the day. Hey, you said you were going to hit these goals by Friday. It's Saturday
now, and you're only halfway. Come on, what's going on? It's going to be able to facilitate a lot
more communication between the teacher, the student, and the parent. When it finds that,
hey, there's something off parent, you should know about this. And hey, teacher, by the way,
I already told the parent that this is happening. I think you're going to see more of that.
I think the whole area of assessment is going to be really, really interesting. A lot of the
criticism of education over the last 20 or 30 years is we've tried to measure more things,
which for the most part is a good thing. And we've been trying to measure it in standardized
ways, which for the most part is a good thing. But because so many people started indexing
on these things that you can measure in a standardized way, they maybe have lost sight on
other things. I was talking to a senior administrator at Harvard, and he was telling me that even at
Harvard, they're seeing almost an epidemic of kids who can't write. And if Harvard's seeing that,
I can guarantee you it's 10 times worse pretty much everywhere else. And it's probably,
no one knows exactly why. Well, think about what standardized testing has been for the last
20 years. There's no writing in it because writing has fundamentally been hard to assess,
or to be able to give someone standardized clear feedback on. And so it's kind of maybe
started to disappear in many cases. We see in the other things in math, when people focus on a
multiple choice assessment only, multiple choice can have value. There's nothing inherently wrong
with multiple choice, but it might squeeze out other things if we put too much emphasis on it.
And so I think AI with its ability to make sense of more open-ended responses,
and even visual responses, or even video responses, I think it's going to broaden the
aperture of how we assess and how we even assess in a standardized way. And that's going to be good
because it's going to allow school to going back to, let's not just focus on what can be assessed,
or narrowly assessed, but what's important. And now we can hopefully assess that in a broader way.
So do you think, is this hopeful, or do you think this actually will happen in the educational
system? We're working on it. I'm both. There's definitely a possibility that a lot of folks,
well-intentioned folks, have good ideas, and either they don't get traction in a system that
historically has sometimes been slow to move, or it manifests itself in unproductive ways.
That's one of my fears. That's why I tell our team at Khan Academy why our role is important.
We're not for profit. We are focused on how does this actually drive impact?
There are other players. There may be more sales focused, and they're just happy to make the sale
however it gets used. And that might not lead to the best possible outcomes for teachers and students.
But generally speaking, I'm, obviously, I plan on devoting my life to this,
so I wouldn't be doing it if I didn't think that this was going to happen.
And so you mentioned earlier that a lot of times students don't retain what they learn.
I think this is really true. It's what you learn in history class in ninth grade.
I would say there's probably a 1% chance you remember it now, unless it's something that
particularly fascinates you. What do you think will change in the system that will increase
retention? I think if we are more explicit about moving to a competency-based system,
where we say, well, one, competency-based system makes you have to get more clear
about what you care about. And look, some of the things that we learned in ninth grade that we
forgot, that might be okay because it was less about learning the text of, I don't even remember
even the eighth amendment, the text of the eighth amendment, but it was more about learning
to critically analyze things, et cetera. And that might hopefully be a skill that we have retained.
But there probably is content knowledge that we do want. In fact, there for sure is content
knowledge that we want people to retain. But we need to get just more explicit about that.
And then if we get more explicit about, look, everyone who graduates from high school should,
for the rest of their life, be able to solve a simple equation. They should for sure know
who Alexander the Great was. They should for sure know how to make sense of a informational text
written at at least maybe a seventh or eighth grade level, which is what most texts in our life
are actually written at. And then if we can focus on those things, because competency-based learning
also focuses you, because right now there's a lot of just hoop jumping and seat time and this
or that that could be very idiosyncratic to a particular classroom. It allows you to focus
on those things and make sure those things happen. And then hopefully streamlines from some of the
other busy work that doesn't have to happen as much. But do you ever see a point where, okay,
this student's really good at math? Oh, he spent one week learning algebra one. That was all he
was focused on. So now he's able to move on to algebra two, and he goes at his pace. And another
student actually goes at a slower pace. And so you do have, for a classroom of 30 students, you do
have people going at 30 different paces, and they're immersed. So that increases retention. There's
less multitasking from going from biology to history to math or whatever. So some of that's
already happening. After I wrote my last book, and my oldest at the time was entering kindergarten,
we started a school con lab school that implements a lot of these. And I won't claim that we figured
it all out. In fact, I'm always pushing the school to be thinking a little bit more about
questioning a lot of the assumptions. But, you know, at that school, yeah, you do have
a good number of students. And math is probably where we're seeing it the most,
where they could easily be three, four, five, six grade levels ahead. There's a lot of students who
are probably, you know, at or one or two grade levels ahead. And there's a few who, you know,
the faculty is working extra hard to make sure that they're going at least at a reasonable pace,
that they're going to get at least get to calculus before they leave high school,
which in the broader world is already a win, because most kids don't even get there. So we're
already, we're already seeing that type of reality. But I think we need to see more experiments. I
would, you just mentioned of like being able to focus on certain things at a time. I'm intrigued
with that idea. There's universities like Colorado College, or colleges, I should say, that do do
that. You take classes, instead of taking four or five classes, you take one at a time, but you
do it for two weeks. And that's all you do. And then you go and switch and you do another one.
I think that's interesting. And I don't think it's just going to be the con lab schools and the
Colorado colleges of the world. We have partnerships with very mainstream school districts. Newark,
New Jersey, we're seeing some really good things. And they're doing a bit of a hybrid where the
teachers are using Khan Academy to assign the daily practice. And by the way, the kids have
support from Khan Mego. But the district says, Hey, look, if you finish your assignment and you
did it well and you got, you showed your proficiency, you can keep going. But if you did the assignment,
but you only got 30% of it right, you should have another go at it. And now it's going to be
different items because it's sampling from a very deep item bank, or maybe you're not ready for
that assignment because you're missing some prerequisite skills. How do we get you to get
some more practice on that without falling too far behind? This is happening in Newark, New Jersey,
as we speak. It's interesting. In 1982, I was part of this program where these seventh graders would
take the SATs. And if you did well, you were invited to participate in this program at Duke
University called TIP, where it had this immersion experiment. And I always remember, finally,
like in three weeks, I was able to go through like a couple of years of math. And then when I got back
to regular school, so I was in a summer program. And when I got to back to regular school, I was
able to advance more quickly. And I always thought that was an incredible experiment that they were
doing. And then at the time, there was only 22 students in the program. Now there's like tens of
thousands across various campuses. And I just wonder when kind of the mainstream educational
system is going to start adapting this, but it sounds like it is to some extent.
It is. And if you look at communities where I live, I live in the middle of Silicon Valley,
what you're describing is more the norm than the exception. But yeah, and I think the work is how
do we make that accessible and the norm more broadly. And that's why most of our work at
Khan Academy, most of the places where we are deploying Kanmigo are large-scale public school
districts. But we're seeing more traction than I would have guessed a couple of years ago.
Now in terms of the existential threat for various industries, one area that has been
a big concern, and you mentioned this quite a bit, is the ability to write. Like this has been a big
debate in education. Like you mentioned at Harvard, some students don't even have the
ability to write. And then in the creative industry, like screenwriting, I think there is a real
question. Will AI, will the GPT-7 be able to write an Oscar-winning movie? And I think the
conclusion in general, and your conclusion is that it won't be, but it'll be a useful tool.
Again, for the creative to be even more creative. But I think people are very worried about this.
And I will tell you, just from conversations I've had with heads of major movie studios,
they are looking for solutions other than screenwriters.
Yeah. Well, I think there's a bunch in this. So on the first level, most writing essentially has
two pieces to it. There is the putting words on paper in a structured, hopefully engaging way,
grammatical way. And then there's the, how do you come up with what you're going to write?
So if you're a journalist, I would think most of your work should be going out there talking
to people, looking through public documents, attending public hearings, being on the same
scene of the crime to report what's going on. So that's all the work that I don't think AI is
going to be able to do anytime soon. And then the journalist takes all of that, and then they write
the article, you know, and all of that. And so I think AI there very clearly has a role of, well,
if it can help the journalists, let's say take all of their notes that they just got from multiple
resources, sources, maybe different recordings, maybe even videos, and then help them get to a
first draft pretty fast, maybe with a little bit of prompting. I think that's a win for that
journalist. They're going to be able to spend more time on the information gathering and less
time on the wordsmithing. But once again, I don't think it's that you're just going to take all that
input and let the AI just pop something out that, okay, let's put it in the New York Times. No, the
journalist is then going to tweak it and say, no, that they're going to act more like an editor.
And they're going to say, no, that let we're burying the lead, let's put this quote up front,
et cetera, et cetera, let's tighten it, let's make it a little bit more punchy. So there's still
going to be work and the craft of writing and the ability to recognize good writing is still
going to matter. I think if we go to the movie industry, I'm not sure exactly how this is going
to play out, but, and I write about this in the book, I think what is going to happen is AI is
going to lower, like I found it ironic that it was the screenwriters who are afraid of AI and
that the production companies really want it. I actually think the AI is going to bring the
balance of power to the individual, to the screenwriters and take it away from the gatekeepers
who are the production houses. We already saw that before AI with things like YouTube and social
media. I mean, you're even seeing this with mainstream news now. It's essentially been
disrupted already by YouTube and social media. The ability for someone to publish and be discovered
without having to go through gatekeepers now is completely transformed. Justin Bieber is a
YouTube artifact. I'm a YouTube artifact. People can publish podcasts now. You don't have to make
a pitch to some executive at wherever to do that anymore. That's the way the world was 30 years
ago, 40 years ago. With AI, I think you're going to see a similar, you're lowering the cost of
getting into the game. Today, if I have a great idea for a science fiction movie, and I have a few,
I dream about one day, not only would I have to write a screenplay, I would have to get in
in front of people who take me seriously. Even if I wrote a great screenplay, I might not even
be noticed unless I'm connected in the right ways, unless I get the right people to read my screenplay.
Someone will say, it was a pretty good screenplay. I'll pay a couple hundred grand for it if it's
really good. In most cases, I'll pay a couple of tens of grand for it. Go write another one
while you're living off of ramen. Then that movie studio might throw some of them away,
but eventually say, okay, we're going to put $100 million behind this one,
hire actors, director, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Five, 10 years later, the movie comes out.
If it's a blockbuster, the movie studio is going to make hundreds of millions of dollars that the
screenplay writer probably made less than that, a lot less, a lot less. If they're very savvy,
they might have gotten a little bit of a cut of that movie, but in most cases, they're getting
next to nothing. In the world we're going into, if I have a great sense of story, if I know what a
great movie should look like, I don't have to stop at the screenplay. I will be able to produce the
entire movie, probably for tens of thousands of dollars or less, including editing, sound.
I'm not going to have to pay actors. I would worry if I'm an actor, actually, in this world,
but the creative who's at the core of the idea is going to be able to go much, much further,
and then they're going to be able to self-publish it on YouTube and monetize it on YouTube, or
maybe there'll be paths, maybe there'll be a YouTube slash Netflix-like thing where
slightly vetted people can surface and put their content out. I would be much more worried if I was
production houses. The production houses probably are going to invest in it. They're going to figure
out ways to do editing much cheaper. They are going to be able to write screenplays,
but a commodity screenplay is very different than a great screenplay. I think for society,
it's going to be good because think about how many hundred million dollar duds there are,
how many bad movies, frankly, most hundred million dollar movies are bad. What a waste of
society's resources. Now, we're going to have a bunch more of movies that probably cost 10 or
$100,000 to make, and they're going to have a higher percentage of bad ones because it's going
to be like YouTube, but we're also going to have a higher total quality of good ones.
It's interesting because Tyler Perry, for instance, he shut down plans to
build a hundred million dollar studio space because he says AI is going to do this. He's a big
movie creator. He has the same view as you. I think I agree, but it's interesting to see how
nervous the writers are. Maybe it's just like an insecurity of writers because they haven't been
historically making that money. They've been kept down in the system, so they just assumed
they're going to be kept down again. But you're right, it is going to give them power. But it's
interesting from your book, there's various groups of people that have these fears. There's
creatives have these fear. There are teachers that have this existential fear. There's professors who
worried the students are cheating. An interesting chapter is the one on parenting. Do you see
parents being afraid AI could take their place? I don't think any parents, well, hopefully parents
aren't afraid of AI taking their job as a parent. I think most of the fears of a parent are we see
directly our kids getting addicted to devices. We either see directly in our own families or schools
or we read about how things like social media and cell phones are affecting mental health of
especially young people, teenagers, probably disproportionately young girls. That's scary
to parents. And so when we see a new technology that's as powerful as AI,
okay, is this going to make everything worse? Not really having a clear idea of how it will
make it worse. My hope once again is I actually think used well, I'm sure there's going to be
use cases of AI that are not great, that can almost amplify a lot of the bad things that we
already see on the internet, whether it's marketing to you, whether it's forms of social media that
make you feel insecure or you have permanent fear of missing out or whatever's going on
or hurt your body image, whatever. But I think there's going to be use cases, these are the ones
we're going to focus on, hopefully others focus on it as well, where the AI beyond just helping you
academically, it can help you even handle the world that you're dealing with. I write in the book
about the AI acting as a guardian angel. Right now, when you surf the internet and our children
surf the internet, they don't realize it, but they're already doing battle and they don't even
know they're in a battle with AI's where these AI's are figuring out the next thing to show on
their social media feed or the search results or the next ad. And their objective function is what's
going to get you to click on that ad or what's going to make you watch longer. And unfortunately,
it seems like triggering content, polarizing content, content that makes you feel bad about
yourself is the stuff that makes you sit on it longer. And any of us who have fallen into it,
we've all spent some time on the internet and clicked on an ad or spent more time on social
media and we never feel good about it when we're done. We all feel like we kind of wait.
Is that true? I feel like that's a little bit of a cliche. Sometimes I surf the internet and I
enjoy the experience. For me, it's true. There's definitely times where my friend sends me a fun
video or a meme or I fall into it a little bit on YouTube or on TikTok and I get a good giggle and
that was exactly what I needed that day. But more often than not, we have fully developed front
to lobes and we can regulate ourselves after 10 or 15 minutes of that. But also even TikTok,
which I've shut down my account and I had a reason to be on it. We had a social media
following. I just took it off because I found even myself, I just went to TikTok to announce a new
feature on Khan Academy and then I end up just swiping and swiping and then 10, 15 minutes
go by. I'm like, I don't feel good about what I'm doing with my day and I stop. I was able to stop
at 15 minutes. There's a lot of young people who aren't stopping at all and they're going two,
three, four hours. And look, it's great if someone has the self-regulation to be able to stop after
15, 20 minutes. That's probably healthy fun, as long as it's not making them feel bad about
themselves. But I am imagining a world now and we're working on this where an AI can
act on your behalf or act on your parents or your teacher's behalf where, yeah, okay, I'll let my
daughter use a cell phone, but I want to see a world where there is an AI agent on that phone
that I am in conversation with. And I would tell them, like, look, I'm cool with her spending
some time on it, but let's be careful about her seeing things that hurt her body image or things
that make her feel like she's missing out on things or just put her into this polarizing haze
or whatever it might be. Then the AI can make sense of what she's surfing and looking at and say,
hey, we've just spent the last 10 minutes looking at pictures of that friend's birthday party
and when you were out of town, maybe we want to go do something else. Or if it can see patterns in
what the daughter is doing, tell the parents, hey, did you know you're child spending an awful
lot of time doing X, Y, or Z? One, that might just be something to police a little bit more,
or it might be an opportunity to have a connection. Like, did you know that they're really interested
in crocheting? Maybe you should take it up. Maybe you should have a conversation with them. This
is something to talk about at the dinner table. So I'm hoping that the AI can act much more as a
used well, a little bit of a guardian angel, and it can help parents, it can support parents,
engage with their children more. I hope that, you know, right now we have devices like Siri
and Alexa and Google Home. And right now they're kind of like, you know, what time is it? Put a
timer on, you know, what's the weather today? You know, how many people live in Ukraine? That's
the type of things we use it for. I would love a time, which I think is going to happen in the
next year or two, where I'm, you know, sometimes we're having dinner together. I want to, and
we're having a conversation, but I know that there's more that my kids have going on in their life
that I'm not getting out of them. When I just ask them, how is your day? How was school? What's,
you know, how's history class going? And I could imagine a world where an AI says,
I could say, hey, Alexa, can you moderate a conversation, a fun conversation between us as
kind of an icebreaker? And it does. And it says, all right, we're going to go around and everyone's
going to say the best part of their day. And then when my nine year old says, oh, my best part of
the day was getting to hang out with my, you know, my friend who was out sick, then the AI could say,
well, why was that? And, and, but once again, it's not squeezing out the parent. It's creating a
context to, as a parent, I create more context where I can engage with my children in a more
meaningful way, as opposed to just being transactional, put that iPad away, go to bed, eat your food.
Hey, it's time to get up. Hey, we're late for the bus. I don't, we all have to do that as parents,
but it squeezes out the like, what do you think is the meaning of life? Or what does it mean to be
a great friend? Or how can we all be better family members? If we could have an expert facilitator
all the time, that'd be pretty incredible. Do you think, do you think, are you going to get a
wearable like AI, like this humane AI pin or, or rabbit or, or maybe make Conmingo a wearable?
Yeah, yeah, it's, it's, I have no imminent plans to do, to do that. Because I'm also someone who
really likes going off the grid, so to speak, and being completely unplugged in certain cases.
But if, if there are devices that come out that could, that I, that I can legitimately believe
will enhance my life in some way, I'd be open to it. And as long as they have the data privacy and
all of the right safeguards in place. Now, I'm wondering what, one big question out there is,
does AI somehow plateau? Like, is there only so much it could learn and simulate, you know,
human conversation? So you mentioned how like GPT-5 is going to have a trillion parameters
as opposed to GPT-4, which just had 175 billion as opposed to GPT-1, which had, I don't know,
a million or whatever it was at a trillion parameters or 10 trillion parameters.
What can AI do that prior versions couldn't do?
None of us know for sure. And I think it is a philosophical debate about if an AI is trained
on human created content for the most part, can it transcend human intelligence in certain ways?
I think the answer is in certain ways it will be able to, because as these, as the parameters
increase, it'll be able to find patterns that are not maybe explicitly obvious to us and maybe
leverage those patterns to create things. But will it be like, you know, a truly transcendent
intelligence? I don't know. I think one of the interesting things that are going to happen is
they're going to be collecting more and more inputs. Right now, it's pretty much human created,
written text for the most part, and now images, videos, sound, files. I think when the AIs are,
get more sensory perception, you know, once you have wearables, once they have cameras,
I know this is a little bit dystopian. So, you know, we have to think about how this gets provisioned.
It's going to get more training data. I also think robotics is interesting because
when we learn, we don't just observe our environment, we play with the environment. I mean,
we literally, that's what that play is literally learning. A kid pokes something, throws it, you
know, shakes it and figures out what, how they're investigating the world. And I can imagine
once you pair AI with robotics and then it can actively investigate the world,
it will get even more input on, and maybe even, and look, it's going to be able to have
sensory input that we don't have. It will be able to see the entire electromagnetic spectrum,
not just that, you know, it's going to be able to hear every, every frequency of sound. It's going
to be able to, you know, detect molecules that we can't at least consciously detect.
So, it's an interesting philosophical debate, but you know, once you start talking about orders
of magnitude, more parameters than we have synapses in the human brain, and it's tireless,
and it has access to all of this information, and it can process it faster than we can.
It is interesting, and I know everything I, even me talking out loud has, I've kind of
scared myself a bit, but, but, but you know, once again, it's all about intent and how we use it,
and, and, and can we use it for, for good purposes, because there, there can be a lot of good purposes
here. I mean, it's just something I said, let's say a good purpose is education. I do, and there's,
there's evidence that I think with a general AI that basically exceeds our current educational
efforts, kids are going to get smarter, meaning they're just going to learn faster, they're going
to retain more, they're going to get that feedback loop much more quickly, and, and so they're going
to be able to, to advance more quickly than our generation was or the generations in between.
I mean, an example that you can see in a specific domain, it's not a general domain,
but look, computers have been better than humans at chess since 1997, and, and computers have
evolved incredibly since then. So it's been, you know, over 20, you know, 25 years or 20,
whatever, 27 years of computers improving since they were already better than humans,
and, and kids use computers to learn chess with some coaching, but 99% is they're playing
the computer and getting immediate feedback. And then there might be some coaching and kids are
so much better now than they were back in 1997. And their rate of improvement is so much faster.
I mean, a 17 year old, just the other day became the challenger to the world championship
that never would have happened 25 years ago. So it's, it's incredible how in, in that specific
domain and other domains like that, kids have advanced and learned and retained so much faster
than kids back then. And I wonder if the same thing's going to happen in, in general education.
I obviously hope so. And it seems like it definitely will. Like our kids will be smarter.
And I, you know, I, I, I typically traffic in optimistic scenarios, but I, and so I hope what
you're saying is right. There's a, there is a, a more dystopian, I don't know if it's dystopian,
but a less optimistic scenario where you're going to have a segment of students who,
who take these tools and run with it and will do exactly what you said. They're going to,
to, to get to heights that we never thought was possible by, at very young ages. And look,
that's, that by itself is not in any way a negative thing. That is a positive thing.
These are going to be the young people who cure diseases for us, who start the next, you know,
great companies who write the next great novel, who produce the next great movies,
all of the above, push AI forward or make sure that AI is used in a safe way. But I do,
I think it's how do we make sure that the other, whatever it is, 60, 70% of students
stay engaged and engaged enough to not be, not be thrown behind by, by all of this.
Because if they are, it's not, it's not, it's not good for them as human beings and it's not good
for society. And so that's where a lot of our, well, we're already seeing with Conmigo in the
classroom is there is a segment of student who just runs with it and they are off to the races.
And once again, no one should hold them back. I mean, sometimes the school system,
temptation is to hold those students back. That is not a good idea. We want these students to,
to move it as fast as they can. But how do we make sure that everyone has a, has a decent chance of,
of being able to participate without holding people back is where a lot of our work is.
Well, and you know, you've been involved in, in obviously been involved in education for
almost 20 years. Con Academy has been around almost that long. Why do we have the old system?
Why do we have credentialing at all where, oh, in order to get a job in a high profile place,
I need a degree from Harvard. Why can't I just go to Con Academy for a year or two,
learn what I need to learn and get a job at Goldman Sachs or Silicon Valley or Hollywood or
whatever. Like, like what is, what is the real role now of, of higher education? Why can't I just
use online education for that? I agree with you 100%. And you're starting to see aspects of that
exist. You're definitely seeing that in, in fields like software engineering, where
you know, the same employers that 20 or 30 years ago might have said, okay, we're only going to
hire from MIT and Caltech and Stanford. They're now saying, hey, anyone can take this boot camp
or take this assessment. And if you pass it, we're going to interview you the same as we would
interview a, you know, 4.0 grad from Stanford. So that's already happening in, in, in certain fields.
I think what you're going to see, and this is a passion of mine, is I do want to create
competency based credentials that have the same or greater prestige as going to Harvard or going
to Oxford. So much so that even if you go to Oxford or Harvard, you'll still want to get these
things to show that you actually learned some, some very useful, very useful skills. So,
you know, systems change is harder than technological change for a whole series of reasons.
But this is something that I, you know, and hopefully I have many decades left on this
planet. But I'm hoping in the next 10 or 20 years, hopefully closer to five or 10 years,
you're going to hear some things even from us about ways that you can get high school,
college credit, potentially even job opportunities via a pretty streamlined route. Once again,
that doesn't mean that it's neither or you might want to do both. But if you don't have
access to Harvard, which very, you know, I was telling some very senior people at Harvard that
right now there's this false tension where they feel, you know, everyone writes about admissions
and it feels like a false tension between equity and merit where there's like, oh, affirmative
action that gets ruled down by the Supreme Court. So how are we going to make sure we have equity
and that we have right, you know, good representation if we have to go more based purely on test scores
or whatever else. And what I've told them is like, you know, it's a false tension because
what you've hold, what you've held constant is capacity. Like you're, you're, you only,
you only admit whatever 2000 students every year, even though there's probably 100,000
qualified students every year. If you could, if you could serve all of the 100,000 qualified
students, you wouldn't have to have these weird, bizarre discussions about admissions and equity
and all of this that people are having, you would just be able to, if you're, if you can handle the
work, we are admitting you and you will get a credential that can get, that can open up the
world to you. So yes, I hope that we can, we can create some pathways like that.
I think the part of that tension is, is the scarcity principle, which is that
Harvard prices their scarcity. And so they make money from their scarcity. You and
Khan Academy or let's say a commercial equivalent makes money from scalability as opposed to scarcity.
And Harvard doesn't want to have 100,000 students. They want to accept only 2000
because that loud, they get charged 300,000 a semester and they'd still fill up. And
you know, I think, I think that's the tension really.
Yeah. And, you know, and obviously our motivation is, you know, our costs go up as we scale. So
our motivation is more of just like, well, how do we maximize impact? But you're right about,
there is, there's always going to be a notion of scarcity and the reality of the Harvard's of the
world. And so much of the education debate focuses on, let's call it about 30 universities,
even though it's less than 1% of students go to those 30 universities. But those 30 universities
are relevant because they, they do over influence society. And so I think there are,
it's not going to go away anytime soon that there's a certain, you know, the US doesn't
have a caste system in the traditional sense, but our, our elite institutions are the best proxy
for them where, oh, oh, you're Harvard class of whatever, wherever, were you there? Oh,
did you have this professor? Oh, wow. Like we're part of the same, part of the same club.
I don't think that's going to go away. What I, and I think there's other positives of not just
a Harvard or a Stanford, but college in general of being there in person, forming bonds. I met
my wife and many of my best friends in college and we have our best memories there. So I think
we can always optimize for some of those in person experiences, but I want to create also
alternative pathways. So that's not the only way that you can get into an upper middle class or,
you know, promising a career. On, on that optimistic note, and I, and I really hope you're
right. I've been writing about this also for a long time. And, and I'm really looking forward to
the utopian world that you have been outlining and creating and explaining particularly in your
book. I'm going to say the title again, because I always forget things really quickly, brave new
words, how AI will revolutionize education and why that's a good thing. And I think what you've
explained today has solved a lot of the, also the fears that many people have about AI, but Salman
Kahn, creator of the Kahn Academy, thanks once again for coming on the show. Thanks for hugging me, James.
From a flat tire in the city to a dead battery on a distant drive, Triple A is partnering with
T-Mobile for business to accelerate response times and get more drivers back on the road fast.
Our nationwide connectivity powers location telematics so Triple A's fleet can find
stranded drivers quickly while being fully equipped with the in-vehicle tools to have
answers when they get there. This is elevating the member experience. This is Triple A with
T-Mobile for business. Take your business further at T-Mobile.com slash now.
