Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets.
Lecture 4, Stories in the Sky, Constellations.
I left you last time with the sun moving against the background of the constellations.
We talk about constellations a lot, but what really are they? Where are they? Who made them up?
How many of them are there? Why are they there in the first place?
In this lecture, we're going to look at the ancient constellations.
We're going to see something of their origins.
Look at the modern constellations. Kind of a surprise.
Very few people know that there are such things as modern constellations.
And then conclude with a relatively good, hard look at how we organize the sky
and something about star names, where they came from, both from ancient times
through relatively modern times to what we do now.
There are millions of stars with names, tens of millions of stars with names,
even if they simply come down to coordinate systems.
And we'll look at the whole thing starting with the very most ancient of times.
There's a lot of misconceptions about constellations.
First is about astronomers and constellations.
There's sort of a feeling that the whole purpose of the astronomer is to know the constellations,
nor they are, check on them every night and make sure that they're all there.
I would say about 80% of all astronomers can't identify constellations,
don't know where they are, don't know what they are or where they came from,
because most come into this field from physics.
They come into it from a point of view of pure science
and pay little attention to the constellations at all.
I find them charming and I find them instructive.
And they are useful even today in terms of naming stars.
They're also a wonderful vehicle for getting the kids out into the backyard to look at nature.
So many have been brought into science in general, not just astronomy or physics,
but into science through the fascination of the stars and through the constellations and learning them.
So let's go on a nighttime tour and take a look and see what they are and what we actually have up there.
Another misconception about constellations is that they're supposed to look something like what they're named after,
and it's a rare one that actually does.
One thing to keep in mind throughout this whole lecture is that constellations are commemorative of things.
They don't necessarily have to look like what they're supposed to be.
They don't portray. There's no artist up there drawing a bear or a man or a bunny.
They are representative of something that was important to the people of the time.
They have two basic purposes.
One is sacred, the other is secular.
The constellations of the zodiac, the constellations through which the sun goes over the course of the year,
have deep sacred meanings.
Many cultures, in fact, most cultures have probably invented their own.
The one that we use, what we consider our Western constellations, came to us from times past.
We don't even know where they originated.
From thousands of years ago, they were translated by the Greeks, the ancient Greeks, into their own stories,
and they were handed down to us through them.
Take a look at the constellations of the zodiac, picking out a few of them starting with, say,
the top of your newspaper horoscope column, Aries, the ram, where the vernal equinox was so many years ago.
A ram, Taurus, the bull, Gemini, twins, two people, warrior twins yet, cancer, the crab, another animal, Leo, a lion.
You can go through the whole set and you find powerful fertility symbols that have to do with planting,
that have to do with harvesting, where the sun was at a particular time of year, Virgo, a virgin.
Libra, scales, it's kind of odd.
I thought they were all animalistic, zodiac, from zoo, the circle of animals.
Libra is a relatively modern invention, only a couple of thousand years old,
that was translated from its original form as the claws of Scorpius, the scorpion.
Yet another strong figure, Sagittarius, a centaur, half man, half horse, another strong figure.
Then we go through Capricornus, a water goat, and I don't want to get into that any deeper.
I'm not entirely sure what a water goat is.
Aquarius, the water bearer, NPCs, the fishes representing a wet quarter of some time.
You can almost see the seasons fall out from the constellations of the zodiac.
So they have sacred meanings.
This is where you find the sun, this is where you find the moon.
There are twelve ancient constellations of the zodiac because the moon goes around the earth approximately twelve times in a year.
It goes through its phases twelve times a year.
So every time you reach a different new moon or a different full moon, the sun is in the next constellation of the zodiac over.
Many of the artifacts of today have come down from times like this.
Seven days of the week, seven moving bodies of the sky, the quartering of the moon.
We'll see this in the next lecture.
The other meaning of the constellations is in storytelling.
You get away from the sacred.
If you go all across the sky, we've got birds, we've got heroes, we've got gods, we've got all manner of things up there.
Try to imagine yourself out in the desert where these originated.
We think they came to us from ancient Babylonia, and it's important to remember that every culture has invented constellations of one sort or another.
The Chinese had somewhere around thirty constellations of their zodiac.
One for each day, the lunar orbit.
Native American Indians had something quite different from one coast to the other.
Each tribe had its own culture, so to speak.
They were important to everybody.
But it's probably more important where you can actually see the sky rather than in rainy areas where it's difficult to do so.
So let's go back to our own what we call Western constellation lore.
Think about how some of these may have originated.
You're out in the desert and it's been a long day hurting the goats or whatever it is that you're doing.
People in ancient times were very much like people now.
They had to have recreation.
You didn't just finish work and go to bed.
You had to have entertainment.
What kind of entertainment?
Well, you might dance, you might sing, or you'd have a tribal storyteller.
It was one of the most honored positions in the tribe.
The storyteller was often passed down from father to son, mother to daughter.
And you tell the ancient stories of the tribe.
And then you're sitting around under a nighttime sky and the storyteller is saying,
Look, look up there.
See that pattern up there?
That's whatever.
Orion the Hunter.
That's the little boys.
That's the sisters, perhaps.
That's something maybe the American Indians would have said.
Let me tell you about them.
And they launch into a long story that can go on for hours about how that particular group got in the sky
and how the gods put that group up there.
Now, it may or may not look like what it's supposed to be.
Corvus the Crow does not look like a crow.
It's a box of stars.
No more than that.
You have a lot of trouble figuring out how to get the bear out of Ursa Major, the great bear.
Yet some of the other constellation patterns just jump out at you.
Orion the Hunter really does look like a human being.
And many cultures have called that particular pattern a human being.
Stars are arranged kind of at random, not entirely so.
And the patterns are not uniformly distributed.
They're just random groupings of stars.
So some things will look like what they're supposed to be.
Some won't.
In some constellation patterns, the stars are actually physically related to each other,
forming some kind of clustering or some other organized pattern
where they were all more or less born together at the same time.
But in most cases, when you think about the three-dimensional quality of the sky,
the constellations have no physical meaning at all.
They're just a bunch of stars that happen to be aligned in more or less the same direction
that form some kind of pattern.
If you were to take anybody who did not know the constellations out into the evening,
that person would begin to pick them out all by him or herself.
The human brain and I are wonderful at picking out patterns.
So let's take a look at some of the things we actually have out there.
The most famous constellation, probably in the Northern Hemisphere, is the Big Dipper.
Aha, it's not a constellation.
We have to discriminate between official constellations,
those handed down to us by the ancient Greeks,
and what we call asterisms or informal constellations.
Many of them they are, and they can vary all over the world.
Some people picking out one group, some people picking out another group.
The Big Dipper, which is known in England as the Plough, you see,
it depends upon your nationality or where you are.
The Big Dipper is a small part of what's called Ursa Major, the Great Bear.
These constellations that we use in English-speaking countries carry Latin names.
You see a whole cross-culture of the world when you begin looking at constellations
and constellation patterns.
Ursa Major, the Great Bear.
It doesn't look much like a bear,
but if you start relaxing your imagination, pretending you're five or six years old,
and just let the imagination wander, maybe you can see it.
The bowl of the Big Dipper makes the hindquarters of the bear,
and then there's the long bear's tail, which is the handle of the dipper.
And then if you look carefully, you see three little pairs of stars
that kind of represent the bear's feet or his tracks,
which the Arabs, the ancient Arabs, call the leaps of the gazelle,
something entirely different.
Every eye sees the sky as somewhat different.
And then you might see a long snout,
and then maybe you might make out the pattern, but it's kind of forced.
Again, it's commemorative of the bear.
The story, you ever seen a bear?
Ever taken good look at one?
Their tails are not very long, they're little bitty things.
How do you get a bear in the sky?
Well, you're very carefully.
If you do this carefully, you sneak up, you can't let the bear see you.
You sneak up in back of the bear, and you grab the bear's tail,
and then you hurl it around your head, and you throw it off into the sky.
Of course, that stretches out the bear's tail, which is why the bear has a long tail.
If you're a good storyteller, you can string this out for an hour and a half
without any trouble at all.
And you've got the little dipper, which is the asterism of Ursa Minor,
the smaller bear, and they're un-lost altogether.
I even, with my imagination, can't see a bear out of that.
And the handle goes in the other direction.
So we have two bears up there, and we have two asterisms within the bears.
So many are the formal constellations, far more are the asterisms,
or the constellations that people, so to speak, the informal constellations.
There are 48 recognized ancient constellation patterns.
The ones that were handed down to us from truly ancient times.
We don't know when they were invented.
Probably 3000 BC, somewhere around then.
They were picked up by the culture of ancient Greece.
The first mention we have of them is in Homer.
And the Greek poets and storytellers began to tell their own stories,
that has wrapped their own myths about the more ancient constellation patterns.
Until they became what we now consider the ancient Greek constellations,
but they were ancient even to the Greeks of the time.
They were cast in their final form by Ptolemy.
Claudius Ptolemaus, the astronomer, the last famed Greek astronomer
and librarian in Alexandria.
He wrote a magnificent textbook, the textbook of the time,
called The Syntaxis.
The Arabs knew it as the Almagesti, the great book,
in which he set down all the astronomical knowledge of the time,
including a set of 48 ancient constellations,
which had been passed down to us 2,000 years later,
and the ones that we still use today.
One of these constellations was Argo.
It's the ship of the Jason and the Argonauts.
Huge thing.
If you know Orion, we'll get to that in a little while,
down way down below, down to the left of Orion.
Hard to see from mid-Northern latitudes.
It was broken up in the 19th century, not as you break up a ship,
but the constellation was separated into three parts.
Pupus, the hull, Corina, the keel, and Vila, the sails.
So that gives us 50 ancient constellations,
once we consider the breakup of Argo.
And that's what has been passed down to us,
and these are the ones that people generally like to learn.
There are two great icons of constellation lore
from the Northern Hemisphere.
One, of course, is Ursa Major, the Great Bear, or the Big Dipper.
The other is Orion, Orion the Great Greek Hunter.
If you find either of these, they will, with a small star map,
lead you to find others.
That is, you can use stars within them as pointers
to eventually the entire sky.
So those are the first two that I at least try to tell people
to locate, and they're the first two that most people do locate
because they're so bright.
Orion is a beautiful seven-star figure.
You can almost see a human being looking down at you
with a three-star belt, three stars right on the celestial equator,
a bright reddish star up here at his right shoulder.
Down here it is left foot, another bright blueish star.
Outstanding figure that was known to the ancient Arabs
as Al-Jawza, and my apologies for the pronunciation
because I'm sure it's not correct.
But she was a mysterious woman.
We don't know where she came from.
Yet another example of a culture showing Orion,
which we see in our wintertime, as a human figure.
Orion's accompanied by two hunting dogs.
Down and to the left, if you take Orion's belt,
points to the dog star, Sirius, the brightest star in the sky.
It looks for all the world like a dog standing on its hind legs.
One of the constellations that looks like what it's supposed to be.
You look over to the upper left of Orion
and you will find the smaller hunting dog, which is just two stars.
You can't get the figure of a dog out of it.
It's commemorative again.
It's not supposed to look like anything.
The three bright stars of Orion, Canis Minor, the smaller dog,
Canis Major, the larger dog, making a magnificent asterism
called the Winter Triangle of three very bright stars.
The constellation patterns are made of stars
of all different brightnesses.
And this is a good time to introduce a subject called magnitudes.
You can make a little more sense out of constellations with that.
Around 130 BC, the subject goes back a long ways.
One of the greatest of all Greek astronomers, Hipparchus,
suggested that we divide the stars up into six brightness groups.
The brightest were called stars of the first magnitude.
At least that's what we call them in English.
Stars, the faintest ones you could see, were called stars of the sixth magnitude
and everything in between.
The dipper stars are generally second magnitude.
The north star is second magnitude.
Strangely enough, we used this system over 2,000 years after it was invented.
It's been quantified, put on a very careful scale.
We can measure stars to the thousandth of a magnitude unit now,
all of this done in the 19th century,
yet it all harkens back to early Hipparchus.
Young eyes can see down to six.
I've known people who could see to seventh magnitude.
Older people, you lose a little bit with age, maybe fifth,
but the sky is filled with these faint stars.
There are only twenty first magnitude stars, twenty or twenty one,
depending on where you want to actually get the cutoff.
Many, many more second than the number of third, fifth, sixth, and so on.
With telescopes you see fainter than that, seventh, eighth, tenth,
Hubble Space Telescope sees down to thirtieth,
but that's far removed from any discussion of the constellation patterns.
Orion has two wonderful first magnitude stars.
The stars of the belt are second, most of the other stars.
That's why this constellation just jumps out at you.
The northern hemisphere winter with the clear skies and the dry skies,
they just sparkle and twinkle at you, making the most magnificent of figures.
There are many other groups.
In fact, it's easier to learn them by groups.
In many stories that are told about them, perhaps the most famous is the Perseus myth.
If northern hemisphere autumns, you'll see rising up from the northeast, Cassiopeia,
which goes around the sky opposite the Big Dipper,
the two acting like a giant clock.
You can actually tell your time by where they are.
Cassiopeia was, I'm a storyteller, we're sitting around the campfire.
We're all staring, what is the storyteller going to tell us next?
Cassiopeia was an ancient queen of Ethiopia.
She was married to Cepheus, a dim bulb of a constellation,
probably reflective of Cepheus himself, apparently.
Anyway, Cassiopeia and Cepheus had this beautiful daughter named Andromeda,
rising up above the western horizon as a long graceful curve of stars.
They bragged, or Cassiopeia bragged, that her daughter Andromeda was more beautiful than the cenemes.
And you didn't say this about gods and demigods, Neptune's daughters.
Well, he took offense at this and had Andromeda chained to the rocks at the coast of Ethiopia
to be ravaged and to be eaten by Cetus, the great sea monster, which also appears in the sky.
Well, Perseus, who is not terribly far from Cassiopeia in the sky,
two beautiful streams of stars in the autumn sky in the middle of the Milky Way,
had been assigned, if you can assign a hero to do something, to kill Medusa,
which was a figure with hair, snakes, so horrible, one look would turn you to stone.
And Perseus was a pretty bright hero.
How do you kill somebody you can't see?
So he polished his shield, pulled out a sword, cut her head off, put it in a bag,
and went on his flying horse, Pegasus, which rises as a great diamond of stars,
a great square of Pegasus in autumn skies, flying back home.
And there's Andromeda chained to the rock, and what's a good hero going to do?
But to go down there at the last minute, pulls the Medusa out of the bag,
shows it to Cetus, turns him to stone, takes Andromeda home to Cassiopeia and Cepheus.
Marys Andromeda. And they live happily ever after, except poor Cassiopeia.
Neptune's still a little annoyed, so he makes Cassiopeia ride over the pole in her throne, upside down.
Now everyone's in trouble.
You know, things haven't changed much.
What do we do here when we're all done for a day of work?
We all go home, and we sit around the campfire.
And who are our most important people in some ways?
But our storytellers, and what's the campfire?
It's called television. It used to be called radio.
It used to be called the piano.
But it's a way of us all getting together, and things haven't changed much.
Have they over the centuries?
Well, the Greeks named the obvious figures.
But many are the spaces in between the obvious figures,
where you don't have much in the way of bright constellations.
The Greeks called them the amorphous regions,
and they were presumably some area where, if one were to do a great deed,
the gods could rearrange the stars and place you in the sky.
A blank canvas, so to speak.
When astronomy really began to become a science
at the Copernican Revolution in the 1500s,
there began to be a need to fill in the blanks, so to speak,
besides which the Greeks, who were up at 38, 40 degrees north latitude,
couldn't see the deep southern skies around the south celestial pole.
So the explorers, who first went down there,
began to map the sky and come up with new constellation figures
of their own imagination, and brought a few back to be drawn by the northern astronomers.
And then other astronomers began to fill in the blanks
between the ancient constellations.
So between about 1600 and 1800 A.D.,
we had the era of the modern constellations,
of which there were countless numbers,
probably a hundred or more that were created.
Any astronomer worth his salt would make up constellations,
try to curry favor with the king, maybe,
or just to make himself famous.
Not very many made it.
Some were more or less reasonable.
You have menoceros, the unicorn,
right in the middle of the winter triangle.
We have such patterns as, oh, links, the links,
the cert of the lizard.
But then you have artifacts of your own time.
The ancients made constellations from what they knew,
from their own culture.
So what do we have in the modern constellations,
other than the few animals that were added in,
fornax the furnace.
Sextans the sextant, octans the octant.
Then there was quadrants the quadrant.
That got a little boring after a while.
We got all three of them.
And some of them just got silly.
Machina electrica, the electric machine.
And the list just goes on and on.
It gets to be pretty funny after you read it for a while.
They started breaking up old constellations.
Edmund Halley had the right idea.
He created a modern constellation called Charles's Oak
after Charles II hopes that the king would do something good for him.
And the king actually did.
He made Cambridge University apparently give Edmund Halley
a master's degree because of the honor that Halley had imposed
upon him through his constellation.
By the 1900s, the sky was a mess.
Everybody had different constellation patterns.
It was getting difficult to name stars.
So in the 1920s, the International Astronomical Union,
an organization of professional research astronomers said,
enough, we're going to adopt the 50 ancient constellations,
which include many of the storytelling genre.
Many single ones, Cygnus the Swan, Lyra the harp,
Aquila the eagle, and so on.
The three bright stars of which make the summer triangle.
And we'll pick 38 of the modern constellations
and we'll throw the rest away.
So we wind up with 88 that neatly divide the sky.
And just to make sure they put little dotted lines all around them,
nice rectangular lines so that every star belonged uniquely
to a specific constellation.
And finally, we have the sky in place.
With a lot of other silly ones out there that are kind of hard to,
they're kind of fun to look at.
We have Muska Australis, the southern fly,
but fortunately Muska Borealis, the northern fly got swatted
and we don't have to deal with that one anymore.
But there are many others that are in a way equally silly.
But what would we do if we were to do it now?
We would have running shoes in the sky, computers.
We'd have things of our own culture.
500 years from now, they'd be laughing themselves silly
over what we picked out.
They do have a real meaning.
They are useful in partitioning the sky into small groups.
Star names have a very long history to them.
They come in a variety of forms.
The most obvious is proper name.
The brightest star in the sky is Sirius.
The first magnitude stars in the northern hemisphere,
the brightest are Arcturus, Vega, and Capella.
You'll learn these after all.
We use the proper names for about the top 20
and a smattering of some of the second magnitude stars as well.
They almost always have something to do with either their appearance
or their position within a constellation.
Sirius, for example, comes from a Greek word
that means searing or scorching,
very appropriate for the brightest star in the sky.
Arcturus is the end of the southern star of Boates, the herdsman,
which rides the sky behind the Big Dipper or behind the Great Bear,
comes from the word Arctos, Greek for bear.
It means the bear driver.
So you get an idea of where these names came from.
Well, most star names, however, are a few are Greek,
a small number like Regulus and Leo,
which means the little king.
A few of them are Latin, but the vast majority are interestingly enough Arabic.
The Greek culture, and this is grossly over-symphophized world history,
the Greek culture passed down to Alexandria in northern Egypt.
From there, much of it passed, of course, into Rome,
which adopted much of Greek culture,
and the Greek constellation lore, in fact,
much of the Greek religion.
And then much of this also passed down into the growing powers of ancient Arabia.
After the burnings of the library at Alexandria,
we lost a great amount of Greek literature and Greek culture,
but it had been translated for us into Arabic.
Much of what we know about it comes from the ancient Arabic texts.
The ancient Arabs viewed Greece as culturally,
as almost their center.
They took all of Greek astronomy into themselves
and dropped a lot of their own constellation lore
and began to name the stars in Arabic after their position within the constellation.
So we have such stars as denib, which means tail,
tail of Cygnus the Swan.
And then there are these Arabic names
were retranslated back into Latin in the Middle Ages
by people who didn't really understand Arabic very well
and just made a mishmash out of the original Arabic names.
So if, excuse the pronunciation,
Betelgeuse comes from a term in Arabic,
meaning the hand of the central one,
and it got reduced to just one word from a phrase,
Betelgeuse, which we call now,
which is often mistranslated as the arm or the armpit of the giant.
It means nothing like that at all.
Many of these names have no real scholarship behind them.
We don't even know what they mean.
You try to use most of these words
on any Arabic-speaking person
they would have no idea of what you're talking about.
You have to go deep into how the name was corrupted back into Latin.
Nevertheless, probably 80, 90% of all the star names in the sky,
and there are a couple of thousand of them are of Arabic origin.
You can't remember all of these and many, many to recall.
So in the year 1600, around the year 1600,
Johannes Bayer, the famous German astronomer,
took the stars that were measured by an earlier astronomer named Tycho Brahe,
who we'll encounter a little bit later,
and plotted them on a map
and called the brightest one within the constellation Alpha,
second brightest, Beta,
and he didn't follow the rule very well.
Sometimes it was done by position,
so it only more or less,
the Greek letter sequence only more or less goes by the brightness,
but mostly the brighter stars in the constellations, the Alpha stars,
and when you tack onto that,
the Latin possessive case of the constellation name,
so Alpha of Orion and Latin becomes Alpha Orionis,
Beta of Orion, because Beta Orionis,
so all good astronomers have to know they're 88 constellations
and they're 88 Latin genitives or possessives,
or you have to know where to look them up at least,
so you won't sound too terribly ignorant
when you talk to other astronomers about them.
Well, there's only 24 Greek letters,
and that means that you don't get a chance
to name too many stars within a constellation,
so enter John Flamsteed,
around the latter part of the 1600s,
who was the first astronomer royal
and who had been assigned by the crown
to come up with good star positions
for the purpose of celestial navigation.
He observed a large number of stars with very high precision
and laid them out in order of the sky's longitude.
The sky has a coordinate system
much like latitude and longitude on the Earth.
It's called right ascension and declination.
Right ascension is the sky's analog to longitude,
it's just the angle measured eastward
from the vernal equinox,
and declination is the sky's version of latitude.
It's exactly the same thing.
So he listed his stars in order of coordinates
within a constellation,
and others later, probably Halley and Newton,
although no one quite knows for sure, numbered them.
So we have now the Flamsteed numbers,
the first star whose distance was measured was 61 Cygni.
Vega as a proper name, the Alpha star of Lyra the harp,
Alpha Lyrae, it's also three Lyrae.
So now we've got the Flamsteed numbers,
and we can go quite a bit fader with these.
And then we want to go fader yet,
and at that point we've really got to start using catalog names.
So we dispense with the constellations
and then simply use the coordinate names of the stars
all the way around the sky in a variety of catalogs
that go fader and fader and fader into the depths.
Any given star might have a dozen, two dozen,
three dozen different names depending upon what catalog it's in,
and it can be quite confusing to translate one to the other to the other.
The most famous is, and I love this because they're the HR numbers,
they're Harvard revised in the Yale Bright Star catalog,
and it had to do of course with beginnings at Harvard,
translation to Yale,
in which you simply number all of the naked eye stars
all the way around the sky in order of right ascension
from the vernal equinox, irrespective of the constellations.
And then there are other catalogs that take you fader down to tenth,
eleventh magnitude.
The Hubble Guide Star catalog takes you down to fifteenth magnitude.
As we'll point out a little bit later,
each magnitude set, five magnitude sets,
is a factor of a hundred and brightness.
So a change of one magnitude is a factor of two and a half.
You go fader very quickly, even with a small increase in numbers.
When you get into the telescopic catalogs,
we have somewhere around fifteen, twenty,
maybe even a hundred million stars that have names.
Astronomers have taken it upon themselves to be the namers of the stars,
by the way.
Anybody can go out and name one,
but the professional astronomers pretty much ignore it,
and go on with their own catalog numbers.
The top numbers are still known,
thousands of years after they were born.
The top stars are still known by their proper names.
You'll see professional articles about Arcturus,
and Rigel, and Betelgeuse, and Denim,
and all the rest of the first magnitude stars.
Beyond that, you tend to use Greek letter names,
then flamestead numbers, and finally the variety of catalogs.
And allowing not only all the naked eye stars,
but every star you can see from a typical backyard telescope
to have a name associated with it.
It's a long way we've come from ancient Greece.
And it's well to remember, too,
that you shouldn't be too provincial about this,
because every culture has different constellation patterns
and different constellation war.
You go down into South America,
they name the dark patches in the Milky Way.
The Milky Way is the band of light around the sky,
which is the disc of our galaxy.
If you look at it carefully, you see that it's not a uniform disc.
It's chopped up with all manner of dark, thick clouds,
which we know now are clouds of interstellar dust,
out of which stars are actually born.
The Incas of Peru and Chile named constellations
after these dark patterns, these spots in the Milky Way.
The North Americans didn't do that,
because the spots are not as prominent up here.
So everybody had their own spin on it.
The Pleiades, the Seven Sisters star cluster in Taurus,
which could be considered an asterism on its own,
was known as kolkha in Incan literature.
It was a basket, it was a harvest basket.
Whereas in the Northern Hemisphere,
to the Greeks and their predecessors,
it was the Seven Sisters, the daughters of Atlas and Plione.
The Western constellation lore is pretty much taken over the sky.
It's outside of, say, Chinese, Japanese,
some of the Asian constellation lore
is where we have the documentation
that in fact thousands of years many of these others have been lost.
We know very little now about South American constellation lore,
other than what's been resuscitated for us
by some modern anthropology.
Much of the North American native lore
is being lost as well, unfortunately.
And it's fascinating to see what other cultures have done
with what we sometimes consider the ancient Greek constellations,
which aren't really Greek at all,
to us from truly ancient times.
And I think when you next time you go out in the backyard
and look at these constellation patterns,
you might think about the fact that all the stars
slowly shift their positions in the sky,
not over three or four thousand years,
and you're seeing the same patterns that Homer saw,
you're seeing the same patterns that Aristotle saw,
and you're thinking maybe some of the same thoughts that they did.
It's a direct link with ancestors thousands of years before we lived.
Thanks.
After listening to lecture four,
a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Why do we call our galaxy the Milky Way Galaxy?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The Milky Way has a very deep lore.
Not all cultures would have called it that,
but it looks like a river, and it's white.
It's a white band, and it looks like milk.
It looks like somebody's taken a jug of milk
and literally spilled it across the sky,
which is the obvious origin of the term.
It was often considered a pathway of souls to heaven.
That was a very common belief,
because nobody knew what it was.
It was just this broad band of light.
It is strikingly beautiful in a dark sky.
You get the least little bit of artificial lighting,
and it just sort of all goes away.
You really have to see it in a dark, moonless sky,
and then you can't possibly miss it.
You do not have to look for it.
You look up in a northern hemisphere, August evening,
and there it is in all its stunning glory.
And as a celestial river,
it was often thought of a way of the gods
bringing water to water the crops,
filling the oceans.
Many other stories told about it as well.
The constellations, although they're rather denigrated
these days by, even in the 19th century,
by professional astronomers,
still have a very great use to us.
First of all, they bring the kids out to look.
I think that's their most important use.
But secondly, they divide the sky up
into reasonably small, organized areas.
If you said about some incident regarding the United States,
it means it's much more vague
than if you said it happened in Montana.
It's the same thing.
I could say to somebody,
hey, there's a new comet.
Tonight, go look in Canis Major and you'll find it.
Nobody will have any problem.
Anybody who knows the sky will know when Canis Major is up
at any time of the year.
Go look. There it is.
Rather than say, there's a new comet. Where?
Oh, I don't know. That doesn't work too well.
So they divide the sky up into manageable portions
just for informal use.
And they're also, of course, used for the naming of stars.
The Greek letter system is based upon constellations.
The Flamsteed numbers are all based upon constellations.
Sure, there are old ways of doing it,
but they're still professionally used.
Even in the early days of radio astronomy,
when we first began to find bright, discreet radio sources
in the sky, they were named after constellations.
First bright radio source in Sagittarius
was called Sagittarius A.
First one in Cygnus was called Cygnus A.
And then they found hundreds, if not thousands,
of others in the system broke down.
Yet everybody still knows Cass A, Sagittarius A, Cygnus A.
We all know these and we all know what they are.
So the names are still useful to us.
The constellations provide a good background
for the naming of things and for the partitioning in the sky
into relatively small areas.
And it, again, is a charming link with the past
that I hope never fades.
