Astronomy, Earth, Sky and the Planets, lecture seven, keeping it all together.
In the last lecture we looked at how Kepler defined how the planets went around the sun.
Kepler however didn't know why the planets went around the sun.
He had an idea that was some kind of force that kept pushing them.
He really didn't know.
But he set the stage for the greatest scientist that we know, Isaac Newton, to tell us how
and tell us why.
In this lecture we're going to look at the basis of the planetary motions, which will
begin to launch us out to the physical natures of the planets.
And look at Newton's laws of motion from an astronomical perspective, at Newton's famous
law of gravity, how he found how gravity worked.
At his replication, just an amazing feat, his replication of Kepler's laws in a wonderful
generalized fashion.
And then we begin to look at the discoveries that can be made from this, the discoveries
of the outer planets of Uranus, of Neptune and Pluto, where in the entire planetary system
can be put together and at the end a little bit of a tag here at the final act where we
bring Einstein back on the stage, who really put it all together and showed us where gravity
really is.
Gravity is an amazing thing.
It's like a magic act.
Here's a ball.
There's nothing between the ball and the floor.
And yet when I let go of the ball, it falls.
Why does it do that?
Well, gravity, we say.
Well, that explains it all, doesn't it?
So what is gravity?
Well, it's one of the four forces of nature, we say.
Gravity, a couple of them that involve the nucleus of the atom, electromagnetism will
look at them all in their proper order, forces that act over a distance without anything
seeming to be in between.
So that doesn't really explain what is gravity.
We don't know.
No one.
We can explain how it works, but no one knows really what it is and what causes it, what
makes it.
Not the greatest minds that have ever walked the planet have yet figured that out.
Maybe someday we will, but we still don't know.
Nevertheless, we know exquisitely well in what way it works, enough so that we can send
spacecraft all across the planetary system and hit holes in one, like hitting a golf
ball in New York and having it land in the hole in Los Angeles.
We know it that well.
So what is it and how does it actually work to understand that we've really got to go
back again to Isaac Newton, who working from ideas that were formulated originally by Galileo
came up with three laws of motion, which were all mathematically correct.
That is, he put the mathematics behind it.
Newton did so much.
Not only the laws of motion, the law of gravity as he knew it then.
He was the first person to split sunlight into a spectrum.
He invented the Newtonian type of reflecting telescope.
He invented the calculus, much to the horror of a great many undergraduates in this country
who have to study it, but he invented it.
If it's difficult, if you think it's difficult to understand, try to imagine inventing it,
along with Leibniz in Germany and the two, had quite a fight in fact over who actually
was the proper inventor of it.
We got to do a little technical stuff here because science often uses a precise vocabulary
that is a little bit different than the vocabulary that is used in everyday speech.
The ball has a velocity across the table, or as I walk around, I have a velocity.
Velocity in science means two things.
It means both speed and it means direction.
If I move the ball this way, it has a different velocity than if I move it this way.
Its speed may be the same, but it changes direction.
If you walk around in a circle, then you are continuously changing your velocity because
you are changing your direction.
Always speed and direction are together in physics.
Any change of velocity is called an acceleration.
That doesn't mean whether you are speeding it up, slowing it down, you put your foot
on the accelerator of a car, you accelerate the car.
That's common parlance.
But if you put your foot on the brake of a car, you are also technically accelerating
it in the technical sense that you are changing the velocity.
Drive around a curve at 40 miles an hour, you are accelerating the car.
Even though the speed is constant, you are changing the direction.
That too is an acceleration.
Now Newton's first law, motion, commonly put in kind of a boring fashion, put a ball on
a table.
Now spend the day watching it.
Fascinating day of watching that ball just sit there.
It will do nothing, will it?
I think we know that right from the start.
It won't do anything until you smack it one and then it goes flying across the table.
The basic idea is that a body in some state of motion is going to stay in that state of
motion unless you do something about it or unless somebody does something about it.
Rest.
If you just let a ball lie on a table, rest as a state of motion.
It's a state of zero motion.
Or if you roll it at one mile an hour, it will keep going at one mile an hour unless
brought to a stop by some force.
Well you know that if you roll a ball across a floor, it stops.
But it stops because you are doing something to it.
There is a force of friction between the ball and the floor and that makes it stop.
If that force of friction were not there, the ball would roll forever and never come
to a halt ever.
To get the ball moving from state of rest here, you got to apply a force.
What's a force?
A little bit of a circular reasoning here.
Force is anything that causes an acceleration.
Out of which Newton formulated the famous formula, probably the most famous in physics.
Force is equal to mass times acceleration.
Or the acceleration is equal to the force over the mass.
You can express it in a variety of ways.
The greater the force, the greater is going to be the acceleration.
But if I apply the same force to two masses, one of which is big and one of which is not,
the smaller mass will be accelerated the more.
You can push a marble with a force and it will really go sailing along.
If you try to do the same thing with a bowling ball with the same force, it won't accelerate
very much.
All seemingly obvious to us now, but not obvious at all at the time.
Newton's third law was that if you're going to have a force or some kind of reaction of
force, you're going to have a reaction in the other direction.
You can't have an action without a reaction.
Force, of course, is absolutely fundamental for anybody who flies in a jet airplane or
anybody who walks for that matter because to walk, I apply a force in one direction
and I move in the other.
All very, very basic stuff, Newton's laws of motion, which began with ideas of Galileo.
Now given that it requires a force to produce an acceleration, what happens when we drop
the ball?
The ball falls at an ever-increasing speed.
Balls do not fall at a constant speed.
They continue to accelerate until they hit the floor or until they hit the ground.
The longer they're in the air, the faster they're going to go.
Now the exception to this is air resistance.
If you throw a ball from an airplane, it will reach a terminal velocity.
If you jump out of the airplane yourself as a skydiver, you will reach a terminal velocity
of a couple hundred miles per hour.
That's because air resistance is buoying you up.
If there were no air resistance, not only would your parachute not work, which of course
is applying a force to your acceleration, but you would keep falling at ever-increasing
acceleration at 9.8 meters per second, increase in speed for every second in the air until
you smacked into the ground.
This is why there are holes in planets from asteroids hitting them because they're being
dropped at exceedingly high altitudes from millions of kilometers away.
And by the time they hit the planet, they're going very, very fast indeed, in fact, at
orbital speeds.
So gravity is a force that acts over distance that can produce an acceleration.
Newton's law of gravity said that for any two masses, put two masses, mass one and
mass two, and separate them by a distance d, between their centers.
One of Newton's great discoveries was that the Earth acts as if all of its mass were
concentrated to a point at the center.
That is, the stuff on the other side of the center was not acting as strongly as the stuff
on the near side of the center, and it all canceled out as if it were all concentrated
to a point.
So in terms of your reaction to gravity, you might as well be standing on a platform
a thousand, four thousand miles high from a little dot at the center that had the mass
of the Earth, and you'd feel exactly the same way you feel here.
So the force that draws two bodies together depends upon the distance between the body's
centers, assuming that they're spherical.
If they have funny shapes, then you have slightly different rules.
You've got to take some kind of an average, but let's just assume spherical bodies.
Newton realized by a combination of the acceleration of the falling ball, the acceleration of the
moon as it went into its orbit around the Earth, and the realization from Kepler's
third law that whatever force was causing the accelerations of the planets had to be
an inverse square law that is the force dropped off as the distance squared from the sun.
He put all this together and formulated his universal law of gravity, and there's a nice
little equation that says that the force between two bodies that draws them together is equal
to a constant.
It's a constant of nature.
It's called G, the gravitational constant, which you can determine from the laboratory.
We don't have to deal with that here.
The force is equal to this constant times the product of the masses.
You multiply the masses of the two in kilograms together and divide it by the square of the
distance in meters.
Now that's crucial because that means as you separate the bodies, the force of gravity
drops off.
If you double the distance, the force of gravity decreases by a factor of four, it's an inverse
square law, but it can never go to zero.
The only way you can get it to go to zero is to drive that denominator, that distance
between the two to infinity, and you can't do that.
That means everybody in the universe attracts every other body in the universe by a force
inversely proportional to the distances between them.
You can't get out of the Earth's gravity ever, no matter where you are.
It weakens with distance, and of course if you go far enough away, other gravitational
fields from other bodies overwhelm the Earth's gravity, and it's inconsequential, but it
doesn't go to zero.
This is a glue that ties the entire universe together because everything is acting on everything
else, a startling idea at the time, and one that worked.
Using the law of gravity and his laws of motion, Newton did something truly astonishing, and
the calculus, we can't forget that.
He reinvented Kepler's laws, but he reinvented them in a marvelously generalized form and
explained that Kepler's laws were simply the result of this gravitational force.
So we have two different kinds of Kepler's laws.
We've got Kepler's laws as he invented them, or as he discovered them, I should really
say.
The empirical laws, the ones that were derived solely from the observations alone, without
any idea of why or how they worked.
Let's look at them again.
That planetary orbits are ellipses with the sun at one focus, the other focus being empty.
That the radius vector, the line that connects the planet with the sun, sweeps out equal areas
in equal times, which means that a planet close to the sun is going to move faster than
a planet far from the sun.
And simple old p squared equals a cubed.
The square of the period in years relative to the Earth is equal to the semi-major axis
of the Earth in astronomical units, cubed, again relative to the Earth.
Turns out that Kepler's laws, as he discovered them, are simply special cases of the generalized
form that Newton came up with.
Take a cone, think of a paper cup that you'd pull out of a water fountain stand, and tip
it upside down with a point on top.
Clip off the top with a pair of scissors, and the cross section, what you're doing is
cutting the cone with a plane.
The cross section is a circle, you can imagine that easily.
Now cut it at an angle to the base, not perpendicular, not parallel to the base, but an angle, and
what you get is an ellipse.
Now cut it parallel to the side of the cone, and you will get a circle that has only one
loop on one end, and it opens up forever at the bottom.
It's called a parabola.
And if you cut it at a steeper angle, you'll get an even wider open curve called a hyperbola.
These four curves are the conic sections.
Between ellipses one, the familiar ellipse, the circle is the other, and the hyperbola
is a family of open-ended curves.
The parabola is sort of the dividing curve between the family of hyperbolae and the ellipses.
Well, what Newton discovered was that orbits don't have to be just ellipses, or in the
special case circles, but that orbits are conic sections with the sun at one focus.
This allows for open-ended orbits.
They curl all the time in nature.
Here you are on the Earth.
The killer asteroid is coming in from outer space, lining up on the Earth, but not quite.
It comes close to the Earth, zips around the Earth in orbit around the Earth on a hyperbolic
orbit and goes back out and never comes back.
That's a perfectly acceptable orbit.
It's just a one-way orbit.
When the Apollo spacecraft were launched, the first ones were launched to the Moon in
elliptical orbits.
They went around the Moon, and they were destined to come back.
The later ones were launched relative to the Earth on hyperbolic orbits, and if something
went wrong, they weren't coming back anymore.
How do you get a hyperbolic orbit?
Anybody has what is called an escape velocity associated with it.
In the case of the Earth, it's seven miles per second.
I can take a body and throw it up this way, and if I exceed seven miles per second, eleven
kilometers per second, I've put it into a hyperbolic orbit around the Earth.
We have to think for a minute and pause here to understand what an orbit actually is.
We talk about orbits so glibly, one body going about the other.
In the case of Newton's generalization of Kepler's first law, we're dealing with any
two bodies at all.
It doesn't matter what kind of body.
It could be two stars in orbit about one another, Jupiter satellites in orbit about Jupiter.
It just doesn't matter.
Any two bodies.
But what exactly is an orbit?
Let me take the ball again.
I can drop it.
It falls.
I'm not going to throw it, but if I could throw it in one direction, think of throwing
the ball parallel to the Earth.
It will immediately fall toward the Earth.
It can't help but do that.
The acceleration of gravity downward toward the Earth is not dependent upon the motion
of the body horizontally.
As soon as you throw it, it'll drop, known to any baseball pitcher.
If you fire a rifle, as soon as the bullet leaves the muzzle of the rifle, it will begin
to fall.
How far the bullet goes depends upon the muzzle velocity and that's all.
Now you can of course point the rifle upward and the bullet will go into an arc, but it
will go up, slow down, and then fall.
Again, it will always fall.
If I can throw this ball fast enough, really throw it hard and fast, the curvature of the
Earth comes into play.
I'm throwing the ball far enough so that the Earth begins to drop beneath the ball.
The Earth is continuously curved, remember.
I mean, it looks flat locally, but it's curved all the way around to meet at the other side.
If I could throw this ball fast enough, it's somewhere around 17,000 miles per hour.
As the ball went off this way, it would fall, but it would fall at the same rate at which
the Earth drops off beneath it and it would curve around and come back to its starting
point and that would take about 88 minutes or so.
I've put the ball in orbit.
Now I pretended that the ball of course is able to go through walls, mountains, and everything
else that's in the way, which I can't do.
However, I can put it on a spacecraft, on a rocket, launch the ball or the spacecraft
upward to get it above all the barriers, including the air, which acts to heat it up, an area
of resistance, and when I get it up to 100 miles or so, I can keep curving it over, keep
accelerating until it hits orbital velocity and it just keeps going around and around
and around and around.
It's in the Earth's gravity, one of the great misconceptions of orbital mechanics that many
newscasters have is that the shuttle is in orbit around the Earth because it's outside
of the Earth's gravity.
It isn't.
It's the gravity of the Earth that keeps it in orbit.
If I could magically shut off the gravity of the Earth, the darn thing would just skitter
off in a straight line and never come back in a perfect hyperbolic orbit.
It would not ever return.
It's gravity that keeps the acceleration going.
The effect of gravity on the shuttle astronauts is just minimally less than it is down here
at the surface because its gravitational force is only falling off as one over the distance
squared.
Now, how does that explain how the astronauts are weightless in space?
Well, they're falling.
You don't feel weight when you're falling.
You feel weight when you're standing on the ground.
The reason I feel weight is because it is the mass of the Earth times the mass of me
divided by the square of the distance between the center of the Earth and me.
That is my weight when I'm standing here.
If I climb a set of stairs, I weigh less because I'm farther away from the center of
the Earth.
If I go on a different planet with a different mass and a different radius, I'm going to
weigh something different there.
When I'm falling in the air, I am weightless.
I don't feel weight until I land.
The spacecraft is falling toward the Earth.
The astronaut is falling toward the Earth at the same acceleration.
There's no differential, so the astronaut feels no weight at all.
Orbiting bodies are falling bodies.
The moon is in orbit around the Earth, which means it's falling toward the Earth at all
times, but it has this horizontal motion that makes it simply go around and around and around
and never come back to a starting point.
The Earth is falling to the Sun.
It just can't get there because it has this looping path that never takes it closer to
the Sun.
That's the orbit, and orbits can come in all four of the conic sections.
That was one of Newton's great discoveries.
The other one is a terribly complicated name to it.
It's called the conservation of angular momentum.
I got a weight on a string, and I could sling this weight around, and the weight has a velocity.
It has a mass, and it has the length of the string.
You multiply the three together, and you get what's called angular momentum.
Now angular momentum is conserved in the absence of some kind of outside force.
That is, once I get it going, I can bring in the string, and the thing goes faster.
Because I drop the length of the string, the velocity has to go up to keep the angular
momentum constant.
This is familiar to anybody who skates, dances, does almost any kind of athletics.
How does a skater put herself into a spin?
You bring the arms out.
You apply the force with a skate, get the spin going, and you lower the average radius
of the body by bringing in the arms, and watch the skater speed up.
If you really want to speed up, you put the arms over the head and lower the radius of
the body even further.
Dancers do the same thing in a pirouette.
Start with the arms out, bring them in, snap it in, speed it up.
What happens as a planet gets closer to the sun on its elliptical path?
The radius vector shortens.
The speed goes up.
Kepler had discovered the conservation of angular momentum, and he didn't know it.
Newton put it in proper form.
This is a crucial point in this course, and in any study of astronomy.
The conservation of angular momentum pervades the subject.
It will come back to it many times over the course of this course.
Kepler's third law, generalized by Newton, has kind of a complicated form.
Remember that the force of gravity depends upon the product of the masses, yet Kepler's
third law has nothing to do with mass.
The mass is not there.
Where did the mass go?
It seems to have disappeared.
Kepler got away with this because the masses of the planets are so minuscule compared with
the mass of the sun.
They're effectively zero compared with the mass of the sun.
The sun dominates everything.
Newton put together a formulation of Kepler's third law that included the masses, and it
goes as p squared again, like Kepler's third law, except p is now in seconds.
It's in actual physical units, rather than in terms of the Earth's orbit about the sun.
p squared in seconds is equal to a constant again, constant's well-known, times the semi-major
axis of the orbit cubed, a cubed, just like Kepler did it.
That's fine, except that a, the size of the orbit is now in centimeters or meters or whatever
unit you want to use, real physical units, divided by the sum of the masses.
People couldn't know that because what happens is that you have the sum of the mass of the
sun plus the mass of the Earth.
The mass of the Earth is pitifully small compared to the mass of the sun, 1,300,000, so you
can throw it away.
That is, mass of the sun plus the mass of the planet is effectively the same for all
the planets because the masses of the planets don't amount to anything.
The mass of the sun is a constant.
You throw it into the constants, you wind up with p squared equals a cubed when you put
it relative to the Earth in years and astronomical units.
If the planets had had masses comparable to the sun, Kepler would have gone crazy.
He never would have figured this out.
He was just lucky that the planets have small masses compared to that of the sun.
In fact, if the planets had large masses compared to the sun, we wouldn't be here anyway and
we wouldn't be having this discussion because for life on Earth probably requires a fairly
low gravitational field as we'll see as we progress through this course.
This allowed Newton to determine ultimately the mass of the sun.
What's the force of gravity between the ball and the Earth?
It's the mass of the ball times the mass of the Earth divided by the square of the distance
between the ball and the Earth multiplied by this constant which we don't really need
to deal with.
The acceleration of the ball downward depends upon the mass of the Earth and depends upon
the mass of the Earth.
Now, one of the things Galileo has purported to have discovered is that the acceleration
of a falling body does not depend upon the mass of the falling body.
He was said to have gone up at the leading tower of peace and dropped two masses off
whether he did or not as irrelevant.
He dropped two masses off.
They fall at the same speed.
The ancient Greeks thought that they fell at different accelerations.
They don't.
As I drop the ball, it's falling in the field of gravity of the Earth.
The acceleration of the ball depends only upon the mass of the Earth and the square
of its radius or the square of the distance between the ball and the center of the Earth.
You multiply that by the mass of the ball and then f equals ma and you've recovered
Newton's law of gravity.
The acceleration of a falling body is going to depend only upon the mass of the Earth
and the distance between it and the center.
All I need to do is measure the acceleration of the falling ball, use Eratosthenes' ancient
measure of the radius of the Earth, and I've got the mass of the Earth, which of course
is huge.
Somewhere around, it hovers in at around 10, oh, just an uncountable number.
Now, how do I get the mass of the Sun?
Kepler's third law, again, as generalized by Newton.
I've got the period, square of the period of the Earth in seconds.
What's the orbital period of the Earth in seconds?
31 million seconds.
It takes the Earth to go around the Sun.
I've got the distance between us and the Sun in, let's say, centimeters.
I know it in kilometers, 150 million kilometers and 10 to the 5th centimeters, 100,000 centimeters
in a kilometer.
I've got that distance.
I know all the constants.
What do I have left?
The mass of the Sun plus the mass of the Earth.
The mass of the Earth is inconsequential compared to the Sun.
I wind up with a mass of the Sun remotely.
I don't have to go to the Sun and measure anything.
I can't put the Sun on a scale.
What I do is to measure the strength of the gravitational field of the Sun at a known
distance.
This opens us up to understanding the entire universe.
You can watch two bodies in orbit around each other, get the sum of their masses, and at
some point, we'll look at how we can get the individual masses.
Any two bodies, get the mass of Jupiter, watch one of the satellites go in orbit around Jupiter,
get the mass of Jupiter.
Toward the end of the 1700s, William Herschel, who founded modern observational astronomy,
made an astonishing discovery.
Herschel was a transplanted musician from Germany who went to England and was really
more interested in astronomy than making music.
He brought his sister with him and the two of them began to make telescopes.
He made the telescopes.
The two of them were out there observing any clear night they could get.
One night, 1781, Herschel saw a funny looking body drift through the field of view.
It had a disc to it.
He thought for a while it might be a comet, but he followed it and he announced its existence
and other astronomers followed it and they realized it was moving along through the Zodiac,
more or less following the ecliptic path, just like a planet but farther away.
Herschel had discovered the first modern planet, the first planet outside the orbit of Neptune.
He called it Georgiocytus, George's star, after his monarch, King George III, who was
the reigning monarch of England at the time and of course the boss of the colonies of
what became the United States.
That didn't go down terribly well with the French or with the Germans or anybody else
to call the new planet after the King of England, so let's just continue the progression of
mythological names.
Saturn was Jupiter's father, who was in mythology, Saturn's father, in Greek at least, Uranus,
the god of the sky, the next planet out became Uranus.
Well, it turns out Uranus is visible to the naked eye, fifth magnitude at its brightest
at opposition and was seen by many people prior to its discovery.
They just thought it was a faint star and didn't know where it was, didn't know what
it was.
So we had enough information to get a pretty good orbit for Uranus shortly after its discovery
and we realized very quickly that it didn't follow Newton's laws.
It was never where it was supposed to be and it occurred to two people, John Adams in
England and Laveria in France, that there might be some other planet outside the orbit
of Uranus that was pulling on it.
Remember gravity is always mutual and everything affects everything else.
It's not quite correct to say, as it turns out, that the orbits of planets are ellipses.
They can't be.
The Earth is being pulled on by Mars, by Jupiter, by Saturn, Mercury, Venus, everything's pulling
on everything else.
Consequently, the orbit of the Earth is slightly changing.
It's only an approximation to an ellipse, a good approximation but nevertheless an approximation.
If you want to know where the Earth is going to be at any given time, you've got to take
into account the accelerations of all the other planets in the solar system, a non-trivial
job, at least on paper and pencil.
Not so bad if you've got a high-speed computer.
But they didn't have those back in the early part of believe, isn't it, at a time when
they didn't have high-speed computers or PCs?
Not in the middle of the 19th century they didn't.
So Adams and Laveria said about calculating where this trans-uranian planet should be
to produce the deviations that we saw.
Like so many other things in science, they came up with the same answer at about the
same time.
Around 1846 or so, Adams sent his results about where this trans-uranian planet should
be to the astronomer royal in England who basically paid no attention to it.
Laveria sent his results to the Berlin Observatory where they had a good star map.
The first night the John Gala looked through the telescope, bingo, there's Neptune, right
in the field of view.
They had discovered Neptune on paper using Newton's laws of motion and the law of gravity.
It was an absolute triumph.
This affected all manner of things in thinking, determinism.
If you knew where everything was at any time in the universe and all the velocities, you
could know where everything was going to be in the future.
No free will.
I robbed the bank because of Newton's laws.
I couldn't help myself.
Not really that way.
As we'll find out in a lecture down the line, we can't know where everything is at any
one time.
It is absolutely impossible.
But that does not negate the great discovery which really goes back to Newton.
We found a planet with a piece of paper and pencil before it was actually discovered in
the sky.
They tried to do the same thing.
Uranus still didn't quite behave itself even when you factored in Neptune.
So hey, maybe there's something out beyond Neptune.
So we tried it again, futile.
It took decades, finally, for Clyde Tombaugh, who was hired at the Lowell Observatory in
Arizona to discover Little Pluto, 40 astronomical units away, 248-year journey around the sun,
which we know now is, is it a planet?
Is it not a planet?
It's still being argued.
It turns out that Pluto doesn't have anywhere near the mass to affect Uranus.
It turns out that the problem was that we didn't have really good enough masses for the outer
planets.
When the Voyager spacecraft passed by the planets on their hyperbolic orbits, we were able to
get good masses for them.
Finally, Uranus falls right into place where it's supposed to be.
So does Neptune.
Everything is well with the world.
There is no planet X out there.
We have come to the end of the planetary system.
With Neptune, if you want to factor in Pluto, that's fine too.
And with hundreds of other bodies that lie outside the orbit of Pluto, all too small
to affect the inner planets to any significant degree.
And largely as a result of Kepler going to Newton from Galileo, we've been able to put
our solar system together.
It's not really the end of the story.
The best observation still slightly evade Newton's laws.
It took Albert Einstein to figure out what was going wrong here.
The problem is with the speed of light.
Speed of light is the fastest thing in the universe.
Nothing can approach it because light has no mass.
So you can't get beyond it.
Light has a very odd behavior.
If I throw the ball at someone and a person catches the ball at a certain speed, now I
run at that person and I throw the ball at the same speed.
For me, the catcher catches it at a faster speed, which is why, of course, baseball pitchers
lunge toward the plate to add the speed of their body toward the speed of the throwing
arm.
Cricket players do exactly the same thing.
Light doesn't work that way.
If I shine a light at you, you'd measure it at 186,000 miles per second.
If I ran at you at half the speed of light, the light would still pass you at 186,000
miles per second.
That is strictly non-intuitive, but that's the way the universe works.
Einstein put together a concept known as space time.
Ford three dimensions of space and one dimension of time all locked together.
And he made the interesting concept, what could happen if you could try to catch a light
wave, run alongside it.
You can't ever catch it because no matter how fast you run, it still keeps going past
you at the speed of light.
The only way to explain that is that your time must slow down.
And if you could run alongside the wave, time would stop.
Not your clock, not your watch, but time itself.
A distortion in time, which also means a distortion in space.
And what Einstein realized was that gravity can be explained as a distortion of space
time produced by a mass.
Why that happens?
We don't know.
And there's a slight difference between that and the Newtonian laws.
As long as speeds are low, you're okay.
But if you start going near the speed of light, all the rules change and Newtonian dynamics
no longer work.
And you have to use Einstein's theories of relativity.
We've gone a long ways here from Copernicus, through Kepler, through Tycho, through Galileo,
to Newton, finally to Einstein, and we understand how it works.
We just don't know why.
After listening to lecture seven, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Does the disappearance of another star in the galaxy and the loss of its gravitational
pull affect our solar system?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
Because the forces of other stars on our planetary system are so weak, it wouldn't affect us
at all.
And stars do this.
They do blow up and, in effect, dissipate their mass throughout the galaxy in that sense
they disappear.
But they're so far away, they wouldn't have any effect on us at all.
If for some reason Jupiter could magically disappear, it would really make a mess out
of the solar system.
The orbits of planets would change.
It would probably destabilize the orbits of the inner planets, in fact.
Nobody entirely knows for sure.
It wouldn't have much in effect immediately, but it probably would over the long term.
We have a very stable planetary system probably because of the way the planets are put together.
Jupiter and Saturn all influence everything else.
And there are ideas that the stability of the inner planets is, in fact, due to the
very existence of Jupiter.
The bottom line in much of astronomy is that there are no things that are really isolated
from everything else.
You can approximate that, but everything else pretty much affects everything.
Everything pretty much affects everything else.
Now, it's a matter of degree.
If a star in the galaxy disappeared, we wouldn't notice it at all.
If a planet in the solar system disappeared, it would have a small impact on the orbits
of the other planets.
If the sun disappeared, then all the planets would go off in straight lines and never come back.
