Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets, Lecture 10,
Iron Planets, Mercury, Venus, and Mars.
In this and other lectures from now on,
we'll use the more scientific definition of temperature,
which is absolute temperature scale,
the so-called Kelvin temperature scale,
in which we start at absolute zero,
where we take all the heat out of a body,
minus 273 degrees centigrade, minus 459 degrees Fahrenheit,
and then count upward in centigrade or Celsius degrees
so we can get rid of the negatives.
Unless, of course, specified otherwise so that we can
be more familiar with what the terms actually mean.
Generally, zero will mean absolute zero.
Unless otherwise specified, when I say 100 degrees,
I mean 100 degrees above absolute zero,
it is still pretty cold.
In the last lecture, we looked at two prime examples
of terrestrial planets, the biggest of them, the Earth,
and if you like to count the Moon as a planet,
the smallest one, of course, the Moon.
The other three are all in between,
and in this lecture, we're going to take a look
at the variety of terrestrial planets from Mercury,
the planet Venus, the planet Mars,
what it might be like to be on one of them,
what they look like, what's on their inside,
and what they have to tell us about the Earth,
because their story is pretty important.
First, let's look at the similarities among them.
They're all structured like the Earth.
They all have iron cores, they all have rocky mantles,
and they all have some kind of a crust on the outside.
They run through a range of sizes.
Mercury is the smallest, Mars is the next one up,
Venus is the next one, and on top of the whole pile
is the Earth.
By looking at the smaller ones and how they're structured,
and how they're made, it'll tell us someday,
even if not now, it'll tell us something about our own planet.
Let's begin outward from the Sun
and look at them in order, starting with Mercury.
If you look at a picture of Mercury taken with spacecraft,
you can't do it from the Earth.
Mercury is very close to the Sun,
at most 28 degrees from the Sun,
and our picture from the Earth is just terrible.
We can't even get a decent rotation period
out of Mercury viewing from the Earth.
It's a very difficult planet to study.
Almost everything we know about it
has come from a spacecraft flyby in the 1960s,
which imaged the planet close up.
And what did we see?
Craters, craters, craters, every place.
It looks very much like the Moon.
Obviously, it went through the stages
of this late, heavy bombardment
that produced the same kind of impacts that we find on the Moon.
And being the smallest planet,
and being so close to the Sun,
it has no particular atmosphere,
and therefore no erosion,
and we still have the remnants of the late, heavy bombardment.
It's a small body.
It's about 38% or so the radius of the Earth,
about 5% the mass of the Earth.
What makes Mercury unique, however,
is its enormous iron core.
The planet is the densest of them all.
It might be the smallest of the terrestrials,
but it's denser than any of them all the way out to Pluto.
This implies that it has a huge iron core.
Mercury could almost be considered an iron ball
with dirt piled on top.
The iron ball is really extraordinarily large.
We're not entirely sure what happened
and how this huge iron core was created.
It probably has something to do with proximity to the Sun.
Something we'll address in the last lecture of this course
when we look at the formation of the planets.
A look at the surface, however, shows real differences
with the lunar craters.
The craters are flatter as a result of a lower gravity.
There are, in a sense, fewer of them.
The craters seem to be separated by some kind of inter-crater plane,
which implies some kind of lava flow
that may have wiped out earlier generations of craters.
There is an enormous impact basin.
One thing that we will continuously see
through this entire study of the planets
is the awesome violence of the early solar system.
We find collisions of gigantic proportions.
The first ones we encountered were the maria basins of the moon,
the huge basins that are filled with the maria.
They filled with these lava flows.
We find similar features on Mercury.
A huge basin was created so violently
that the shock waves went through and around the planet
and jumbled mountain ranges on the other side.
Neither Mercury nor the moon has real mountains like the Earth.
The Earth has these tectonic mountains
that are raised up by continental drift.
The mountains on the moon are raised mountains from impact craters.
That is, they're simply the rims of giant impact craters in the maria.
We find the same kind of thing on Mercury.
There are no tectonic types of mountains
because there are no continents and there's no continental drift.
Mercury does have a tiny, tiny magnetic field, however,
and it does imply that the core is a little bit liquid,
or the small size of the body.
We're not entirely sure why it should be, but it is.
It has very little atmosphere.
Most of the atmosphere that Mercury has
comes from atoms from the Sun that impact on rocks
and kick atoms off of the surface rocks.
But it's nothing that you could possibly breathe.
The atmosphere is effectively zero or very close to it,
very much like the moon.
It's basically a pretty dead body
and one that is not a nice place to visit.
Surface rocks hit temperatures of somewhere around 500 plus degrees Kelvin.
The surface rocks under the Sun
are pretty close to the temperature of a self-cleaning oven.
If you put lead solder on the surface of Mercury,
it would start to melt. It's that hot.
What is also unusual about the planet is its rather odd rotation.
This is a very difficult thing to view from the Earth.
However, these terrestrial planets,
particularly Mercury and Venus,
are amenable to being hit by radar.
That is, we use an active radio telescope
by sending out radio waves from the Earth,
bouncing the radio waves off the planets
and detecting the return signals,
much like an aircraft radar system would work.
We can not only measure the precise distance of the planet
by how long it takes the radar beam to go out
and hit the planet and come back, knowing the speed of light,
we can also determine the velocity
through something called the Doppler shift.
Think of a light wave.
Think of a wave moving in water, if you like.
Run a boat through the wave.
If you run a boat into the waves
in the direction in which they're going,
the frequency of the waves hitting you will appear to be higher.
In other words, you will measure a smaller wavelength.
If you go along with the wave,
you'll measure a longer wavelength.
This is called the Doppler effect.
It's most noticeable in sound.
If a car or an ambulance approaches you on the street,
the pitch will be higher as it approaches you.
It will be lower as it goes away from you.
Light, radio, all electromagnetic radiation
does exactly the same thing,
which allows us to determine velocities of bodies in space
without actually going out and being there.
We can just... same way in which a police radar gun works.
We can measure not only the speed of the planet of approach
or recession and its distance,
but we can hit different parts of the planet
and measure the spin rate.
And it turns out that Mercury has a very odd rotation.
It takes 88 days to orbit the Sun,
and its rotation period is exactly two-thirds of its orbital period,
59 days.
Mercury is locked in synchronous rotation with the Sun,
not unlike the way the Moon is locked in synchronous rotation with the Earth.
The Moon keeps one face pointed toward the Earth
because the orbit is relatively circular,
but Mercury also has a relatively elliptical orbit.
The result of that is that you get an exact two-thirds locking.
That is, the rotation period of Mercury relative to the stars
is exactly two-thirds of its orbital period,
as a result, of course, of its proximity to the Sun.
If you were on Mercury, the Sun would rise actually
every 176 days... rise and set every 176 days,
and the forward side of the planet, it would be blistering hot,
whereas on the rearward side of the planet,
and the nighttime side away from the Sun,
the temperature plummets to the order of 100 degrees above absolute zero or so.
It would be a very unpleasant place to visit.
It is a dry planet, except, again, there's good evidence for ice at the poles,
even as close as the Sun, because they're basins up at the poles and never see sunlight.
Consequently, if you have a little bit of ice, it'll last forever.
It's not a polar cap like we have on Earth.
It's probably ice mixed in rather loosely with the rubble caused by eons,
billions of years of impacts.
You move away from Mercury from four-tenths of an astronomical unit
to seven-tenths, and you encounter a very, very different kind of body, Venus.
It's often called the twin of the Earth, because it's very much the same size as the Earth.
It's 95% the radius of the Earth, about 80% the mass.
If you were walking on Venus, your gravity would feel very similar to what you have here,
whereas on the Moon, it's only one-sixth of what it is here.
You'd be very light, you'd rather float around.
On Mercury, a little bit heavier, but on Venus, you'd feel very much at home,
except for the weather, which is something we'll talk about in a little while.
We don't have a good view of Venus either.
We can get a nice nighttime shot.
We can see it from the Earth, but there's no features to see from the Earth to speak of.
A few dusky markings here and there, and it's been known for generations that Venus is covered by clouds.
You cannot see the surface at all.
Sure, the Earth is covered by clouds, but there's lots of breaks in the clouds
through which astronomers can look to see outer space.
We can, for Mars, for example, we could examine the Earth from Venus.
We could examine the Earth, see the continents, see all the features over a period of time, but not Venus.
It is perpetually cloud-covered.
You could never see the surface, so how do we know anything about it at all?
First of all, we can hit Venus by radar from the Earth and get the rotation period.
What a surprise.
The rotation period of the atmosphere is quite different from the rotation period of the solid body of the planet.
Venus is one of the three bodies in the planetary system that rotates in the wrong direction.
It takes 243 days relative to the stars to make a full spin,
and the axis is perpendicular, almost exactly perpendicular to the orbit, except that it spins in the wrong direction.
Nobody knew why this was so for most of our study of the planet.
The current theory, which could easily be knocked down, we don't really entirely know,
is that the atmosphere, which is very thick around Venus, became tidally locked to the Sun and then locked itself onto the planet.
And as a result of this thick atmosphere surrounding Venus, which holds the clouds,
that slowed the planet down and made it slowly spin in the wrong direction.
It's the air that is so fascinating about this planet.
One of the many things, in fact, that's so fascinating about this planet, the clouds completely cover it.
When you observe natural radio radiation from the planet and infrared radiation,
not from radar, but just the natural stuff that's coming off, we can determine the temperature of the surface.
The temperature is close to 750 degrees centigrade, close to 900 degrees Fahrenheit.
In spite of the fact that the planet is almost twice as far away from the Sun as Mercury, it is just as hot.
It's a result of the atmosphere.
We can detect absorptions of carbon dioxide molecules from sunlight hitting the planet and scattering back to Earth.
The only way that that planet can be so hot is that the atmosphere must be extremely thick.
Direct sampling, in fact, has shown that at the surface, the atmospheric pressure is almost 100 times that of the Earth's atmospheric pressure.
You'd simply be crushed trying to walk on the surface.
And it is 96% carbon dioxide.
On the Earth, carbon dioxide is a tiny fraction of 1% composition of the atmosphere.
Even that is enough to significantly raise the temperature of the Earth's surface by absorption of the natural infrared radiation.
There is so much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere of Venus that it has produced a runaway greenhouse effect
that has made the temperature zoom up to that again of roughly a self-cleaning oven.
And it doesn't matter whether you're on the daylight side or the nighttime side.
The atmospheric blanket is so thick that Venus never cools off at night.
So imagine being on the surface of this roasting place where the temperature isn't so high that the couple of spacecraft that were sent by the old Soviet Union
to land on the surface didn't last much more than about half an hour after they got some fascinating pictures of the rock structures
which just look like volcanic planes going off to the horizon with very little in the way of other features.
The clouds by spectroscopic analysis from the Earth and by direct sampling as well turn out to be not water.
This beautiful planet is covered with sulfuric acid clouds.
Compared to Earth, the clouds don't necessarily have to be of the same composition of the atmosphere.
On the Earth, you have water clouds floating in basically a nitrogen atmosphere.
On Venus, you've got sulfuric acid clouds floating in a carbon dioxide atmosphere.
It actually rains sulfuric acid in the clouds.
Of course, it gets too hot. It never really hits the bottom.
But you can sort of imagine replicating Venus by climbing into a self-cleaning oven and don't do this at home.
This is all sort of a thought experiment.
Climbing into a self-cleaning oven, having somebody turn on and spraying yourself with oven cleaner.
A really nice place.
So much for the goddess of love and beauty, thank you very much.
Beautiful from Earth, not there.
On the surface, of course, you're looking at a cloud deck very, very high in the sky.
You would never see the stars.
The sun would rise, if you could see it, would rise in the west and set in the east.
Everything's backwards.
By the time you get to the surface, the winds are blowing gently, only at a few miles per hour.
Very little erosion, very little soil to drift around.
And it's relatively peaceful and quiet, except that a weather report on...
Imagine a weather report on Venus.
Unlike what you have on Earth, it would be, well, today is going to be hot, slow winds, tomorrow.
Hot, slow winds.
Day after tomorrow, hot, slow winds.
No storm team there, thank you very much.
A very quiet place if you can take the heat and you can take the pressure.
How do we examine the surface?
Again, radar.
The U.S. flew a mission to Venus to put a satellite in orbit about the planet, not just a simple flyby.
This spacecraft, called Magellan, carried a side-looking radar that could beam radar waves,
radio waves down toward the planet and see the reflection.
It mapped almost all of the planetary surface via radar,
producing pictures made from radio waves that look just like optical pictures,
just as if you were flying above the planet's surface,
taking pictures from your very hot airplane, hopefully an air-conditioned airplane.
And what do we see?
Everywhere we look, volcanoes.
Over a thousand shield volcanoes on the planet's surface.
Shield volcanoes being similar to the Hawaiian volcanoes.
Some big, some small.
Volcanic structures that are unlike anything we've ever seen on Earth.
It is a wildly volcanic planet.
It's not known whether it's still volcanically active.
There's some evidence that maybe some of the volcanoes are still going off.
But there's no...
It's mostly chemical evidence.
There's no direct visible plumes coming out of anything.
The Venusian surface is all volcanic.
The whole thing is volcanic.
Radar beams do show what appear to be sort of continent-like structures,
but there's no plate motion that we can see.
Maybe it tried to have a little plate motion,
but these continent-like structures are volcanic bulges
that have simply lifted the surface up
and kind of cracked the surface, produced faults,
produced canyons that are kind of like what we see on the Earth,
but really in structure very different from what we have here.
There are no continents really to speak of.
There's only one really large mountain range,
and that's sort of one of these volcanic bulges up toward the North Pole,
but we don't see any mountains as we see them on Earth.
A very different kind of structure, which is kind of odd, isn't it?
For a body that is very much in size and mass like the Earth.
It's called a sister planet sometimes,
but it's only externally a sister planet.
Physically, it is a terribly different kind of body.
We also observe impact craters, surprisingly enough.
The impact craters on the Earth have been wiped away by continental drift,
they've been wiped away by erosion, fierce winds and water,
but there's no water on Venus.
It doesn't rain water on the surface,
and as a result, the amount of erosion is really very small,
so we keep track of the impact craters.
We find about a thousand impact craters all the way around the planetary surface,
rather uniformly distributed,
and from the number of impact craters compared to the number on the Moon,
whose absolute age we know as a result of the Apollo spacecraft landings.
This gives us a chance to measure the impact rate per million years,
let's say, or per billion years.
From the number of craters on Venus,
we can tell the age of the Venusian surface,
roughly between half a billion and a billion years old.
That is the entire planetary surface.
This is very unlike the Earth.
The ocean basins are brand new crust,
basically zero age near the mid-Atlantic ridges, for example,
and where the new crust is coming out,
whereas the most ancient of rocks on the Earth go back well before three billion years,
not on Venus.
On Venus, the whole planetary surface is about half a billion to a billion years old,
and it seems that at that time, half a billion to a billion years,
the whole planet underwent sort of a global overturning of volcanic action
that erased away all the features that were there before,
leaving a clean slate upon which to produce yet more impact craters.
So we have no record of what happened beyond roughly a billion years ago,
before a billion years ago.
Now, how could something like that have happened?
Well, we think it's because Venus is a little bit closer to the Sun than we are.
As a result, you can't get liquid water on the surface.
It would boil away.
If Venus ever had oceans, it would have cooked away.
As a result, the water goes into the atmosphere.
Water is a greenhouse gas, which makes the surface hotter.
Now, when you don't have water, you also can't plant carbon atoms into the rocks, into the soil.
Venus and the Earth have the same amount of carbon.
On the Earth, it's in the rocks.
It's in carbonate rocks, it's in coal, it's in oil.
Very little of it is in the atmosphere.
On Venus, it's in the air.
Consequently, Venus developed this carbon dioxide atmosphere.
The water floats up.
It gets broken down by sunlight.
The hydrogen from the water escapes into space.
The oxygen atoms can combine with the carbon to produce the carbon dioxide and can combine with it.
In addition, the sulfur gets baked out of the rocks.
The sulfur can combine with the hydrogen and the oxygen can produce the sulfuric acid.
And you have this runaway greenhouse effect where you can't get the carbon in the rocks anymore.
Carbon dioxide is a tremendous greenhouse gas and the temperature just goes shooting up.
So it's like you took the Earth and cooked all the water, all the carbon out of the Earth.
You would have another Venus.
You don't have that on the Earth because the Earth is a little too far away for that to have happened.
You can keep liquid water on the Earth and have a stable atmosphere without the greenhouse effect running away with itself.
Push it seven tenths on AU in and the planet just ran away.
That softens the rocks.
If the rocks are a little bit soft, you can have a greater overturn of volcanic action.
That is, the volcanism is enhanced as well.
If you enhance the volcanism, there's a good chance that the heat from the interior of the planet can escape.
Venus has no magnetic field.
That sort of implies that the core is frozen.
Well, it kind of makes sense.
If you have all this volcanic activity going on, you could have released much of the heat from the interior and possibly a frozen the core.
So you wind up with a terribly different planet.
Just shove the Earth in by three tenths of an AU.
You'll probably get another Venus and a very different kind of body.
Well, the Earth we've looked at already, this big terrestrial planet, very stable water on the surface.
Not a lot of water compared with the mass of the planet, a lot of water compared with a human being.
Far more than we're ever going to need, of course.
Oceans being a couple of miles deep.
No water on Venus.
Tiny, tiny bit in the atmosphere.
Tiny, tiny bit of ice.
Tiny, tiny bit of ice on Mercury.
Hey, go out to Mars.
Now you have a somewhat smaller planet again.
It's about 10% or so.
It's about half the radius of the Earth, about 10% the mass of the Earth.
So it's not all that much bigger than the planet Mercury.
You see you have kind of an envelope distribution.
You start with Mercury small, Venus bigger, Earth bigger yet,
and then you squeeze down to Mars.
And as we'll see in a lecture down the line, then you go out to the asteroids,
which you could assemble presumably into a planet which will be then smaller than Mars.
You have a complete envelope pointing toward Jupiter, for good reason,
which we'll talk about in the last lecture.
Mars has a marvelous history to it.
It is, in many ways, much more Earth-like than bigger Venus.
We can see the surface.
We see a few clouds in the atmosphere, dust storms that occasionally obliterate the surface,
but you can see down to the surface from the Earth.
And what do you see?
Polar caps that look very much like the Earth.
Tilt of the axis, about 24 degrees.
The obliquity of the ecliptic is very similar to that of the Earth.
A rotation period, a little over 24 hours.
If you lived on Mars, the Sun would rise and set.
You'd have days very much like the Earth.
It'd be a little colder.
Your half again is far from the Sun.
Surface rocks can at the equator.
Roughly hit the freezing point of water.
And, of course, everywhere else, it's much colder than that,
but still a very Earth-like kind of environment.
The tilt of the axis means Mars will have seasons very much like the Earth.
And as winter comes on in the Northern Hemisphere,
so, for example, we see a polar cap extend,
a temporary polar cap extend down toward roughly half the equator.
You see the same thing on Earth.
The permanent polar cap on Earth is ice.
It's always there.
And as winter comes on, snow grows a polar cap
down to about the mid-40 latitudes or so.
And the same thing happens in the Southern Hemisphere,
Southern Hemisphere winter.
The same thing happens on Mars.
The difference involves the Martian atmosphere.
There's no oxygen in the Martian atmosphere.
It is very much like the Venusian atmosphere.
It's carbon dioxide.
It is, however, only 1% roughly the pressure of the Earth's atmosphere.
So you're going from a factor of 100 times greater than Earth on Venus
to 1,100th of Earth at Mars.
Quite a range.
The rest of it is nitrogen.
It's mostly carbon dioxide.
And at those temperatures, the carbon dioxide freezes out
and forms a dry ice snow, frozen carbon dioxide,
the same stuff that's used to fog theater sets.
Part of the polar cap is, however, water.
There really is frozen water on Mars.
No question at all.
Now, the Martian history is a checkered one.
Back in the 19th century, an Italian astronomer looked at Mars
and thought he saw fine lines on the planet's surface that he called canali,
meaning basically fine lines on the planet's surface.
This was picked up in English as canals.
Canals, canals are built by people.
There must be Martians.
Why do the Martians build canals?
Well, it's pretty dry there.
In spite of the little bit of water there is, most of us at the poles,
clearly they are using the Martian water at the poles
and they bring the water down to canals
to irrigate their corn and soybeans down in the Oasis near the equator.
This was picked up by the newspapers,
mostly in the United States,
gave glowing pictures of what the Martians must look like.
Various astronomers described the canals,
drew great maps of the canals in the Oasis
and the dark areas that come and go with the seasons.
And it's all an illusion.
When the Mariner spacecraft passed by Mars,
what did it see?
It went over the south pole,
not the south pole,
but under the southern hemisphere of Mars.
Craters, craters, craters everywhere.
What a boring sight for the public.
Public immediately lost.
No canals, craters, looks like the moon, looks like Mercury.
Let's forget Mars.
Another spacecraft went past the northern hemisphere of Mars.
During the time of a dust storm,
couldn't see anything.
Public lost even more interest.
But then the dust settled.
The global dust storms can be pretty fierce.
The winds, which are normally gentle,
can kick up into the hundreds of miles per hour
and have a global dust storm,
like a sandstorm in the Sahara,
except that it fills the whole planet,
keeping you from seeing the surface.
And as the dust settled down,
this immense volcano appeared,
popping up through the dust.
And then another one, then another one.
And a huge bulge with three volcanoes,
two and a half times the height of Everest.
Huge things.
The biggest volcano on Mars is so large,
if you took it off Mars,
it would cover the state of New Mexico.
You could put the entire Hawaiian island chain
in the depression, the calder at the top,
that collapsed in to fill a lava basin down below.
The whole northern hemisphere appears to be wonderfully volcanic,
whereas the southern hemisphere is cratered.
Nobody knows why this difference exists.
One thing we did learn, though,
there are no canals,
and there are, unfortunately, no Martians.
We do, however, see river valleys.
If you look in the southern hemisphere,
you see tributary valleys,
much like you would see
flying over the western part of the United States.
They're dry now,
but it looks for all the world
like water once flowed on the planet.
If you look in the northern hemisphere,
you see tremendous outwash valleys,
huge channels in which water
catastrophically flowed.
That reminds you an awful lot
of the western United States
where there was once a huge lake in Montana,
Dan by a Glacier,
and within a couple of days,
a lake the size of Lake Erie
flowed all the way to the Pacific Ocean,
scouring the land.
It looks just like what we see on Mars.
Now, the air pressure on Mars now
is not great enough to allow liquid water.
As anybody knows who's tried to cook and say,
Denver, it requires longer to cook an egg up there
because the air pressure is lower
and the boiling point of water is lower.
When you drop the air pressure,
the boiling point goes down and down,
and eventually, if you get it down far enough,
the boiling point hits the freezing point
and you can no longer have liquid water.
That's why you can't have liquid carbon dioxide on the Earth.
It goes from the solid state right into the gaseous state.
The same would be true on Mars.
You cannot keep liquid water,
but those channels show that water once flowed
in the liquid state,
including many other pieces of evidence,
flow channels off crater rims,
soften craters that look like they're almost
produced by an impact in what amounts to mud.
We think that there's a lot of water
underneath the surface soil,
which is itself very, very dry.
We don't see water lying on the surface.
You can't have liquid water, but it once flowed,
and if it once flowed,
this implies that Mars once did, in fact,
have a thick atmosphere,
and it lost it.
As cold as it is,
turning into this runaway refrigerator,
it lost its atmosphere,
because it's simply not massive enough to hold it.
And even if we were to quote,
terraform Mars, if we could go there
to produce a thick atmosphere
and make it a real Earth-like planet,
it would lose it again.
There's no way Mars can keep an atmosphere.
Its gravity simply isn't strong enough,
but there was once water there.
And some scientists think that the water
in these outflow channels formed an actual ocean
in the northern hemisphere.
There's evidence of glaciation here and there.
It's all gone now.
Mars cannot keep an atmosphere.
Its heat dissipated a long time ago.
It's a one-plate planet.
There's no continental drift.
There's an enormous channel
called sometimes the Grand Canyon of Mars,
but it wasn't carved by water.
It's actually technically called Valles Marineris,
the Mariner Valley after the spacecraft,
probably caused by the rising of the bulge
on which we find these volcanoes
and to put a crack in the crust
that would stretch literally from New York to Los Angeles.
An enormous fault canyon.
We find all of this geologic activity,
probably ancient, probably goes back a few billion years.
It's unlikely to have much of it anymore,
but Mars was once apparently quite Earth-like.
Now, there's good evidence for life on Earth
shortly after the planet solidified,
shortly after it was born.
The oldest fossils go back three billion years or more.
They're somewhat arguable.
It goes back a long, long ways.
If this happened on the Earth,
did it happen on an Earth-like Mars?
Is there life on Mars?
Was there life on Mars?
There are no Martians.
We've landed spacecraft on the planet.
We've looked around.
There's no critters running around.
We have done chemical experiments on the soil.
There's no significant evidence
for biologic activity,
even current or past biologic activity,
although it cannot entirely be ruled out.
We have no evidence for it.
The best evidence we have,
which is highly controversial for life on Mars,
are Mars rocks.
Mars rocks?
Nobody's ever gone to Mars.
How do you get a Mars rock?
You have a giant impact on the planet.
Some of those rocks are kicked to such high velocities
that they're blown off the planet altogether.
They go into orbit about the Sun.
A few million years later, the Earth sweeps them up.
They land on the terrestrial surface as meteorites.
We have rocks from the Moon for much the same reason.
Lunar meteorites.
We have a dozen or so rocks from Mars.
Can we prove it?
Sure.
We look at isotope ratios of the chemical elements in the rocks.
They're similar to what the robotic spacecraft
have found on Mars.
We look at trapped gases.
The trapped gases in these meteorites
have this composition of the Martian atmosphere.
There's no question at all.
One of them, which was found in Antarctica, was sliced open,
and there were some scientists who thought,
gee, these little tiny things look like they might be
microfossils of some sort.
The argument has raged now for years.
It may rage for years into the future.
The only way we will really know whether this life on Mars
is someday either to go there in person
or send very sophisticated robotic craft
to drill deep into the soil, see where the water is,
look in the basement rocks, really look down,
bring samples back to us for real analysis,
pristine samples, data where we know where we're taking them from.
Either way, we sort of win.
If there's life on Mars, if there was ever life on Mars,
it will tell us something about, eventually,
about how life forms on planets.
If there isn't life on Mars or never was life on Mars,
we wonder, why not?
And we probably treasure ourselves all the more,
so as far as we know, we're the only planet that has it
anywhere in the universe.
To conclude it all, look at them all again, together as a unit.
Little Mercury, big iron ball in the middle, dirt on the outside.
Venus, kind of like Earth, iron core similar to that of the Earth,
a runaway oven, a hot body that was in which the greenhouse effect
simply ran away with itself.
The Earth, with its liquid water and its wonderful atmosphere,
its breathable atmosphere, and then a little bit out to Mars,
a runaway refrigerator.
And we see here a marvelous thing called the Goldilocks effect.
Venus is too hot, Mars is too cold, too far away,
and here we are, the Earth, right in the middle.
There's a little strip around the Sun where we can have liquid water,
which seems, so far as we know, to be what is truly necessary for life.
We can then ask the question, do other stars have planets like our own?
There are other stars which we can tell from this Doppler shift
that do have Jupiter-like planets.
A hundred of them or so have been found.
Do they have Earths?
Maybe, maybe not.
We haven't found any yet.
There are Earths in a water-type zone that is Earths in a zone
in which you can have liquid water.
We don't know.
We don't know whether there's a life anywhere else.
The only place we have found it is in the third planet out from the Sun,
our beautiful precious Earth.
After listening to lecture 10, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Do we have any evidence of past life on Mars?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
We have no evidence at all for past life on Mars.
The so-called microfossils found in the Martian meteorite
could, so far as many scientists are concerned,
have been produced by simple geologic activity.
If there had been life on Mars, we have no idea what form it might have taken.
It might have been something completely alien from what we find here.
We don't know.
This is the fascination of looking for life on another planet.
This ends lecture 10.
Remember to visit this course's web page at www.modernscholar.com
where you'll find additional information about the lectures that you just heard.
