The last lecture we looked at the terrestrial planets, these balls of rock and iron, planets
made of dense, heavy stuff.
Now we take the giant jump out to the monsters of the midway, to Jupiter, to Saturn, to the
big guys of the planetary system, huge planets that dominate everything.
We're having more mass in it than all the other planets roll together.
We'll take a look at the external characteristics of these two planets, compare them, we'll
look at the internal characteristics, see what they're like when we dive down deep inside,
then take a look at their enormous number of moons, and finally at their rings, especially
Saturn's magnificent ring, the one that's known to everybody, and that if anything
else almost defines astronomy.
These planets are really large.
The Earth is the largest of the terrestrial planets.
Jupiter has over 300 times the mass of the Earth.
It's 11 times the diameter of the Earth.
Saturn is almost as big, about 100 times the mass of the Earth, almost 10 times the diameter
of the Earth.
These are truly giant bodies.
They're characterized by cloudy surfaces.
Let's look at Jupiter first, because pretty much what you say about Jupiter is true about
Saturn.
It's really more a matter of degree than anything else.
Jupiter is lined with stripes of cloud belts.
It's a rapidly spinning planet.
In spite of the fact that it's so much larger than the Earth, it spins around in the normal
direction the way same way that the Earth rotates in only nine hours and 55 or so minutes.
It's a very rapid spin.
Given that the planet is 10 times the diameter of the Earth, roughly speaking, its equator
is spinning around at about 20 times the speed of the Earth, or at around 20,000 miles per
hour.
What has happened, then, is to take these clouds and to spin them out into zones that
are parallel to the equator, very different from the cloud bands that we see on the Earth,
where there are these more rotating systems that bring pressure fronts across the United
States and other parts of the world, very different.
The winds at the equator blow at an exceedingly high speed.
In Jupiter, in Jupiter's case, up to about 300 to 400 kilometers per hour, they are really
moving along, which gives the equator of the planet actually a faster rotation speed than
the body of the planet itself.
Embedded within the beautiful cloud belts are colorful swirls and eddies, some of which
come and go, and some of which are at least semi-permanent.
Now in the southern hemisphere of Jupiter, there is a large red spot that astronomers
and all their imagination call the great red spot that is about twice the size of the Earth.
It's a high-pressure kind of storm system that's been there since at least 1670 and
probably before.
We don't have any idea when it's going to go away or even if it's ever going to go away.
It's unique in the planetary system.
There are other storm systems on other planets like this, but they come and go.
Nothing seems to be quite as permanent out there as this great red spot.
Its origin is not understood.
The planet is made largely of hydrogen and helium.
One of the things that characterizes both Jupiter and Saturn is that the chemical composition
is very similar to that of the Sun.
On the average and gross product, 90% hydrogen, 10% helium, and roughly a tenth of a percent
of everything else.
And remember, it's that tenth of a percent out of which the Earth is made, making our
terrestrial planets really quite special indeed.
The clouds, however, are made of ammonia crystals.
It's sort of the same idea we developed with the terrestrial planets.
In the Earth, you have water clouds floating in a nitrogen atmosphere.
On Venus, you have sulfuric acid clouds floating in a carbon dioxide atmosphere.
On Mars, you have a few wispy water and carbon dioxide clouds in a carbon dioxide atmosphere.
On Jupiter, you have ammonia clouds floating in a hydrogen and a little bit of helium atmosphere.
The colors are not very well understood.
It's a very colorful planet with kind of browns and reds, and they are probably produced
by some kind of sulfur compound in the atmosphere that is yet to be identified.
But it is a really noxious place to be because not only have we found the ammonia crystal
clouds but all manner of hydrocarbons as well, methane, propane, acetylene, all manner of
stuff that your local oil company would really like to get their hands on if they could,
but it's a long piping job and we're unlikely ever to mine a planet like this.
Below the ammonia clouds are other cloud decks that may even include a water cloud
deck although that's a little bit uncertain at this point.
When we dive into the clouds, we find that the cloud belts and the atmosphere, the gaseous
atmosphere of the planet is roughly a thousand kilometers deep, much, much deeper than we
have on the Earth.
You never get to a solid surface.
You'll occasionally hear people say, how much would you weigh on Jupiter?
Well in a sense you'd weigh nothing because you'd drop right into the clouds and fall
and never find a solid surface within there anywhere.
Jupiter and Saturn are sometimes called the gas giants which is partly true because there's
a lot of gas there in the atmosphere but really they should probably be called the liquid
giants because the theory at least shows that as you go into the planet the temperature
and the pressure both go up but the pressure eventually dominates and turns that hydrogen
into a liquid mush.
The hydrogen, like the oxygen of the Earth, is in its molecular form.
It's H2, that's H sub 2, molecular hydrogen, not dealing with the isotope here, molecular
hydrogen in the atmosphere that turns into liquid molecular hydrogen about a thousand
kilometers down, probably in kind of a gradual way.
It's nothing like an ocean that you could, if you don't want to even think about swimming
in it, deeper in, not terribly far in, the liquid molecular hydrogen turns into a metallic
state.
A metal is sort of loosely defined as a substance that can conduct electricity, a transfer of
electrons from one atom to the next and electricity will flow.
This means you have an electrically conducting medium.
We have never been that far inside of Jupiter, in fact the best we've done is to drop a probe
into the cloud belts and the probe immediately disappeared and was crushed.
There was no way of getting deep inside.
So we have to rely on theory to understand what is deep inside these planets.
Inside is this liquid molecular hydrogen, Jupiter is spinning so fast that the electrically
conducting fluid then generates a very powerful magnetic field.
Jupiter has a magnetic field over 10 times greater than that of the Earth, a truly powerful
field that has some interesting ramifications when we start looking at going back to the
external part of the planet and looking at the satellites.
Deep down inside is probably an Earth-like core, not really like the Earth, but made
of kind of the same chemicals as the Earth.
Rock, silicon, silicates, heavy stuff, iron, nickel, that kind of thing, of probably about
15 times the mass of the Earth.
So around that Earth-like core, and we can't carry that analogy too far, we have this huge
ball of hydrogen and helium in the liquid state topped by a gaseous atmosphere, which
is topped by ammonia clouds.
Jupiter has a curious radiation pattern.
All planets shine in the optical part of the spectrum that you can see with the eyes by
reflected light.
But Jupiter is also a powerful radio source, it's one of the strongest radio sources in
the sky.
There are three sources of radio emission from the planet.
One is what we call thermal radiation, that is the planet simply radiates energy because
it's hot.
Well, hot, it's not very hot, the temperature is only a little bit above 100 degrees Kelvin,
but it's warm enough to emit considerable amount of infrared and certainly radio radiation.
We'll get to the other components of it later.
We can measure the temperature of Jupiter from the amount of radiation that it emits.
You can also calculate the temperature that Jupiter should have on the basis of solar heating.
The remarkable thing is the temperature is about 15 degrees Kelvin higher than it ought
to be, which shows us that Jupiter is actually self-luminous, it's actually emitting some
of its own radiation.
Sure, the Earth does too to a tiny degree in terms of heat vented from volcanoes, but
it is a terribly small amount.
Jupiter, on the other hand, is emitting somewhere around half as much radiation as it gets from
this, half as much radiation again as it gets from the sun.
It's self-luminous in the radio part of the spectrum.
If you could switch the sun off, Jupiter would disappear optically.
You couldn't see it anymore, but it would still glow in the dark as an infrared and
radio emitter.
How can this be so?
What is causing the radiation?
It's a big body.
It's still contracting from the time of its formation four and a half billion years ago
and trading gravitational energy for heat, which then leaks out of the planet.
As long as it's slightly shrinking down, it'll keep radiating four and a half billion years
after its formation, it's still a cooling body and still radiating itself away.
Surrounding the planet is an enormous magnetosphere.
The magnetosphere is the magnetic field that is filled with particles from the solar wind
that is shaped by particles slamming in from the solar wind.
It is a powerful belt of particle energy, lethal to a human being.
Our astronauts, when they went to the moon, passed through the Earth's Van Allen belts,
which are similar to what Jupiter has, but they went through them so fast that it didn't
affect them.
You don't want to live in them for any period of time, but you can pass through them with
little difficulty.
You probably couldn't.
The radiation field within Jupiter's magnetic field is certainly lethal to a human for almost
any level of exposure.
No astronaut is going to visit close up the Jupiter.
Even the robotic craft that have gotten too close have been partially damaged by the radiation
field of Jupiter.
This radiation field, that is, this magnetosphere that's filled with the particles, produces
another kind of powerful radio radiation.
It's called synchrotron energy, synchrotron radiation, because it's similar to the kind
of radiation that might be produced on some kind of atomic accelerator.
You have magnetic field lines and electrons that are trapped in them, spiral around like
crazy at near the speed of light, and they emit radiation as they go into a very different
kind of radiation than you observe from a hot body.
We have two kinds of radio radiation.
The hot body radiation, thermal radiation, the synchrotron radiation.
In addition, Jupiter's inner satellite, Io, is so close that it orbits inside Jupiter's
radiation belts.
There is a powerful electric current that actually passes between Jupiter and its innermost satellite
that produces sudden and powerful radio bursts, almost like lightning bursts that you would
get on a standard radio when listening to your music from the earth.
All three of these are picked up from earth, and making Jupiter one of the brightest radio
sources in the entire sky.
Saturn is similar.
Jump ahead just a little bit, and we'll kind of go back and forth between the two.
It's kind of fun to compare them.
Saturn has a mass that is about one-third that of Jupiter, yet it's almost the size
of Jupiter.
An interesting thing happens when you make a transition from the big planet to the smaller
one, one that gives us a powerful lesson for when we begin to talk about the next two
planets out, Uranus and Neptune.
What would happen if you could strip mass off of Jupiter?
It would seem as if you'd get a smaller planet.
The radius would go down, and to some degree that's true, but you're also diminishing the
gravitational field of the planet, which is what holds the planet together, and a lower
gravitational field allows the planet to puff back up some.
So the result then going from Jupiter to Saturn is a lowering of the density of the
planet rather than much lowering the radius of the planet.
Saturn then becomes the least dense planet in the solar system.
Jupiter's average density is a little bit greater than that of water, showing that it's
largely made out of light stuff.
Saturn's is only seven-tenths that of water.
As the saying goes, if you get a bathtub big enough, you could put Saturn in it, and it
would float.
And it's just simply a result of the fact that Jupiter and Saturn are made out of the
same thing.
Saturn's smaller mass instead gives it a lower density rather than a much smaller radius.
The cloud belts of Saturn are there, but they're nowhere near as strong as the ones we see
on Jupiter.
We again have ammonia crystal clouds floating in a hydrogen helium atmosphere, and the internal
structure of the planet is about the same as that of Jupiter.
And as farther from the Sun, the magnetic field is weaker, the magnetosphere is weaker,
everything seems to be somewhat diminished when it comes to this next largest of the
planets of the solar system.
The cloud belts are partially hidden by a methane haze, which makes them a little bit
more difficult to see.
We don't see the storm system so much, not certainly no permanent storm system, but seasonally
Saturn takes about 30 years to go around the Sun, Jupiter about 12 seasonally, a white
storm system develops on Saturn called, as astronomers can only call it, the great white
spot instead of course the great red spot, which strips itself around the planet.
Saturn oddly enough has equatorial winds that blow considerably faster than Jupiters
for reasons that are not understood.
They're blowing at the order of somewhere over a thousand kilometers per second, much
higher than that of Jupiter.
We do not know why.
Come back to Jupiter now.
Both of these planets have extensive satellite systems.
We sometimes call natural satellite systems.
The inner planets do not have satellite systems like that.
The Earth has a satellite, and you don't want to call it an unnatural satellite, but it
wasn't formed with the Earth.
We think our Moon was formed in a giant collision between a almost planetary sized body and
the Earth in the primitive days, something we'll talk about at the last lecture.
The outer Mars has two small satellites that are probably captured asteroids.
Then you go out to the giant planets, and they have enormous numbers of satellites that
orbit in the planet's equatorial belt.
That is, they orbit parallel to the planet's equator.
There's no point in even telling how many there are.
Classically, Jupiter's got 16 reasonably decent satellites that can be more or less
seen from the Earth.
Four giant ones, and then a dozen smaller ones.
But if you give any kind of number, which will number in the tens and the tens and eventually
into the hundreds, it would be wrong, because we keep discovering new ones, and what do
you call a satellite, and what don't you call a satellite?
This is something this big a satellite, eventually we'll find basically rocks in orbit about
the planet.
So, there's little point in talking about the number.
It simply doesn't mean anything anymore.
Galileo saw them for the first time, the four big ones.
These are the ones we really need to concentrate on.
They are roughly half a million to two million kilometers away from the planet, and orbit
in periods of about two days, roughly to two weeks.
They can easily be seen not just in a small telescope, but even simple binoculars will
show them to you.
If Jupiter weren't there, they'd be visible to the naked eye.
They're so bright.
But Jupiter's glare simply blocks them from that kind of view, but if you steadily hold
binoculars to Jupiter, you will see one or two or three, maybe even four little points
of light spreading out.
But any small telescope of the cheapest variety will show the satellites.
After all, Galileo saw them with this little 28-power telescope with a lens only about
this big.
They're fascinating to watch because you can actually see them orbit even over the course
of a night.
You can see them shift positions.
Sometimes they'll be on one side of the planet, sometimes they'll be split, sometimes they'll
be on the other side of the planet.
They go in order outward, I.O., spelled I.O., simple enough, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto,
all four having something to do with the mythology of the god Jupiter.
The innermost and the second one out, I.O. and Europa, are large bodies.
They're approximately the size of the Earth's moon.
Ganymede and Callisto are truly planetary-sized bodies.
They're roughly the size of the planet Mercury, which gives you a sense of just how large
Jupiter really is to have Mercury-sized bodies as satellites in orbit around it.
All four of these have unique properties.
The densities drop from the inside out.
They are, in a sense, Jupiter's little planets.
They are to Jupiter as the planets are to the sun and may have been formed in very much
the same way.
One of the oddest bodies of the entire planetary system is the innermost satellite, I.O.
If there is any vision of Dante's hell in the solar system, it is I.O.
with hot, sulfur-filled volcanoes.
It is the most volcanic body that we know of, a remarkable, remarkable satellite.
The volcanoes are active even as we look at them.
Hubble Space Telescope has seen them pop off.
The Voyager, the Galileo spacecraft that has been orbit around Jupiter, has seen them
pop off.
Very dangerous place.
No astronaut is ever going to think of landing on I.O.
Not only are you going to be in Jupiter's intense radiation bath, but a volcano could
literally erupt beneath your feet at any moment.
They're silicon volcanoes, kind of like they are on the Earth, but they seem to be loaded
with sulfur, which gives I.O. kind of a yellowish color.
Why should that be so intensely volcanic?
There is a curious relationship in the orbital periods between I.O., Europa, and Ganymede.
For every time I.O. goes around four times, Europa goes around two times, and Ganymede
goes around once, and it is a perfect locking.
This is an example in planetary dynamics of what is called a resonance.
Going out and pushing somebody on a swing, your little brother, perhaps, or your son
or your daughter, push on the swing.
Now the swing has a natural period to it.
If you push erratically, you can't get the swing going, and you're certainly going to
annoy the person who's on the swing.
If you really want to get the swing going, you push with the rhythm of the swing, and
you can bring the swing up to very, very high proportions.
That's what's going on here.
Each satellite has a gravitational effect on the other satellites, but if they're in
this synchronous kind of rotation, in this resonance, resonant orbital revolution rather,
you build up gravitational perturbations on each of the satellites.
Io has, if left alone, would have a circular orbit about the planet, but the resonance
allows the orbit of Io to change a little bit.
It's so close to Jupiter that Jupiter raises intense tides on Io.
Now if the tide were left alone, that's fine, it would just cause a misshapen satellite,
but the satellite is being pulled back and forth, which changes the strength of the tide.
Go to a grocery store.
You want to buy an orange?
What do you do?
You want a good orange?
You want to squeeze.
When you squeeze the orange, you actually heat it up a little bit.
Now it's not terribly noticeable in the grocery store, but if you had magic hands and went
to the grocery store and picked up the orange and squeezed it at a megahertz a million times
per second, you would pump so much energy into that orange that the orange juice would
boil and pop through the surface as an orange juice volcano, and that's exactly what is
happening on Io because of the intense squeezing that is caused by the tidal forces.
That was actually predicted before it was seen by the Voyager spacecraft, and what
a stir it caused when all of these volcanoes erupting, pools, what appeared to be almost
pools of liquid sulfur, lakes of liquid stuff before it finally solidifies, the deadliest
place in the planetary system outside, of course, of landing on the sun itself.
You move out to Europa, things have quieted down a little bit, although it's still an
active body because it's being squeezed a little bit too, but no, we're near as much
as Io.
Io is basically a rocky body.
It has something of the natures of the interior planets.
Europa also somewhat, but more watery.
It's cold out in the outer part of the planetary system.
Ice can form vast amounts of water in the form of ice.
Europa seems to have a deep liquid ocean on top of a rocky core surrounded by an icy
crust.
If you look at the surface of it, we've seen these very close up, especially with the Galileo
spacecraft.
It looks very much like ice that's rafted upon itself and is constantly shifting position.
Now, the magnetic field also implies that there is a saline kind of ocean underneath
there.
An ocean, liquid water, it's got to be warm.
Suddenly what pops into mind?
Where did life maybe form on the Earth, maybe in the oceans?
Does Europa have life?
Is this one possibility in the solar system that we haven't really examined?
A lot of scientists are interested in drilling through that ice and seeing what's in the
water below.
It's at least one small, certainly small, but one small possibility as a reservoir of
life.
Maybe we have the Earth, maybe we have Mars, maybe not, maybe we have Europa, maybe not.
It is one of the smoother bodies in the planetary system as well.
It's all, the ice is simply, the heat from the inside has produced kind of a smooth surface
on it.
Ganymede and Callisto farther out bear the scars of this heavy bombardment, the same
thing that caused the craters on the moon, the craters on the southern part of Mars,
the craters on Mercury.
They're heavily cratered, but what do we see but giant skating rinks?
These satellites are roughly half water ice.
Their densities are quite low.
There doesn't seem to be, there may be an iron core in some of these, but it's really
the ice that counts and they're glazed with an icy surface and we see craters in the ice
from billions of years ago.
Ice is very strong at these temperatures when you're only dealing with temperatures of maybe
100 degrees above, 100 Kelvin degrees above absolute zero.
And the craters last literally forever, a little soft perhaps at huge basins created
and carved out of the ice.
Jupiter's also got four medium sized satellites that orbit inside Io, a yet deadlier place,
and then way, way out there is another quartet of satellites and yet another quartet of satellites
that orbit in the backward direction, they're probably captured asteroids, nobody knows,
and then dozens of little things that we are discovering.
The closer we look, the more satellites we find.
It's the big four, however, that count.
And the inside, little particles are always hitting the inner satellites and knocking
pieces off them, which generates a debris ring around Jupiter.
Yes, Jupiter has rings.
You can't see them from Earth very well.
In fact, it's extremely difficult to see them from Earth.
They were discovered with a Voyager spacecraft.
The real rings, however, belong to the next one out to Saturn, making the planet one of
the most beautiful objects in the planetary system.
I have known students to look through modest sized telescopes at Saturn and then look at
the professor and say, oh, you're kidding, you've painted that on, haven't you?
I'm looking at a slide, aren't I?
No, no, no.
It really does look like it's pictures in a telescope.
It's well worth finding some of the telescope, run it up to reasonably high power and look
at those beautiful rings.
They are extraordinary.
Rings, yes.
It's not one ring.
There are multiple rings in orbit about the planet.
Yes, in orbit.
They have to be.
Otherwise, of course, they would fall inward and they follow Kepler's laws.
The outer part of the ring is going around with a longer period than the inner parts
of the rings, showing that they are not solid, something known as long ago as the 19th century.
They consist of countless numbers, trillions, if not more, of ice-coated rocks, probably
not much bigger than this, up to maybe meter-wide boulders.
All in orbit about the planet, all colliding with one another, of course, all the time,
perhaps consolidating, perhaps grinding themselves down, very bright.
These rings are over twice the radius of Saturn itself.
When they are fully open and more or less pointed at the Earth, they make Saturn twice
as bright as it would be without the rings.
Now, Saturn has an obliquity of its ecliptic of around 25 degrees or so, rounding it off.
That means that as Saturn goes around the Sun, it first presents the southern part of
the rings to the viewer, and then later the northern part of the rings to the viewer.
And twice in that 30-year period, the rings are exactly edge-on.
And when the rings are edge-on, they disappear.
They're gone.
You can't see them.
The rings are the thinnest things we know of.
If you went to your average football field and you laid a piece of paper, kept stitching
pieces of paper, and laid it out over the entire field, that would roughly approximate
the thinnest of Saturn's rings.
They're probably no more than a couple of hundred meters thick, and yet twice the diameter
of Saturn itself.
It's kind of frustrating, in fact, if you want to show someone or a student or a friend
Saturn's rings, you point the telescope at Saturn and you hit it at that period when
the rings are edge-on.
Kind of embarrassing.
Saturn doesn't have any rings tonight.
Let me tell you how unusual and how odd that is, and you try to get out of the situation
as fast as you can.
Come back a year later, there are the rings again.
There are multiple rings.
They're called, logically, the A, B, and the C ring.
They're divided by gaps.
The A and the B ring are divided by what is called the Cassini division.
It's a very dark band where there are none of these tiny moonlets.
They're simply absent, or at least diminished within that ring.
Another example of a resonance.
Within that Cassini division where there are fewer particles, the orbital period is a simple
fraction that of one or two of the satellites, and the satellite's gravitational field simply
clears it out.
There's another division farther out where there is a satellite, and the satellite, as
it orbits about the planet, simply cleans the ring particles out like a vacuum cleaner.
It just sweeps them up.
Looking at the rings very close up, you see multiple ringlets, dozens, hundreds of individual
ringlets, all of which are hardly explained.
Some of them are due to resonances.
Some of them are probably due to large moonlets that are embedded.
The rings are very stable because if a particle strays out, it'll go up in an inclined orbit
and then pass through the rings again.
It'll collide with a ring particle and stick back in the rings again, so the rings maintain
their stability.
We don't entirely know what made them, but the best idea is probably that an inner satellite
got hit by something large and got broken up, and then additional collisions simply
grounded down literally into a powder, producing these bright ice-coated rocks that we see
as the Saturnian rings.
Saturn also has multiple satellites, too many to count.
Any number you give would eventually be wrong, there's no point to it, but an easy dozen
or 18 that can be reasonably well considered as decent-sized satellites, and what a zoo
it is.
The biggest is called Titan.
It's the second largest satellite in the planetary system, just a little bit in back of Ganymede,
approximately the size of Mercury, and to make it unique, it's the only satellite with
a thick atmosphere.
We see a little bit of an atmosphere around some of the Jovian satellites, but this one
has an atmosphere that's one and a half times the pressure of the Earth's.
It's largely nitrogen, but filled with methane and all kinds of other hydrocarbons, and there
is some sense that on Titan, it rains methane or even ethane, and some theoreticians have
even predicted a hydrocarbon ocean on the surface of the satellite.
We can't tell because of the methane haze.
The hydrocarbons under the action of sunlight produce a smog very much like the one that
hangs over a large city like Los Angeles.
You fly above LA at some point, it's kind of hard to see the mountains or maybe even
the ground, the same thing happens on Titan, where the ground is entirely hidden because
of the thick smog.
We'll know eventually because the Cassini spacecraft will drop a probe onto the surface
of the satellite, and we will finally see what is on it in a few years.
We have seen these planets close up by means of the Voyager spacecraft.
We have sent the Galileo spacecraft as well to Jupiter.
They have all taken close up images, far better than anything we can see from our own planet.
We will eventually send more orbiting craft around these planets and get to know them
better and better.
Why do we want to know them?
Well, look, we now only have two giant planets with a strange meteorology.
Now, if we can begin to understand something of the meteorology and the climate patterns
on Jupiter and Saturn, that will eventually lead us back into understanding the climate
patterns on our own planet.
As everybody knows, weather forecasting is as much of an art as it is a science.
It's a difficult thing to do because there are still many things we don't understand
about our own atmosphere and our own atmospheric circulation.
Studies of the outer planets are natural experiments which will help us do so.
Not only do we have Jupiter and Saturn, but we've got these five large satellites and
many, many smaller ones.
Saturn has just got such a weird set.
There is one that has no rotation period.
It just sort of randomly spins in a chaotic fashion.
There's one that's half bright, half dark.
There's one that looks like it's right out of Star Wars, a monster satellite that looks
like this death star in the movie.
It's just an amazing thing to look at.
They're all different as opposed to Jupiter satellites which are at least have some kind
of coherence to them.
Saturn doesn't, for reasons that we really don't understand.
We're taking ourselves out now to 10 astronomical units away from the Sun.
We're going farther and farther away into depths of the planetary system where sunlight
is dropping off more and more.
Our next visit is going to be Uranus and Neptune where we will begin to put Jupiter and Saturn
and the terrestrial planets into a little bit better context and finally work our way out
to the very end in the next lecture to mysterious Pluto.
Is it a planet?
Isn't a planet?
Or not?
Wait and find out.
After listening to lecture 11, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
How is it that the rings of Saturn hold their shape?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
They are dynamically stable as thin systems.
They automatically pull themselves into this thin pattern and part is due to the collisions
among the particles, I believe, that if they are thick, then the particles are coming in
at an angle and they hit other particles and that flattens the whole thing out.
So it's a dynamically very stable system.
When you get farther away from Saturn, the rings actually extend out far beyond what
we see with a telescope.
There are additional dusty rings farther out and they're much thicker than the inner rings.
They're dangerous places, these rings.
We have to be very careful with spacecraft.
They are so thin that as they're so thickly spread with particles that no spacecraft could
actually pass through Saturn's rings.
We had to be careful about taking the Voyager spacecraft that visited Saturn back in the
1970s and make sure they went through the ring plane way outside the apparent rings.
Even then, they got dinged a little bit by some of the dust particles way out there.
This ends lecture 11.
