Hello, I'm Charles Matthews, a teacher at the University of Virginia, and I'm delighted
to be teaching this course about how humans in the West have thought about evil.
The 20th century Polish poet Zbigniew Hebert, survivor of the Nazis and the Soviet Union,
once wrote,
Teachers in our high schools pound into us that history is the teacher of life.
But when history crashed down on us in all its brutal glory, I understood in the very
real glow of flames above my home city that she was a strange teacher.
She gave to the people who consciously survived her and to all who followed her more material
for thought than all the old chronicles put together, a dense and dark material.
It will require the work of many consciences to shed light on it.
This is our task to shed light on some of the most profound questions of human history
and most fundamentally the question of the problem of evil.
Hebert was no little intellect.
He was one of the most powerful poets of Polish writing, world poetry for that matter.
His poems were used as anthems for the Polish Solidarity Movement in the 1970s and 80s and
in fact we'll be looking at some of his own work later in the lecture course near the end.
He's a remarkably far-seeing thinker.
The passage in particular that we just read is powerfully brooding.
Consider it for a second.
What does it mean to call history a strange teacher?
It means that it's cunning, that it teaches by indirection, by surprise, by pain, not
by direct lessons, clearly and lucidly articulated by school teachers at the fronts of classrooms
and readily digested by attentive students sitting neatly in rows.
What does it mean to say that the material it gives us is dense and dark?
That language suggests it's more than merely grim or merely savage, that it's something
that is very difficult to understand, requiring serious effort from many people working in
many different ways.
Among these people are you and I and in these lectures this is our task to shed light on
some of the most profound questions of human history and most fundamentally the question
of the problem of evil.
Now particularly in the last hundred years or so thinkers have made repeated attempts
directly and indirectly to come to grips with this question.
Hannah Arendt, another thinker who we'll be looking at later in these lectures, once
wrote that the central problem for post-World War II intellectuals will be the problem
of evil, but it didn't turn out that way.
Thinkers of the era didn't spend much time thinking about human malice and the suffering
it creates at all.
Such a head in the sand attitude is not unique to thinkers in the post-war era.
Arendt's point after all was an implicit criticism of those pre-war intellectuals who had not
taken seriously the challenge of human evil, telling themselves that surely World War I
had convinced humanity that savagery of that sort was never a suitable strategy.
And of course World War I came as a near total surprise to thinkers as well who had imagined
that such savagery as was unleashed in that conflict had been carefully bred out of or
civilized out of Europe, at least Europe at any rate, by the long peace of the 19th century.
Indeed, we don't have to look deep in the past for this pattern.
The same thing was happening in the 1990s for those of us whose memories go that far
back.
The habitual avoidance of evil suggests something important about thinking about evil, namely
that it is difficult and painful work, and much of the time we would rather spend our
energies avoiding thinking about this problem rather than confronting it.
So if we don't discipline ourselves into thinking about it, our mind will gradually
drift away to reflect on other things.
If discipline and focus are what we need, that is what we will get in these lectures.
This lecture series looks at how humans, especially in the West over the past five millennia,
have thought about the origins and the nature of evil.
Why does evil exist?
What exactly is evil?
What is its nature?
Is it something primitive in human psychology?
Is it something distinctly humanly civilized, some dimension of human life, that is, in
some important way, a function of humans living together in society?
Is it somehow superhuman, something that exists outside of humans but manages from time to
time to take control of us in some demonic possession?
Is evil necessarily part of the cosmos, an inevitable part of it?
Or is it somehow something that we created and thus can, in some way, possibly constrain,
manage, reduce, slowly let wither away back to nothingness?
And how should we live in the shadow of evil, however we conceive of it?
These are the questions we'll see these thinkers and these texts asking and attempting to answer.
To begin with, let's try to offer a provisional definition of evil.
This is complicated, so bear with me for a second here.
Let's say that evil is something that is not just against the moral order, something that's
not just wrong, however you construe that moral order, but intentionally and willfully
against that order.
That evil, that is, has a dimension of willfulness and rebellion.
Now let me be clear, this rebellion needn't be directly experienced as rebellion by those
engaged in it.
People can do evil without thinking too much about the acts that they do.
Indeed, often that's the worst kind.
Lots of people participated in really savage forms of evil in the 20th century, genocidal
oppression, horrible forms of racism, other kinds of abuse of ethnic minorities, and many
of those people, especially if they had been brought up in those cultures, did not understand
what they were doing as violating the moral order.
They understood themselves to be obeying the moral order.
And those people thinking about what they were doing as evil was not a possibility in
their minds.
Now from the outside, thinking about what they did, we see what they're doing as evil,
and maybe them later on can see what they're doing as evil.
Albert Speer, the great architect of the Third Reich, the leading artist of the Third
Reich, really, of Hitler's world, and also eventually the director of war munitions and
supplies for the Third Reich.
But a cultured, educated, and civilized man, a man who survived the war and lived for 25
years in Spandau Prison in Berlin for his part in the Holocaust and in the Third Reich's
many crimes, a part he freely admitted and owned up to.
At one point after the war, Speer was asked by someone, how is it possible that you worked
with Hitler and did not realize how evil what he was proposing was?
And Speer said something that was very interesting, it's reported to have said something.
He said, it's hard to know the devil when his hand is on your shoulder.
Part of the power of evil is the way it insinuates itself intimately into people's lives.
And so often, people don't, in fact, experience what they're doing as evil.
But when we think about acts of evil considered as just that, as acts of evil, even when their
perpetrators didn't recognize them as such, such acts of evil, in their very essence,
as I propose, are attempts actively to reject the moral order, even if the people who do
them don't understand themselves to be doing that.
And similarly, when we ask about the problem of human suffering, we need to narrow our
focus a bit there as well.
Suffering of the sort we want to investigate here strikes us as excessive or gratuitous,
as not necessary.
We're talking about pain that seems pointless or useless in some sense, pain that is inflicted
for no point at all.
One of the greatest thinkers on this character of suffering is a man named Emmanuel Levinas.
We'll be reading, talking about some of his work near the end of this course as well.
Now in thinking about evil and pain in this way, we can distinguish between three large
families of theories about evil, each with its advantages and difficulties.
Let me quickly say something about each of these, which we'll see manifest in many of
the people who are coming up.
First, there's the account of evil that locates it centrally in a kind of folly, as a wholly
irrational, senseless eruption of chaos in an ordered world.
Evil here is somehow against the order of the cosmos itself.
As such, some thinkers in this tradition have talked about evil as privational, as depriving
creation of goodness and being, depriving reality itself of some dimension or thickness
or depth of reality.
Not introducing some positive evil into the world, but simply annihilating some of the
good things that are there.
Now many thinkers have explored this vision, but from my money, the most profound and far
thinking one has been Augusta, the Roman Christian bishop of the fourth and fifth centuries.
Now this is ultimately a very optimistic and hopeful vision, though it also suggests a
certain truly disturbing capacity on the part of creatures to revolt against the moral order
that they inhabit.
The advantages of this account are many, but one of the most profound is that this picture
is actually quite psychologically illuminating.
Small children don't know why they do mean things, and in general, evil deeds are always
done for reasons that when we query them, when we ask about why someone did something,
these reasons never quite manage to seem as intelligent or rational to us upon reflection
as they did at the time we did them.
However, this account does have its problems.
One big difficulty with it is that it is perhaps too theoretical, too abstract, and because
of that, possibly too escapist.
After all, while it may be very metaphysically reassuring to talk about evil as the absence
of being, it's not clear how that idea helps someone confronting a killer or someone trying
to think about the vast scope of evil and genocide in the century just past.
The very theoretical profundity of the account that is may lead it to be a little distant
from practical application.
And this gets to a second challenge for this view, one that is experienced, one that is
encountered really as a practical challenge, and then reaching out from that practical
challenge to really threaten the very theoretical core of this interpretation of evil.
And that challenge is this.
Can this picture really account for the positive power of evil?
It's demonic character.
The way that evil sometimes has a terrible sincerity around it.
It's hard to see how you can talk about a Rwandan genocider, that is, one of the people
who was involved in the genocide in Rwanda.
How you can talk about a genocider swinging a machete or even an ordinary criminal in
an alley as somehow absent of being.
The problem with both really seems to be that they're all too present.
So this picture has some insights, but also has some challenges to face.
A second view does not see evil as essentially against the cosmos, opposed to the cosmos,
but rather sees it as fundamentally part of the cosmos itself, part of our natural makeup.
On this naturalist account, which prides itself on its cold-eyed realism, evil is simply one
of the energies that we must acknowledge and reign in as best we can.
Thinkers who fit roughly in this picture would include the Greek historian and political
thinker Thucydides, perhaps the philosopher Aristotle, some thinkers in the Jewish rabbinic
tradition, and some modern thinkers like Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud.
The insight of this view is paradoxically how it helps us to domesticate evil, as it were,
precisely by rendering evil somehow part of our natural character.
It does not appear here with any satanic magnificence or with any kind of alienated theological aroma.
It's really a part of our world, and that very grim thought that evil is in fact all too human
can become, if you think about it, a right these thinkers propose.
The source of some real hope.
For if evil cannot be defeated or driven out of our world totally, then its home is our world.
At least we are facing a struggle with a force that is nothing other than ourselves.
It's a force that is human-sized.
The difficulty here is that this view's hope may seem finally inadequate to some people.
After all, what is the hope a hope for?
That we can hold off evil for the moment?
That seems unlikely to mobilize enough energy for us to do much more than resist it at the instant that we meet it.
To do more to really confront the roots of evil, it seems like we need other energies
that can drive us forward.
Furthermore, this accounts cold-eyed realism may hide the way that it suggests to us,
it insinuates to us, that evil may not be as terrible as we experience it as being.
That is to say, by talking about evil as natural and by domesticating evil in this way,
we are offered a comforting disillusionment of knowing that the world is not as bad as we maybe thought it was.
It might be a harder world, but it's not as terrifying, these thinkers are saying.
But what do we do with our experience, experience that some of us have had,
and all of us can imagine having, of encountering evil that seems not to be so domesticated?
What can we say about the idea of a demonic force of evil?
Just as the first then, this one too has some insights and some challenges.
Now the third account may seem initially odd to you, but I think in fact it is more common than you might realize.
And that is what we can call the evil as maturation account.
This account builds itself up around a paradox, that is to become fully grown up,
some painful separation from our too familiar, too cozy original surroundings may be necessary.
Just as teenagers rebel against their parents in order to gain their own sense of identity,
so our moral maturation requires a kind of rebellion against God or the moral order, however one thinks about that,
a kind of wounding in order to come to gain wisdom.
This is a very old theory of evil.
The Greek Christian bishop Irenaeus of Lyon in the second century of the common era,
and the 19th century German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel offered accounts of this.
And I propose to you that in fact this account today is quite common.
The advantage of this view lies in the way it captures a certain dimension of evil's reality.
Certainly it's true that some evil is clearly a matter of trying to lash out at the world in misconstrued anger at it.
Certainly sometimes people try to gain a sense of their identity by estranging themselves
from the two comforting confines of the world that they presently inhabit.
But the disadvantage of this view lies in what we may call its partiality.
It may be right that some evil turns out to be for our edification, but all evil.
People who talk about this view talk about the world and the world's sufferings as a veil of soul-making.
A site wherein we are taught to become human beings.
But there are lots of people in the world whom evil doesn't ultimately help grow up.
There are lots of people in the world whom evil stops before they grow up.
For those people, it seems this account is not just cold comfort.
It might be actually obscene.
But we're not only interested in these theoretical insights.
We're also concerned with the practical advice recommended to deal with the challenge of evil in the way that these thinkers construe that challenge.
In other words, it's not enough to know how exactly someone theoretically talks about evil.
You have to see how that theoretical picture of what evil is and how it relates to humans
interlocks with a set of practical proposals about how to respond to this reality.
The practical and the theoretical are actually two sides of the same coin,
and changes in one's formulation affects the other's formulation.
So you have to understand both to understand either.
Whether we can test evil by direct confrontation, by aggressively arming ourselves against it in some way.
By trying to absorb it into ourselves as marks of our glorious martyrdom for our God.
Whether we develop techniques to resist its assaults on us by nonviolent practices in which we must be trained.
These and many other kinds of practical proposals are all intimately related to a theoretical,
to particular theoretical visions of what evil is for each of these thinkers.
And that's the story that this lecture series tells.
The attempt of human thinking in the West to come to terms with the full reality of evil as it presents itself to us in our lived experience.
Now, let me say something about the overall story we'll be telling in these lectures and note some of the highlights of what's to come.
Roughly, we're going to look at and tell the story of how a series of accounts challenge one another
and are challenged by the reality as they confront and that provoke them into thinking about evil.
We're going to start 6,000 or so years ago in the ancient Near East with some of the oldest stories we have in human history.
We're going to work our way through the scriptural heritage of the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament for Christians and the Christian New Testament.
We're going to look at Greco-Roman classical thought.
Attends to all three Abrahamic traditions' ideas about evil as they were formulated in those traditions in late antiquity in the Middle Ages.
Move into the Reformation, the Renaissance, and the Enlightenment.
And culminate in the modern age, ending with the 20th century and our recent struggles with evil, including 9-11 and beyond.
Now, throughout the course, we'll not only study a series of philosophers and theologians on these matters,
we'll also offer many examples from history, literature, religious scriptures, and mythology
in order to make clear some of the more abstract distinctions of philosophers and theologians
and also to challenge those abstract distinctions.
We study these thinkers, these texts, these traditions, not just because it's interesting to know what others thought,
but because it can be enormously useful.
In fact, as we'll see, from the ancient Near East on, humans have always wondered about what other people thought about these problems.
And their own thinking about evil has always gone on against the backdrop of other and previous ways of thinking about it.
That is to say, the activity of asking questions about these questions, the activity of inquiring into the history of thinking about evil,
is as old as the activity of asking these questions itself is.
And in thinking about evil, then, people have always found it useful to learn what others before them had thought as well.
Now, in thinking about these things, we'll find the following dimensions of the question worth considering.
First of all, the question that I'll repeat again and again, even if only occasionally,
because I think this is a really, really deep question for us.
The question of abstraction versus concrete description, abstract thinking versus concrete narration of evils.
We'll see this debate carried out through many, many people in our text.
Plato and Aristotle fight it out over this in some ways.
The 18th century thinkers, 17th, 18th century thinkers, Gottfried Leibniz and Pierre Bale fight it out about this issue.
The issue is this. Can theory, can a theoretical representation of evil capture the full reality of evil?
Can it capture its depth and its breadth?
That is, is it possible for a theory to accommodate the enormously different empirical realities that we name with the term evil?
Can any theory account for how to connect up genocides of international scale on one side and parents who beat their children on the other?
Can any theory account for all that? Hard to know.
A second challenge is the question of whether or not evil is transcendent or mundane.
We saw that already.
What is the relationship between evil and the gods or God, or however one construes the absolute moral order or divinity that surrounds the cosmos?
Or if one does it all.
Might evil be something that God plans out in advance?
Might evil have a positive function in the moral structure of the cosmos?
Here, there's a debate going back to, again, the Christian theologian and bishop Irenaeus and leading into the 20th century.
Is it possible, as very many Christians have said for a long time, and as certain liturgies, certain practices of worship in the Christian church have suggested,
that the fall of humans, that evil's introduction to the cosmos is, as the Latin phrase puts it, a Felix culpa, a happy fault.
Is there some way in which the fall itself was used by God to elevate humanity above what it would have been otherwise?
A third question is the question of whether or not evil is in some way a healthy part of our world or something that is wholly destructive and parasitic on it.
Thinkers like Augustine and Nietzsche would be useful here.
There's a question also about whether or not evil is natural or a violation of nature.
Not the debate that we'll see coming up with Plato and Aristotle, not too far away in our lectures.
Another question that's become increasingly important in the last century is whether evil is a matter of barbarism versus civilization?
Or whether civilization is itself, in some complicated way, complicit in evil?
Whether civilization, human civilization, might itself be, in some important way, a function of evil?
Remember, early as we go back to say the Hebrew Bible, the Tower of Babel itself, the first genuinely human social event, is precisely designed to be a rebellion against God.
And in the 20th century, lots of thinkers about the Holocaust have suggested that, in fact, the Holocaust itself could not have happened,
absent the conditions of modern societies and civilization.
There are lots of questions of this sort.
What is the relationship between personal evil and communal evil?
How can we think about individual responsibility if evil's corruption affects an entire culture, perhaps our entire species?
Is the naming of evil as itself evil an achievement, someone like Camus would say it is, or an evasion, someone like Freud might say it is?
And most fundamentally of all, is any of this questioning, any of this theoretical activity, really helpful in our attempts to inhabit a world filled with evil?
Or are we just sitting in our armchairs enjoying ourselves with frivolous mental diversions?
All of these very abstract, very general questions will be silently suffusing all these lectures.
I'll only mention them from time to time, but they'll always be in my mind, and so they should be in yours as well.
We're not going to answer the question of why evil exists here.
We're not going to choose one of these rival accounts, as if this were a game show, and the positions described here were contestants.
What I want to do is introduce you to a range of different voices, different ways of talking and thinking about this.
Some of them will sound quite familiar to you from the beginning.
Some of them will sound very novel, perhaps alien to you, but all of them, however distant they may seem, go into the thinking and the speaking that you do about evil.
They give you many of the tools you use in coming to grips with our world's dense and dark material.
Even with 36 lectures, we can't be comprehensive.
There's too many people who have thought about evil, and maybe there's just too much evil to think about.
And anyway, you all have your own private stocks of experiences and insights, thoughts and memories that go into your own thinking.
But our thinking about evil, taken collectively, does have behind it a history of which it is tremendously edifying to be aware.
Now, before I end this lecture, let me return to the passage of Herbert that we began with for a second.
He says something very important there that I want to point out.
He says that his teachers tried to teach him, but he truly learned only from seeing through his own eyes his own city on fire.
And what he learned was not quite what he thought his teachers were trying to teach him, that history was a strange teacher.
In doing this, Herbert suggests some profound tension between the effort at direct teaching and actual learning.
This challenge between what we can call book learning and life experience is one of the deepest we have to face here.
We can't forget the important suspicion that lectures like these, lectures that attempt to glean some morals, some wisdom from human history,
are themselves potentially useless, a dangerous distraction prone to make us focus on trivialities at the cost of losing the larger import of a lesson at hand.
But that's a very abstract challenge, a challenge to the very possibility of a series of lectures like these,
to the possibility that something useful could be communicated through them.
The only real response we have to that is just to go ahead and undertake the lectures,
to see something of the depth and breadth of the ways that humans from 6,000 years ago until today have developed a wide range of ways
of thinking about the nature and origins of evil and attempted to discern the resources we have for dealing with that problem.
And that's what we'll turn to next.
