Welcome back.
In this lecture, I want to talk about two of the oldest, if not the oldest, sources
of human thinking about evil.
The creation myth of Babylon that we know as the Enuma Elish, and one of the earliest
stories about a human facing the challenge of making meaning out of the epic of death
and suffering, the epic of Gilgamesh.
These stories go back many thousands of years, and some of their elements in all likelihood
stretch back into prehistory, 10,000 years or more.
Yet they still have incredible power to provoke thought and perhaps to inform us of important
truths.
These narratives express one of the most fundamental convictions that humans have had, not one
that everyone shares, but one of the most profound ones about evil.
The idea that evil is somehow larger than individual human decisions to be bad, that
somehow evil must predate or precede human malice.
These stories express, that is, an idea that is still powerful for many today, the idea
that evil has a cosmic and perhaps metaphysical reality beyond human being, that evil is
a force or a power or a person.
But it's an idea that need not have all of the same ethical connotations that we commonly
take evil to possess.
Hence, the earliest linguistic precursor we have for our word Satan, the word that we
all typically talk about as the devil, the earliest version of this word actually in
proto-Semitic as far down as linguistic archaeologists have been able to discover, the word is shatan.
And it does not mean fundamentally an evildoer or a devil or a demon or anything like that.
The word shatan simply means rival.
God's rival is how the devil was originally conceived of in these cultures.
And we'll see today that that rivalry is in some ways at the heart of the entirety of
the ancient Near Eastern mythos of creation, a mythos that begins from the idea that humans
are in some sense in a world composed of rival powers of good and evil.
Now these stories also express another fundamental conviction, that it's only experience that
can really teach us about evil and its meanings.
Gilgamesh, in the epic, is a very wise and brave man, but even he is tormented by the
problem of evil and the fact of human suffering in ways that overcome him.
This is a hard lesson, especially for an academic like myself to bear.
But even I can agree with it, at least to this extent.
It's always important, when thinking about evil, to test our more grandiose and abstract
claims about it against the stubborn testimony of lived human experience.
The fundamental judge in all of this must be you and your own experience, but throughout
these lectures I'm going to try to show how historical and fictional narratives and examples
may help illuminate our situation as well.
In this lecture we begin that effort and in doing so we make alive again a line in the
epic of Gilgamesh that remains perhaps my favorite beginning of a story of all time.
That line is, it is an old story, but one that can still be told.
Think about that for a second.
Imagine a small group of people on the side of the Tigris or the Euphrates River, four
thousand years ago.
The evening is coming on, the fish are cooking on the fire, and the people have gathered
again after a long day of fishing and looking in the reeds along the river for animals and
for berries and fruits.
They've gathered to talk and to remember the stories that they were told as children.
And one of them tells the story of Gilgamesh.
That's how old these stories are, and yet they can still be alive for us today.
At least that's my hope.
We'll see how you think about this after the lecture is over.
But the categories of good and evil are present from the earliest civilizations of the ancient
Near East.
As qualities of actors and of persons, our earliest stories talk about good deeds and
bad deeds, good people and malicious people.
Looking at these ancient Near Eastern myths, it's also important to notice that this is
the matrix, this is the context out of which the Hebrew Bible itself emerges.
I'll say more about that in a little bit.
But we did not know much about this matrix, this context, until about 100, 150 years ago
when clay tablets began to appear at archaeological digs that actually told the stories of these
ancient civilizations.
And when they did, they made us realize that the way we had been reading texts, we thought
we knew very well, like the book of Genesis, importantly left stuff out that we couldn't
see was there precisely because they were shadowing the text of Genesis, but not visible inside
those texts.
Now, in calling these stories, the myth of the enumen Elish and the epic of Gilgamesh,
in calling these myths, I'm not trying to be dismissive.
When I say myth, I mean the deep structures of the cultural unconscious, the foundational
narratives and the frames by which people think in these cultures.
People today have myths of similar depth, myths about individual achievement, about
the justice and significance of your own nation in the world, the idea of freedom and how
it is a universal desire of all people, some such ideals.
These myths orient humans in all times to understand the world in certain ways and make some things
obvious to us and some things harder to believe.
Now, central to the ancient Near Eastern world was what scholars have come to call a mythic
pattern called the combat myth.
Now, the combat myth was a fairly common theme across many of these cultures.
Mesopotamian, Hittite, Canaanite stories all tell this story in similar ways.
The story of the cosmos, the universe as a whole, as a site of combat, a battlefield
between good and bad divine powers.
This combat myth gives rise to these cultures' cosmogenes, that is, their stories of how
the world and the cosmos came to be.
Cosmogenes is a word that comes from cosmogenesis.
In this myth, the cosmos is the site or perhaps it's the consequence of a titanic struggle
between the forces of a good God and the forces of a rival evil God.
In fact, this cosmogeny includes in it a theogeny, a theogenesis, a story of the creation of
the gods.
Now, the creation of humanity is normally the final act in the drama that begins with
the origins of these gods.
In these stories, these chaos gods, these early chaos gods are confronted, defeated,
and destroyed by other, often younger, up-and-coming, hero gods.
Now, for our purposes, we'll focus on the Enuma Elish, the Babylonian cosmogony myth.
Here, this is the oldest one we have, and in its deep structures and the elements that
go into its composition, it probably goes way back in prehistory, and it is a classic
case of this combat myth.
But then it attaches an interesting coda to that about how exactly the world came to be.
Let me tell the story now.
Reality begins with two primeval gods, Apsu and Tiamat, those are the two gods.
They create other gods, sort of their children, Ea and his siblings, all of whom live in Tiamat's
body.
They're being nothing outside the gods.
There, they make such a racket, as children will, that they torment Tiamat and Apsu, and
Apsu begins to be so annoyed he decides to kill the young gods.
But Tiamat disagrees with this and warns Ea, her son, who then kills Apsu, the father.
Ea then becomes the chief god, though he doesn't marry his mother.
That's another myth, we'll get to that later.
And he, Ea, has a son named Marduk, the grandson of Tiamat, who is more powerful still than
Ea, or it will turn out, Tiamat.
Now the child Marduk is given winds to play with as a way of amusing himself, and he
uses the winds to make storms, which disturb his elders, just as their frolics had once
upset their parents.
And these gods, now the old fogies, convince Tiamat to kill Marduk.
Tiamat likes this idea, but in fact she gets a bit too excited about it, and she scares
the gods, some of whom join her, they're scared into submitting to her, and join her
force, her team, but some of whom are scared into joining Marduk in his now outright war
against her.
Marduk fights and kills Tiamat, and forms the earth from her corpse, slicing her in
half, making her top half the heavens, and her bottom half the ground and the waters.
And he uses the blood of her second husband, Kingu, whom he also kills, he was very thorough,
Marduk, to make human beings.
By the act of destroying the evil chaos monster, and in an obscurely overlapping way, creating
our new world out of her corpse, this hero god becomes the king god, the primary god
in the Babylonian pantheon.
And that's how the world in the Enuma Elish comes to be.
Now, for the later career of thinking about evil, several aspects about this myth are
key.
First, the chaos god Tiamat is not represented as the source of evil, per se, though she
is in fact prior to people like Marduk, and perhaps more profoundly part of the universe
than hero ordering gods like Marduk is.
The evil emotions, or the attitudes of evil, envy, hate, fear, murderousness, mark the
victorious younger gods, such as Marduk, as much as they mark the older gods.
Evil, then in some sense, is an intrinsic structure of reality, part of the basic framework of
the universe.
Evil is natural, just part of the cosmic order.
But it is also a dimension that is an inevitable conflict with the forces of order, symbolized
by Marduk in some sense.
Because the cosmos is created in a struggle, and out of the old cosmos, the cosmos so created
may bear traces of, or be the ongoing site of, this conflict between good and evil.
This explains the persistence of evil for this tradition.
Evil is literally worked into the fabric of the cosmos here.
Now compare this account to that of the creation in the book of Genesis, especially in Genesis
1.
Genesis 1, in the beginning God creates the heavens and the earth, Genesis 1 seems written
in explicit opposition to the Enuma Elish.
And indeed, we now know that the Hebrew word Tehom, which is the word that in English translations
is mostly translated as the deep, the deep over which God moves at the beginning of creation.
That word Tehom is etymologically linked to the Babylonian word Tiamat.
But consider the difference from the beginning between these two stories.
In Genesis 1 there is no struggle, there is no rival, Tehom is there, the deep is there,
but it is passive before God's absolutely commanding will.
And God sees what God has created and deems it all good.
There's no sense in the Genesis story that we live amidst the rubble of a long ago cosmic
war.
Now this is really interesting to know because in fact we didn't used to know this about
Genesis.
We only learned this about the book of Genesis because the Enuma Elish was discovered in
the 19th century.
In fact, we're not going to tell the story here, but there's a great story to tell about
how the Enuma Elish was discovered.
It was discovered by a self-taught working class Englishman named George Smith who managed
in his lunch hours to go to the British Museum in London and learn Akkadian and Sumerian.
He literally just learned the Cuneiform script and figured out what was going on in these
languages.
And then he convinced scholars at the British Museum to help him get over to the Near East
so he could do some digs.
And on those digs he turns out to have been the first person to discover both much of
the Epic of Gilgamesh and then also the Enuma Elish.
Before Smith and his excavations, no one had any idea that there was such a text as this.
But again, compare the Enuma Elish to Genesis here and note the remarkable differences.
What we see in Genesis is a holy commanding God ordering out of the depths an ordered
creation, a creation which that God then deems to be altogether good.
Now here's an important difference between Jewish and Christian understandings of Genesis
which will be very important to keep in mind as we go on.
And this is something of a bee in my bonnet, so let me say something about this.
Although we talk about the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Old Testament as if they are
the same text, in very many important ways they are not actually the same text.
There are some choices of text selections that differ, but more importantly it's how
these two communities read the text that differs.
And here at the beginning and this creation story in Genesis 1, there are some really
important differences.
Any self-respecting Jewish rabbi will tell you that there's no suggestion of what Christians
call the ex nihilo character of creation in Genesis 1.
That is, they will say, although Christians want to say that God created the world out
of nothing.
In fact, the rabbis will say, there is something there.
It's the deep, stay home, it's there already.
That is why this text is enormously fraught and we'll come back to it in other moments
too when we look at the differing ways that Jews and Christians think about the fall of
Adam and Eve.
In this context though, what's important to note is that even though that is true about
that text, that both Jews and Christians can fairly see that there's no obvious way to
read the text in such a way that it affirms that God created everything out of nothing,
which is not to say that there was nothing before the deep, but just that the text itself
doesn't say that God created things out of nothing.
It is nonetheless clear that the basic trajectory, the impetus of this text, unlike the enuma
alish, is towards a world where there is one God who uniformly and without resistance
creates the cosmos out of a passive matter.
No basic metaphysical rivalry between good and evil exists here.
The enuma alish explains the cosmic order, but then the question remains, what's the
place of humans in this order?
For while the gods look like humans, and while humans are made from the blood of a god,
remember, kingu, kingu's blood makes human beings, one thing distinguishes them.
Humans are mortal, and the gods are not.
And therein lies a tale, and that tale is the epic of Gilgamesh, the first recorded human
attempt to understand and inhabit a world where suffering happens, and perhaps a world
where suffering is partially constitutive of what makes us human.
Now the epic is, as we have it, is composed in Akkadian out of much earlier Sumerian myths.
The Akkadian text we have is from around 1200 BCE, but we have fragments of it from
Sumeria that are from 2000 to 2400 BCE.
So we're talking, it's an old, old text.
In Akkadian, the title of the epic of Gilgamesh is not, in fact, the epic of Gilgamesh.
It is rather, he who saw the deep, Shah Nagpu Ameru, where deep, where what it is to see
the deep means more than just the plumbing of a merely spatial profundity.
Rather, to see the deep means to see something deep about human experience.
Even in the Akkadian text, people understood that the epic of Gilgamesh was incredibly
profound.
Now in this story, Gilgamesh is a hard king over the citizens of his city, Uruk, and to
stop him from being so oppressive, the gods create Enkidu as Gilgamesh's equal.
Enkidu is going to be Gilgamesh's friend, though he is called part animal and part human,
where Gilgamesh is part god and part human.
There's is the story of their friendship, and in a way it's the first buddy movie of
human history.
After fighting when they first meet, fighting each other and realizing that they're well
matched, they become inseparable and they go on legendary adventures.
They journey to the Cedar Mountain, somewhere probably in Lebanon, and defeat Humbaba, the
ogourish guardian of the mountain.
They kill the bull of heaven who was sent by the goddess Ishtar to punish Gilgamesh for
spurning her seduction.
This murder of the bull of heaven doesn't go over well with any of the gods, and so
they kill Enkidu as punishment.
At the death of his friend, Gilgamesh is distraught, almost mad with grief.
He's also terrified by death, realizing it will come to him as it did to Enkidu.
So to assuage his grief and palliate his fear, he undertakes a quest to find the key to immortality
by undertaking a long and perilous journey to meet the ancient and immortal flood hero
Utnapishtim, kind of an early version of Noah.
And after many difficulties, Gilgamesh finally meets this man face to face.
But the old man is unwilling or unable to help, and he tells Gilgamesh, the life that
you are seeking, you will never find.
When the gods created man, they allotted to him death, but life they retained in their
own keeping.
As predicted, Gilgamesh's efforts do eventually fail, and he collapses weeping.
He returns to Uruk, his city, where the sight of its massive walls prompts him to praise
this enduring work, the work fully of human hands.
This recognition of the achievement of human effort is a sign that Gilgamesh has begun
at the end of this epic to find a way out of utter despair, a flow turning back towards
a merely human life.
But even then, the old Sumerian myths of Gilgamesh do not spare him from death.
There are fragments of a parallel work, or perhaps a coda to the epic, that actually
recount the moments of Gilgamesh's dying.
Let me read you this, because the message is terrifically bleak.
This is what is said to Gilgamesh as his life nears its end.
You must have been told that this is what being human entailed.
You must have been told that this is what the cutting of your umbilical cord entailed.
The darkest day of humans awaits you now.
The solitary place of humans awaits you now.
The unstoppable flood wave awaits you now.
The unavoidable battle awaits you now.
This is not very happy stuff, right?
The unequal struggle awaits you now.
The duel from which there is no escape awaits you now.
But wait, the last line of this enormous litany of foreseen suffering?
But you should not go to the underworld with your heart knotted in anger.
Even here, then, that last clause suggests that there should be some consolation.
The life of humans is not entirely bleak, or need not be.
Another fragment of one of these poems has Enkidu, after his death, speaking to Gilgamesh
from the underworld and saying to him, I fear you will come to hate our friendship, because
it did not last forever.
Death, the finitude of human life, and the fact that this finitude makes humans vulnerable
to death at any moment.
This death is the great threat to all human happiness.
What the epic of Gilgamesh suggests, though, is that it is precisely this finitude of human
life that is the basis of whatever blessings, whatever joys we can have.
It is the walls of Uruk, after all, made by human hands that are the only things that
are able to draw Gilgamesh out of his despair.
No lesser animal knows that it will suffer and die, only we do, and only we know that
we are doomed to this fate, and so we are given double evils in this way, the fact of
death and the prior knowledge of it.
Yet we are also not yet dead, and we can choose how to live in light of death.
Gilgamesh's journeys are in this way an allegory for every human's journey through life.
There comes a moment when we know that death is our future, and then we must decide what
to do with that knowledge.
It is not a knowledge that is communicated in the sentence that, say, quote, all humans
are mortals, unquote.
It's a sentence speakable by anybody at any time.
You can get a five-year-old to say that sentence.
But very few people actually know what it means.
Very few people come to gain and struggle with that knowledge in a real way.
This wisdom cannot be perhaps communicated, but it is real, and it can be acquired.
In this way, Gilgamesh is the first figure of a type of character we'll see again and
again in these stories, in these lectures.
Abraham and Job, soon, Dante, later on in the Middle Ages, even a figure like Joseph
Conrad's retired sailor, Charlie Marlowe, who is the narrator of Heart of Darkness.
All of these people have a kind of acquaintance with evil, which has changed them, but which
they cannot exactly communicate to others so that others share in their knowledge.
Each person's quest is their own, and what I'm saying to you now is also a failure of
attempting to communicate something of Gilgamesh's story.
It is, in a certain way, a futile exercise.
For all of this is said about Gilgamesh's story, from the outside of the tale, as it
were.
I strongly urge you to read it for yourself.
It is truly an old story, but one that can still be told, and one, perhaps, that still
needs telling around campfires, at bedtimes, in classrooms, even studios, recording studios,
even today.
Let's wrap this up for now.
What these stories give us is more than their own reflections on evil.
In many ways, they set the terms on which later texts and thinkers and writers will debate
these questions.
As I've already said, the Anuma Elish is the dualistic background against which the Genesis
creation myth is written, and the dualism of the Anuma Elish will continue to haunt the
Abrahamic faiths of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam as a shadow, a rival unspoken in
their own scriptures, but a rival that their scriptures know about, a rival to their own
stories of how the world began and from whence evil came.
Gilgamesh has a more positive influence, for it exemplifies the genre of the quest story,
and in particular the quest story as modeling an entire human life, the human's lifelong
search for the meaning of life in the face of suffering and evil.
In thinking about evil then, these texts show us that we're using categories, and even
occasionally some names, words, and titles, think about that word Satan again, that go
back thousands of years.
The afterlife of these texts, in their continued power to provoke, remains with us even today.
Now in the next lecture, we'll look at a rival way of thinking about evil, one that
does not offer a picture of evil as so fundamentally unhuman.
It adds another distinctly colored thread to the tapestry we're beginning to weave
of human thinking about evil, so we turn to that next.
