Welcome back.
In this lecture, I want to talk about someone who most of us consider to be the first truly
modern philosopher of Western history, and that is the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes.
Hobbes was born in 1588 and he died in 1679, that is he basically spanned the entire century
between Calvin and Sir Isaac Newton.
His birth was prompted, he said, by reports of the Spanish armadas sighting off the coast
of England, an event that many English thought prefigured their imminent invasion and subjugation
by a foreign king, Philip II of Spain.
This was one of the most traumatic moments of English history, even though the attempted
invasion of course failed.
And Hobbes always said afterwards that my mother gave birth to twins, myself and fear.
Many of his contemporaries and those who came after him would both certainly agree that
Thomas Hobbes is one of the greatest thinkers of fear in the world.
He was educated pretty well at Oxford University, pretty well by those standards, pretty good
by ours, but was always more of a self-taught person than taught by others.
He was very much a product of a renaissance humanist training and in 1629 his first major
work came out and it was the first translation into English from the original Greek of Thucydides'
The Peloponnesian War.
Already we're seeing some connections with previous lectures in our series here.
That translation was universally acclaimed and it won Hobbes a great deal of fame and respect.
In the coming decade he continued to think philosophically and politically about the
nature of the human community and the proper shape of a human organizational structure
and he began to be more and more involved in English politics as intellectuals of the
time frequently were.
During the English Civil War Hobbes fled from all sides, ending up in France.
Eventually after the war ended and his masterpiece Leviathan was completed he fled back to England
for the royalists had determined that his work was inimical to faith in the king and
the king at this point was of course back in France.
Hobbes' work in the Leviathan is relevant for us in two important ways.
First of all in his famous overall picture of the human in the state of nature and the
basic human motivation set which Hobbes insists is quite savage.
He seems to suggest and he comes very close to saying, though he never quite says it,
that evil is the human's natural state.
Secondly, and this is why he never quite says it, he only almost says that humans are naturally
evil.
Secondly, in his discussion of the nature of good and evil itself, the terms we use,
the categories we employ in thinking, he insists they are not metaphysically natural
categories at all.
They're not descriptions of realities that are part of the fabric of the cosmos but they
are essentially categories constituted by the constructed political community we live
in.
This claim that the very foundations of the moral language we employ is in fact a construction
something that humans have to agree to and does not exist before that agreement is very
influential for all later writers on good and evil, whether they affirm it and build
on it or react violently against it and argue against it.
And as one might expect, this view and the larger world view behind it has profound and
interesting similarities with the thought of Thucydides and Machiavelli.
Let's talk a little bit first about the basic picture of the human and of human nature in
what Hobbes calls the state of nature.
This is the condition that, of course, in his summative judgment he says, in the state
of nature, the life of man is nasty, brutish, and short.
The state of nature is a complicated condition that Hobbes uses to imagine what people would
be like outside of civilization, but effectively imagine people who didn't have any prior attachments
or affiliations to one another kind of living in the same area, living in caves or beneath
trees or whatever.
A few facts about humans would become prominent in how they interact with each other.
First of all, humans are roughly equal in strength and intelligence, roughly equal.
And what Hobbes means by equal is we all have equal hope of being able to get what we want
and we all have equal hope of being able to kill somebody else in a conflict over what
we want, right?
In fact, Hobbes would add a third thing to that in some ways, he would say, we all have
equal fear of being killed by another person in a contest over what we want.
Now because even in a state of nature, outside of government, outside of society, outside
of any coherent system of ordering ourselves, even in this situation, people still have
to get certain things, food, cover to sleep under, security for themselves.
Inevitably, human desires overlap on various objects or various locations or various ends
and they rest on identical things, so a problem arises of a conflict over the scarcity of
goods.
Furthermore, this immediate conflict over the scarcity of goods is complexified by the
fact that, as Hobbes points out, humans are not only interested in certain things being
given to them or being acquired by them, they're also interested in certain things not happening
to them.
Most basically, we don't want to die.
Thus, humans don't only go around this state of nature, seeking out various things and
looking for people who might be trying to seek them as well in order to elbow them out of
the way.
They also go around the state of nature terrified of one another because they know that each
one can kill any other.
Again, and in this way like Machiavelli and in some ways like Ducidides, Hobbes thought
that fear was in fact at least as deep, if not deeper, a motive for human behavior than
any other, including love or desire.
Therefore, in this state of nature, in this condition, Hobbes says, a strange, permanent
state of semi-conflict arises, a state of what he calls the war of all against all.
Now, in this war of all against all, no one can be trusted, no one can be relied upon because
you effectively have no way of holding each other to account if you, in fact, violate
each other's trust.
Furthermore, Hobbes thinks the basic conditions for generating a stable human language would
be lacking from this.
A language requires a community of some political order to be in place, Hobbes thinks.
So not even really is there a real language in this condition.
Nonetheless, despite all this, Hobbes thinks in an important way humans can imagine themselves
into this state, even though it is not fully a human life, not one that we would recognize
as a suitable life for people to live in.
Nonetheless, it's one we could imagine to be our condition.
And Hobbes says this teaches us something very important about how humans are taken
on their own, taken outside of society, taken outside of civilization.
Humans are originally animals, they're originally beasts, they seek ends, and if they see others,
they will hurt and kill them if they can so that they can get the things they want without
interference from those others.
And they will hurt and kill them for fear that those other people would hurt and kill
them before they hurt and kill the other people, right?
In other words, there's a spiraling paranoia built into the psychology of Hobbes.
And in this paranoia, which will become very important later in his thinking and in people
who descend from him intellectually, in this paranoia there is always a good reason to
in fact harm another person, even if you have no evidence whatsoever that they're about
to harm you, because they could harm you at some point in the future.
And so therefore, killing them now is removing a potential future enemy.
Now Hobbes is not saying this is a good state, he doesn't approve of this state.
He wants to say this is simply a fact that he notes, a reality of our condition that
absent society, absent civilization, we are these kinds of beasts.
For Hobbes, the savagery of humans in settings where they can get away with it is simply
a fact from which you have to begin.
And this is very important for him and makes him sound a little bit more like Machiavelli.
But if you think about it, I think anyway, far more ruthlessly amoral than Machiavelli
was.
If you want to have a stable system of government or morals, you won't begin from a sense that
humans have the moral law in them.
You will begin from the premise, for it is only by assuming that humans are savage, and
showing how even the most savage human can come to see the wisdom for their own self-interest
of joining in associations to build societies, it is only by accepting that premise, Hobbes
thinks, that you will actually generate a rationale for a social order that everybody
in society can affirm.
Now, let's be very clear here, Hobbes is not saying that humans are naturally evil.
That would mistake his point of view completely.
Humans are not naturally evil, nor are they naturally good, nor are they, in some sense
as they should be, we will see in a future lecture for Friedrich Nietzsche, beyond good
and evil.
Hobbes is not saying we need to get beyond good and evil, rather Hobbes is saying that
in a certain way humans in the state of nature are beneath or before good and evil.
For, and this is the other shocking part of Hobbes' argument, this is the second large
factor in it, and the part that over time was equally astonishing to his contemporaries
and those who came after, outside of some preset social order, there is no way to talk
about good and evil at all.
There is no such language of good and evil for Hobbes.
The savagery of humans when left to their individual devices outside of the social order, suggests
that morality thinks something very dark about the reality of morality as a metaphysical
standard or a natural motivator in human beings natural constitution.
It means Hobbes thinks that morality has no reality in that sense.
Centrally, and for our purposes, this is really crucial, the failure of human society to capture
these kinds of phenomena, the inability of human society to fully describe the forms
of behavior that humans take outside of that society, means that in this extra social situation,
in the state of nature, there are in fact no moral norms.
The desires, he says, are in themselves no sin.
Let me quote you this passage here because this is a very important passage, very controversial passage.
The desires are in themselves no sin.
No more are the actions till they know a law that forbids them, which till laws be made,
they cannot know, right?
In other words, without laws, without explicit agreement among people, there is no standard
in which an action can be known as bad or good, nor can any law be made till they have agreed
upon the person that can make it.
Now what does that mean?
That means that laws need a social system of governance, a ruler, or a legislator of some sort.
Absent that legislator.
There is no way for laws to exist, Hobbes says.
An absent law's existence, there is no way for people to know if they're doing right or wrong.
In fact, they don't even care if they're doing right or wrong.
They're doing what is strictly speaking in their interest.
That's the law, if we want to call it that, that they will follow.
Now given that is, that moral norms arise from people's cooperation to affirm laws and rules,
whether explicit rules about right and wrong in the form of political laws, traffic laws, etc.,
or tacit rules about what is good or bad behavior in the form of cultural standards,
given this assumption, the state of humans in the state of nature means for Hobbes
that in nature itself there are no such standards, there are no such laws.
Now this is very important, so let's take a second to think about the state of nature a little bit more thoroughly here.
And how do humans get out of the state of nature?
The counteract or rise above this state of complete moral anarchy and complete, not immoralism,
but amoralism, a condition of being without morality.
Humans collectively agree to work together, and Hobbes is in this generally recognized as the first social contract theorist.
Most of what we know of life derives from this collective decision, Hobbes thinks, to live in communities,
including, he says, our moral sense, our apprehension of good and evil.
For Hobbes, good and evil literally have no reference beyond what we agree are good things and evil things.
And this is because since our knowledge of good and evil depends on our having words with stable meanings with which to talk about them,
when such words do not exist, we have no ideas of good or evil at all.
This is huge, and it was immediately recognized, or almost immediately recognized as being an astonishing claim on Hobbes' part.
Most people, when the Leviathan was originally produced, were astonished by his depiction of the state of nature
and the idea that humans are in their being fundamentally bestial.
But a few thinkers very quickly and more and more people, as time went on, realized that in some ways even more troubling than that
is Hobbes' basic idea that the language of good and evil doesn't apply in nature itself.
Hobbes turns out to be not just the first social contract theorist, that person who talks about how societies form,
on their view, by contracting together, by consenting to a series of laws.
He's also what philosophers today call the first full-fledged social constructivist.
That is, he is the first person to say that morality has no basis in our natures,
but is merely something we construct socially, entirely in some important way, contingently,
as a matter of explicit decisions, possibly even shallow preferences, it is sometimes implied.
Now there may be some parallels, ancient parallels, with parts of this view.
The figure Trissimachus in Plato's dialogue The Republic, we saw, seems to suggest in some important way that morality
is merely what the strong can get away with.
And of course, Thucydides seems to suggest that the Athenians on the island of Milos say something similar.
But Hobbes is really the first truly clear example of someone stating this overtly
and following out its consequences to their ends.
Interestingly though, the idea seems to be something that Hobbes and his contemporaries
had glimpsed in their own readings of Thucydides.
Thucydides tells stories in the Peloponnesian War that seem to suggest some real dark truths
about the nature of human order.
Let me read you a passage that Hobbes translated,
a passage that was very widely recognized in the Renaissance as a moment of revelation,
not just about Thucydides' world, but about the world that the people of the Renaissance,
of the 16th and 17th centuries especially, were living in.
What happens when political instability creates cultural anarchy?
Hobbes is talking about a particular rebellion that happens in the city of Corsera.
And during the revolution, he says,
the received value of names imposed for signification of things,
that is, the definitions that names had, the way that names refer to things,
was changed into arbitrary.
This is Thucydides in Hobbes' translation, remember.
For inconsiderate boldness was counted true-hearted manliness,
sudden deliberation, a handsome fear, modesty, the cloak of cowardice,
to be wise in everything, to be lazy in everything.
A furious suddenness was reputed a point of valor, thus Hobbes.
Now, Hobbes, in recognizing the idea that language can float,
language has an ability to be mobile across meanings of words,
so that a word at one point can mean one thing and then at another context entirely another,
and that sometimes these changes in language can be due to changing political circumstances,
was not even the last person to make this point.
Of course, in our century, thinkers studying the way that the Third Reich thought about language
have talked about this and also, most famously, perhaps, the English essayist and writer George Orwell
in a number of writings has talked about the possibility that language itself can be perverted by politics.
Hobbes goes further than this though in some way because what he says is that language can only be perverted by politics,
that absent politics, language loses its sense altogether.
Hobbes and his contemporaries saw Thucydides' lesson as not only revealing something about their own time,
but revealing something that, in fact, in their world was shocking about the nature of human moral order in general.
There's was a world where patriotism at one moment meant support of the king,
at the next moment it meant a desire to exile the king,
at the next moment after that, a desire to kill the king.
On Tuesday, virtue meant scholastic ethical submission to a religious community,
but then on Wednesday it would mean Republican independence from a tyrant.
At one time, fidelity meant one thing and then in the next moment it's opposite.
The revolutions in politics that these people survived, Hobbes and his contemporaries,
were nothing compared to the revolutions in language and meaning and culture
that they had to endure on a daily basis.
Now none of this is to say that for Hobbes, everything is equally likely to be successful in human linguistic endeavors.
Far from it, human flourishing relies on successful human communities knowing words properly
and being founded and the conditions under which they can be founded and can continue through time.
These conditions are very narrow and typically for him involve a powerful,
almost tyrannical executive power to ensure to compel all to obey the rules.
Absent that very strong ruler founded on a very narrow range of principles,
human life will devolve again into a condition of being solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.
But Hobbes thinks that he's not proposing this, he's merely describing the conditions of humans,
not evaluating them. In this he's like Machiavelli.
I'm not telling you how things should be, I'm telling you how things are.
Surely we can say that some conditions are evil and some things are bad and some things are good
and we might think that Hobbes' teaching is evil or we might think it's good,
but from Hobbes' perspective we can really only say that they are evil from where we stand.
We can't actually say any more than when we say good or evil we are saying something we promote
or something we abhor.
So those are his two huge points.
First, the human is a beast. Secondly, the bestiality of human means that language is in some important way
a social construct.
Now the responses to Hobbes from the moment of Leviathan's publication were immediate and vehement.
Many called him an atheist or a moralist.
Interestingly, they really couldn't call him a relativist because they didn't have a language to talk about that charge in.
There really wasn't much of a way to talk about Hobbes as a relativist at the time.
Of course, at the same time and for the century after he wrote, many of the people who attacked him
were also borrowing from his views, using his arguments in support of their own ends
or at least simply responding to his charges on the terms of debate that he had established.
But Hobbes wasn't trying to endorse the view that morality was everywhere and always nothing more than convention.
He was simply saying that this is what would happen if people descended into a state of barbarism.
There is no net of natural virtue or a basically good human nature
that would stop people from becoming beasts.
As the old Latin saying had it, homo homini lupus, the human to the human is a wolf.
Man is wolf to man.
Hobbes certainly thought that any ethical system once established ought to be obeyed.
The people inside it ought to obey it, not because of any kind of absolute moral command,
because if they didn't obey it, eventually that society would revert back into a state of nature.
And that's much worse than almost any moral system you inhabit.
If anything, Hobbes has appeared as the centuries have gone on, not as a tyrant or an immoralist,
but as a relativist or a moralist, but really more of a tyrant, a defender of absolute power.
But there, lurking at the heart of those views, those arguments for an absolute centralized power,
is the first formulation of something that we can call relativism.
And that suggests that for Hobbes, he thought in some important way,
our understanding of evil is a social construct.
Now, since Hobbes, many people have challenged his views,
both about the nature of human motivation in a state of nature, whether or not they are so ruthlessly self-interested,
and also about whether or not morality has any purchase outside of social conventions.
Among the most important and profound challengers was an Anglican bishop, Joseph Butler, who lived soon after Hobbes.
Hobbes had tried, Butler understood, to re-establish moral order out of sheer individual self-interest.
And part of his argument, Hobbes' argument, was the claim that all moral actions would reduce to self-interest anyway,
even if we don't know that they do.
Butler's challenge was to this claim.
He challenged the core premise of Hobbes' picture of moral psychology, of the moral reasoning of the human.
And he challenged it by talking about what philosophers call the moral phenomenology of moral experience.
The experience that the person has when they are doing something good or bad.
Butler thought that Hobbes' view meant that humans always only acted out of self-interest,
and that even when they thought they were being kind to somebody because they should be kind to that person,
because that person needed kindness, they were doing it out of self-interest, was Hobbes' argument.
Butler thought that this rejection of a natural morality only worked if self-interest is one thing,
but for Butler, it doesn't work because there are two senses of self-interest.
And I'm talking about this now, and I want to talk about this a little bit more,
not just because it's interesting about the Butler-Hobbes debate,
but because the kinds of arguments Hobbes makes about humans being founded entirely on self-interest
are still quite abroad in our culture today.
And understanding them and understanding the counterarguments to them will help you, whichever of those views you take,
will help you understand something more of their depth.
So for Butler, two senses of self-interest.
The first is the ordinary sense of self-interest in which I am interested in having my will fulfilled in the world.
If I want a drink, I want a drink. I want to get the drink.
If I want my child to get a particular teacher in school, that too is something I want to happen.
If I want to give $10,000 anonymously to charity, I want that gift to happen in the way I want it to happen as well.
All of those things are forms of self-interest in some sense.
They're all forms of me wanting my will fulfilled.
But there's a second sense of self-interest in which that last example of giving $10,000 anonymously to charity
is not obviously in my material self-interest.
And Butler thinks that Hobbes confuses those two senses.
Of course, I do in fact want my altruism to be carried out.
That's the first sense of self-interest, right?
I want my aim to be accomplished.
But only, Butler says, only someone morally tone deaf would miss how my desire to see my interests accomplished in that case
does not equate to sheer selfishness.
I can genuinely care for other people, Butler says.
And the fact that the care is genuinely my care doesn't mean that it is not genuinely also for other people.
Hobbes' illusion of that distinction, his confusion of those two categories,
Butler thought means that he actually misunderstands human moral psychology in very important ways.
And anyway, that's a crucial debate that's still going on today
since Hobbes has had such profound influence in a number of academic disciplines
as well as in our culture as a whole.
Now, Hobbes' thought and the thought of his various descendants, his intellectual descendants,
has had enormous influence in our society, mostly around this idea that Butler took on,
that humans are self-interested thoroughly in the ways that Hobbes proposes.
But there's been another dimension or a specification of this dimension in the 20th century
that became very important, and I just want to mention for a second before we go on.
And that is game theory.
Hobbes' picture of the human as rooting everything they do in the structures of rational self-interest
has been taken by a series of very, very sophisticated mathematical models
and taken up and redefined as the practice of what's called game theoretical understandings
of how people and possibly international states should interact.
In these pictures, game theorists will sometimes argue that you can imagine
one nation attacking another nation before the second nation attacks the first
entirely out of fear that the second nation will attack it.
That is, the first nation might be rational on a Hobbesian game theoretical reading,
might be rational in striking another nation and destroying its military capacities,
perhaps even its industrial base, in order to secure itself from the threat,
the potential, possibly even merely hypothetical threat, of that other nation.
And in offering that picture, Hobbes' thought has had a profound influence
on international politics and also on, interestingly, nuclear strategy.
So while you might think that a scholar who lived in a pretty quiet corner of the world
during a pretty turbulent time, that is, England and France in the era of the 17th century
and the English Civil War, wouldn't necessarily have a lot of application to our world today.
In fact, his thought is shaping our world every day.
Now we'll next move on to other great Renaissance thinkers
and then into the Enlightenment skepticism about the naturalness of traditional moral categories as well.
But in Hobbes, I hope you see that the profound challenges he puts to us,
both about our received understandings of right and wrong,
and about the typical ways we think about how to be or not be good and how to avoid doing evil.
Stay with us even today.
