Welcome back. In this lecture, I want to spend some time looking at the thought of Hanna
Ahrendt, one of the most innovative and provocative political thinkers of the 20th century, and
a person who gave us two concepts that are very important for thinking about evil in
a political register in its political dimensions in the 20th and now the 21st centuries. These
two concepts are, first of all, totalitarianism, and secondly, the banality of evil. We'll
see that with these terms, she has really set the terms literally of thinking about political
evil for better and worse for all those who came after her.
Ahrendt's life is fantastic and rich, and I would urge you to read a biography of her life.
Really interesting. But generally, you can say this, she was herself both victim and theorist
of the century's evils. Born in Germany in 1906, she was an astonishingly intelligent student,
studied with the philosophers Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers. She received her PhD in 1929
at the age of 23, depressing for people like me, but then fled Nazi Germany for France in 1933
and finally reached America in 41. She taught and wrote in America for the rest of her life,
living in New York but traveling the world until she died in 1975.
Ahrendt's thought in the period from 45 to 75, the last 30 years of her life, was really dedicated
to making sense of the realities of the 20th century and the evil that riddled it. Her thought
in these decades developed across the time she spent on it in an arc from totalitarianism
to banality. Many think that these two concepts for her suggest two fundamentally opposed views
of evil. But in fact, I think that they cohere nicely together. The great and dangerous innovation
of evil in the 20th century on the reading of Ahrendt's work that I want to propose is the
capacity of states to make people who would never normally be capable of direct and massive cruelty
to another person become actors who play quite significant roles in vast schemes of human annihilation.
To see that, first I want to talk a bit about her first major work, The Origin of Totalitarianism
and then talk about her most controversial and probably famous work,
Eichmann in Jerusalem. Let me start with The Origins of Totalitarianism first.
In this book, published in 1951, Ahrendt argued that modern totalitarian states like Nazi Germany
and the Stalinist Soviet Union effectively embody a new kind of radical evil.
Particularly in the category of totalitarianism itself, Ahrendt thought she had identified
a crucial political innovation of the modern world and named it for the monstrosity that it was.
The totalitarian state is aptly named by her because it demands the totality of all that is
within its boundaries, the products of its citizens, the culture of its people, the very bodies and
souls of its citizens, its own history. And it plans to do with all those things whatever it wishes,
control of the modern education, modern technology, modern media, modern industry,
all these things. The totalitarian state wants control of everything,
not simply for control's sake, but actually in order to shape humans far more profoundly and
directly than any political structure ever before ever could. Ultimately Ahrendt thinks,
this means the totalitarian state is set against human beings in their own idiosyncratic individuality.
For humans are never so readily disposable as this totalitarian state wants them to be.
Human freedom for her can never be reduced to purely predictable by law behavior. In other
words, it can never be properly understood in purely law-oriented terms. Because of that,
totalitarianism has to be fundamentally hostile to human freedom. And because human freedom is
essential to our understanding of human existence, Ahrendt thinks, this means that the totalitarian
regime's project inevitably entails the destruction of the human's capacity to be not only a free actor,
but to be a genuine human. Humans are destroyed, she thinks, by the political
system's relentless pressure on them, which creates instead of real humans, shells of human beings
in their places. She famously says, in the conclusion, the epilogue to the origins of
totalitarianism, she says that what totalitarian ideology is therefore AMAD is not the transformation
of the outside world, but the transformation of human nature itself. Now this explains why for her,
she thinks it's important and useful to use the term radical evil to talk about totalitarian evil.
Of course, this term harkens back, as you'll remember, to Kant's discussion of radical evil,
especially in his religion within the limits of bare reason. For Kant, as you'll recall, radical
evil is radical because it injects a principle of selfishness at the base of human agency,
so that evil is finally a form of fundamental radical selfishness for Kant. That's not Ahrendt's
use of the term radical evil. For her, radical evil takes a more destructive and demonic form.
It's radical because of its annihilating effects on political community and individuals.
She says the terrifying discovery, especially in the Second World War, and this is one we'll come
back to in a few lectures, is that the psyche, the human individual, can be destroyed before
their bodies are destroyed, and they can will their own annihilation in some important way.
They can become effectively zombies. This is a reality that the 20th century has taught us
in a far more profound way, she thinks, than any century before. The dark discovery of the 20th
century is that humans are far more plastic than we here to fore imagined. People in a totalitarian
state are turned into zombies again, or robots, who annihilate themselves and one another,
all in the interest of the abstract totalitarian state. Now, this was a remarkably controversial
idea, and it gained a lot of traction in philosophy and politics in the years that came,
but about 10 years after the first publications of origins of totalitarianism,
Arendt attended the trial of Adolf Eichmann, an important German Holocaust agent in Jerusalem,
and she reported on it for the New Yorker. The articles that she wrote for the New Yorker became
effectively the first draft of her most controversial book, Eichmann in Jerusalem,
a report on the banality of evil, and what she saw in that trial, both in the way it was prosecuted,
and in the primary subject of the trial, Eichmann himself, made her rethink, in some ways alter,
in some ways deepen, much of what she had said 10 years before. Now, Eichmann is an interesting
figure. He was in many ways the central bureaucrat of the final solution, and her story concerns
Eichmann as an individual in the role he played, but also in what he suggests about the Holocaust
as a whole. Of all the Nazi leadership caught and prosecuted after the war, Eichmann, she thinks,
is in many ways the most interesting, if only because his case seems the most troubling for our
received views of evil and wickedness. On many levels, Adolf Eichmann is a surprising figure
to have risen so high in the Nazi hierarchy. He had been a vacuum oil salesman in the early 1930s,
and then joined the Nazi Party and the SS in 1932, just before they took power,
and began to ascend the ranks of the Nazis. You'll recall Nietzsche's famous line,
Supposing truth were a woman, what then? Here we can almost ask, Arendt almost explicitly asks,
Suppose evil is a vacuum oil salesman, what then? In other words, if you think about how evil
manifests itself in the 20th century, it doesn't manifest itself in Miltonic satans, it manifests
itself in these kind of nebishes, these figures like Eichmann. Throughout the 30s, his remarkable
facility with bureaucratic matters and his unquestioning, literally unquestioning devotion to
work made him increasingly valuable. In 1942, he was given the job of transportation administrator
for the Nazi genocide against the Jews, which put him in charge of managing a large part of
the logistical bureaucracy of the Holocaust. He carried out his duties with relentless unimaginative
efficiency, and his criminality as the central bureaucrat of the final solution would certainly
be enough on its own to convict him of crimes against humanity. But his case has made more
curious and his soul seems all the more morally suspicious because of the surprising event
in the closing months of the war. As it became clear that the war would be lost for the Nazis,
Heinrich Himmler, Eichmann's superior and overall head of the SS, decided to stop
shipping prisoners to the death camps. He ordered Eichmann to stop sending the trains there and keep
the prisoners kind of as a bargaining chip for what Himmler hoped would be some kind of negotiated
settlement with the Allies. Eichmann, however, disobeyed this direct order and the trains kept
running up to the end. Now many thought that this showed Eichmann's utter savagery,
his absolute evil, that even when Nazis like Himmler said, let's slow down on this, Eichmann
said, no, we've got to keep going. And there's a lot of power to that idea, right? It makes sense
that if Himmler says, don't kill Jews and you keep killing Jews, I mean, there must be something
really demonic about you, right? Arendt doesn't think so. Arendt says, where once she had described
totalitarian evil as radical, now in the character of Adolf Eichmann, she sees evil as banal. In some
sense, there was nothing demonic about him. The story of Eichmann, and we'll explain why she
thinks it's banal in a second. The story of Eichmann, though, is really just a frame that Arendt uses
to hang on her larger point on. She's worried about what the shape of the trial itself suggests.
How, in fact, the trial is prosecuted, how Eichmann's case goes forward. The real question
in the book, the one that took a little while for people to figure out she was asking,
is simple, but really quite disturbing. Do we have resources, she asks, in our ordinary moral
vocabulary to help us bring into view what the Holocaust really was and explain to us why it
is justified to punish those who participated in it? And she argues that, no, in fact, importantly,
we don't have quite all that we need, or rather that we need to attend to the particularities
of this experience in order better to be able to understand it, better to be able to judge those
who did it, and, and this is very important for her, better to be able to respond to similar
situations should they happen again. Arendt, that is, challenges the moral and legal concepts that
organize the war crimes trials, and she argues that they need to be rethought. To judge the Holocaust
on the old moral concepts of individual responsibility, personal integrity, individual intent,
she thinks using these categories is cowardly and dangerous, and it avoids the really fundamental
philosophical challenges that the Holocaust, the Shoah presents to people today. She says this in her
book, she says, in Eichmann and Jerusalem. To fall back on an unequivocal voice of conscience,
in suggesting that Eichmann had broken his conscience, right, he'd violated his conscience in
some sense, she says, not only begs the question, it signifies, this is really interesting, it
signifies a deliberate refusal to take notice of the central moral, legal, and political phenomena
of our century. The devastating criticism, I mean, it may sound subdued, but to say that effectively
these war crimes trials were deliberately designed, even if not consciously, she thinks, deliberately
designed to avoid confronting the real challenges of the phenomena they tried to judge. That was
what was so astounding and offensive and insulting to many people about our assessment of the trial
of Eichmann in Jerusalem. It sounded like she thought the prosecution was somehow wrong for
judging him. That was never her point. Her point, though, was that the prosecutions, the terms they
used, the narrative they constructed of Eichmann, that narrative was flawed and allowed us to deflect
our attention from what Eichmann really represented. Now, there are two dimensions of these phenomena
that aren't once us, particularly to rethink. First, our understanding of how individual moral
awareness can be warped by a society-wide moral change. And second, how that warping is itself
possible only because of a certain superficiality to most people's moral character. Let me talk
first about the question of the individual character's relationship to the larger social order.
And this brings us back to Eichmann's decision to disobey Himmler's orders to stop shipping
Jews to the camps. Why did he do it? The obvious answer is in front of our faces, right?
Surely he did it because he was a demon, because it was more evil, if it's possible to imagine,
than the highest of the high Nazis. That's the prosecution's case. In some ways,
Eichmann was more of a Nazi than the original Nazis. But that's not Arvind's point.
She saw something else, something far more disquieting in Eichmann. Eichmann understood
himself, first of all, not to be obeying orders, but to be doing his duty, following the law.
And this is crucial, and aren't built her argument around it. The language of morality
in Eichmann's mind was retained, even while its aims were horribly misdirected.
There's an interesting moment in the trial, Arvind points out. Someone mentions Immanuel Kant,
and Eichmann happens to say, oh yes, I've read Kant, right? One of the major bureaucrats
of the final pollution has read Kant. And in fact, he's read the critique of practical reason,
Kant's central ethical text. And what's interesting about this, this classic German thing, right?
But what's interesting about this is that Eichmann understood himself not simply to reject
Kant, not at least at first, but instead alter Kant's view. He wants, he thinks, what he says,
is to keep the intensity and the fervor of duty, of doing one's duty, which goes beyond
mere obedience. You do not only obey the law, whatever that law is, you must do so if you
are to be moral with devotion to it. Now this account of doing one's duty provides Arvind
with an alternative picture of why Eichmann saw it until the end, to carry out the transports
to the camps. He did so not out of fanaticism, his boundless hatred of the Jews in some sense,
but out of duty, an Eichmann's own self-understanding. It was his conscience, Arvind thinks, that led
him to do it. He thought it was his duty under the law to kill the Jews, and Himmler's order was illegal.
What an astonishing claim. But support for this view comes from a study of some of the things
that Heinrich Himmler actually had said earlier in the war. There's an unbelievable speech,
you can hear it on the web, you can hear Himmler's voice giving this speech. In Poznan, Poland,
in 1943, he gave a speech to a group of SS leaders kind of at a conference of the SS,
the Holocaust, how it's working so far, what we should do from here on out,
something like that. The speech was one of the more remarkable events in the history of human
morality. This is what he said in it. I want to tell you about a very grave matter in all
frankness. We can talk about it quite openly here, but we must never talk about it publicly.
For all people who are Holocaust deniers, this speech is a devastating sign that in fact
they're living in a fantasy world. Because Himmler says here, this is all, you know,
something we can talk about here in secret, but we never want to admit it publicly.
I mean the evacuation of the Jews, the extermination of the Jewish people.
Now think about this sentence. Most of you will know what it means to see 100 corpses piled up
or 500 or a thousand. Imagine someone saying that. You know what this means. You know what it looks
like. And then this, this is the abyssal sentence in some ways. To have gone through this, to have
suffered this, he's saying, to the SS officers who did it, who didn't suffer it, who did it,
to have gone through this. And except for instances of human weakness, to have remained decent,
that has made us tough. This is an unwritten, never to be written, glorious page of our history.
Think about that little excerpt there. What an unbelievable thing to say aloud, to form in your
mind. There's many things to say about it. I won't have time for all of them, but one thing
that's really interesting is that Himmler was right about one thing. There was enormous physical
violence done to the people who perpetrated these crimes, their own bodies in a way,
revolted against them. Many of the people, many of the SS officers, the death camp guards, many of
these people suffered from ulcers, alcoholism, stress, and other bodily deformations. Their
very bodies revolted against the crimes that they committed. None of that is supposed to generate
any sympathy for the Nazis, but it's a sign of the monstrosity of their deeds that their very
bodies rebelled against what they were doing. Arendt then is not arguing that the Nazis were
morally well-formed agents. When Eichmann says he's doing his duty, she has to believe him in some
sense, but she's not saying she admires that or respects it or that he understands his duty
properly. What she is saying is that the Nazis in general, there were some sadists, some savage
people, maybe a number of them, but they experienced their annihilationist practices as stemming
from a command that seemed to them relevantly moral. And this is Arendt's crucial point.
Arendt's point is that a society can experience not just a kind of moral collapse,
but a kind of moral inversion where the form of morality, the language of duty,
honor, conscience, right and wrong is retained even as the content, the actual meaning of those terms,
is utterly inverted. We don't recognize this because we assume people do know somewhere deep
down inside that they're bad, that they have a conscience that always tells them unerringly
when they're right or when they're wrong. Perhaps Arendt says that's a mistake. Perhaps when a
moral transformation is broad enough and deep enough in a society, think about what a totalitarian
state does to an entire nation, it is enormously difficult to resist this. Not impossible for
everybody, but difficult so that almost everybody surrenders. As Arendt says, normally, conscience
motivates us to disobey orders only when they go against the law's normality. Normally, in our
moral experience of the world, by and large, morality and the law at least overlap significantly.
There may be some tensions, but normally, by and large, what the culture as a whole says is right
and wrong maps on pretty safely to what we think is right and wrong. But in a criminal regime,
she says, the black flag of conscience warning us that something is illegal flies as manifestly
above what normally is a lawful order. For instance, not to kill innocent people just because they
happen to be Jews. As that black flag flies above a criminal order under normal circumstances,
I'm paraphrasing Arendt there. In other words, she says, in a criminal regime, the experience
of when we are violating our conscience seems to map onto those situations that the law says
are immoral, even where the law itself is immoral. That is, those situations that the law
lies to us about their immorality. In a criminal regime, the conscience tells us, the conscience
tells us, the consciousness, the conscience tells us that morality itself is immoral.
Eichmann's experience then shows us what can happen when conscience exists within a framework
of deep evil. We get not moral anarchy but moral inversion. And again, this is a passage from Eichmann
in Jerusalem, one of the most devastating of passages, and her summary of what actually
happened to morality in the Third Reich. Just as the law in civilized countries assumes that the
voice of conscience tells everybody, thou shalt not kill, even though man's natural desires and
inclinations may at times be murderous, so the law of Hitler's land demanded that the voice of
conscience tells everybody, thou shalt kill, although the organizers of the massacres knew
full well that murder is against the normal desires and inclinations of most people.
This is the important sentence. Evil in the Third Reich had lost the quality by which most people
recognize it, the quality of temptation. Just think about that one sentence for a second.
What she's saying is that in the Third Reich, evil no longer appeared to people as a temptation,
it appeared to people as an order, an obligation incumbent upon them from the law. She goes on.
In fact, she suggests temptation applied to goodness instead. It flipped its place in our
moral experience of the world. The law told us to kill, so we began to experience the desire
not to kill as a temptation, and temptations we know morally should always be resisted.
So she goes on. Many Germans and many Nazis, probably an overwhelming majority of them,
must have been tempted not to murder, not to rob, not to let their neighbors go off to their doom,
and not to become accomplices in all these crimes by benefiting from them.
But God knows they had learned how to resist temptation.
Now in this context, Eichmann felt that the weight of morality, of respectable opinion,
was all on the side of the Führer's law, not Himmler's order. Therefore, Eichmann felt that
Himmler's order was a temptation, aren't his proposing, something he should not obey, not
because he enjoyed killing Jews, but because he felt that he should always obey the law.
Now none of this is meant to exonerate or excuse anyone in Germany, at least of all Eichmann.
For after all, others in Germany in these years, even some on the front lines of the Holocaust,
did know it was a tremendous evil, and did try to fight it. But most didn't have that curious mix
of strength of character and sheer dumb luck that enabled them to avoid it.
Most of the people who participated in the Holocaust, though, were not devils. To call
them devils, for our end, is both offering them an odd sort of compliment and providing us with a
subtle form of consolation. It complements them because it suggests qualities of demonic
magnificence, that their actions do not evidence any character behind them of being.
It consoles us because it means that we have a framework ready to comprehend who figures like
Eichmann were, and what he has done, when in fact that framework is really shattered by the
reality of what Eichmann really is. It seduces us into thinking that this is just another example
of people gone villainous. But aren't things, that's not true. This is not about individual
villains coordinating their work together. Instead, a society as a whole went mad into a kind of moral
stupor. And this is the term that aren't characterized as the monality of evil, a term that,
because it is so common in our world, we should seek to understand it.
Now the first thing to know about the monality of evil is that she doesn't think that everyone,
every form of evil is banal. She wants to say that some kinds of evil, very important kinds are
banal. She thinks there are sadists, she thinks there are savage people, that that's not the
issue. Our normal moral categories can capture them. The problem is that we have a series of
phenomena increasingly common in our world where individual villainry doesn't seem to capture the
story. The Holocaust wasn't a conspiracy of satanic supermen. It was rather an essentially
bureaucratic phenomena and it must be addressed as such. And she thought that this was the problem,
this was what wasn't addressed in the trial in Jerusalem. While the prosecution sought to portray
Eichmann as a devil, he himself displayed none of the maliciousness attributed to him. He talked
only in clichés. He borrowed words and phrases from people who spoke to him and tried to just
repeat what people said. He exhibited no ability to think on his own nor any capacity for imagination.
The disparity between the prosecution's portrayal of Eichmann as a kind of demonic villain and the
uncomprehending, cliché spouting, automatically unthinkingly mendacious idiot in the prisoner's
dock was so great at times aren't thought it threatened to turn the trial into a farce.
The idea of attributing intention or motives to someone like Eichmann was almost out of place,
she said. This is a classic line about Eichmann here, she says, except for an extraordinary
diligence in looking out for his own personal advancement. He had no motives at all. He merely
to put the matter colloquially never realized what he was doing.
That's an interesting thought. How can the central bureaucrat of the Third Reich, of the
Holocaust, of the final pollution, never realize what he's doing? Well, a couple really interesting
things to know about Eichmann. He only ever once saw people being, or saw the effects of a massacre
once he was out in the field and he came across an action, as they were called,
where a bunch of people had just been shot and buried underground and literally there was blood
bubbling up from the ground. He described this in a trial and he said it made him very upset.
The other instance is where one of the people, one of the Jewish council leaders he had been
working with to organize the movement of the Jews had been, from his perspective,
accidentally picked up and taken to Auschwitz. This guy got a note to Eichmann saying,
I'm in Auschwitz, can you help me? Eichmann, the only time he ever did, he went to Auschwitz
and he found this death camp prisoner. He said in the trial, I put my arm around him and I said,
what a mess we've gotten ourselves into here. Can you imagine this? An SS officer in Auschwitz
going up to a person in the famous striped prisoner pajamas, putting his arm around him and saying,
yeah, my dear friend, how did this happen? This is terrible. He couldn't get him out of Auschwitz,
he said. That would have been against the rules. Although Eichmann was the guy who ran the place,
he was the guy who, he was the boss of everybody. But he got the common not to let this guy great
a gravel path. And it turns out that about six weeks later, the guy was shot trying to escape
anyway. But think about the lack of reality Eichmann demonstrated in that event. Here he is in Auschwitz.
He knows what goes on there and he just won't even acknowledge it. He doesn't even realize,
he doesn't seem to think of anything that's actually before his eyes. That's what our it means.
Now, this is important. This suggests that calling totalitarian evil banal doesn't make it trivial.
Aaron's point is not that anyone, that Eichmann was an ordinary guy, that anyone would have done
what he did. She simply claimed that Eichmann's evil doesn't require superhuman capacities on the
one hand or any kind of demonicness on the other. Her claim is really that Eichmann's evil, his
banality, his shallowness is simply as deep as his evil could go. That's not to say that there
aren't wicked people again, but that the kind of evil we have to worry about politically
in this world, a world filled with totalitarian states, is the kind of evil that Eichmann
represents. That's the new challenge. We know about sadists. We know about tyrants. What we have to
worry about now are bureaucrats. And this suggests something of how she wants to condemn Eichmann
as well, how she would write the trial. For her, the problem is not that Eichmann is a devil,
a demonic person. The trial is not about his character, his soul. The problem is not who he is.
Well, at least that's not why he's on trial. He's on trial for what he did. He's on trial
because of his actions in the world and what they did to people in the world.
The trial is a judicial and political act, not a moral assessment of Eichmann. She offers
a moral assessment, but she wants to say that the judgment of the trial has to be about his action.
And the reason he needs to die, and she very clearly thinks that he needs to die, he needs
to be hung, is precisely because of the actions he did, not because of the character he is.
Now, having I said all that, let me wrap this up because we'll see RN's thoughts coming back
to us in future lectures. The lessons she offered are still yet to be learned.
Many observers at the Yugoslavia war crimes trials and the Hague, trials of people implicated in
the atrocities in the Balkans of all sides, many observers in the post-genocide Rwanda
trials in Rwanda noted the incongruity of the prisoners pre-war lives with their deeds.
And many of the prosecution cases rely on trying to construct a prehistory of such people's
sadism or cruelty, but often no such prehistory exists. The problem is if we want to say that
the reason that we can judge people as evil is because they are in some sense in their
inner lives evil, we're going to misunderstand the character of modern political evil.
Now, RN's study was a study done in a way from outside the experience of totalitarianism,
but it's matched in certain ways by lessons from the inside as well. Though here the work is presented
by and large not as direct theoretical reflection, but instead as a series of literary reflections
on the experiences of those who have suffered under totalitarian states. And we'll see
what to say about those things in the next lecture.
