Welcome back.
It's time to end these lectures on the history of human attempts to discern why evil exists
and how we should live in its shadow.
I want to end now by looking back on all these lectures and suggesting some lessons that
we can draw from them for our own lives, both today and going forward.
It is truly, in the words of the Gilgamesh scribe, an old story, but one that can still
be told.
It is what in our very first lecture we heard Zbigniew Herbert call history's dense and
dark material, which will require many consciousnesses to shed light upon it.
You might think from this that evil has no solution, that there is nothing to do but
bear it as best we can, without hope of any intellectual advance in comprehending it,
any insights that we can gain from this struggle.
But I don't want to end with so completely a pessimistic note.
Perpessimism is its own kind of consolation, isn't it?
To despair of a solution, to drop our tools and just walk away is so much more easy than
struggling with the idea that the answers won't come easily, if at all.
No, our problem is simply that the challenge is genuinely, genuinely hard.
It's something we've been struggling with ever since the first pages of recorded history.
It probably will be something we continue to wrestle with until the sun burns out, or
we do.
But that it is difficult does not mean that we cannot wrestle some deeper comprehension,
some richer apprehension out of the mystery.
And I submit that a number of the ways of looking at evil that we have talked about
in these lectures offer us good places to begin in this project.
Let me begin just by recapitulating something of the journey we've been on here.
Over the course of these many lectures, we've seen the manifold attempts by thinkers and
writers of diverse beliefs to represent and anatomize evil, diagnose its challenges, and
formulate a range of responses.
There are, of course, severe limits to what we've studied.
Most obviously, we've only studied what can broadly be called Western conceptions of evil.
And in fact, there have been over the course of human history and are currently several
major civilizational ways of being human, distinct ways of understanding the cosmos
and the human's place within it.
China, Mesoamerica, the ancient Near East, South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Sub-Saharan
Africa, there might have been several distinct ways of being human.
And then Europe.
In these lectures, we've really only been studying the European and a few ancient Near
Eastern approaches to these things.
Others with other skills, with other forms of learning, can talk in an educated way about
those other forms of being human, but not I.
Nor even within this Western tradition have we studied everyone that we could have studied.
We've not addressed some really major thinkers such as Kierkegaard, Abelard, Seneca, Cicero,
Carl Jung, Carl Rahner, Zoroaster, Locke, and Burke, Tocqueville, Foucault, Montesquieu.
There are thousands of people we could have talked about.
All of them have much to say about evil, that it would be good for us to hear that we could
learn much from.
But within the confines of these lectures, we've done enough, I think, to give us some
basis on which to form some thoughts about how people in the West have thought about
these matters for the last four, five thousand years.
A fair range, I think it's reasonable to say.
What these lectures teach us is the intractability of the challenge of evil for humanity and
humanity's ceaseless efforts to confront that challenge.
In this way, Rousseau was right.
You'll recall that he said that we cannot help but ask these questions.
We cannot help but struggle with them precisely because the reservoir of hope in our beings
is such that it can never be fully quenched.
We always ask these very abstract questions of why there is evil.
It's not simply a matter of putting a bandaid on the immediate problems that evil presents
to us, the wound, the damages, the evils, the malices, the vindictiveness of our moment.
All of those events, all of those phenomena make us step back from them in some part of
our brain, in some part of our soul and say, how does this world hang together if these
kinds of questions, if these kinds of realities are there?
Now in all these certain themes and issues have appeared again and again.
We've uncovered what we could call different layers, different strata of thinking about
evil.
Most basically, if you saw from the first lecture forward, there are three large families
in the people we've looked at, three large families of thinking about evil, of understanding
it.
On the one hand, you have pictures of evil that represent it as, in some sense, about
folly, stupidity, and about nothingness.
People like Plato on the one hand, Augustine, Pascal, people who think that in some important
way, evil suggests a kind of nihilism that is available to us in the world.
A second group of families, a second group of, second family of theories, talks about
evil in terms of a natural component of our world, a part of our world that is in some
important way, and expungible from it, a consequence of just the kinds of creatures we are and
the kind of world this is.
In this sense, thinkers in different ways, such as Nietzsche and Freud, Aristotle, possibly
even someone like Lucidides, could be here.
Suffering and malice are simply part of the world we live in.
And then in the third category of theories about this, we saw thinkers like Irenaeus
and Hegel, and as I suggested, much of our contemporary thinking imagines evil as a kind
of inevitable step on the process of maturation.
For human beings, perhaps for the cosmos as a whole, in some important way in this family's
view, evil is an estrangement that is necessary for us to become mature, to become properly
self-conscious about who we are and our place in the cosmos.
All of these accounts, all of these families are in important ways significant and valuable
and bear important testimony and insights that it's worth our hearing.
Another layer is the question of whether, and this is I think really interesting to me,
because before I had worked out these lectures, I hadn't actually seen this, but there is
a long-standing debate between those who see evil as, in some important way, the refusal
to be properly extreme in the pursuit of virtue.
The refusal to see that sometimes virtue requires a real zealotry.
In a way, Plato, Augustine, Pascal, all line up on this side that evil turns out to be
a kind of mediocrity in the face of a situation where extreme effort is required.
On the other side, there's another body of scholars, another collection, who say, you
know, there's something there, but the danger is that, in fact, evil is exactly the expression
of an extremity, an extreme zealotry, where moderation is the better course, thinkers
like Aristotle arguing against Plato, Montaigne arguing against Pascal, Hume arguing against
any number of people.
This tension between is evil something that is a manifestation of our failure to be properly
committed to the world, or to the good, the cause of the good, or God, versus a construal
that says evil is in some ways an over-commitment, a hyper-commitment, to a narrow range of ends
that when we are committed to them, fails to make us see the full range, the full spectrum
of human beings and human goods.
That's another layer.
A third layer would be the question of the implications of our understanding of evil
for our understanding of the universe as a whole, and of our understanding of the universe
in turn for our understanding of evil.
All the debates around theodicy, all the debates around whether or not increased knowledge
of the cosmos is going to help us master the propensity we have to evil.
These debates are all informing this level of the question of evil.
Another one is the question of the relationship between civilization and barbarism, and even
the debate that emerges in the 19th century and then grows in importance in the 20th,
the debate about whether or not modernity itself is in some ways complicit for creating
new kinds of evil.
Remember Hannah Arendt saying that the problem with totalitarian evil in the 20th century
is it creates a new kind of political evil that we never had imagined could exist before,
the kind that shows us that humans can actually be turned into kind of robots or zombies.
Connected to this, themes of technology and scientific advance the dangers of knowledge
and experience, the possibly novel challenges of modern politics, especially totalitarian
states as Arendt says.
Even the hegemony of a particular kind of scientific rationality, or a way of thinking
about life itself as potentially that too restrictive to contain the full spectrum again
of human life.
These sorts of what you can call dimensions of how evil can affect our thinking, the
mode of intellectual engagement with the world, that's another dimension of evil that we've
tried to bring to our attention, highlight and focus on in an explicit way.
And last, but certainly not least, the question that for me anyway lies at the heart of a
lot of these issues.
And that is again for me captured most vividly in a few very intense, very powerful pieces
of art, Dante and Milton, Conrad, possibly Camus, The Fall with Jean-Baptiste Clamont.
The question of the deep fundamental character of evil, is it banal, is it empty, is it
demonic, is it vacuous, is it positive, is it ultimately unnatural to our cosmos, to
us, or is it fundamentally part of the world's essence?
All these are questions that we've been trying to get at in these lectures.
Now one problem that we face with evil today is just that we don't know how to handle it.
When we think about outside of the scope of these lectures, people today, ordinary everyday
people, all of us together, we seem not to be able to understand the problems we confront
when we confront evil.
If you think about the 20th and 21st centuries' horrors, the extent of suffering and human
malice in these centuries has truly been remarkable.
And yet often we think about ourselves as somehow in a better moral situation than people
in previous centuries.
Whatever you say about the 18th century, something like the Holocaust was unimaginable in it.
The invention of modern terrorism is in fact a modern invention.
The intentional attempt to destroy human civilians with bombs, that itself is a relatively
modern invention.
Why do we continue to insist that somehow we are morally superior to people three or
four centuries ago if we're doing this and they wouldn't have even found it thinkable?
Again, think about Andrew Delbanco's line, the line I gave you in the last lecture,
the previous lecture, a gap has opened up between our awareness of evil and the intellectual
resources we have for handling it.
That might be the problem here.
Increasingly, we know neither how to resist nor how to suffer evil, most basically because
we don't understand it.
Evil bewilders us, and our typical response to it is really more of a theatricalization
of a response.
It's kind of a histrionic which reveals not any real horror at the reality and danger
of evil, but rather our fear of admitting our incomprehension of what it is we confront,
what it is we are called to respond to when we encounter evil.
Much of our current entertainment, movies, TV, what have you, is fascinated by evil,
but that's partially because, importantly because we don't understand it.
Entertainment returns us to the puzzles of our lives in interesting ways and offers us
short-term solutions like snack food, like junk food, to dealing with them.
One of the things that it most is interested in is criminality, evil, malice, these sorts
of things.
The reason why?
Because for us especially, as moderns, as people here in the 21st century, it's hard
for us to make sense of a world where evil of our sort exists.
We don't know what to do.
To see what I mean about this, just witness the confusion that people felt.
Again, after 9-11, everyone used the language of evil.
Pretty much everybody talked about it incessantly for a few weeks, but it was a fairly brittle
language we used.
Some people thought that this was a direct attack by evil incarnate in some sense and
others reacted against that, resisting any use of the discourse of evil.
Few imagined that there could be a place to stand between a kind of furious demonization
of people who were not like us and an abject self-recrimination blaming us and us alone
for what had happened.
And since then, the historical depth of our problems has grown even more immense.
I remember in the 1990s opening up a magazine once in the early 90s and seeing a wonderful
cartoon.
They had these two old men sitting in an old men's club and they're sitting there, kind
of looks like they're just staring off into space, astonished by the history of the world,
what current events were taking them to be.
This is 92, 93 when the collapse of the former Yugoslavia was underway.
And these old men, you could imagine them, you know, having been born around the beginning
of the First World War, are fitting there and one of them says to the other, the Balkans,
this is where I came in.
The idea of the cartoon, right, being that in some sense we've had a whole century and
look, we're back where we started again.
But as I give these lectures now, American troops, my country's troops, are fighting
in places that the Romans and the Greeks and Alexander the Great fought in 2,500 years
ago.
For a long time in this last decade, American troops actually had the ancient city of Babylon
within one of their military bases.
The ruins of the city was within the perimeter of the base.
A more poignant, ironic joke on the part of whatever God may be is hard to come by.
That somehow, Babylon, you know, this is where Western civilization came in and look,
we're back there at it again.
Maybe these questions are just too hard for us.
Maybe the problems are simply intractable.
But why not then simply punt on asking them?
Why not just avert our eyes from these questions?
Why not just eat, drink, and be merry?
Well, for me there are two basic reasons.
First, evil hasn't gone away, nor is it likely to.
As the contemporary American poet Charles Simick says, God's refuted, but the devil's not.
And insofar as it's not, it will continue to be a puzzle for us.
And that's the second point.
We can't avoid thinking about evil.
If we try to avoid it, it looms over the horizon as what remains unthought for us.
And so all our thinking knows of its presence just over the edge of our vision.
And eventually it will intrude again into our lives and into our minds, as it did for
many of us on one beautiful, crystal clear, late summer day in 2001.
But even if we know why, we still have to think about how to think about evil.
We need a way of thinking about it that will avoid the two sorts of pitfalls that I mentioned
earlier, the two sorts of pitfalls that thinking about evil is especially prone to stumble into.
On the one hand, the attempt to demonize other people, people who are unlike us.
On the other hand, the temptation to internalize evil, to render it entirely a phenomenon that
makes us worried about gaining and accruing guilt in our souls in some way.
If we can find a language of evil that neither, first of all, affixes too quickly and easily
the title of evil to people or to groups of people that are unlike us in some fundamental
way, and also, B, does not paralyze us with guilt and drag us down into despair, we can
find a language of evil that does neither of those things, avoids those problems, then
we've got something that's possibly workable.
I've suggested in these lectures that there are several different routes to such a possibly
workable language. Which one you think is best is in some ways a matter of your own judgment.
But there's another question behind the problem of evil.
And this is a kind of a little latent time bomb in the question, laid down at least as
early as the tree of the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil.
And that's the question of whether or not the knowledge that we could gain, the theoretical
insight we would gain, does it produce anything like hope?
And many thinkers, ancient and modern would suggest it doesn't. Consider the book of Ecclesiastes.
In much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow.
Or as T.S. Eliot put it, after such knowledge, what forgiveness?
These are real questions, and we cannot avoid them. We cannot deny their concerns.
Any answer to the problem of evil must recognize the profoundly sober thought that we may not
be able finally to gain any useful insights, not just insights that are interesting and
illuminating about evil, but insights of the sort that might provide us with hope, that
might provide us with knowledge not just about evil, but how to go on from our encounters,
concrete and otherwise abstract, with evil.
But you know, all the evidences of evil, suffering, and cruelty in the world, are not the only
thing about our world. They would not provoke us unless we felt that they were in some fundamental
way wrong. Exceptional, curious, anomalous problems that require explanation.
If the world was organized in such a way that evil was truly, naturally a part of it, so
that it fits smoothly into the world, we wouldn't find it so puzzling. But bare fact, that is,
that evil is so puzzling, is itself, I think, a sign of hope.
And not the only sign of hope, it seems to me, at least not for me.
At the end, consider the witness of Leonard Wolfe, a great English writer, intellectual,
political activist, and husband and savior sometimes of Virginia Wolfe. I'll let him
attest to what I mean here. I take this account from his autobiography of the years leading
up to World War II, an autobiography that he wrote in the 1960s, in that he recounts
the end. A little scene, and I'm quoting him now, a little scene which took place in the
last months of peace. They were the most terrible months of my life, for helplessly and hopelessly
one watched the inevitable approach of war. One of the most horrible things at that time
was to listen on the wireless to the speeches of Hitler, the savage and insane ravings of
a vindictive underdog who suddenly saw himself to be all powerful.
We were at Rodmell, that's their country house, during the late summer of 1939, and I used
to listen to those ranting, raving speeches. One afternoon I was planting in the orchard
under an apple tree, Irish reticula, those lovely violet flowers which, like the daffodils,
come before the swallow dares and take the winds of March with beauty. He loves poetry.
He's a great guy. Suddenly I heard Virginia's voice calling to me from the sitting room
window. Hitler is making a speech. I shouted back. I shan't come. I'm planting iris, and
they will be flowering long after he is dead. Last March, this is March of 1966 now, he's
writing about recent events. Last March, 21 years after Hitler committed suicide in the
bunker, a few of those violet flowers still flowered under the apple tree in the orchard.
It's the bold resilience of those flowers and the hope they represent that the world
is fundamentally a good place, that it is something that's worth saving, worth living
him, that serves to enable a rejuvenated belief, a resuscitated belief, both in the idea of
evil and in the idea of an evil inflamed by goodness, in the idea that humans have standards
against which they may willfully revolt, and that in so doing they are violating the order
of nature itself. And it is in those flowers that we have seen imitated throughout these
lectures in human beings stubbornly persisting in the face of great pressures never to surrender
to despair. But more than this, we can say here at the end that in fact the stubborn
persistence of those flowers speaks of another kind of persistence, namely our own, our own
persisting to ask the question of evil, to continue to be puzzled at it, not just to
resist it, but to be puzzled by it, to find evil a mystery, something that needs an explanation,
something that raises questions of meaning for us. It's a fact not often taken enough
notice of, unless they'll take in enough account of, that this puzzlement is itself a sign
of tremendous hope about our condition. If for example we were to consider the pessimistic
argument that the reality of evil should teach us that our world is not fundamentally morally
ordered, then it seems that our continually asking of this question, this is a problem
for us. As the great English Christian apologist and novelist writer C. S. Lewis has put it,
in terms of people's stubborn belief in religion, in the face of pessimism, and I read from
Lewis here, the very strength and facility of the pessimist case at once poses us a problem.
If the universe is so bad, or even half so bad, how on earth did human beings ever come
to attribute it to the activity of a wise and good creator? Men are fools perhaps, but
hardly so foolish as that. Lewis wants to say here, if the evidence is so strong against
goodness, how did people ever come to imagine that there was a good creator, a good God,
a good moral order? The direct inference from black to white, from evil flower to virtuous
root, from senseless work to a workman infinitely wise, staggers belief. The spectacle of the
universe as revealed by experience can never have been the ground of religion. It must
always have been something in spite of which religion acquired from a different source
was held. So much Lewis. Think about that phrase, in spite of which, in that phrase
we perceive something remarkable, namely the fact of our stubbornness, in insisting
that the basic truth about the world is its goodness. But we should not be self-congratulatory
about this stubbornness. It's not something we seem to will consciously to affirm. It's
not, that is, most basically a form of moral courage, but rather a form of what we might
call moral acknowledgement of confessing, giving witness to what people simply see. Now, this,
this isn't really a theoretical insight. This is fundamentally a practical insight.
Our reflection on evil doesn't begin from distanciated theoretical presuppositions or
from an armchair philosophizing situation, but by attending to and reflecting on our
pre-theoretical responses to conflict, suffering and evil. Humans naturally resist evil. They
resist evil both practically in their bodies by fighting it. They resist it cognitively
and intellectually in their minds by refusing to accept the picture of the world that evil
would press upon us. They even in part resist not only evil from the outside, but their
own evil, their own sinful deeds, their conscience often attests against this. And they should
do so. This is Lewis' argument, and I think it's mine too. They should do so, for evil
is inherently evil. And in their very resistance, cognitive and practical, theoretical and muscular,
they manifest some sense of goodness and justice, an intuition which seems a providential provisional
witness of some basic goodness present in the world. And this explains part of the difficulty
that we have found humans to have in thinking about evil. For while we might think about
it as a speculative matter, a theoretical matter, perhaps the origins of a truly useful response
to evil, those origins are found in our practical resistance to evil itself. To the bare fact
that what we call evil, we call evil and not just the way things are, or how the world
is organized, or just part of the deal. Our practical astonishment at, our puzzlement
at, and our resistance to evil may be more useful for thinking about a proper overall
understanding of what evil is and why it exists than we might at first give it credit for.
We might want to look more to our practical reactions to evil than our theoretical speculations.
Perhaps that is, more deeply than the details of their various answers to the question why
evil exists. The thinkers and the texts that we have looked at in this lecture series help
us come to a better understanding of evil, simply by the bare fact that they all founded
a puzzle of one sort or another. Perhaps that is the crucial clue we have been stocking
all along. It may well be that, in the bare experience of mystery at the puzzle of evil,
we see the secret to the answer to that mystery. Not in any theoretical revolution, not in
any psychological consolation, but simply in the fact that in our minds, in our hearts,
in our souls, in our spirits, and with our hands, we are opposed to evil and we struggle
with it every day and the struggle goes on. And I think that's where we'll end this. Thank
you for spending this time with me. These lectures have been a pleasure for me and I hope they
have been for you as well.
