继 ps diolch yn cael Mahmary 하ffwуры y cyffrNote'r Seinfeld chi'n gwybod yr uswn
syniad hwnnw, yn tu lle chael gwybod y dотаill iau yn cael hwn
ol gyda chi nu trades ond allu o'r gwirledd tickets ddiwrnod i wylio.
Fe oedd ci'n byw ddifweud demen nhw – i wge achievement arall y gweithgaredd dros yma,
So, it's kind of exciting that, you know, you've getting a little advance glimpse of what I've been up to for the last three years in writing this book.
The catalyst for this book was partly the fact that I took over this new job from Richard Dawkins,
the professor for the public understanding of science,
The title always makes me laugh somehow because there is a kind of expectation with this professorship that maybe I know the whole of science and that I am here to explain it to the public.
Quite a few journalists seem to have this impression as well because when I first got this job I would get these phone calls from people.
Wrth i ddim yn gwneud o'r cyfnoddiad yng Nghymru, mae'r ymddiad deilio'r cyfnoddiad yn ymddiad yng nghymru.
Mae'r cyfnoddiad yng Nghymru yn ymddiad yng nghymru.
Yn cyfnoddiad yng Nghymru, mae'r ymddiad yn ymddiad yng Nghymru.
Felly, ychydig yn ymddiad yng Nghymru?
Felly, ymddiad yng nghymru?
Felly, boedd yn gwneud hynny yn eu ddweud.
Felly, rydyn ni eisiau yn siŵr ymddiad.
I'm really embarrassed to admit. You can look me up on Wikipedia, but you can look a lot of things up on Wikipedia actually.
So I quickly went online, pulled up telomeres, read quickly through what a telomere was,
and then confidently told this journalist that the pieces at the end of the DNA,
which control how long a piece of DNA will last.
So I realised this is kind of crazy. There's no way I can be expected to know it all.
But actually it began to make me think, is it possible at any point in history that scientists,
scientists might know it all? Could we answer everything? Could we know everything?
And so that was partly the sort of inspiration for this journey,
was to see whether there are any problems in science that by their very nature we will never be able to solve.
So actually the books are divided up into seven edges of knowledge,
which kind of took me on this journey outside of my own area of mathematics into different regions.
And I'm going to take you through a few of these stories.
But I think that kind of desire to know is absolutely basic.
And it is extraordinary how much we have discovered, or the news stories coming out each week.
I mean, I think since I took over this job, the sort of things we discovered,
we managed to land a kind of spaceship the size of a washing machine on the side of a comet.
Absolutely extraordinary.
We've got robots that we've programmed to develop their own language that we as humans can't understand.
We have to interact with the robots to be able to understand that language.
We've sequenced the DNA of a 50,000-year-old cave girl
and repaired the pancreas using stem cells of a diabetic patient.
I mean, this catalogue of things that we've achieved and the things we've discovered is extraordinary.
And I think that basic desire to know is almost as basic as a desire to reproduce.
And here's Aristotle, the beginning of metaphysics.
He says, everyone by nature desires to know.
In fact, I did a little research and the word to know is actually one of only about 100
which have a universal translation across all languages.
Not even the word eat is necessarily clearly translatable into each language.
So an incredibly basic desire.
But it's always dangerous at any point in history to declare you will never know something.
And I've kept in mind on my journey throughout the last three years
trying to find out those things that we cannot know.
A few stories.
One in particular is this guy, Auguste Comte,
who in the middle of the 19th century declared,
we shall never be able to study by any method the chemical composition of stars.
Now at the time, that seemed completely fair.
I mean, how on earth are we ever going to visit a star to dig a bit out
and actually find out what it's made of?
But of course, a few decades later, we knew exactly what stars are made out of.
Why? Because we don't necessarily have to go and visit the star.
The star is visiting us every night.
The light coming from the star is telling us what the star is made of.
So it's always dangerous and I'm sort of very clear that, you know,
I'm not sure whether I've got any definitive answers here about things
that you can absolutely say you can't know.
But that was the journey to try and understand
whether maybe you can articulate that there are things that you will never know.
Of course, the desire to know about the unknowable isn't restricted to science.
I mean, there's a very famous example of a politician
who got into quite a scrambled mess trying to describe his theory of knowledge.
Here he goes, Donald Rumsfeld trying to explain about the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq
and whether they were there or not.
To clear, there are known knowns.
There are things that we know that we know.
We also know there are known unknowns.
That is to say, we know there are some things we do not know.
But there are also unknown unknowns, the ones we don't know we don't know.
Now, actually, Donald Rumsfeld got awarded the Foot in the Mouth Award
by the Plain English-speaking Society for this statement,
but I actually think it's very unfair,
because I think this is a wonderful statement about states of knowledge.
The unknown unknowns, those are those black swan events.
I can't tell you about the unknown unknowns else they'd be known.
I'm going to try and tell you about the known unknowns,
whether we can know what those unknowns are.
There's another category here that I think he missed, though,
which I think is very interesting when it comes to a politician,
which is, of course, the unknown knowns,
which Slavoj Žižek actually pointed out,
was those Freudian things that you actually know,
but you don't deny that you know them,
but they come out and somehow,
and I think probably those are the most relevant to a politician as the unknown knowns.
So this journey to try and find the unknown unknowns,
I wanted to try and apply my mathematical mind
to see whether I could articulate
whether there were any questions in the science.
Another inspiration for this book
actually came from the person that I took over this job,
as a Somoni Professor for the Public Understanding of Science,
because my predecessor was Richard Dawkins.
Now, you, of course, know that Richard spent a lot of time
not just talking about biology and evolution,
but also about God.
His God Delusion book was probably one of his most popular books.
So I kind of braced myself when I took over this job
for getting a lot of questions, not about telomeres,
but about what my beliefs about religion were and God's were.
Now, I was quite keen to just create a sort of distance between me and Richard.
There were very different things scientifically.
So I kind of prepared this response to journalists
who would phone up and say,
what are your religious beliefs?
I would tell them I'm a deeply religious man.
My religion happens to be the arsenal.
I have faith every year,
and it's been tested once again
that next season we will win the premiership.
I go to my temple every Saturday or Sunday,
this weekend it will be Sunday.
I sing songs to my idols and I worship them.
And so I hoped that this would kind of bat away
these questions about religion.
But some of these journalists were very persistent.
So I remember one instance on,
it was a Sunday morning on BBC Northern Ireland Radio.
There was a programme about philosophy and religion,
and I said I'm quite happy to talk about philosophy and science and things like that,
but I really don't want to talk about religion.
Of course, as soon as we got on air,
that went out the window and he was like,
some artist, do you believe in God?
He wasn't from India, sorry.
I would stop doing that.
So he just kept on pressing me,
and it became quite an aggressive interview
to the point that as a mathematician you see,
if you're asking me whether something exists,
actually we spend a lot of time at the Math Institute here
proving things exist,
maybe without being able to know what they look like,
but we can prove that they exist,
or often we prove that things don't exist.
Andrew Wild, who this building is named after,
proved that there aren't solutions to Fermat's occasions.
He had a way to prove these things do not exist.
So I said, OK, I'm quite happy to engage in this.
If you give me a definition that I can start to engage
my mathematical mind with.
So he said, ah, well, God,
that's something which transcends human understanding.
Ah, you've just played me out of the game.
I mean, how can I engage with that?
So it seemed to me, so I got brave.
I said, well, how can we stop with the debate with that?
But actually, that definition sort of stuck in my mind,
as quite an intriguing one.
So as the years went on,
and I sort of decided to engage a little bit more perhaps
with this kind of the bridge between science and religion,
I began to think about that as a definition.
But what about the definition of God being the things
that we cannot understand,
the things that we cannot know, the things which transcend us?
So can I apply my scientific mind to what that God would be like?
And I talked to a philosopher in my college, in New College,
Stephen Mulhall, just before I was doing an event
with a chief rabbi actually about,
he's got a wonderful book called Science and Religion,
The Great Partnership.
And he referred me to this guy Herbert McCabe,
and here in Oxford, who actually a Marxist theologian.
Get that, you know, that's quite a cool title.
But he's got quite a lot of crazy articles
about Christian kind of traditions and things,
but he had this one article which Stephen Mulhall referred me to,
and in there he says,
to assert the existence of God is to claim
that there is an unanswered question about the universe.
So I thought that's quite an interesting definition,
and I sort of, through the book,
I run with sort of just exploring a little bit about
what sort of idea that is as a God.
Herbert McCabe says, you know, religion basically committed
iconoclism by giving this very abstract high concept
too many properties it just didn't have.
And of course as kids that's what we get introduced to,
all the silly things, and then we sort of discard that.
So I sort of wanted to have a perhaps a more nuanced engagement
with this question by defining something
of abstract like this.
Now there is this term, the God of the gaps,
which you may have heard of,
but that's actually used by religious people
as a kind of negative thing.
A lot of religious people will say,
no, you're meant to attempt to know God,
so actually the God of the gaps is something
that they sort of use as a kind of negative statement.
But I want to try and reclaim that maybe
and just explore through this book
and a little bit with you now
as we go through these attempts
to find out what is it that could transcend
our understanding forever.
So as I said, the book is divided up
into these seven edges of knowledge,
seven areas that I've sort of explored,
which go from trying to understand
the nature of the universe, is it infinite,
whether we can infinitely divide matter,
what's going on inside our brain.
So I'm going to take you on a little tour
of a few of these to give you a sort of feel
for what might be unknowable
and whether we can know that sort of thing.
I think one of the ultimate symbols
of the unknowable is in fact the dice.
A dice would not make a fun game
if you could actually predict
what this was going to do next.
So the first edge that I explored
is about the nature of the future.
Can we predict the future?
And in fact mathematics at its heart
is very much trying to do that.
I'll call a mathematician a pattern-searcher.
What we do is look at patterns in the past
and try and use those to extrapolate
to understand patterns into the future.
So how powerful is my language of mathematics
in being able to predict what is going to happen next?
So actually each of the edges is accompanied
by an object which kind of sparks
my journey into the unknown.
So the object for this particular edge
is the casino dice.
And this is in fact a casino dice
that I picked up when I was in Vegas.
I was trying to use my maths to make a lot of money
and I've lost so much money
but they let me keep the dice.
That's nice of them.
Now it's a thing of beauty.
You can come and look at it afterwards.
Because it has to be incredibly fair,
it's a pretty much perfect cube.
The edges are just beautifully sharp
and the paint has the same density,
the acetate, it's really...
It is a thing of beauty
and it also is something that I absolutely hate.
Because I cannot...
My desire to do mathematics was partly
about wanting to know, with 100% certainty
that something was true.
And here was this thing
which when I roll it, I just don't know
what I got to one that time.
I might be able to...
I've got the equations for this thing
but how can I tell what it's going to do next?
So that was a kind of challenge.
Actually maybe if I worked hard enough
I could know what this was going to do.
And I guess the hero on my journey
to try and use mathematics
to be able to predict the future
is Isaac Newton.
Because Isaac Newton came up
with the laws of motion, the physical laws of motion,
the idea of calculus.
He showed us how the universe can be controlled.
We can predict when an eclipse is going to happen.
We were able to predict that Mercury
was going to go across the sun just recently.
And that's all thanks to
this revolution that Newton started.
Which kind of revealed
that the universe may be
a kind of clockwork universe
controlled by these equations.
If you know how things are set up,
you run the equations, you can know
what's going to happen into the future.
Well, if Newton is my hero,
my nemesis in this whole desire
to know the future is this guy here,
Henri Poincaré, a French mathematician
who at the beginning of the 20th century
said, yeah, well,
universe may be controlled by equations.
It may be that
if you know the absolute start-up
of any system you run the equations,
you'll know exactly what's going to happen in the future.
But he said, unfortunately,
you're never going to have that complete knowledge
of how a system is set up.
Because there's always a little bit of error.
If you're measuring how the solar system is set up,
then how can you be sure
that you've got the 50th decimal place right?
And what Poincaré showed
is that just a very small change
in maybe the 50th decimal place
may cause a dramatically different outcome.
Now, one of my favourite examples
of chaos in motion,
and this is an illustration
that even something very simple
can have a very difficult
future to try and predict.
So this is a pendulum.
Now, a pendulum is generally something so simple
and predictable, we use it to keep track of time.
But this is a slightly different pendulum.
So this is what I call a double pendulum.
So it's jointed,
so it's a little bit like a leg.
So it's just two metal pieces here.
So the, you know,
it's a very simple geometric description
and the equations are equally quite simple.
But being able to predict
the behaviour of this thing
is almost impossible.
So let's set this off.
And...
You see, why are you laughing?
Because it's so hilariously funny
that you can't predict it.
It's very interesting.
It always makes me laugh.
I've had a little notch there,
so the point is I'm going to try and repeat that behaviour.
I'm going to try and start it off
in exactly the same starting position.
Then it's...
Wow!
It's a completely different behaviour that time.
I think I've tightened it a little bit too fast
because it's...
Let's do a big one here.
This is my favourite desktop toy.
I can play with this for absolutely hours.
But it sort of illustrates
that even very simple systems
you make a very small change to the conditions
and it can go in a completely different direction.
And this is the signature of something called chaos.
Another of my favourite desktop toys
is this one here.
I use this to make all my decisions about life.
So you can see it has
different options.
Ask a friend, try again, no way.
Definitely maybe yes.
And what you do is...
I'll show you the little video of this.
So this is one set up in a lab.
You start this thing off and try to predict this.
So I'm going to ask it,
shall I go to have a beer in the pub
after this lecture?
Let's see...
Oh, definitely!
Oh great, so that's good. Excellent.
I think I've...
It always says definitely when I ask it about the beer.
It's really great. Thanks.
But you can see from this that
just if I run that again,
trying to see beforehand
which magnet that's going to end up in.
So there are three magnets here
and the thing is just being pulled around.
It's a bit like an asteroid flying around three planets
and which planet is it going to hit
will eventually go for this one here.
And here's three computer simulations
I did where I actually just changed
something like the sixth decimal place
of the coordinate where the pendulum
started.
And you can see...
So I've coloured the magnets up now.
So I've got blue magnet, a yellow magnet
and just a very small change
caused a completely different behaviour,
a different path, different planet
that the asteroid hit.
And here is a computer simulation
which tells you, helps you to predict
maybe
where the pendulum is going to end up.
So there are some regions which are very predictable.
So if you're close to the yellow magnet
so the idea is if you start the pendulum
off
over a particular point
you look at the colour under that point
where the pendulum is going to end up.
So if I start near a yellow magnet
then the thing just wobbles about
and goes back to the yellow magnet.
But there are other regions
which are a little bit further away.
So here's a very large swath of red.
You start there, it'll swing out
but will then end up at the red magnet.
So small changes are not going to be
cause any dramatic difference
in where the magnet will end up.
But I was starting that magnet
in the top left-hand corner
in this region you have what's called a fractal.
So this is a shape
which has infinite complexity.
So as I zoom in on it, it never simplifies.
It never becomes a single colour.
So it means that
however
accurately I try and measure this thing
just a few more decimal places
can kick it quite easily
from going from the yellow to the red magnet.
So this is saying that
unless I have complete
description of how the universe
is set up, I cannot know the future
in this region. Just a small change
in a decimal place will cause a completely
different outcome to happen.
Now I also
was accompanied on my journey into
these edges of knowledge
by a few experts.
I chose a lot of areas I'm not expert at all
and it's very much was a learning curve for me some of this.
And in this chapter
about chaos I actually chose
a colleague of ours here
in Oxford. This is Bob May
Lord May as he's there.
And he actually discovered
this idea of chaos theory
affects so much of what we're trying
to predict about the future. The reason
that I wasn't sure whether it was going to be a monsoon
out there, I mean yesterday
we had monsoons kind of weather hitting us
being able to predict the weather
five days in advance is impossible
because just a very small change
in some of those measurements of the wind speed
temperature can cause within five days
things to go dramatically different.
Now the planets too
are very sensitive but on a
fortunately on a longer scale than five days.
I mean we're talking sort of five billion years
a very small change can actually cause
the solar system to do something completely different.
But Bob May has
discovered that not only in
these kind of physical systems but also in
biology as well. He's a mathematical
biologist. He discovered that
trying to keep track of population dynamics
is also controlled by chaotic
equations. So just a very
small change you put in one extra animal
and the dynamics can be completely different.
You can have the whole system collapsing
whilst without that animal you can have
a very healthy
pack of animals the next year.
And in fact now he's working
he's a cross-party member in the House of Lords
and he spends a lot of time
actually working on the banking crisis
and trying to understand whether that was an example
of a chaotic behaviour.
And sure enough
people in economics there are regions
like those yellow regions where things are very predictable
and then it can go
into very strange unpredictable regions.
And he said this to me whilst we were talking
I went to him and had lunch with him at the House of Lords
and he said not only in research
but in the everyday world of politics and economics
it would be better off if more people
realised that simple systems do not
necessarily possess simple
dynamic properties.
And I asked him how are you getting on
in trying to persuade your fellow
politicians about the importance of knowing
about chaos theory.
And he said Marcus there are just egos here
nobody's interested in what I said
it's just they're all interested in their careers
so he was very down on that.
But I think that is one of the important things
when you're trying to do policy
is knowing when you can be confident
about what's going to happen next.
I'm not saying that mathematics is completely useless
we've been able to land that spaceship
on the side of a comet because
of Newton's equations.
But it's also important to know
maybe in the top left hand corner
of that fractally picture
where now you can say you can't know.
So it's almost as important to know
when you can't know as to know
when you can know because then you can be
conservative and hunker down and kind
of avoid
the mess that might emerge.
So I came back to my dice and I was
very interested okay well what about this
is this just chaotic
or if I knew this
to a certain amount of detail could I actually
predict what it was going to do next.
I have the laws of motion which control
how this falls, how it hits the table
and I
actually discovered a recent piece
of research done by four Hungarians
which revealed that actually this is more
predictable than I thought it was going to be.
So what they've done is
I mean I had that picture with the three magnets
which I had three colours for
so now we've got six sides
and so we've got six colours to keep track of
so we can draw a picture of how we start
off a dice and what
what that effect will have
on the outcome, which coloured face will it
land on and it turns out that
if the table that you're throwing it on
is
that dissipates quite a lot of energy
so it's sort of when it falls the energy
kind of gets sucked out of it so like a carpet
for example then actually
the behaviour of this is described
by the picture in the top left
hand corner so actually
if the energy is being dissipated so if I throw
this on the floor here
it doesn't bounce very much
and actually it turns out
that we don't have this fractal quality
there's sways of yellow
sways of green, sways of blue
and so a small change is not going to change
where that dice is going to land up
so here's a tip do you want to know which way it's going to land
what you need to look at is the bottom
number because it's more likely to land
when you throw it like that
on the bottom number
in fact I had a one on the bottom and it came up one
so there you are, quids in
but if you think about it
at the craps table in the
you've got to sort of felt on there
it's dissipating some sort of energy
but here this is very hard this table
so as you move through here
the rigidity of the table is increasing
and so it's losing less energy as you go through
so let's try and do that again
so down in here we get a very fractal region
so now a very small change
so
so it landed a four
whilst I had the one on the bottom
at that time
so it depends on the circumstances
but there are regions where I can
know what this dice is going to do next
and actually that's kind of your
one thought is
I've sort of brought up on the universe is controlled
by equations and if you know the complete setup
you should be able to know exactly
what's going to happen next
of course we may not know the complete setup
of the universe
a small change means that you might lose a lot of
knowledge about what's happening next
but in fact there's part of science which says
even if you know the complete setup
of the universe
there are still certain circumstances
where there's no way you're going to know
what's going to happen next
and one of them is
the chapter that I explored
next
was trying to predict the behaviour
of a pot of uranium
on the internet
so this pot of uranium
I audited it over the internet
and I'm assured it's
I'm assured that it's completely safe
but the instructions say
don't eat it
but this actually
at its heart
is the question of when this
is going to radiate
at the side it says
it's going to emit 984
counts of radiation
so if you have a Geiger counter
you get 984 counts per minute
so it's got some sort of
estimate of what it's going to do
but that's only an approximate estimate
so it says over a minute
on average that's what you'll get
what it can't tell me is
when it's going to emit an alpha particle
for example
and the extraordinary thing is
the current state of physics says
how the universe is
that there is no mechanism
nothing that we can do
which is going to tell us
when this uranium is going to emit
it's next particle
that this we say is random
but that's actually just an expression
of our lack of knowledge of the startup
this seems to be something
which the physics says is genuinely random
and actually the person at the heart
of trying to explain what this bit of uranium
is doing, why it's emitting at particular points
this is a picture of Heisenberg
I'm trying to embrace and love Heisenberg
but he's another person I don't really like
and this equation
so you've probably heard of this thing
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
almost embeds the idea that
there are things you cannot know
that you will never be able to know
about a physical system
and it's not a vague wishy-washy
thing about cats and Schrodinger
it's actually a very explicit mathematical formula
and follows out of the mathematics
so these two terms here
delta x and delta p
this is about a position and momentum
so basically
these two things are kind of paired up
and the more knowledge you get
about the position of something
the less you know about the potential momentum
the momentum you remember
is how something is travelling
it involves the speed of the thing
and in fact
I've got to tell you one of my favourite jokes
Heisenberg is storming down the autobahn
in Germany and the police
pull him over and they get him
out of the car and say
sir do you know how fast you were going
there's no but I know exactly where I was
now that's good
a good sign that you're all laughing
because if anyone who didn't laugh
and I now have to explain the joke a little bit
is that there's a trade-off here
and this is what this equation says
the more I know about
the position of something
that's the delta x is controlling
what the error is so the more I know
about it and the smaller the error
in order to make this equation true
the momentum has to increase
the uncertainty
in the momentum has to increase
the knowledge I have of the momentum
I lose knowledge about it
and actually it's perfectly summed up
in some of these lovely experiments
now you might have heard about this thing
called the double slit experiment
where you send an electron through
and it doesn't really decide
it seems to go through both slits at the same time
and actually this thing about uncertainty
is even revealed with just one single slit
so all I'm going to do
is to take my uranium off in a very far distance
so that's going to be my particle gun
I'm going to have say
an alpha particle shooting out of here
and I've got this a large distance away
I've got a screen
with a slit in it
and it means that if a particle passes through there
then there can be
no momentum in the up-down direction
because any momentum in the up-down direction
would push it off
and it would hit the screen and not go through
so if any particle that goes through
that slit
I know has almost
zero momentum
in the vertical position
because that's the only way
if it had any momentum it would not go through that slit
because the distance I've made very large
but as soon as it goes through that slit
I also have now gained
a very tight knowledge
about where that particle is
because it's gone through that slit
so I seem to have got the trade-off
I know exactly the momentum
and I know exactly the position of this thing
but as soon as I know the position
it causes a sudden uncertainty to occur
in the momentum
so sunny this thing gains momentum
when it didn't have it before
and the uncertainty is expressed here
so this is actually experimental data
where they took particles
the smaller the slit
the more information I have
about where that particle is
which means there must be a larger trade-off
in the spread of momentum
and you can see this
the narrower slit is the bottom
graph and then suddenly the momentum is spread
all over the place so where the particle arrives
on the screen could be in a wide
range of possible values
but as I lose information about
position by widening the slit
the momentum comes back in again
and I have more information about the momentum
now this is absolutely extraordinary
it kind of says that I can't know
these two things together
but actually
some physicists have started to interpret this
and saying actually this is a mistaken language
that actually
these particles don't have
a momentum and a position
we're so hooked on the way Newton thought about the world
we just think yes
you've got this electron, it's got some position
it is somewhere
in the momentum and you use that to try and make predictions
but physicists now say
no you shouldn't think of it like that
it's a wrong language
so often some of these kind of unknowns
turn out to be just that we aren't able to use language properly
and so
people now think that you should say
well that electron doesn't have
a position
an identifiable position until you observe
where it is and so we have this scene now
called a quantum wave
which actually describes the probability
that where you'll find that electron
should you
or that particle, alpha particle
should you want to observe it
so you should think of this thing as not having a position
it's got a sort of probabilistic position
spread out over space
the peaks of this wave function
tell you it's more likely to be there
the troughs tell you it's less likely to be there
and this is all you can know
and you can't know where that
where that electron is going to be
more dramatically you can't know
when you observe it
where it's going to be
it could be in any of these kind of peaks
or even in the troughs as well
and so quantum physics at the moment
has at its heart this belief
that it doesn't matter what you do
you will not be able to know and predict
and you can run the experiment over and over again
and you'll get different answers
with the same setup
if you could ever start the thing in the same way
and actually this is responsible for the uranium
emitting particles
you know a lot about the momentum
of the things inside the nucleus of this uranium
which causes an uncertainty in the position
such that at some points
suddenly the particle would say
hey I seem to be outside the nucleus
I'm not inside it anymore and it goes flying off
so this is actually Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
helps to understand
why this thing is actually emitting particles
now there are some people who just believe
this can't be how the universe is really behaving
surely this just can't be random
about what this is doing
and there must be some mechanism
for deciding ok it might look probabilistic
the same as the dice
the best things we had to predict the dice
is probability but we know that there are laws of physics
controlling what that dice is going to do
and one of those who really believed
this just can't be the answer
was Einstein and Einstein had this famous quote
quantum mechanics is very impressive
and it certainly is
it's one of the most well tested theories
we have on the scientific books
it was such accuracy that
we know we're on to something
but an inner voice tells me
that it is not yet the real thing
the theory produces a good deal
but hardly brings us closer to the secret of the old one
I am at all events convinced
that he does not play dice
and I think
maybe it's the mathematician in me
I also
I'm still with Einstein with this
that surely we will come
to a point where we have a new theory
a new Einstein that tells us something
about the mechanism which is going on
which is controlling this
but we know that the mechanism is going to be really
freaky
we know this thing called entanglement
which shows us that any mechanism
there can't be a little internal clock in there
which is just saying now you're spitting out
now you're not whenever you look
this system if it is there
we know must be spread across the whole
of the universe which is controlling
what this thing is doing
now I mentioned right at the beginning
that part of this exploration was about this idea
of God being the things that we cannot know
so here is something that apparently
we are not able to know
when this thing is going to spit out
a bit of its nucleus
so the
actually the person I took on my journey
to this edge of knowledge
is a quantum physicist
but he's also a priest
so this is John Polkinghorn
he likes to call himself a vegetarian butcher
how can somebody be a quantum physicist
and also a priest at the same time
John Polkinghorn he has incredibly good credentials
he's trained with Dirac
in Cambridge then went and trained with Feynman
he made great discoveries
about quarks
and then halfway through
his scientific life
he then decided that he wanted to be ordained
so I was very intrigued to talk to him
about how
does he believe
his God works in the world
because there are a lot of religious scientists
and I must say although I believe in the arsenal
I am an atheist at heart
and I will declare that
but there are quite a lot of religious scientists
but they divide into two groups
and one are the Daists
and one are the Theists
the Daists say okay look
I don't know where this universe came from
I don't know what started it
or what created it but once it's been created
there's no okay I'm going to call that God
because I really don't know what it is
but after that
basically the laws of physics take over
and the whole thing is now something I can talk about
and so they don't think God
acts in this world in any sort of meaningful way
but John Paul Kinghorn is a theist
and he really believes
whatever this thing God is
that it acts in the world
and so I was trying to press him
okay well how, you're a scientist
how is he acting in the world
how is this thing it acting in the world
and you know we're thinking of it as the unknowns
so that's very interesting
so here we have an unknown quantum physics
I don't know when this particle
is going to emit or where
I'm going to find a particle
is that an unknown that can have influence in the world
well yes it can
I mean whether it has any sort of
belief
whether there's any sort of meaning
to what that action is
so I was intrigued you know are you going to say
maybe your God is using quantum physics
so it can make a decision
that the electron here and here
and that might actually have a dramatic effect
on the universe because chaos says that
small changes can have big effects
so I thought he was going to say yes
quantum physics perfect place my God
to act in the world
but he wasn't going to buy that a toy
so no no no because that really depends
all of these
observations
decisions about where the electron is going to be
depend on an observation
it depends on interacting with the thing
my wave function
a deterministic wave function
and actually we're all part of a system
so surely what is an observation anyway
surely we're all just part of some huge great big universal wave function
so he wasn't into using
quantum physics as the way that his God
was acting in the world
so I said okay well how are you doing this
how is it doing it
and he actually went back to chaos theory
intriguingly so his theory is that
as humans we can never know
the setup of a system
with complete accuracy
there will always be decimal places
which we don't know about
and he believes that that's where
a God could act and tinker with things
and change things so it could be different
as the thing evolves
actually Newton used to think this as well
and Leibniz who was his great competitor
over the calculus just said that's totally ridiculous
why on earth would he have to tinker
why because he just set the whole thing up
and let it go running in the way that it was meant to
at the beginning
so he knew exactly what was going to happen anyway
so
it was a kind of intriguing journey
talking to him about how would you use
science to kind of
marry up with your theistic beliefs
in a God acting in the world
but the interesting thing is that I went into this journey
is that one of that reason
that a lot of the scientific religious people
who are daest to say okay I don't know
where all of this came from
let's call that creator
a God and then I'm just going to do science
and so that unknown
because it is you know we don't know
where it all came from
but actually this Heisenberg uncertainty principle
gives us a chance to actually see
where this stuff came from
because okay where did my pot of uranium come from
well I went on Amazon
so I bought it on Amazon
so that's its first source
and actually it's amazing kind of reviews
you can find on Amazon
so glad five stars
so glad I don't have to buy this from the Libyans
in the parking lot at the mall anymore
there were some others complaining
about the fact that the thing had disappeared
you know gone down by half
he was so good
you're laughing and I don't have to explain about half-lifes
oh that's so good
anyway so yeah
but if I trace this back okay
as I talked to somebody on Tuesday about this
and he said he was a miner
and he said well it's clear it came from a mine
okay yeah but where did it come from
before the mine and you trace it back
so it was made in a star
the most amazing thing you know how stars make all of these extraordinary
atoms
but what about before that so we trace it back
where did all of this stuff come from
and it turns out that actually Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
might be
the equation
which helps us to get something from nothing
this is one of the big unsolved questions
why is there something
rather than nothing
and actually if you've got two things
that things get measurements get paired up
if it sort of matters what order I do it in
so a measuring position and momentum
somehow it matters what order I do
and they get combined in an uncertainty principle
but there's another uncertainty principle
which combines energy and time
so this is expressed here
so any increase in the amount
if you want to narrow in on a little window of time
the energy within that window
becomes less certain
so if you've got a region where there's nothing going on there
so you've got no energy
but actually if you decrease the window of time
that means that the energy uncertainty
must increase and so nothing might suddenly become
a little bit of something
a little bit of error
and of course Einstein said
energy equals mc2
energy is equivalent to mass
so you've got mass inside here
so as we look in a little window
actually we can suddenly get these quantum fluctuations
where nothing can suddenly give rise
to matter
and this is actually
you may know what Stephen Hawking
is famous for
he's famous for predicting that black holes
another place actually where we seem to lose information
if you go past the horizon
of a black hole inside
we seem to not be able to know what is going on inside a black hole
because information can't get out
one theory has it
but Hawking thinks there may be a way things can get out
and it's because of the uncertainty principle
at the horizon is that
although there's nothing there
every now and again
this quantum fluctuation can cause a particle
an antiparticle to appear out of nothing
it's a bit like taking the equation 0
equals 1 minus 1
so you can have nothing and then suddenly get 1
and minus 1 and that antiparticle gets sucked into the black hole
makes it a little bit smaller
and the particle gets emitted out
so we believe in this thing Hawking radiation
we haven't measured it yet which is why he hasn't got
a Nobel Prize yet but when we do measure it
he will because this is a way that
black holes will actually kind of evaporate
and may give back information
we think that there's
something called the information paradox
that black holes may be somewhere where we lose information
but actually this leaking
according to this equation
equation might be a way of us getting back information
but here is an equation
which then gives us a way of getting uranium out of nothing
now you might say
well yeah but that isn't really nothing because you've got space there
space just vacuum
isn't nothing it's a three dimensional
space and so that is something still
and as a mathematician I certainly
believe that it is a something
so that isn't really nothing so where did that something
where did that empty space
where did that empty geometry come from
but even now as we push
one of the big mysteries is how to equate
relativity and quantum physics
and the idea of quantum gravity
fluctuations in quantum gravity
mean that even space itself
might emerge as a fluctuation
out of genuinely something which is nothing
so actually
it might be that our desire
for some creator
is well actually the creator is just mathematics
mathematics is outside of time
it's been there forever will be there forever
and this is a way of just
blowing something into those equations
and then you get something out of nothing
so you know often they say God is a mathematician
I would reverse that and say no no mathematics
is the God which started all of this
so that's a couple of the
unknowns so
let me just give you a little guide
through a couple more and then I'll show you one of my
so let's see
one of the other ones is I
dig down into my uranium and ask
how far can you go can you infinitely divide uranium
if you go inside it that atom
is made out of electrons and quarks
we think that's the bottom layer but
how do we know that and we'll maybe
we thought atoms were the bottom layer
so that one's
we might keep on dividing space
although we think there's a little quantized space
beyond which you can't divide anything
what about going out is the universe infinite
if it is could we ever know that
so that's one of my other edges
time
what about time itself
so you know we think time
had a beginning the big bang
but can we talk about what happened before
the big bang
now I was brought up in this department
on the kind of idea you can't
it doesn't make sense because you need time
to say before and so if there wasn't
any time you can't say before
that's really clever
I like that and they would always go
yeah so what's north of the north pole
and you go yeah I get that
there's kind of nothing there
but actually people are beginning to wonder
that maybe you can talk about time before the big bang
the weird thing is that time
it's time infinite
is it going to go on forever
when it turns out that it may also run out
at the other end as well which is kind of frightening
so time may
we know we're all finite
but what if the universe is finite
that's pretty frightening
and it turns out that everything's kind of decaying
like these black holes and all we'll be left with
is photons and gravitons
and photons and gravitons have no sense of time
and so time will disappear
they won't be able to measure things
but actually this seemed deeply depressing
so I went and talked to Roger Penrose
who's my journeyman on this journey into time
and he's come up with a lovely
positive way of viewing this
that then you can rescale the universe
because you've lost a sense of time
and that will be the beginning of a new eon
and a new big bang
so it was more hopeful, I love Roger
and I love Roger as well because he changed his mind
he was one of these people I was brought up on
who said you can't talk about time before the big bang
and now he's changed his mind
I love that in a scientist
so I'm going to take you
actually into a journey
I'll talk for another
I'll talk quarter two
because I wasn't allowed to start
if that's okay
because I do want to take you into this edge
to see me outside my comfort zone
which is the question
about what's happening inside your head
it's called the hard problem of consciousness
you're all sitting there
and you're all doing
most of you doing a pretty good impression
of a conscious being
I can see some of you sort of
fair enough it's very sunny
but you know I do believe that most of you
are having a conscious experience
but is that conscious experience
anything like the conscious experience I'm having
how can I ever know
that you really are conscious
or maybe you've just sent an avatar down here
and you know
you're doing such a good impression
and so actually the
objects I took on my journey
into the hard problem of consciousness
is in fact
well it's a chatbot app
that I downloaded onto my smartphone
so I think it's a really interesting question
when will my smartphone become conscious
and could I ever know that
maybe it already is
so
it's perfectly encapsulated in this kind of touring
question
the problem of
talking to a machine
and determining at what point you say
this thing is conscious
so I actually did a little experiment with this
it's called Cleverbot you can download it for free
and you have a conversation with it
and you sort of try to think
whether is it somebody on the other end typing these things in or not
so here's a little exercise for you
I asked a few questions
I asked questions of Cleverbot
and I also did this a bit earlier
and I asked some questions of my son
my son's doing physics in Bristol at the moment
he's 20 years old just to give you some context
so I asked them both questions
and I want you to listen to the questions
and think can you work out which one is the machine
and which one is my son
so we kicked off with
do you have a girlfriend
so response A came back
do you want me to have a girlfriend
response B came back
mind your own business
so is that the machine
and the machine of course learns
it's an example of machine learning
because every conversation you have with it
is banked and becomes a conversation
it will have with somebody else
okay the next one what is your dream
so response A was my dream is to become a famous poet
response B
to make lots of money
who was going to want to do that one
yes my son was born in the Thatcheride Age
question 3
are you conscious
now both of these responses are intriguing
because they played on this idea of Descartes
I think therefore I am
so response A was if I wasn't
I don't think I
it was quite convoluted
but this one is Descartes' response
which says the only thing I can be certain of
and this goes
one of the topics of this book is
how can you know anything
and Descartes said the only thing I can be sure of
is that I am conscious
so there you are
which one of those is a machine
and which one is my son
and if we got the machine better
how can we ever know whether it was having a conscious world
of course some of you may be synesthetic
anyone's synesthetic here
yes there's a finger going up at the back there
what are you synesthetic with
numbers and colours
my wife is similarly synesthetic like this
and so they are having a genuinely different conscious experience
because when they see a number
it gets coloured up
I did some wonderful work
with a piece of Messien
Messien was synesthetic with sound and colour
so when he listened to music
his music it was full of colour
so we know that people do have genuinely
different responses
conscious experiences
but how can you tell
one of the things I do as a mathematician
very often if I am trying to understand something
is to understand when something isn't that
it's a very good way to flip the question
take an animal
which of these animals around us
which species are actually conscious
how many of these animals if you stick them in front of the mirror
a cat, a dog, a rabbit
would know that what they are looking at
is themselves
so here's a chimpanzee looking
is that
is he just admiring himself or doing a few
funky moves
now here's a test
that Gordon Gallup came up with an animal behaviourist
he said ok maybe you put a mark on somebody's forehead
if you look in the mirror and you see something
oh that's a bit weird
you put your hand up to your forehead
so he was interested in what animals will have this similar response
wondering if you've got them used to what a mirror does
so here's the orangutan who's been marked
looking at himself in the mirror
and so what is this response
to suddenly seeing
oh what's that weird thing I've got on my forehead
so that would be
if you put yourself in front of the mirror
and you didn't know that somebody had put some yellow stuff
on your forehead
you would immediately go like this
you wouldn't go like this on the mirror
so you can see he's really pissed off
that why has this person put this great big yellow
dobb in front of it
so it turns out
how many animals pass this test
very few humans do
chimpanzees do
and orangutans do
but gorillons do not
it's very few species that pass this test
now there's a very crude test for consciousness
but it is a measure of them realising
that that is themselves
so what about children
if you've got a fetus
a fetus isn't
conscious so here's a picture of me as a baby
I don't think I was conscious
didn't have a sense of self then
but what points in my evolution
as I grew older did I
suddenly start to pass that mirror self recognition test
and realise yeah I am a conscious being
there must have been a moment when my brain
did something which changed
and then I had a sense of consciousness
it probably wasn't here
but with experiments that we've done
we've seen that actually
there's a transitionary moment in the brain
around 18 to 24 months
if you put a 16 month old
in front of the mirror
with a little mark
generally they don't react
they perhaps do something to the mirror
but a 20 month year old will immediately do this
so something has happened in the brain
that has changed that has created this consciousness
and actually you can ask the same question
of the universe
the universe of the big bang
was there any consciousness then
so at what point did consciousness actually emerge
and actually Julian James
has a psychologist
he has an interesting theory that
that moment when we suddenly started hearing a voice in our heads
must have been pretty frightening
and that might have been the spark
for something like an idea of a god
maybe that's what sparked off the thought
there's something else going on inside here
ok so this idea of negatives
let me tell you to this one
the time when we all lose consciousness
every day or rather every night
is when we sleep
so what happens in the brain every night
that changes that we could see
maybe what a quality of the brain
that makes us conscious
so here's an awake brain
and you do something called TMS
it's transcranial magnetic stimulation
where you switch on some neurons
so this is like a little computer gates
because a cascade across the brain
and a feedback
the integrated network is actually talking
to lots of other bits of the brain
feeding back to the original source of the stimulation
this is a sleeping brain
stimulated in exactly the same area
or the same TMS
in deep stage 4 sleep
where you have no conscious experience
everything is very localised
there's no communication going on across the brain
as if the tide has come up
and all of the network has gone down
so there's now a belief that
that we can somehow measure the quality
of a network
and there's a guy Giulio Tononi
who's come up with the way a network
actually feeds back and forth
between each other the nature
of those logic gates may have something
to do with giving
a network a feeling of what it's like
to be itself
and so Giulio Tononi has come up
with this extraordinary equation
a coefficient of consciousness
now I've got to love this
what makes me me is now an equation
and the varying quality
of this equation as we go through the day
and the night or we go into a coma
that this can measure
something about your conscious experience
to the extent interestingly that you can create
a zombie
a zombie is something that has no conscious experience
but behaves exactly as a human would do
so here are two networks
they have eight neurons
they're wired up in different ways
but without put behaviour
of both of these networks
it's exactly the same so if you interacted with it
you would not have any difference between the two
yet one of them has a lot of feedback
in it and has a high level of consciousness
with this coefficient but the one on the right
has no feedback
and it has a zero consciousness
according to this equation and so this will be
an example of a zombie network
now of course
I'm going to skip Wittgenstein
sorry
actually I will tell you about Christof
Christof is one of the people who got very interested
in this equation
and I talked to him he's my
I skyped him so I was never quite sure
whether actually my conversation with an avatar
or something whether he was really there
but he got very frustrated with me trying to
push him on whether we could ever answer
this problem of consciousness and eventually he said
what sort of research project is it Marcus
where you throw up your hands and say forget about it
I can't understand it ever it's hopeless
that's defeatism and I think we have a very
schizophrenic relationship with this idea
of the unknown
and one sense
the unknown is what drives us as scientists
the known things are great
but what we spend our life trying to understand
are the things that we don't know
so in one way the things we don't know
are our lifeblood
but the things that will remain forever
unknown
those are the kind of nemesis of the scientists
so it is a belief I think most of us
kind of feel like no you have that arrogance
that we are a species that could know everything
and I think that's really what drives me
when I throw the dice
why do I keep on looking
it's my desire that I want to know how this is going to end
a one
thank you
