This is lesson number two.
In lesson number two, we'll look at multiplication
and also introduce the concept of division.
As usual, I like to ask the question, what is?
What is multiplication?
Now, hopefully, you know how to multiply.
That's the assumption I'm making here.
That's the assumption I'm making here.
That people who are watching this tape,
whether you are an elementary school age student
or an adult or something in between,
do you know how to multiply?
But what is multiplication?
And hopefully, in your mind,
what multiplication is, is repeated addition.
In fact, I am told, I was not there,
that in ancient Egypt, before multiplication was discovered,
that every time a problem that we would do by multiplication
had to be done by addition,
they'd write the answer down,
and put it on a brick or on a scroll,
and keep it in a library,
because with so much work, you'd lose problems.
And in fact, then, someone created multiplication.
Multiplication is repeated addition.
For example, in our first visual,
we see that 6 times 8 means 8 plus 8 plus 8 plus 8 plus 8 plus 8.
6 8's added.
And, of course, the answer is 48.
Once you learn to multiply,
you basically forget this,
and you simply remember your facts.
But it's always a good idea to go back
to understand what multiplication is.
As, again, we get two fractions,
decimals, even to algebra,
understanding what multiplication is can be very helpful.
Notice, multiplication is not counting.
It's one step above.
Addition and subtraction were counting.
Multiplication is now something different.
It's repeated addition.
It is not counting.
The rules are different.
Another way to conceive a multiplication
is by looking at, for example, the next visual,
which shows you a physical representation
of numbers that multiply to be 12.
Here we have 3 rows of 4.
That is, 3 times 4 is 12.
Notice, if you turn your head sideways,
you might see 4 rows of 3.
4 times 3 is the same as 3 times 4.
That's 12.
The next visual gives an alternate approach
to multiplication of two numbers,
giving an answer of 12.
Two rows of 6, or if you like,
six columns of 2,
so that 2 times 6 or 6 times 2 is 12.
And the next visual gives a third way
to multiply two numbers to get 12.
1 times 12, or 12 times 1.
Now, let's take a look at a somewhat special number.
The number is 9.
In our first visual,
we see that we have 1 times 9.
One row of 9.
We also could look at it as 3 rows of 3.
This is very special.
Every one of the arrangements so far has been rectangular.
That is, with 12, 3 rows of 4, 2 rows of 6.
But this is more than a rectangle.
This is a square, 3 rows of 3.
And in fact, if you turn sideways,
you still have 3 rows of 3.
And in fact, 9 is called a square number,
because one of the ways to multiply it looks like a square.
This will become even more important in future lessons.
But right now, let's just recognize
that these rectangular arrays,
these rectangular groupings of physical things
show us what multiplication truly means.
Now, a question I always like to ask
involves the next visual.
We're multiplying 38 times 247.
Now, at this point in time,
I'm not going to ask you to multiply.
I'm just going to say, look at the two and the three.
They are connected.
Where, let's see, 2 times 3 is 6.
Where does that 6 go?
In what place value?
So stop the tape and decide where the 6 goes
and justify your answer.
Well, a lot of people would try to do that
by actually multiplying the entire problem.
No, no.
We have 2 times 3, or 3 times 2 is 6.
Notice that 2 is in the hundreds place.
Two hundreds.
The 3 is in the tens place.
And I multiply 3 tens times two hundreds.
I multiply the digit times the digit.
3 times 2 is 6.
But I also multiply the place value times the place value.
And tens times hundreds is thousands.
So the 6 must go in the thousands place.
Not because we did it by rote,
but because we understand when we multiply.
And this is true for fractions and decimals.
And anytime we multiply, we multiply digit times digit
and place value times place value.
That is how we multiply.
Now, most of you, like I said,
I'm assuming know how to multiply,
but I'm going to show you a new method,
an alternate method of multiplication.
Now, if you like your own method,
in a fashion way, that's fine.
But I think this method called the lattice multiplication method
is really good.
And the reason it's good is because it involves
no carrying or renaming when you're multiplying.
It's excellent that you have no calculator
because there's no limit to the size problem you can do.
And of course, it's very useful in multiplying multi-digit
as two, three, four digit numbers.
So let's go to the whiteboard
and try to set up this thing called the lattice.
And basically, a lattice is just a rectangle
that allows us to multiply,
and I believe is a much more efficient way of multiplication.
Basically, what we're going to do
is we are going to first make a rectangle.
And since we're multiplying a two-digit number
by a three-digit number,
we're going to make a rectangle into three columns
for the three-digit number
and into two rows for the two-digit number.
And then we'll connect each of the corners
in the smaller rectangles to its opposite.
Now, it's very important to go through.
In case you don't, you need to make a little curvy.
That's OK.
It need to be straight,
but it must go from corner to corner to corner
at the bottom, as we'll see when we actually do this.
So that is how we would multiply a two-digit times a three-digit.
That is the lattice that will allow us to do this.
And in the first visual,
we see that we're going to multiply
the same problem we just thought of it,
38 times 247.
And we put in the numbers,
and then the next visual shows us actually drawing
the diagonal lines that will help us to do our adding
when we finish multiplication.
So we're going to multiply three times seven.
And the wonderful thing about lattice multiplication
is there's no order that you must multiply in,
because each of the multiplication parts is independent.
And if we do three times seven, we get 21.
And notice by splitting each box into two parts
with that diagonal line, we can write the two and the one, 21.
We skipped over to three times two.
That was the problem we looked at before.
Where does that six go?
Notice there's a six there.
Notice the left part of that box is blank.
If you want to put a zero in, that's fine.
My wife says that every little place should be filled up.
So obviously when your answer is a one-digit number,
you would put a zero in that tens-place box, if you would.
The next visual shows the completion of the multiplication.
Three times four is 12.
Eight times seven is 56.
Eight times four is 32.
And eight times two is 16.
Then we add, and that's where the diagonals come in.
We add along the diagonals.
They represent the place values.
So basically in the ones place, we have a six.
In the tens place, we have a one, a five, and a two.
Well, one plus five plus two equals eight.
In the hundreds place, two plus two plus three,
that's seven plus six is 13.
We write down a three and we carry the one over to the thousands place.
One plus six plus one plus one is nine.
And we have our answer.
And the next visual shows us that indeed 38 times 247
is exactly 9,386.
Now, let's do a few more at the whiteboard.
In fact, I think what I like to do is start off with a simpler problem
and have you try to do it and then come on back and I'll do it
and make sure if you've got it right or not.
This is going to be a two-digit by two-digit problem.
So we'll go ahead and set up for a two-digit by two-digit lattice,
connect the corners, and again, it's really important.
It's not important that the lines are straight.
If your hands are shaky, that's OK.
And we're going to do 53 times 72.
Now, something I should really do here is an estimation.
We talked about that in lesson one.
It's really important to estimate.
Now, what is 50 times 70?
50 times 70, 5 times 7 is 35 and 2,0.
So 50 times 70 would be 3,500.
Let's remember that.
Our answer should be close to 3,500.
At this point in time, if you think you know what you're doing,
hopefully you do, I'd like you to turn the tape off and stop the tape
and work this problem and work it using the lattice method.
Even if you feel comfortable with what I call the old-fashioned method,
try this.
So stop the tape now, come on back, and we'll work the problem out here.
OK.
7 times 3 is 21.
7 times 5 is 35.
2 times 3 is 6.
And again, we could put a 0 in there, but I'll leave it blank.
And 2 times 5 is 10.
I'll mention something.
If you're a parent who's helping your child,
this is a great way to see where their problems are
if they're having multiplication problems,
because you'll notice that each of the boxes has a multiplication fact.
So for example, if I thought that 7 times 5 was 40,
and I had put 40 in there and did everything else correctly,
you'd see the wrong answer, but you'd also be able to determine what the problem was.
In the old-fashioned method, sometimes as a teacher,
it's very difficult to understand what error the student made.
You try to look inside their brain because it's very difficult.
Here, the multiplication facts are there.
If all the multiplication facts are correct and the answer is incorrect,
that means you added incorrect.
Let's go ahead and add now.
We have a 6 here in the 1's place.
1 plus 0 is 1.
2 plus 5 is 7 plus 1 is 8.
And we only have a 3 in the 1's place,
which means that 72 times 53 appears to be 3,816.
Now, what's our estimate?
Our estimate was 3,500.
3,500, 3,816.
Relatively close.
I believe our answer is correct,
and the estimate helps me with that belief.
Let's do another problem.
This one's just a little bit more complex,
but as you can see, there's no limit to the size of the numbers.
You can multiply with this method because you don't have to worry
about little carry numbers in various places.
Everything is very simplified.
So let's erase this and put up a 3-digit times a 3-digit problem.
So let's go ahead and draw a little bit bigger box
and divide it 3-way that way and 3-ways that way
and draw our diagonals, our lattices.
And again, we want to connect all the corners.
All right.
Now we're ready to put the question in.
And the problem is 279 times 461.
Before we try to multiply it, let's go ahead and estimate.
And I would say that that's 300 times 400.
And again, you may say that's 200 times 400 or 200 times 500,
but I like 300 times 400.
Well, 3 times 4 is 12, and there are four zeros.
So that would be 12, but four zeros would be 120,000.
So our estimate will be 120,000.
Let's go ahead and multiply now.
So go ahead and stop the tape.
Multiply this out using the lattice method.
Look at your answer and come back and we'll see how I do it.
Okay.
Let's play around some just to show you that you don't have to do it
in any particular order.
How about we start with 6 times 7?
Well, 6 times 7 is 42.
If this bothers you, by the way, and you like starting at the right
and going right to left, that's fine.
It doesn't make a difference here.
1 times 9.
Well, that's easy.
In fact, the whole ones are easy.
1 times 7 and 1 times 2.
Okay.
4 times 9 is 36.
6 times 9 is 54.
Let me make that 4 look more like a 4.
There you go.
4 times 7 is 28.
4 times 2 is 8.
And 6 times 2 is 12.
So if my multiplication is correct, which I assume it is,
we go ahead and add along the lattices right now.
Well, 9.
4 plus 7 is 11.
We carry the 1.
6 and 5 is 11.
2 is 13.
2 is 15.
And 1 is 16.
Carry the 1.
3 plus 8 is 11.
Plus 4 is 15.
And 2 is 17.
And 1 is 18.
And again, we carry the 1.
2 plus 8 is 10.
1 is 11.
1 more is 12.
And of course, since there's nothing in that place,
we'll just put the 1 there.
So it looks as if our answer is 128,619.
Our estimate was approximately 120,000.
I feel very comfortable with this answer because my estimate
says that this is a very reasonable answer.
So I think we could see that multiplication can be made very
simple.
You know, your facts, which we assume you do,
and you can add, which we assume you do, you can.
The lattice multiplication makes this very reasonable problem
to do.
And this information helps us confirm that the answer makes
sense.
Now, if we have time in this lesson, we'll come back and
perhaps do another problem.
But if not, there are plenty of problems in the workbook.
But now let's go ahead and talk about an introduction to
division.
What is division?
Well, some people would say, well, if multiplication is
repeated addition, that division is repeated subtraction.
And that's OK.
But I would hate to do a division problem by subtracting
many, many times until I got down to zero.
So another way of looking at division is that it's the opposite
of multiplication.
If we look at this next visual, we see that 6 plus 7 equals 13.
And knowing that tells us that 13 minus 6 is 7.
Knowing addition helps us understand subtraction.
So also it shows us that if we know that 6 times 7 is 42,
we know that 42 divided by 6 is 7.
So just as subtraction is the opposite of multiplication,
I'm sorry, subtraction is the opposite of addition,
division is the opposite of multiplication.
And that's very important because just as we looked at
subtraction, we said the rules for subtraction are the same
as the rules for addition.
When we look at division, whether we're dividing whole
numbers, decimals, whatever, the rules for division will use
the same rules as the rules for multiplication.
And remember, the multiplication rule was multiply digit
times digit, place value times place value.
OK.
Now, let us take a look at the next visual.
It shows us 55 divided by 5.
What is the answer?
Now, you may know the answer, but I want to know the answer
from a basis of understanding.
The question is what times 5 is 55?
And as long as we're talking about how division and multiplication
use the same rules, notice that 5 is 5 once.
The 55 is obviously 55 once.
So here's the 55 tens.
So the question is 5 times what number is 55,
and 1 times what place value is 1?
Well, 1 times 1 is 1.
So the answer is going to be a whole number.
Obviously, 5 times 11 is 55.
That is 5 once times 11 once equals 55 once.
So the answer is 11.
And my use of the notion of 1's times 1's may be a little
disconcerting at this point.
A little confusing.
But that's OK, because later on we talk about the long division
algorithm, the long division method in lesson 3.
I think you'll see that it really makes a whole lot of sense.
And a lot of times where people get confused in long division,
it's because they don't relate it to multiplication.
But the problem is not all division problems work out.
Not all division problems have nice, simple answers.
I mean, yes, 42 divided by 6 is 7, and 55 divided by 5 is 11.
But how about, as shown in the next visual, 38 divided by 6?
What is 38 divided by 6?
Well, again, let's assume we don't know the answer,
and we're concerned about looking at it as a multiplication problem.
What times 6 is 38?
Well, if you know your 6 times tables or your 6 facts,
you know that there is no number.
38 is not a multiple of 6.
But we do know that 6 times 6 is 36.
The next visual shows that.
It also shows that 6 times 7 is 42.
So 38 is right there between 36 and 42.
And if we multiplied 6 times 6, we got 36.
What's left over?
Well, there'd be 2 left over, because 36 plus 2 is 38.
The next visual shows that that 6 times 6 plus 2,
36 plus 2 equals 38.
And therefore, we could say and do say that 38 divided by 6
is equal to 6 with a remainder of 2.
The visual shows 6R2.
The R is, again, a symbol for remainder.
So again, that simply means that we 6 times 6 is 36.
The remainder of 2 is added, which gives us 38.
OK.
Now, so division, and we'll get into the long division,
like I say in lesson number 3, division and multiplication
are very much the same.
They're both not counting.
We're not concerned about lining up place values as much as
in multiplication, digit times digit, and place value times
place value.
So at this point in time, let's consider a couple of problems.
Go back to the whiteboard and consider a few problems,
both in multiplication and very simple division.
Go ahead and erase the previous problem.
And let's try a problem that has a zero in it.
Sometimes that messes people up and turns multiplication.
Let's do a two digit times a three digit multiplication problem.
We set up the lattice.
And if you're solving a problem making this,
you'll notice after a while you'll get very good at drawing
the lattice boxes.
OK.
Let's multiply 509 times 99.
A lot of people have trouble remembering their nine facts.
So as we got opportunity to show, we can at least know some of them.
Estimation, 500.
Well, 99 is pretty close to 100.
500 times 100.
Well, five times one is five and four zeros.
That's 50,000.
So our estimate would be close to 50,000.
All right.
At this point in time, why don't you stop the tape,
work the problem, and come on back and we'll take a look at the answer.
OK.
Let's say nine times nine.
This time I'll do it from right to left is 81.
Nine times zero is zero.
I put that zero in there to make sure I know I did that, that it was just blank.
And nine times five is 45.
Now, if I'm really slick, what I recognize is that these two nines are the same.
So when I multiply, I'll get the same answer.
If you want to check on yourself, you can go ahead and multiply again,
but I'll just go ahead knowing I did it correctly.
Put the 81 in the zero and the 45.
At this point in time, I need to add one.
And you'll always only have one number here.
One plus eight is nine.
Eight plus five is 13.
Write down the three and carry the one.
Five plus four is nine and one is 10.
Four plus one is fives.
Looks like the answer is 50,391.
Notice our estimate was 50,000.
That's very close.
I feel very secure that this answer is correct.
And hopefully you did it correctly when you did it, when you stopped to take.
All right, let's take a look at a division problem.
In fact, we take a look at a couple of division problems.
How about 58 divided by 07 58 divided by seven?
Now, even if you know the answer without having to think,
what I'd like you to do is think about the multiplication problem,
just like we did the problem before and then come up with an answer.
So let's stop the tape thinking about a multiplication problem
and then a remainder, get an answer and come on back.
We'll take a look at your answer.
58 is not in the seven times table.
I do know that seven times eight is 56.
And as Goldilocks would say, that was too small.
And seven times nine is 63, which of course is too large.
So someplace between 56 and 63, we have our number 58.
Obviously, seven times eight, 56.
And we have to add two more to get to 58.
Seven times eight plus two.
So that's the answer to our problem.
58 divided by seven would be eight with a remainder of two.
Since seven times eight, 56 plus two is 58.
Again, it's very important to understand the basic foundation of division
until we get to the long division method,
because if you don't understand what division is about,
that method will make no sense.
Let's try another problem.
How about, oh, let's see.
803 divided by 10.
Let me get.
It may seem a little more complex.
It really isn't.
I want you to stop the tape again using multiplication,
since division is the opposite of multiplication.
I want you to work this problem and then turn the tape back on when you're done.
OK, let's see.
10 times what?
Well, we know that all numbers that are obtained by multiplying by 10
end in a zero.
So let's try 800.
800 is going to be 10 times 80.
Since we know that we multiply by 10, we just take a zero on the end.
So 10 times eight is 80.
Now, how about 10 times 81?
That's going to be 810.
803 is between 800 and 810.
So our answer obviously is going to be 80 times 10 plus some remainder.
Well, what do I have to add to 800 to get to 803?
I have to add three.
So our answer is that 803 divided by 10 is 80 with a remainder of three.
I hope you got that one correct.
Let's take some time now to review what we've learned in this lesson, lesson number two.
The first thing we learned is that multiplication is repeated addition.
I'm going to spend some time talking about this again because I really think it's important,
because the rules of mathematics sometimes seem like they came down from some mountaintop.
Some person went up there and came down.
They were chiseled in stone, and the rules really are quite simple
if you understand the consistencies as we talked about in lesson one.
Multiplication is repeated addition.
It is not counting.
We do not have to line up place values.
In fact, we multiply each digit in our number by each digit in the second number.
And in fact, the thing we must remember about multiplication is that whenever we multiply,
we multiply the digit times the digit and the place value times the place value.
That's very important because later on we get to, for example, fractions.
Once we know where the place value is and where the digit is,
then it's simply a matter of multiplying digit times digit and place value times place value.
That knowledge alone will make how we multiply fractions understandable.
Without it, it becomes a magic trick.
Some method, again, that the teacher showed you how to do, and you had to memorize.
I don't believe in that.
I believe you need to understand what you're doing.
So digit times digit, place value times place value.
Also, I want to reemphasize the importance of estimation.
When you're finishing, you have an answer where they use old fashioned multiplication,
use lattice multiplication, which I think is very, very good.
Use a calculator.
And again, we'll talk at length about the calculator in lesson 11.
You need to estimate to make sure that your answer makes sense, that your answer is reasonable.
Now, division.
We've just introduced the notion of division, but we had to look at it as the opposite of multiplication.
If we know how to multiply, then we can know how to divide.
And in fact, at this point in time, when we're doing a division problem,
all we're looking for is what's the closest number in that multiplication table.
And then where we have to add to get to the number in question.
For example, another example, if we're dividing by 9 and want to know what 70 divided by 9 is,
we know that 9 times 7 is 63.
9 times 8 is 72.
That's too big.
So what we say, we say 9 times 7 is 63.
And what must I add to 63 to get to 70?
I must add 7.
So that 70 divided by 9 is 7 with a remainder of 7.
If you believe in lucky numbers, that should be a lucky division problem.
Again, in our next lesson, lesson three, we'll introduce and show you a sort of application that shows why it works.
The long division algorithm.
I'll look forward to seeing you in lesson three.
