Welcome to Lesson 3, the long division algorithm, and for those of you who do not like big words,
especially in mathematics, algorithm simply means method.
It's a nice, fancy word, has a nice, interesting history going back to Arabic and an Arab mathematician,
but basically it simply means we're looking at a long division method.
Again, many of you may already know how to do this, but we want to see why it works.
What we're going to do is take a look at a sort of real-world type problem that will introduce us visually to the algorithm.
Then we'll go back and do it as we normally would do it on paper or at a chalkboard in school,
and then we'll look at a number of problems to ensure that you know how to do division.
And at the very end, we'll talk about dividing by zero, one of my favorite topics.
But now, here's the situation.
I happen to have a side light.
In addition to being a teacher and every once in a while making tape lessons,
I own a small business that distributes magazines.
And I have a number of stores that I deliver to.
My current contract, there are four stores.
And my contract with those stores and with the magazine supplier is that I will deliver the exact same number of magazines to each store.
If I deliver one more or one less to any of the stores, the contract is canceled.
I lose my business.
So it's very important for me to ensure that I deliver the exact same number of magazines to each of the stores.
On the other hand, I don't want to have any extra magazines left over unnecessarily
because until I deliver a magazine to the store, I don't get paid.
So having a whole bunch of magazines sitting around my closets is no good.
I need to deliver as many magazines as I can,
being sure that each of the four stores gets the same number of magazines.
And that story situation will lead us to see how and why the long division method works.
So let's take a look at the first visual.
And in the first visual, we see that I have four containers, four boxes, if you will, one for each of the four stores.
And each of those boxes, I will deposit the magazines that I've received when the truck comes by from the magazine company.
And then I will ensure that each of those boxes has the same number of magazines.
Let me explain.
In the next visual, we see that I've received 547 magazines.
But those magazines come wrapped.
I have five packages of 100.
And those are marked with rectangles marked with 100.
You should know that inside each package of 100, there are 10 packages of 10.
So the 10 magazines are wrapped in plastic.
10 packages of 10 are rewrapped in plastic.
And I have a package of 100.
Besides the five packages of 100, I also have four packages of 10.
Those are small little rectangles of the X, X being the Roman numeral for 10.
And also seven individual single magazines.
So the total of 547.
And my concern is how many magazines do I have to put in each of the cards?
And it's for each of the four stores.
So I maximize the number of magazines I can sell.
And each of the boxes has the same number of magazines.
Well, let's start with the packages of 100.
How many packages of 100 can I use?
Well, let's see if I put one package of 100 as shown in the next visual in each of the boxes,
that uses up four packages and I have one package left outside.
Now, what do I do with that one package?
I can't put it in one of the boxes.
Why not?
Because if I put it in one of the boxes, then it's very possible I'll have a different number of magazines at the end in each box
and I'll lose my business.
I can't afford to do that.
I make a few dollars in this business and I want to continue to do that.
So what do I do?
Well, can I take the package of 100 magazines and take a machete and chop it into four pieces?
Well, I don't think so.
I don't think anybody wants to buy a chopped up magazine.
So what am I going to do?
What I'm going to do is show it in the next visual.
I'm going to unwrap the package of 100.
And when I said inside, we have 10 packages of 10.
So no longer do I have a one 100 package.
I have 10 packages of 10.
And what do I do with those 10 packages of 10?
Well, remember the truck dropped off four packages of 10, which I still have.
Plus I have the 10 packages of 10.
As the next visual shows, I have a total of 14 packages of 10.
Okay.
Well, now I have these 14 packages of 10.
What am I going to do with them?
I've got to make sure I have the same number of packages in each box.
So really what I'm doing, I'm doing 14 divided by four, 14 packs of 10 into each of the four boxes.
Well, let's see if I put three packages of 10 as shown in the next visual into each of the boxes,
I will have used up as many packages of 10 as possible because only have two packages left outside.
So now in each box, I have one package of 100 and three packages of 10.
And I have those two packages of 10 outside.
I'm not going to chop them up.
What I can do is to remove the plastic from each of those two packages, leaving me with what?
With 20 single magazines.
Now, I already had seven single magazines at the truck dropped off.
So as you see in the next visual, I have 20 single magazines plus seven more for a total of 27 single magazines.
How can I divide 27 into four boxes so that each box has an equal number of single magazines?
Well, 27 divided by four, the closest I can come is six times four is 24.
So I put six single magazines in each of the boxes.
You'll notice the next visual shows you that each box has one package of 100, three packages of 10, and six individual magazines.
And notice outside, I have an additional three single magazines.
What shall I do with those three single magazines?
Well, there's no way I can put three magazines in four boxes.
I'm not going to cut them up into pieces.
No one would buy pieces of a magazine.
What I'm going to do is just leave those, put those on the shelf until the next delivery comes by and include those three magazines because I cannot break my contract.
And if I must have the same number of magazines delivered to each store.
Well, let's see what that means.
What that means as the next visual shows, when I divide 547 magazines into four containers so that each container has an equal number of magazines,
I have 136 magazines in each of the four containers and a remainder of three.
That is 547 divided by four equals 136 with a remainder of three.
Now, before we go any further, we need to check our answer to ensure that it's correct.
And what I would do is I'd say, wait a second, I have 136 magazines in each of the four boxes.
Let me go ahead and multiply four times 136.
And next visual I did that turns out to be 544.
Then I add my remainder of three and I get 547, which of course is the number of magazines that was delivered.
I am correct.
The answer is correct.
And now we're going to do is take a look at the actual process, the long division process of divide, multiply, subtract, bring down,
relating it to the magazine problem to see why we divide, multiply, subtract and bring down.
The first visual shows us the division problem for divided into 547.
Now, remember, we started with the hundreds, the package of 100s.
So we start in the 100s place.
And the next visual, we ask ourselves, how many packages of 100 can I put in each of the boxes?
And of course, the answer is one, because what I'm doing when I'm dividing is I'm dividing four into 500s.
What times four is five digit times digit?
One times four is as close as I can get to five, but also place value ties place value.
What times four ones is five hundreds?
And the answer, of course, is 100.
So I put the one in the hundreds place.
And of course, therefore I've used up four packages 100.
So I multiply one times four and subtract to see what I have left.
Five minus four is one.
What do I do with that one?
Well, that 100, I changed into 1010s.
And of course, I added the 1010s to the additional four 10s already had given me 1410s.
And you see in the next visual, I've done that.
The bringing down really is an understanding that I've taken the remainder of that subtraction problem
and changed its place value.
This case from one 100 to 1010s, adding the four 10s, bringing it down and making 1410s.
So I am now going to divide four into 1410s.
And the next visual shows us that three times four is 12, which is as close as I can get to 14.
And when I subtract 14 minus 12, I get two 10s that are left over.
Once again, I take the two 10s and make them into 21s.
Bring down or add the seven ones I already have, and I have 27 ones.
And that's what the next visual shows.
Now the question is, how do I divide four into 27?
Well, visual shows us that six times four is 24.
And when we subtract, we get a three.
Since that three is three ones, we can't change the three ones into anything else.
That is our remainder.
We're finished.
We finished subtracting into one's place.
Whatever we have left is our remainder.
And therefore, what we have, of course, is that the same answer we got before.
And we divide 547 by four.
We get 136 and a remainder of three.
And again, we can check this four times 136 is 544.
We add three.
We get 547.
If especially this tape is being used to introduce division to the students,
then I would suggest you go back and rewatch the part of the tape on the magazine problem.
And then watch again what I just did with the visuals in terms of the actual division method.
And try to see how they match up, because indeed they do.
I know with many students I've worked with, division is just something you learn.
You almost sing to divide, multiply, subtract, bring down with no reason for doing it that way.
I think if you look at that division problem as indicated by the magazine distribution situation,
it all should make sense.
Hopefully it does.
Now, you know what we didn't do?
We didn't estimate.
We should have estimated.
Let's take a look at the original problem, which right to divide 547 by four.
How about we divide 500 by five?
Is that okay?
547 is pretty close to 500 and four is pretty close to five.
I want to get a simple division problem.
And 500 divided by five would be 100.
So we'd expect our answer to be about 100.
And certainly our answer of 136 with a remainder of three looks pretty good.
And we've checked it.
So we've checked it.
We know it's right.
It made sense.
It was reasonable in terms of our estimation.
And of course we are correct.
Now let's take a look at a couple of different types of long division problems that I will ask you to do.
And then we'll come back after each one and look at how to do it and discuss what is special about that problem.
Let's take a look at the first problem on the next visual.
This is a problem that involves dividing by a one digit divisor.
The number we divide by is called a divisor.
And in fact, we should mention that the answer to a division problem is called a quotient.
Kind of an odd word, but it's called a quotient.
So when we divide, we get a quotient and then we get a remainder.
So we want to divide eight into 479.
At this point in time, if you feel confident in your division skill, what you need to do is turn the tape off and work the problem.
If you think, well, I'm really still not sure about this process.
Then don't stop the tape when I ask you to and watch me work the problem.
But hopefully you are fairly confident or at least willing to give it a shot.
So at this point in time, go ahead and stop the tape, work the problem and turn the tape back on when you have completed your computation.
The next visual shows us how we work the problem.
We could not divide eight into four because eight is greater than four.
So in effect, we change the four 100s to four 40 10s, right?
Four 100s is 40 10s combined with the seven 10s we already had.
And now we have 47 10s.
So the question is eight into 47 really is what times eight ones is 47 10s?
Well, five times eight is as close as we can get.
So five times eight is 40.
And what times ones is 10s?
10s times ones is 10s.
So the five must go in the 10s place as is shown in the visual.
Five times eight is 40.
We subtract 47 minus 40, giving us seven.
Those seven 10s are converted to 71s.
We bring down the nine ones we already had.
We now have 79 ones.
Okay.
What do you do now?
Well, we have to divide again eight into 79.
Okay, let's see what times eight comes as close as possible to 79.
Well, nine times eight is 72.
So we put a nine in the answer in the ones place.
Nine times eight is 72.
We subtract 79 minus 72.
We get seven.
There's nothing left to bring down.
We're in the ones place.
We are finished.
Whatever is left is our remainder.
So the answer, of course, is 59 with a remainder of seven.
Had we estimated, and certainly hopefully you did,
I would have said eight goes into 480.
Recognizing that 480 has 48.
48 with a zero at the end.
So eight times six is 48.
So eight times 60 be 480.
So if I said estimate 80 to 480,
I would say the answer should be 60.
And, of course, an answer of 59 with a remainder of seven,
pretty, pretty close to 60.
So our estimate would have been right on.
And therefore we know it's correct.
We would also, of course, check by multiplication.
Eight times 59, adding seven gets us to 479.
So we estimate and we check by multiplication
and then adding our remainder to the answer
of the multiplication problem.
So that takes care of that one.
Let's take a look at the next visual.
The next problem, what is different about this problem?
Well, this problem has a two-digit divisor.
The number we're dividing by 13 is a two-digit number.
But in reality, this should not make a difference.
The only thing I would suggest is if you don't know
your 13 times tables, as you know your eights
or sevens or nine times tables,
we'll simply go off on the side.
And if we're going to say, let's say,
how many 13s do you think there are in 75?
There's no 75 in this problem,
but I don't want to give away any of the answers.
How many 13s are in 75?
Well, I think there's four.
So go off on the side of your paper and multiply four times 13.
That's 52.
Too small.
Try five times 13.
That's 65.
Six times 13 is 78.
That's too much.
So we know that if we wanted to divide 13 into 75,
the answer would be five, right?
Because six times 13 was too large.
Do that on the side.
Don't hide it, because all my students
hide their multiplication work and division problems.
That's kind of silly,
because you're liable to make careless errors.
And plus later on, in a longer problem,
you may need the same multiplication fact
to be doing another part of the division problem.
Let's go ahead.
Given that hint, I hope it's a hint,
let's go ahead and do 13 divided into 970.
Even if you are feeling a bit insecure in division,
stop the tape, work the problem to the best of your ability,
because sometimes it's important to work a problem,
get it wrong to see what you did wrong
rather than seeing someone do it right.
So at this point, stop the tape,
work the problem, and come back when you have a final answer.
Okay.
13 into 970.
And the next visual shows us the answer.
And let's go through that answer step by step.
We divided 13 into 97.
We couldn't divide 13 into 9.
13 is greater than 9.
And of course, the answer is going to go above the 7,
not because it's a rule,
because that 97 is 97 tens,
and our answer is going to go in the tens place
because what times 13 ones is 97 tens?
7 times 13 turns out to be 91.
So we multiply 7 times 13 right down to 91,
lining it up so we can subtract 97 minus 91 is 6.
That 6 tens becomes 60 ones.
We bring down the ones place digit,
which happens to be a zero.
So we still have 60 ones.
And now we divide 60 by 13.
Well, let's see.
65 is too big.
That's 5 times 13.
So it must go in four times.
We put a 4 up in the ones place.
And 4 times 13 is 52.
60 minus 52 is 8.
We're done because there's nothing left to bring down.
We were in the ones place.
That 8 is our remainder.
And therefore the correct answer, 13 into 970,
the answer is 74 with a remainder of 8.
If we wanted to check it,
we'd multiply 13 times 74 and 8 to our answer,
and we'd get 970.
What if we wanted to estimate?
We had tried to estimate at the beginning of the problem.
Let's see, how about making 13 into 10
and making 970, 1,000?
10 divided into 1,000 is approximately 100.
The answer was 74.
Again, notice in division,
we're looking for nice round numbers,
and as long as we're in the ballpark, that's fine.
So the fact that the answer was 74,
estimate was 100, that's still close.
If our answer had been 740,
then we'd be concerned
because 740 is quite a ways away from 100.
The idea is, is the answer reasonable?
The estimate will not necessarily give you a very precise answer.
It will give you an answer that hopefully says to you
that my answer, the answer I got when I divided, is reasonable.
And if it's reasonable, it probably is correct.
And of course, the way to ensure that it's correct is to check.
Let's take a look at the next problem.
Now, the next problem,
I'm not going to tell you right now how this problem is different.
It looks very similar to the last problem.
Oh, wait, wait.
It has four digits in the number we're dividing into.
That's not the reason we're doing this problem.
You'll see when you do the problem.
We're going to divide 19 into 5,824.
And again, I'd like you to divide this problem.
First, I want you to make an estimate,
then divide using the long division method,
check your answer by multiplying and adding the remainder.
And as a fourth task,
I want you to stop and think at the same time,
what's special about this problem?
Why am I giving you this problem?
So at this time, go ahead and stop the tape,
work the problem, estimate,
work it, check, and come up with the why this problem is selected by me.
Stop the tape now.
Okay.
We're going to divide 19 into 5,824.
Let's do our estimate first, as you should have done it.
19 is pretty close to 20,
and 5,824 is pretty close to 6,000.
Well, let's see, 20 would go into 63 times,
20 would go into 630 times,
so 20 would go into 6,300 times.
I expect my answer to be somewhat close to 300.
Now I divide 19 into 58.
Let's see, 3 times 19 is 57.
Can I subtract?
I get 1.
I bring down the 2 in the tens place.
I now have 12 tens.
19 divided into 12.
That's too small.
I cannot divide 19 and 12,
and that is exactly why I gave you this problem.
A lot of students at this point in time get confused
or just try to do something to make the answer go away.
Finish the problem.
That is not how you do mathematics.
You do mathematics by thinking about the consistency.
The division process is always consistent.
So what we're going to do here is we divide it.
How many 19s and 12?
What times 19 comes as close to 12 as possible?
Well, zero.
Zero is the number.
We can't make zero feel bad.
It's not a number. Zero is the number.
So we put a zero in the tens place,
and then we multiply.
Zero times 19 is zero.
And then we subtract.
12 times 12 minus zero is 12.
And now we take those 12 tens that we couldn't divide into
and make them into 121s.
Bring down the 4 in the ones place,
and we got 124 ones.
Okay?
How many 19s are there in 124?
Again, I don't expect you, unless you're a math genius,
to have memorized your 19 time staples.
But I do expect you to be able to go on the side of your paper
and to experiment a little bit.
Try maybe five times.
Well, five times 19 is 95.
That's still too small.
Six times 19 is 114.
And that's just about as close as we can come.
So as the visual shows you, we multiplied.
Six times 19 got 114, subtracted, and got 10.
The remainder is 10.
We're done.
The answer, of course, to 19 into 5,824 is 306
with a remainder of 10.
306, that's pretty close to 300,
so our estimate was real good.
But now to double check to make sure this is the correct answer,
we'll multiply 19 times 306.
And again, I would certainly suggest using that lattice method
we talked about in the previous lesson, adding 10,
and you will get 5,824, which will indicate to us
that this is the correct answer.
So again, what we do is when you're dividing,
if you have a situation where even after you bring down,
what you have to divide into is smaller than what you're dividing by.
We had 19 divided into 12.
Don't panic.
Simply say, hey, continue with the process.
If 19 goes into 12, zero times, we put the zero down, multiply.
Zero times 19 was zero, and we subtract, and we're on our way.
Remember that the place value should line up in the answer.
So we're done when we have a digit in the ones place.
In this case, we had a 6 in the ones place.
We can't have the, we can't run out of numbers too early.
In other words, we have to have the ones place filled in,
as we know we're done.
So again, we have the process, we estimate, we check,
and don't get upset if a zero appears in the answer.
Speaking about zero, you know, some people have a real hang up on zero.
You go to school and the teacher tells you,
you cannot divide by zero.
It's against the law.
Now, if you're a wise guy, and I was not a wise guy when I was in school,
I was too good a student.
I've become a wise guy as a teacher.
And you're a wise, your Asian has to say,
why can't you divide by zero?
Many people would say, because you can't.
It's just against the law.
That is an insufficient answer as far as I'm concerned.
I want to know why you cannot divide by zero.
And the reason is very simple.
Division is the opposite of multiplication.
So as we see in the next visual,
if I'm trying to divide zero into six, or six divided by zero,
the question I'm really asking is, what times zero is six?
Well, there's no number times zero that gives us six.
And therefore, there is no answer.
The answer is called undefined.
We cannot define a number which would have multiplied by zero will give us six.
And in fact, zero divided into almost any number is undefined,
because 27,000 divided by zero would ask,
what times zero is 27,000?
It's undefined.
There is no number.
I said almost every number, because as the next visual shows us,
zero divided by zero means what times zero is zero.
Any number times zero is zero.
Any number you like.
How old are you?
How many marbles do you have?
How many cars do you own?
Whatever it is.
Anything times zero is zero.
So we can't say the answer is undefined.
The problem is we have too many answers and that's called indeterminate.
We can't determine which of the many answers we have is correct.
So zero divided by zero is indeterminate.
Anything else divided by zero is undefined.
And that's another example of understanding rather than remembering a rule
or believing it came down from the mountaintop.
What have we seen in this lesson?
We've seen a practical story sort of example of why the long division method works.
The long division process you divide, you multiply, you subtract,
and you bring down the next place value number.
When you finish, you're in the once place and whatever is left after you subtract is called the remainder.
You estimate before you start your problem and check your answer to make sure it's reasonable.
When you're all finished, you multiply your answer by the divisor, the number you're multiplying.
Sorry, the number you're dividing by.
And you add your remainder.
So the answer, the quotient times the divisor plus the remainder better be the number you started with.
And then you'll know you'd be right.
And we all know why we can't divide by zero.
This hopefully has now made you into understanding what division is all about.
In our next lesson, we'll take a look at fractions.
So we'll see you in lesson four.
