Here we are at lesson four. In lesson four, we are going to discuss fractions, what a
fraction is, and some basic operations that we do with fractions that allows us to do
all the more advanced computations that we'll look at in lessons that come after lesson
four. Before we start any of that, I want to talk a little bit about the psychology
of fractions. Over my years of teaching, I've had many students, both young and old, who
indicate they're afraid of fractions. They know that they cannot do fractions. If you
know that you cannot do something, then you're probably right. But indeed, I don't buy into
that. I say that the reason many people are afraid of fractions, the reason they feel
they can't do fractions, is they've never been asked to understand what fractions are
all about. I'm hoping that this lesson four will allow you to have a foundation in fractions
that will make fractions as easy as anything else in mathematics. I personally believe that
most of mathematics, certainly the type of mathematics that we discuss in basic math,
is quite simple and you can do it. Let's go ahead and start. What's my first question
going to be? Well, if you've paid attention to the first few lessons, you know, I'm going
to ask, what is a fraction? Typically, the answer I get is a fraction is part of a whole.
Hmm. Again, that's right. Sometimes, but not always. Sometimes a fraction can be seen as
a ratio, the ratio between two numbers, a relationship between two numbers. Sometimes
a fraction is an incomplete division problem. So for example, two thirds can be seen as
two divided by three. In fact, the symbol for division, the line bar with two dots, those
two dots, one above the bar, one below the bar, represent the top and bottom of a fraction.
So there are various ways to look at a fraction, but to me, the most correct way is as a ratio.
You must have two numbers, one on top and one on the bottom. What do those two numbers
mean? Well, let's take a look at a visual picture, one of my favorite kinds of pictures,
a picture of a pizza. This pizza has been cut into three rather large slices and one
of the slices has been eaten. Well, now we have two of the three slices remaining. What
fraction of the pizza is left to be eaten? Well, there are two pieces left out of the
original three, which means we have two thirds. The fraction two thirds is representing the
pizza that's left, two out of three slices. Now the question now comes about is, all right,
but how a fraction is the same because they look a lot different than regular numbers.
And if you remember back in lesson one, I said that fractions and decimals and even algebraic
polynomials will see are very consistent with whole numbers. Now we take a look. Well, as
you can see here, we have two numbers, two whole numbers, 27 and 52. Both numbers contain
the digit two. But is the two in 27 the same as the two in 52? And the answer is, well,
it's the same digit, but does not have the same value. The two in 27 is in the tens place,
two tens. The two in 52 is in the ones place, two ones. So although the digit two is the
same, their value is different because of the different place values. Now we look at
two fractions, two thirds and two eighths. Are they the same? Hardly. In fact, if we
relate it to pizza, would you rather eat two thirds of a pizza or two eighths of a pizza?
Assuming the original pizzas were the same size and you like I like pizza, you'd want
two thirds because we know two thirds is bigger than two eighths. But why is it bigger if
the two's are the same? Well, the difference is found in the bottom of the fraction. Two
thirds is different than two eighths. And therefore we need to relate a fraction to
a whole number just as the two in 27 was different than the two in 52 because of place value.
The same thing is true for two thirds and two eighths. What it is, is that the numerator,
as we can see in this visual, the top of a fraction is the digit like two and two thirds.
And the denominator, the bottom of the fraction is its place value. Now probably no one's ever
told you that before. And if you buy into that, I think you'll find that a lot of the
seemingly magical rules of adding, subtracting, multiplying fractions will make a whole lot
of sense, will be consistent with whole numbers. I can almost guarantee that. The interesting
thing about this is that because the numerator can be any number we want, any whole number,
we're not limited to a single digit. The numerator can be 12 or 17 or 103. But we still treat
that numerator as a digit. The denominator can be any whole number we'd like other than
0. We know we can't divide by 0. It could be 1 or 2 or 5 or 12 or 117, which means almost
any number could be its place value. The denominator is the place value. That's so important because
as I said in an earlier lesson, if we understand where the place value is, computation becomes
much, much simpler. Okay, let's take a look at another pizza. This is a pizza that's
been sliced into three slices, just as the one before was. But now, you know, your mother
or your wife or somebody comes in and says, Hey, you can't serve people pizza like that.
Those slices are too big. The pepperonis will get all of the people's shirts or blouses
or whatever. We've got to cut the pizza into slices that are more manageable. So let's
say we took each of those three slices and sliced them each into four smaller slices.
How many total slices we have? Well, we'd have four and four and four. We'd have 12 slices.
So now the question can be asked if I had eaten two thirds, two of the slices, two thirds
of the pizza, how many twelfths, how many of the smallest slices would I have eaten?
That is, as we see in the visual here, two thirds equals how many twelfths? Well, what
did we do? We changed the thirds to twelfths by making each slice into four slices. We
multiplied the number of slices. So if we multiply the three in the denominator of two thirds
by four, we'll get the 12th in the denominator of the twelfths. Now we multiply the bottom
by four, let's multiply the top by four. And of course, two times four is eight, which
means two thirds equals eight twelfths. So if one person ate two slices of the original
pizza that have been cut into three pieces and someone else ate eight slices among the
12 slice pizza, they would have eaten the same amount of pizza. Two thirds and eight
twelfths are equal. Mathematically, we say they're equivalent, but it means the same
thing. They have the same value. Now notice that we multiply the top and the bottom of
two thirds both by four. Why did that work? Is it magic? Is it a rule? No, it's really
very simple. If I multiply the top and the bottom by four, I've really multiplied by
four fourths. What is four fourths? Four fourths is one whole. What happens when I multiply
a number by one? Well, I get the same number. So multiplying two thirds by four over four
gave me eight twelfths, which is really the same value. It looks different, but it really
is the same amount. If you go back to the thought about the pizza, you'll see the two
thirds and eight twelfths is the same amount of pizza. If we couldn't multiply two thirds
top and bottom to get eight twelfths, can we take the eight twelfths and turn it back
into two thirds? And the answer is, surely we can. We can take the eight and the twelve
and divide the top and the bottom by four. Eight divided by four is two. Twelve divided
by four is three. We get two thirds. And again, we divided the top and the bottom of a fraction
by the same number because dividing by four over four is the same as dividing by one and
dividing by one does not change a thing. Eight twelfths and two thirds are identical. Well,
the question comes about now. If we can multiply the top and bottom by the same number and
divide the top and bottom by the same number, can we also add or subtract by the same number
top and bottom? Well, look at one half. If we add one to the top and one to the bottom,
divide the same number, we get two thirds. Is one half the same as two thirds? I really
don't think so because I think you can see that two thirds of a pizza is a lot more
than one half. Okay. Maybe we need to subtract. Well, let's take four fifths. If we subtract
three from the four and three from the five, the same number top and bottom, we get one
half. Is four fifths the same as one half? Not really. Four fifths is much more of a
fraction than one half. So therefore, adding or subtracting the same number is not going
to work. What we can do is multiply the top and bottom of a fraction or divide the top
and bottom of a fraction by the same number. And doing so, we will get what's called an
equivalent fraction, a fraction that looks different, but has the same value. Okay. That's
to be very, very important because in adding and subtracting fractions, we're going to
have to be able to find equivalent fractions. Another thing that we do is we need to know
what we can divide by because if you looked at 812 and said, you know, what number can
divide both 8 and 12? We need some cues, some, some help. Okay. Well, that help is available
because if we know something about the multiplication tables of various numbers, we know some consistencies.
For example, all numbers that can be divided by two, that is all numbers obtained by multiplying
some whole number by two are even numbers. So if we had a numerator and a denominator,
we have both numbers, numerator and denominator were even numbers. We could divide the top
and the bottom, the numerator and the denominator by two. Okay. Numbers that are divisible by
five, that is numbers in the five times table, end in five or zero, 25, 40, 75, 105, 120.
So if we had a numerator and denominator that each either ended in five or zero, we could
say, Hey, we could divide the top and the bottom by five and get an equivalent fraction
that was smaller in size in terms of the numbers in the numerator and denominator, not smaller
in size in terms of value. It would be the same exact fraction. They would be equivalent.
Well, how about three? You think about numbers that are multiples of three, 369, 1215. That
doesn't seem to be a pattern until you look at the next number, 8472. Is that number
a multiple of three? If you're going to do this by going through the three times table,
you'd probably be here for another couple of hours is a much easier way to do that.
Add up the digits, eight plus four plus seven plus two. If you add up those four digits,
you get 21. Two plus one, the two and the one from 21, two plus one is three. 8472 is
divisible by three. When you add up the digits of a number and you keep adding the digits
until you get a one digit number, if that one digit number is three or six or nine, that
number is divisible by three. If the number you get, the digit you get at the end is something
other than three, so it's so nine. The original number was not a multiple of three and therefore
it cannot be divided by three. Well, there comes a need you see when we're working with
fractions to present our answer in simplest form. Generally, in terms of fractions, that
means something I call reducing. Reducing is dividing the top and the bottom of the fraction
by the same number until you no longer can do that, until the only number that would
divide the top and the bottom is one. Now, why do we do that? Do we do it just to please
the teacher because the answer in the back of the book is that way? No. It's a very,
very good reason. If let's say you were at a flea market and you wanted to buy something
and you wanted to negotiate with this person at the table who has tried to sell whatever
you're trying to buy and you said, how much is it? And the person said, well, make me
an offer. Yeah, I really can't tell me your price. Persons, tell you what, if you'll take
out your wallet or purse, maybe have your money, I'll take 49 98 of what you have. For
most people that would pose a real serious problem. In fact, they probably say, look,
you can have everything I have in my wallet. I'm not going to try to figure out 49 98. But
if we recognize it, 49 and 98 can both be divided by seven. And again, seven times
tables is something you just need to know as opposed to the clues for two and three
and five. And I divide 49 by seven, I get seven. I divide 98 by seven. I get 14. Well,
seven and 14 are also divisible by seven. And I get one half. Well, you say you would
have said one half. I understand that. But I didn't understand 49 98. Most people have
real difficulty with larger numbers. And we use two numbers in a fraction, the numbers
themselves, the numerator and denominator do not have to be very large before it becomes
confusing. When we present an answer in the real world, a numerical answer, we are communicating
something. And if we're going to have a fraction or answer, we want that fraction to be as
understandable as possible. And therefore, rather than 49 98, we want to reduce our answer
to one half, because certainly one half is very much understandable. Now, let's take
a look at the next visual. Here we have 48 54ths, a fraction we'd like to reduce because
48 and 54 are relatively large numbers. As you can see in the visual, we've divided at
the top and the bottom by two. We did that because we recognize that 48 and 52, I'm sorry,
48 and 54 are both even numbers and can be divided by two. When we divide both numbers
by two, we get 24 27. We recognize that 24 and 27 can each be divided by three. If we
didn't see that they were both in the three times table, we could see that by two plus
four is six, two plus seven is nine. Since the sum of the digits is six or nine, both
numbers can be divided by three. And we do that and get eight ninths. Eight ninths is
the simplest form of this fraction because the only number that divides both eight and
nine is one. So 48 54ths can be reduced to eight ninths. In the second part of the visual,
we see that we could have done it in one step if we had recognized that both 48 and 54 are
in the six times table. That is both can be divided by six. And we divide both by six,
we get eight ninths. Does it make a difference which way you do it? Absolutely not. You don't
have to do it in one step. If you can get the correct answer, that is what's important.
And again, the correct answer here is writing an equivalent fraction, a fraction of equal
value using the smallest numbers in simplest terms so that people will understand what
your answer means. Sometimes we have problems with fractions that involve what's called
improper fractions. Now improper fractions are not fractions that belch in public or
do something else that's considered unsocial behavior. Improper fractions are fractions
where the numerator is equal to or greater than the denominator. And that's the kind of
fraction that is not part of a whole. Seven sevenths, twelve fifths, that kind of thing.
Well, here we see 25 sixths. 25 sixths is an improper fraction. Improper fractions are
not understood by most people. The reason is because typically we look at fractions
as part of a whole. We want to see a fraction where the numerator is less than the denominator.
So our job here is to convert 25 sixths, the improper fraction, into what's called a mixed
number, a whole number and a proper fraction. Here 25 sixths is shown visually where each
sixth sixth is made into one whole. Notice we have four holes and one sixth left over.
That would make us believe that 25 sixths can be correctly written as four and one sixth.
How would you do that without having to draw all those circles? Well, we could do it as
a division problem. 25 sixths really means six divided into 25. We divide six into 25.
We get four with a remainder of one. The four, the answer, the quotient is the whole number.
The remainder is the numerator of the proper fraction. And of course the denominator, six,
stays the same. So 25 sixths is equivalent to and is much better written as four and one sixth.
We have taken the improper fraction and converted it into a mixed number of equal value.
But again, easier to understand. We are always trying to communicate and in communicating
with numbers, we want to make those numbers as understandable as possible. The last basic
operation we want to work with with fractions has to do with doing the opposite of what we
just did. It turns out in multiplication and division of fractions, we're going to need
to change mixed numbers back to improper fractions. So eight and four fifths. I want to change
that to an improper fraction. First separate the eight and the four fifths eight plus four fifths.
It really is the same as eight and four fifths. Let's change the eight into improper fraction.
Eight is how many fifths? Well, since five times eight is 40, 40 fifths is equal to eight.
So we change the eight into 40 fifths. We now have 40 fifths plus four fifths. And of course
we can buy those and get 44 fifths. Another way of looking at it simply is taking the
whole number eight, multiplying it by the denominator, 40, and adding the four in the
numerator, 44 fifths. And basically if we look at the simplification process, we change
an improper fraction to a mixed number as dividing, the changing the mixed number back to the
improper fraction is really like checking, multiplying the answer by what we divided
by, in this case the denominator, and then adding the remainder. And the remainder of
course is the numerator of the proper fraction. Let's go ahead and take a look at a few problems.
To make sure that everybody out there understands what's going on. And hopefully I'll get the
problems right. Okay. And basically, probably the important thing we want to do here is be
able to take improper fractions and simplify them into mixed numbers. And then if necessary,
if the fraction in that mixed number can be reduced, we need to do that too. So let's
start out with 31 sevenths. And what I'd like you to do is to stop the tape and to simplify
31 sevenths into a mixed number. And then if possible, reduce the fraction. It's part
of the mixed number. So we present 31 sevenths in its simplest form. Stop the tape and simplify
31 sevenths now, please. Okay. 31 sevenths, we would divide 7 into 31. 7 goes into 31
four times. So the whole number is 4. 4 times 7 is 28. 31 minus 28 leaves us with a remainder
of 3. 3 sevenths. In these simplification problems, when you divide the denominator stays the same.
It stays at 7. Can we reduce 3 sevenths? Well, let's see. We know that 3 can only be divided
by 3. Can 7 be divided by 3? Can we reduce 3 sevenths? Well, let's see. We know that 3 can only be
divided by 3. Can 7 be divided by 3? No, it can't. The only number is to divide both 3
and 7. The only number is 1. And therefore, 4 and 3 sevenths is the correct answer. Now,
let's take a look at another problem. I'll erase this. And now we'll look at 75 sixths.
And I would like you to take 75 sixths and do what you have to do to write it in simplest
form as a mixed number with a fraction that can no longer be reduced. So stop the tape
and write 75 sixths in its simplest form. When we divide 6 into 75, I believe we get 12.
And the remainder is 3. So we get 12 and 3 sixths. We should recognize that both 3 and 6
can be divided by 3. And if we divide the top and the bottom of 3 sixths by 3, we get 12
and 1 half. And of course, 1 half is a fraction that cannot be reduced. Now, just stop for a second
to prove a point. Which is easier for you to understand? 75 sixths or 12 and 1 half. I
sincerely believe that 12 and 1 half is a much easier number to visualize. 75 sixths
for most people would be an area beyond their understanding. And if we were trying to communicate
some information numerically, 12 and 1 half would do the job a lot better. Let's take
one more. And again, you'll notice when I have more than one kind of more than one problem,
there's a purpose to each one. In this case, we have 57 12ths. Same idea. What I'd like
you to do is write 57 12ths as a mixed number. Stop the tape and simplify 57 12ths. We divide
12 into 57. We get 4. Let's see. 4 times 12 is 48. That leaves 9. And we get 9 12ths.
Can 9 12ths be reduced? Well, yes, it can. 9 12ths can be reduced by dividing top and
bottom by three. And we get 4 and 3 fourths. And again, if we take a look at all three
of those representations of the same number, 57 12ths, 4 and 9 12ths, 4 and 3 fourths,
which one of those three is easiest for the most people to understand? And I think you'll
find the answer would be 4 and 3 fourths. There's no question about it. It is in simplest
form. Okay, let's try something else. Let's try a different kind of problem involving
equivalent fractions. If I said to you, okay, I had eight 11ths and I wanted to find an
equivalent fraction with a denominator was 33. And the question was eight 11ths equals
how many 30 thirds going back to our discussion of equivalent fractions, stop the tape and
figure out what the numerator is. So those two fractions are equal. Stop the tape. Now
please. Well, obviously 11 to 33. We multiplied. We multiplied by three. If I multiply the
bottom of the fraction by three by three, I must multiply the top of the fraction by
three. Eight times three is 24. And therefore 24 30 thirds is the same as eight 11ths.
They are equivalent fractions. And in our next lesson, we talk about adding fractions.
You'll see that this is a very, very important skill to have. Okay, let's try one more problem.
How about 45 105th? There's an interesting fraction, rather large numbers. We need to
do is to change that to a form that is more easily understood. Can we change that to a
mixed number? Not really. A mixed number can only be obtained from an improper fraction.
This is a proper fraction. The numerator is less than the denominator. The question is, can
we reduce it? Can we divide the top and the bottom by some number and come up with a fraction
equivalent to 45 105ths, but that has smaller numbers. Well, stop the tape and do that right
now. We recognize that both 45 and 105 and in five and therefore we can divide the top
and the bottom of the fraction by five 45 divided by five is nine 105 divided by five is 21.
Are we finished? Nope. Both nine and 21 can be divided by three. And when we divide both
nine and 21 by three, we get three 7ths. Now, had we known our 15 times table, we could
have easily divided both 45 and 105 by 15 and got three 7ths. But the route to get there
is not as important as the answer. 45 105ths is most easily understood when written as
three 7ths. Okay, let's take a look at what we've done in this lesson in terms of understanding
some very basic skills that we'll need to work fractions with. The first thing we understand
that a fraction is really is a number, that its numerator is similar to the digit, the
denominator is similar to a place value. In fact, it is the fractions place value. And
one of the things that we can do with a fraction is write it as an equivalent fraction. We can
multiply the top and bottom by the same number. We can divide the top and bottom by the same
number. If we do that, the new fraction is equal in value, even though it looks different
than the original fraction. What else can we do? Well, we need to reduce fraction. We need
to take a fraction and divide the top and the bottom of that fraction to get an equivalent
fraction that has smaller numbers in it. Same value, but easier to understand because the
numbers are smaller. Another thing we saw, a very important idea, is changing an improper
fraction to a mixed number. We take the improper fraction, a numerator greater than a denominator,
and we divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number is the answer to the division
problem, that is the quotient. The remainder is our numerator, and the denominator stays
the same. So we change an improper fraction to a mixed number. We also saw that we can
take a mixed number and change it back to an improper fraction. If we take the whole number
in the mixed number and multiply it by the denominator and add the numerator to it, that's
the new numerator, and the denominator stays the same. We now have an improper fraction.
If you understand all of these ideas, then you are ready for lesson number five. Lesson
number five, we'll learn to add fractions. We'll see you there.
