This is Lesson 5. In Lesson 5, I am going to see that you can learn how to add fractions.
You will see this too. In fact, the key thing, be recalling two important ideas. The first
important idea is that fractions are numbers, that the numerator is like a digit and the
denominator is like a place value. The second important idea goes back to Lesson 1, that
adding is counting. We can only add or count things that are the same, that have the same
place value. Therefore, the question is, and something I want you to think about, in order
to add two fractions, what is required? Stop right now, think about it, put in words, what
must be true about two fractions if we are going to add them? What you should have said
is they have to have the same denominator. The reason for that, if the denominator is
the place value, and in order to add, we must only add numbers in the same place value,
therefore the fractions must have the same denominator, since the denominator is the
place value. Our first visual shows you two-ninths plus three-ninths. We can add these two fractions
because they have the same denominator. Two-ninths plus three-ninths equals five-ninths. What
question should we ask before we end this problem? The question we should ask is, can
we reduce five-ninths? Is there a number that divides both five and nine? The answer is
other than one, no. Five-ninths is our final answer, it's in simplest form. The next addition
problem is five-twelfths plus one-twelfth. Again, the same denominator, five plus one
is six, the denominator stays the same since we're adding apples and apples, we always
get apples, so twelfths and twelfths gives us twelfths, so the answer is six-twelfths.
We recognize that six and twelve can both be divided by six, and dividing top and bottom
by six, we get one-half. Five-twelfths plus one-twelfth equals one-half. Again, it's
not unusual because they're reducing to have two fractions and winding up having a much
smaller denominator in the answer, but that is the correct answer, one-half. The third
of these problems is seven-tenths plus five-tenths. Again, the denominators are both the same,
so we can add keeping the denominator, we get twelfth tenths, but twelfth tenths is
an improper fraction. We cannot leave an answer as an improper fraction, so we must simplify,
we divide ten into twelve, which goes in once with the remainder of two, so we have one
and two-tenths, but that answer is not in simplest form because two-tenths can be reduced,
and the final answer is one and one-fifth. I stress the one. A lot of times students
in mine have failed to put the whole number. They got one and two-tenths equals one-fifth.
Equals has a very definite meaning in mathematics. Two numbers are equivalent, that is, they're
equal, they must be the same. One and two-tenths cannot be equal to one-fifth. One and two-tenths
equals one and one-fifth. Now, we've looked at addition problems that involve adding
fractions with the same denominator. What if the denominators were different? The next
problem is one just like that. That is a problem that asks us to add two-fifths plus three-sevenths.
The two denominators are different. We cannot add those two fractions. We must convert both
fractions to fractions that are equivalent and that have the same denominator, but we
learned in the previous lesson how to do equivalent fractions. The only question now is, what
is that common denominator that we're going to convert the fifths and the sevenths too?
We know that we're going to multiply the top and the bottom of each fraction by some number
and by the same number, top and bottom, to get the equivalent fraction. So we need to
know a number that we can obtain by multiplying by five and multiplying by seven. Seems to
me the obvious choice is five times seven or thirty-five. Therefore, we're going to
have two-fifths equals how many thirty-fifths and three-sevenths equals how many thirty-fifths?
Well, we learned in lesson four that we multiply top and bottom by the same number to get the
fifths to be thirty-fifths. I multiply by seven. If I multiply the bottom of the fraction
by seven, I must also multiply the top of the fraction by seven and two times seven is
fourteen. So now we see that two-fifths equals fourteen thirty-fifths. The three-sevenths,
we multiply the bottom by five. We must also multiply the top, the three by five. Three
times five is fifteen. So we have fourteen thirty-fifths is equivalent to two-fifths.
Fifteen thirty-fifths is equivalent to three-sevenths. We now have two fractions with the same denominator.
We can add those fractions by simply adding the numerators and keeping the denominator
because when we're adding, the place value stays the same. Fourteen plus fifteen is twenty-nine.
We get twenty-nine thirty-fifths. Can we reduce twenty-nine thirty-fifths? Well, let's see.
Is either number even? Nope, we can't divide by two. Can we divide by three? Well, two
plus nine is eleven and one plus one is two. So twenty-nine certainly is not divisible by
three. How about five? Well, thirty-five ends in five, but twenty-five does not end in five
or zero. So neither two nor three nor five or it turns out anything else except one divides
both twenty-nine and thirty-five. Our answer is twenty-nine thirty-fifths and that's the
correct answer. The next problem asks us to add one-third plus five-twelfths. Now, one-third
plus five-twelfths, again, the simplest way to get the common denominator, not always
the best way, but certainly the simplest way, is to multiply the two denominators. And three
times twelve is thirty-sixths. And of course, the equivalent fraction is obtained, multiplying
top and bottom of one-third by twelve. We get twelve-thirty-sixths. And for the five-twelfths,
multiplying top and bottom by three, we get fifteen-thirty-sixths. Twelve-thirty-sixths
plus fifteen-thirty-sixths gives us twenty-seven-thirty-sixths. Now, twenty-seven-thirty-sixths can
be reduced. We can either divide by three, top and bottom, and get nine-twelfths, and
divide by three again, and get three-fourths. Or, if we're really sharp, we recognize that
twenty-seven and thirty-sixths are both divisible by nine, and we get three-fourths. But either
way, one-third plus five-twelfths is three-fourths. Before we go any further though, some of you
might say, wait a second, I can think of a number that's less than thirty-sixths that
I can use as a common denominator. And of course, you're absolutely right. And the next
visual shows us using what's called the lowest common denominator, the LCD, the smallest
number that is both a multiple of each of the two denominators. In this case, a multiple
of three and a multiple of twelve. Since three divides evenly to twelve, twelve is the lowest
common denominator. So the question is, one-third equals how many twelfths? Well, three times
four is twelve, so one times four is four, four-twelfths. And the five-twelfths doesn't
change because we're multiplying by one, if you will. Five-twelfths equals five-twelfths.
We add the four-twelfths and the five-twelfths, we get nine-twelfths. And of course, we reduce
and get three-fourths. The question is, should you use the lowest common denominator? My
answer to that is, it depends. The lowest common denominator reduces the size of the
numbers, reduces the amount of reducing, I repeat myself there, but reduces the amount
of reducing because the numbers are smaller, and can be easier if it's obvious what the
lowest common denominator is. But some of my students get confused. They much prefer
to use a common denominator obtained by multiplying the two denominators. When you work the problems
in the workbook, for example, see which one pleases you. Using the lowest common denominator
is no big shakes. If you want to use a denominator obtained by multiplying the two denominators
and that works for you, that's wonderful. The key thing in mathematics is when you compute
that your answer is correct, not how beautiful your process is, not even how quick you were
done with the problem. The only thing that's important is that your answer is correct and
hopefully that you understand what you're doing. Okay, let's take a look at another
problem, seven eighths plus five sixths. Now seven eighths plus five sixths, we could
use 48, eight times six as a common denominator. But again, we should see that eight and six
can both divide 24. So if we use 24 as a common denominator, that is the lowest common denominator,
and therefore we multiply the top and bottom of seven eighths by three and get 21, 24.
We multiply the top and bottom of five sixths by four and get 20, 24. And when we add 21,
24 plus 20, 24, we get 41, 24. Now why can't we stop there? Well, you should be saying,
hey, that's an improper fraction. We can't leave an answer as an improper fraction, not
because it's against the law, because it's more confusing for most people. People want
to see proper fractions in the answer. So we need to simplify 41, 24. Well, 24 goes into
41 one time and the remainder is 17. So the answer is one and 17, 24. Can we reduce the
17, 24? Well, let's see. Two doesn't go into 17. Three doesn't go into 17. Five doesn't
go into 17. If you look at our seven times table, seven doesn't go into 17. In fact,
the only number to divide 17 other than one is 17. So we cannot reduce and the answer
is one and 17, 24. Now let me mention one other thing right here and now in terms of
when we're adding two proper fractions and the answer is an improper fraction. We don't
even have to think about dividing, like example, 24 to 41, because the answer has to be one.
If it's an improper fraction obtained by adding two proper fractions, when we simplify, it's
going to be one and then subtract the numerator minus the denominator. Why? Well, let's imagine
I had a bunch of change in my pocket and the change was less than a dollar, a proper fraction,
if you will. Let's say, well, the most I could have is 99 cents. And let's say you also had
an amount of change in your pocket, again, less than a dollar and the most you could
have would be 99 cents. If we pulled our two pockets full of change, could we have $2 or
more? And the answer is no. In fact, the most we could have is $1.98. So when you add two
proper fractions and the answer is improper, the whole number in the mixed number that's
equivalent will be one. And all I had to do here was say one and then 41 minus 24 is 17.
And the answer is one and 17, 24. But look, if you like dividing, you want to be my guest,
you can divide. I just try to make things simplest for my students so they can get their
answer as quickly as possible, as efficiently as possible, and get the correct answer. Alright.
What is next? Well, next, we're going to talk about adding mixed numbers, because so far,
we've only added fractions. Okay. Mixed numbers is no big deal. Why? Because all the mixed
numbers, in addition to having some fractional place value, that is, we have 14 to 25, whatever
it is, we have something in the ones place and possibly even something in the tens place.
But adding whole numbers is no big deal. We add the fractions, we add the whole numbers
and we get our answer. The first problem is four and two-fifths plus three and three-sevenths.
Okay. Now, what's the first thing we need to do? We need to get a common denominator.
As you can see, we've used a common denominator of 35. Why 35? Well, because five times seven
is 35. And we couldn't think of a lower common denominator. And the reason we couldn't think
of it, because seven times five is the best we can do. We then multiply the numerators
by the same number in each fraction that we had multiplied the denominators by. Five times
seven is 35. Two times seven is 14. Seven times five is 35. Three times five is 15. And now
we're ready to add. The reason we can add is because we have our place values lined
up. The four and the three are lined up in the ones place. The 14 and the 15 are lined
up in the 35th place. So we add 14 plus 15 is 29, 29 and 35. Four plus three is seven.
The answer is seven and 29 and 35. Can we simplify? No, 29 and 35 is a proper fraction.
Can we reduce 29 and 35? Two doesn't divide 29. Three doesn't divide 29. Five doesn't
divide 29. In fact, nothing divides 29 except one and 29. So that's our answer. The answer
is seven and 29, 35. So that was the problem. We had to get a common denominator, but notice
there was no simplifying. There was no reducing. Okay. You might notice the fractions in that
problem were the exact same fractions in the first problem we added with unlike denominators.
So in reality, it was the same problem except we had to add four plus three. You may recognize
the next problem, seven and one third plus two and five twelfths. Again, we're gonna,
adding the whole numbers is, is fine. We just want to be sure we add the fractions correctly.
Let's go ahead and we did hear and use the lowest common denominator, which is 12. Remember,
if you wanted to use a three times 12, 36, you're welcome to do that. One third is four
twelfths, five twelfths, four stays five twelfths. We had the four twelfths and the five
twelfths and get nine twelfths. Seven plus two is nine. So we have nine and nine twelfths.
We can reduce nine 12th because it's a proper fraction, but both nine and 12 are divisible
by three. And we wind up with nine and three fourths. The correct answer. And again, that
was the second problem we looked at. We had looked at one third plus five twelfths. Now
all we do is put some whole numbers in front of those. The next problem, five and seven
eighths plus four and five sixths. Again, we've already added seven eighths and five sixths.
We'll do it again, but remember that what we're talking about here is the lowest common
denominator possible. We recognize that six and eight both divide 24. So the LCD is 24.
We've changed seven eighths to 21, 20 fourths. We change five sixths to 20, 20 fourths. And
you'll notice that I've rewritten the five and the four again. Many of my students don't
do that. And they sometimes forget to add the whole numbers that equals mean something.
Five and seven eighths is not equal to 21, 20 fourths. Five and seven eighths is equal
to five and 21, 20 fourths. We add the 24th place. If you will, we get 41, 20 fourths.
We had the ones place five plus four is nine. And we say, wait a second, that fraction is
improper. It's improper. We can't have that. So we're going to do. Well, we know that 41,
20 fourths is one and 17, 20 fourths. But now the question is what do we do with that
one? We do the exact same thing with that one that we did in adding whole number problems
in the early elementary school. We carried, we take that 24, 24th and made it to one hole
and put the one hole where it belongs in the ones place that as we add it to the nine and
we get 10 and 17, 20 fourths. And as we saw previously, we cannot reduce 17, 20 fourths.
So that's our final answer. 10 and 17, 20 fourths. Okay. You now have a number of basic
problems that show you how to add fractions and mixed numbers. So I think we need to do
now is go to the whiteboard and provide you with some problems to work on. Then I'll work
through it, make sure we all agree on the answer. And by the end of this lesson, you
should be able to add fractions so well that everyone in your neighborhood will be proud
of you. Let's go to the whiteboard. Okay, the first problem I'd like you to do when
again, I'll write the problem out. And then I'd like you to work it and then come on
back to the tape after you finish completely and be sure to check to see if you can simplify,
reduce and so on. Let's see. We have seven and 13, 20th plus five and three fourths.
Okay, so I'd like you to add those two mixed numbers and complete your answer as best as
you can. And then start to tape up again and we'll go over how I would do this problem.
Okay, the first thing we need to do is to get equivalent fractions with a common denominator.
But the first thing I'm going to do is something else. I'm going to write down the whole numbers
and I'm going to write down the plus. Because in our next lesson, we're going to talk about
subtracting. And if we don't write down a plus when we're adding or a minus when we're
subtracting, we might do the wrong thing. And I speak from experience. I've done the
wrong thing and dozens of my students have done the wrong thing, especially on tests.
And you know, you get the wrong answer when you add, when you should be subtracting.
Well, now we need equivalent fractions. We need a common denominator for 20 and for
four. Well, we could use 80 and it wouldn't be wrong except beginning in pretty big
numbers. I recognize that four times five is 20. So let's use 20 as a common denominator.
In fact, of course, it is the lowest common denominator. We need not change the numerator
in the first fraction because certainly seven and 13 20. It's equals seven and 13 20.
What did I multiply four by to get 20 when I multiplied four by five? If I multiply the
denominator by five, I must also multiply the numerator by five to have an equivalent
fraction. And that is 15 20. So now what do I do? I add because I have the same place
values all lined up the 20th place, the fractions and the ones place 13 plus 15 is 28 20 and
seven plus five is 12. Am I done? Hardly 28 20 is an improper fraction. The numerator is
more than the denominator. So we need to simplify again. You could divide 20 into 28, but using
what I said before, we know since it's improper and we got it by adding two proper fractions,
when we simplify, we're going to get one and that one is added to the ones place that is 12 becomes 13.
And we have eight 20th left. And we're not done yet. Why not? Well, because eight 20th can be
reduced. We may recognize they're both even numbers. We further recognize that both numbers can be
divided by four. And if we divide eight and 20 by four, we get two fifths since five times four is
20 and two times four is eight. And let's not forget the 13. So our final answer here to seven and
13 20th plus five and three fourths is 13 and two fifths. Okay, let's take a look at one more problem
we can do. I'm going to erase this. And again, if you got that problem wrong, if you did something wrong,
go back and try it again. Try to add that those two numbers correctly. And generally, if you make a
mistake, you go back in the tape, you'll see what you did wrong and correct it. Not everybody has to get
every answer correct the first time they do it. All right, here's a problem eight and 11 12 plus seven and
three fourths. Okay. So I want you to add those two numbers and come up with a final answer in simplest form.
Stop the tape. And when you finish your computation, turn the tape back on and we'll work the problem.
Okay. First of all, again, I'm going to write the eight and the seven and my plus to show that I'm adding
common denominator. Once again, I could use 48. I could I could use 24. I could use a lot of numbers, but I'm
going to use 12 because it is the lowest common denominator. Also, it saves me some work because 11 12
equals 11 12 and four times three is 12. And therefore three times three is nine.
Now I'm going to add. See 11 12 plus nine 12 is 20 12 eight plus seven is 15 15 and 20 12, which is not our
final answer. 2012 is improper. We need to simplify. And again, since we're adding two proper fractions, we know
we simplify, we're going to get a whole number of one. We add that one to the 15 and get 16 20 minus 12 is eight
12 and of course we can reduce a 12 by two, but even better, we can reduce it by four and we get 16 and two thirds
so that eight and 11 12 plus seven and three fourths equals 16 and two thirds. Now let's try one more problem
just to make sure that we know what we're doing. And let's see how about this? How about we do 13 little bigger
whole numbers and five sevenths plus let's say 21 and one eighth. So go ahead and stop the tape, add that up and come up
with the answer, the correct answer in simplest form and come on back when you finish your work.
Okay, go ahead and write my equals 13 plus 21 common denominator when you'll notice that eight times seven is 56 and there is
no number less than 56 that can be divided by both seven and eight. So we'll have to use 56. Okay, what times seven is 50
while eight times seven is 56. If I multiply the bottom by eight, I must multiply the top by eight 40 56 eight times seven is
56. And I must multiply the one times the seven one times seven is seven. Okay, now we just add we have common
denominator seven plus 40 is 47 56 13 plus 21 is 34. So we have 34 and 47 56 is that a complete answer? Well, let's see, can
we simplify it is 47 more than 56? No, it's not. So it is a proper fraction. It cannot be simplified. Can we reduce? Let's see 47
can 47 be divided by two? No, it's an odd number. Can we divide it by three? No, four plus seven equals 11 and one plus one from 11
equals two. So it's not divisible by three. Is it divisible by five? Nope. 47 does not end in five or zero. Is it in the seven times
table? Nope. In fact, 47 is one of those numbers that we'll discuss in a much later lesson that can only be divided by one and
itself. So we cannot reduce this fraction. In fact, 34 and 47 56 is our final answer. Let me give you one more problem. I thought that
was the last one. One more problem I just thought of that might be interesting to see if you understand what you're doing. And it's a
problem you should be able to do fairly quickly. If you see the trick, and it really is a trick, five plus eight and two thirds. Go ahead
and add that up and see what you get. Now the trick, of course, is there was no fraction in the two thirds. Well, that's okay. We
could say it's zero thirds or it's nothing. If I have zero in a place value and something else in that same place value, just keep the same
number. So zero plus two thirds is two thirds. And five plus eight is 13. And my answer is 13 and two thirds. Can I reduce? Not two
thirds is reduced as far as possible. Two thirds is a proper fraction. There's no simplification. In fact, it's a very easy problem. But sometimes
problems that are so easy that they appear different and difficult can be a challenge. Hopefully you got that one right. So let's talk about
adding fractions. Hopefully, hopefully we're all experts. To add two fractions, the first thing you must have is a common denominator. The easiest
way to get the common denominator for two fractions is to multiply the two denominators. If possible, we could use the lowest common
denominator, the LCD. And this is the smallest number that is both a multiple of the first denominator and the second denominator, LCD.
Once we have a common denominator, we use what we know about equivalent fractions to find the missing numerators. Once we've done that, we
have our fractions with the same place value, the same denominator. We have our whole numbers and the mixed numbers lined up. So we add, we add
the numerators, keep the denominator, we add the whole numbers. If the fraction we get is improper, we simplify, noting that since we're adding two
proper fractions, if we have to simplify the whole number to one, we add that one to the whole number in the answer. We have the fraction that
remains. We look to see if it can be reduced. If it can be reduced, we reduce it to lowest terms, and we have a mixed number that is the answer
to the problem. Now, that doesn't seem as difficult as it might have seemed before we started this lesson. And in fact, if you understand adding fractions,
then the next lesson, lesson six, subtracting fractions, will be simple as all. See you there.
