Welcome to lesson six. In lesson six, we're going to talk about subtracting fractions.
Just as I mentioned in lesson five, adding fractions, all we need to do is combine what
we know about fractions and what we know about subtraction. And subtraction of fractions
becomes relatively easy to do. What do we know about fractions? We know that the denominator
is the place value. What do we know about subtracting? Well, subtracting is the opposite
of addition. It involves counting so we must have the same place value. So in order to subtract
fractions, they must each have the same denominator. So we're not going to even look at any problems
that involve fractions with the same denominator. We'll go right to a problem that's subtracting
two mixed numbers with different denominators. And that first problem, of course, is eight
and five eighths minus two and one third. And you'll notice that we've already set it up.
We have the common denominator of 24. Three times eight is 24. Notice I've written the
whole numbers eight and two, and I put that subtraction symbol in to remind me that I'm
subtracting because otherwise I might be tempted to add. Well, 15 24th is equivalent to five
eighths. 8 24th is equivalent to one third. I subtract 15 minus eight and get 7 24ths.
Eight minus two is six. There's no simplifying when it comes to subtraction because obviously
we're not going to get an improper fraction. If we get an improper fraction, it means we've
done something improper. This is equivalent to the fact that there's no carrying in subtracting
whole numbers. Simplifying is a lot like carrying is the same idea. So we are not finished because
we need to check to see if we can reduce. Can we reduce 7 24th? Well, seven is not divisible
by two or by three or by five. It is divisible by seven, but 24 is not divisible by seven.
So we cannot reduce this fraction. The answer is six and seven 24ths. Now that wasn't so
difficult. Here's another problem. Seven five and five sixth minus three and three fourths.
Notice again, we've got it set up. We write the whole numbers. We put the subtraction symbol,
the minus sign, and we have our common denominator of 24. Four times six is 24. The numerator
is 20 in the first fraction because five times four is 20. In the second fraction, the numerator
is, let's see, what is the numerator? It's 18. 18 because three times six is 18. So now
I subtract 20 minus 18 is two. So two 24ths and seven minus three is four. Four and two
24ths. Well, that can be reduced. The two 24ths, both of those are even numbers. I divide top
and bottom by two and I get four and one 12th, which is the final answer. In the next visual,
we'll see an alternate way to do this. That is using the lowest common denominator. Just
as I mentioned in lesson five, if you don't want to use the lowest common denominator,
if you want to always get the common denominator by multiplying the two denominators, that's
fine. But sometimes using the lowest common denominator will make the problem a lot easier.
In this case, we use 12 because both four and six divide 12. We get 10 twelfths minus
nine twelfths, which is one 12th. And of course, seven minus three is still four. We get four
and one 12th. And by using the lowest common denominator, we did not have to reduce. When
you use the lowest common denominator, it does not guarantee that you'll not have to reduce.
It just reduces the amount of times you'll have to reduce because you're using a smaller
denominator. Now, the next problem, eight and one third minus three and three fifths.
We get the common denominator as shown here, 15. That's fine. We have eight and five fifteenths
minus three and nine fifteenths. That is a problem. Why is it a problem? It's a problem
because we cannot subtract five minus nine. What did we do with whole numbers when we
had a subtraction problem in a certain place value that couldn't be done? We had two minus
five or three minus eight. What did we do? One word, we borrowed. And we'll do the same
thing here because as I said early on in lesson one, subtraction, addition, multiplication,
etc., are consistent. What we do with fractions is really not much different than what we
do with whole numbers. We will borrow. But some people, I should say many people, have
a problem with borrowing with fractions because it's not precisely the same as borrowing
with whole numbers. In borrowing with whole numbers, a lot of people just are trained to
put a little one up there. You can't put a little one up here in the numerator. It's
not correct in most cases. What I've developed over the years is a story. Let's take this
exact problem, this problem of eight, I should say eight and five fifteenths minus three and
nine fifteenths. Let's say, for example, that there was a new coin, a new U.S. coin. Oh,
let's call it the molly. A molly is 15 mollies make $1. If you have 15 of these coins, you
can trade it in for a dollar bill. Let's say I always keep my coins in my pocket. I keep
my dollar bills in my wallet. In this particular case, I have eight dollar bills in my wallet
and I have five mollies, five fifteenths of a dollar in my pocket, in my change pocket.
I go to the store. I'm going to buy something. Let's say I'm buying some simple old, some
tennis balls and the tennis balls come to $3 and nine mollies. Well, I don't have nine
mollies. All I have is five. So what do I do? Well, I go to give the person behind the counter
$4. The person behind the counter says, I'm sorry, I have no change. I'll just keep your
$4. Well, I'm not used to giving tips to people when I purchase tennis balls. So I say, oh,
no, no, no, I've got to get my change. I'm not getting it ripped off here. What can I do?
I want to buy the tennis balls. You don't have change. He says, well, if you go across the
street, there's a store over there and they always have lots of change and they'll be
happy to give you change for a dollar. So I put my dollars back in my wallet. Remember,
I had eight dollars in my wallet. I had five coins, five mollies in my pocket. I go across
the street to the other store and the lady standing behind the counter. I say, the gentleman
across the street said, I could get change for a dollar and she said, fine, what would
you like? Well, I told her I'd like mollies. Well, if I give her a dollar, how many mollies
would she give me? She'll give me 15. Why? Because 15 mollies, 15, 15th of a dollar equals
one dollar. Now, am I going to take those 15 coins and hold in my hand as I cross back
across the street? No, my mother trained me better than that. You don't go across the
street holding money. You put it in your pocket. Now, wait a second. I already had five mollies
in my pocket. I put 15 more. How many mollies do I have? I have 20. How about my wallet?
Do I still have eight dollars? Of course not, because I gave the lady one dollar. So now
I have seven dollars. Do I still have the same amount of money? I have seven dollars
and 20 mollies. Is that the same as eight dollars and five mollies? And the answer, of course
it is. It's exactly the same. And now I can go to the store and give the gentleman there
three dollars and nine mollies. And what do I have left? Well, I had 20 mollies. I have
11 left. I had seven dollars. I gave him three. So I have four left. If you can remember
that story, then what we'll do next on the individual makes a whole lot of sense because
we'll do the exact same thing. Only we do it symbolically. We have eight and five fifteenths.
We change the eight to seven plus one. That is the one dollar. So we have seven plus one
plus five fifteenths. And then we change the one to 15 fifteenths. Notice whenever you
change one to a fraction, the numerator and denominator are the same. So instead of fifteenths,
we had eighteenths, it would be 18 eighteenths. If it was twenty fourths, it would be twenty
four twenty fourths. We have fifteen fifteenths. So we have seven plus fifteen fifteenths plus
five fifteenths, which gives us seven and twenty fifteenths. Just as we said, I had seven
dollars and I had 20 mollies, twenty fifteenths of a dollar in my change pocket. And now the
next visual will show us symbolically how to subtract. We have eight and five fifteenths
minus three and five fifteenths. I'm sorry, three and nine fifteenths. And we, we, we
borrow. We actually borrow one from the eight, making it seven. And then we change the one
hole into fifteen fifteenths. An easier way to do that is to simply add the fifteen and
the denominator to the five in the numerator, giving us twenty. Because again, if we're
changing one hole into fifteenths, it will always be fifteen fifteenths. So we have
seven and twenty fifteenths minus three and nine fifteenths. We now can subtract. We've
borrowed and we have enough in the numerator and the top fractions is attract. Twenty minus
nine is eleven, eleven fifteenths, and seven minus three is four. So we now can borrow.
And borrowing a notice is very much the same as a whole number. The only difference is
that you don't just put a one. You got to think about, if I have, for example, a common
denominator of thirty, then I'll simply change one hole into thirty thirtieths. But again,
the easy way to do it is to simply take the denominator, add it to the old numerator,
and you get the new numerator. Of course, this is only after you've gotten the common
denominator. So let's look at the next problem. We have nine and two thirds minus four and
eleven twelfths. Common denominator, we use the lowest common denominator of twelve. Nine
and eight twelfths minus four and eleven twelfths. Well, can we do that? No, we can't. We cannot
do, why not? Well, because we cannot subtract eight minus eleven. So what must we do? We
must borrow. We borrow from the ones place and the nine becomes an eight. We change that
one hole into twelve twelfths. The eight twelfths we have before plus the twelve twelfths we
added gives us twenty twelfths. And now we can subtract. Twenty twelfths minus eleven
twelfths is nine twelfths. Eight minus four is four. We're not finished yet because nine
twelfths can be reduced by dividing top and bottom by three. We get four and three fourths.
So that's our final answer. That shouldn't have been so difficult. Again, the idea of
common denominator, always going to have to have that to add or subtract. If we cannot
subtract the top numerator minus the bottom numerator, we borrow from the ones place and
then we can subtract. We see if we can reduce and we have our final answer. Now, there are
two types of fraction-subtraction problems that sometimes present the challenge. Actually,
they're fairly simple problems, but they're a bit different. And in both cases, they involve
where you have a subtraction problem with two numbers, only one of which has a fraction.
For example, the first problem, nine and eleven fifteenths minus four. Well, notice the four
has no fraction. If our first step in subtracting fractions is to get a common denominator, we
might as well get one. We might as well use the fifteen. If four has no fraction with it,
we can make it fifteenths. But how many fifteenths is it? Well, four and how many fifteenths equals
exactly four? Seems quite obvious. Four and zero fifteenths equals exactly four. So our
numerator for our new fraction is zero. That is four equals four and zero fifteenths. Can
we subtract? Can we do eleven minus zero? Of course we can. Eleven minus zero is eleven.
Nine minus four is five, and our answer is five and eleven fifteenths. Do we have to
reduce? Well, actually, because we only had one fraction, if eleven fifteenths could not
be reduced, and it cannot be reduced, then when we get our answer, we don't even have
to worry about reducing. In other words, if the fraction in the top number, the one number
of the fraction cannot be reduced, then when we subtract, the answer will not have to be
reduced. Of course, if we could have reduced eleven fifteenths, we could have reduced it
at the beginning before we even started the subtraction process. Quite simple, but again,
people look at it, and they see the missing fraction, and they get all hung up on what
to do. Simply, common denominator, the same denominator as the other fraction, and put
a zero in the numerator. Very much equivalent. Okay, the next problem. Now you'll notice
the missing fraction, or the number without a fraction, is on top. We have eight minus
five and two sevenths. Same idea. The common denominator is seven, right?
We use the same denominator, and the numerator is zero, because eight and zero sevenths is
the same as eight. But now we can't subtract. We can't do zero sevenths minus two sevenths.
So we borrow. No different. We borrow one from the eight, which makes it seven. We add
the old denominator to the old numerator, seven plus zero, to get the new numerator,
seven sevenths. Is seven and seven sevenths the same as eight? Of course it is. And now
we can subtract. Seven sevenths minus two sevenths is five sevenths, and seven minus
five is two. So the answer is two and five sevenths. Can we reduce? No. And the same
thing is true here. If we could not reduce the one fraction in that problem after we
subtract, we'll not have to reduce. Okay, so in these kind of problems, for example,
if that had been eight minus five and, oh, let's say two eighths, we could reduce right
there, make the two eighths one fourth. And still, after we subtracted, there'd be no
reducing. So these are very special kinds of problems, but still it's a good idea to
think about the steps. And in this case, some of the steps are quite simple, but
always when subtracting numbers with fractions, the first thing we need is a
common denominator. Then we simply get the numerators in the equivalent fraction. We
borrow if we need to. We subtract and then we reduce our fractional answer if
possible. And if we follow those steps every time, we'll get the right answer. Let's
see if you can get the right answer. Let's go to the whiteboard and work a few
problems. And what, again, is as usual, what we'll do is I'll present the problem.
You take a look at it, turn off the tape and work the problem to the best of your
ability. And then we'll see about how I would do it. Let's see. Let's go ahead
and get a problem. Here's one. How about nine and five eighths minus two and five
sixths? Okay. Using our steps, common denominator, numerators of equivalent
fractions, borrow if necessary, subtract, reduce if you can. Using those steps, go
ahead and work this problem, stop the tape and come back when you finished and
have a final simplest form answer. Okay. As always, I'll start out by putting my
whole numbers and my minus sign. What is the common denominator? Well, you could
have used 48, but let's go ahead and use 24 since eight and six both divide 24. We
will use the lowest common denominator. Eight times three is 24. And if you're
still having some difficulties getting the equivalent numerators, especially with
lowest common denominator, you might want to do this. Go ahead and put the
multiplication numbers in. Five times three is 15. Six times four is 24. Therefore,
we must multiply five times four and get 20. So now we have our second step taken
care of. We've got the numerators of the equivalent fraction. Well, do we need to
borrow? If the answer is no, we go on. If the answer is yes, we borrow. Do we need to
borrow? The answer is yes. 15 minus 20 cannot be done. So we borrow. We borrow one
from the nine, which gives us eight. And then simply rather than talking about 24,
24 plus 15, 24, which would be correct. We simply add the 24, 20 down here to the
15 and we get 39. That is eight and 39, 24 is the same as nine and 15, 24. And now
we can subtract 39 minus 20 is 19, 19, 24. Eight minus two is six. The last step is
to see if we can reduce. Can we reduce 19, 24? And the answer is no. Two does not
divide 19. Three does not divide 19 since one plus nine is 10 and one plus zero from
10 is is one. We need three, six or nine in order for it to be a multiple of three. Five
does not divide 19 since it does not end in five or zero. And in fact, the only thing
that divides 19 other than one is 19 and 19 does not divide 24. So we cannot reduce
this fraction. That's this is our final answer. Six and 19, 24. Again, it always looks
simple when the instructor does it. But if you followed step by step and thought about
what you're doing, this is not a very difficult thing either. And I know from past
experience, especially working with adult students, students who believe from their
school days that they could not do this, a problem like this would be crushing. They
could, they just give up when they saw it. In actuality, you could see it's not very
difficult. They could do it. You could do it. Anybody who took the time to learn the
steps and work it carefully and with confidence would get the right answer. Okay, let's take
another kind of problem. See, we do that. Let's see. How about 10 minus six and 15,
23rds? Yeah, I like you to work that problem, get your answer in simplest form and then
turn the tape back on when you've completed that computation. Okay, the first step is
to get a common denominator. Well, we might as well use 23 since one fraction doesn't
have a denominator. It could be the same denominator as the other fraction. The second
step is to find the numerator of the equivalent fraction. 10 and 0, 23rds is the same as
10. The third step is to borrow if necessary. Do I need to borrow? Can I subtract 0 minus
15? Not most days. No, you can't. I've got to borrow. So I subtract one from the 10. I
borrow one, leave me nine ones and I add the 23 plus to zero when I get 23, 23rds is
nine and 23, 23rds the same as 10. And the answers, of course it is, which means we've
now have an equivalent number and we can subtract 23 minus 15 is eight, eight, 23rds, nine
minus six is three. Can we reduce three and eight, 23rds? Well, there's two ways to look
at that. You can say I couldn't reduce 15, 23rds. So I certainly can't reduce the answer.
Or if you didn't remember that fact, we could say is there a number that divides both eight
and 23? Well, two divides eight, but not 23. Three and five do not divide either number.
And that's it. There is no number other than one that divides eight and 23. So the answer
is three and eight, 23rds. Okay, another problem for you. This problem is 10 and one sixth minus
four and seven tenths. Okay, again, using the five steps, subtract, write your answer
in simplest form and turn the tape back on when you're done. First thing I'm going to
do is write my whole numbers 10. Of course, I'm going to subtract four and I need to get
my common denominator. Now I could use 66 times 10, but I'm going to use the lowest common
denominator and I know that 30 can be obtained by multiplying six times five and 30 can be
obtained by multiplying 10 times three. So my lowest common denominator is 30. Six times
five is 30. One times five is five. 10 times three is 30. Seven times three is 21. Can I
subtract? Not what I'm borrowing because five minus 21 cannot be done. So what shall I do?
Borrow from the 10. I have nine. 30 plus five is 35. And again, you can double check that nine and
35 thirtieths is the same as 10 and 5 thirtieths, which of course is the same as 10 and one sixth.
Now I can subtract. 35 minus 21 is 14. 14 thirtieths. Nine minus four is five. I was thinking
ahead of myself and I said the answer rather than I want to strike nine minus four is five. Can I reduce
14 thirtieths? Yes, I can. They're both even numbers. Don't forget your whole number. Very important.
Divide the top and bottom by two. I get seven fifteenths. So 10 and one sixth minus four and
seven tenths is five and seven fifteenths. Is that the answer you got? If it is not the answer
you got, go back and work the problem again. But first look at what you did that was wrong and
correct it by doing the problem again in the proper fashion. Get the answer of five and seven fifteenths.
Okay. Let's try one more problem. Hopefully we're doing well here. And again, this is not that
difficult. The key thing is step by step, not trying to do the entire problem in one shot, but doing
each of the steps step by step. Let's see how about 18 and three tenths minus 11 and one half.
Same idea. Go ahead and stop the tape. Work the problem. Get it in the lowest terms. Turn the tape
back on. We'll work the problem together. Okay, let's see. Write down my 18 minus 11 common
denominator. Common denominator, of course, is 10. You could use 20. In fact, you could use a
thousand. Any number that's divisible by both by two and 10. But let's use the lowest common
denominator, 10. Three tenths was equal to three tenths. That was tough. One half. Well, two times
five is 10. So one times five is five. Can I subtract? Can I subtract three tenths minus five tenths?
No, I can't. So I'll borrow one from the eight, leaving me seven in the ones place, change that
one into tenths. 10 plus three is 13. 13 minus five is eight, eight tenths. 17 minus 11 is six.
So six and eight tenths. Can I reduce that problem? Yes, I can. Eight and 10 are both even
numbers. I divide by two, writing down my six first. Eight divided by two is four. Ten divided by two is
five. Six and four fifths. Can I reduce four fifths? Nope. The only number that divides both four and five
is one. So six and four fifths is the answer. 18 and three tenths minus 11 and one half is six and four fifths.
Now let's do one more. We have one more problem to be done.
That's how about this one? 736 and 15298.
Now, what do I draw that line for? I don't know. I'm so excited about these big numbers minus 104.
That looks like a very strange problem. There's a reason for my doing that. Go ahead and work the problem. Come up with the
answer and return to the tape and we'll work the problem together. Before I work the problem, what I was trying to get at
here, these numbers are quite large. The denominator is quite large. But in this particular type of problem, that's
irrelevant. It's a very simple problem because in reality, we need a common denominator. The common denominator is 298.
Now generally, you'd never see a problem with that large denominator, but just for the fun of it, we did it. The numerator, of course,
is zero. Can we subtract? Of course we can. There's no need to borrow. 15 minus zero is 15. The denominator stays the same.
736, we're back to a subtraction problem. 6 minus 4 is 2. 3 minus 0 is 3. 7 minus 1 is 6. We get 632 and 15298.
Can we reduce 15298? Well, let's see. Does 2 divide 15? No, it doesn't. 3 divides 15, but does 3 divide 298?
2 plus 9 is 11, plus 8 is 19, 1 plus 9 is 10, 1 plus 0 is 1. So indeed, since we didn't get 3, 6, or 9, 298 is not divisible by 3.
15 is divisible by 5, but 298 is not because it doesn't end in 5 or 0. In fact, the only number that divides both 15 and 298 is 1.
So our final answer in simplest form is 632 and 15298, a problem that initially looked a bit difficult, but really isn't.
And I think that's true with many fraction problems, and hopefully what we've seen in this lesson is that if we stick to our understanding of fractions,
that the denominator is the place value and that the numerator is our digit. And in order to subtract, we must have the same place value.
That is, we must have a common denominator. If we use our five step process, I think we'll see that subtracting fractions is not too difficult.
So once again, just to be sure we've got it, the first thing we do is we get a common denominator, lowest common denominator if possible, but you don't have to use it.
The second thing we want to do is we want to get the numerators of the equivalent fractions, just like we did with adding fractions.
In fact, the first two steps in subtracting fractions are just like the first two steps in adding fractions.
The third step is borrow if necessary. Don't borrow, just borrow, only borrow when you have to.
The fourth step is to subtract, subtract the numerators, keep the denominator, subtract the whole numbers.
And the fifth and final step in the subtraction process is to reduce if possible.
You remember those five steps and use them every time you subtract fractions, you will have no problem.
In our next lesson, we'll go to the next thing, of course, which will be multiplying fractions.
And I think you'll find that it will be equally as easy as adding and subtracting. See you in lesson 7.
