This is lesson seven. Multiplying fractions. Before we even get into any visuals, I want
you to think about what you might have learned before if you learned about multiplying fractions.
What you probably learned either from a teacher or from the textbook was to multiply two fractions,
you multiply the numerators, and you multiply the denominators. For example, if I was going
to multiply two-fifths times three-sevenths, I would get six-thirty-fifths. Before we
even start, I want you to think about what you know from previous lessons that would
tell you why you multiply numerators and denominators. So stop the tape, have some thought about
why we do it that way, and then come on back and we'll discuss it.
Hopefully you remember that in lesson one, we said that in multiplication, we always
multiply digit times digit and place value times place value. And we learned about fractions,
we said that the denominator was the place value and the numerator was the digit. So
as the visual shows, it makes sense that we multiply two times three to get six, five
times seven to get thirty-five, because we multiply digit times digit, and place value
times place value. Thus, when the question was asked before, two times three is six,
in what place value would we put the six here, the six is in the thirty-fifths place, six-thirty-fifths.
And then, of course, what we should do is check to see if we can reduce that fraction.
Well, two divides six, but does not divide thirty-five. Three divides six, but does not
divide thirty-five. And in fact, the only number to divide six and thirty-five is one,
so we don't have to reduce. Now, we're about to see how something else we know about multiplication
that is true for whole numbers helps us in multiplying fractions. The next problem shows
us six-twenty-fifths times ten-twenty-once. And we can see that we're going to multiply
top times top, bottom times bottom, and get sixty-five-hundred-twenty-fifths. But then
we need to reduce, recognizing that both numbers end in zero or five, and therefore can be
divided by five. We do that, and get twelve over one-oh-five. Then we recognize that by
adding the digits, both numbers can be divided by three, and we divide by three, top and
bottom, and get four-thirty-fifths. But look at the numbers in that problem. Fairly large,
sixty-five-hundred-twenty-fifths. It'd be nice if we could make the numbers smaller before
we even multiply. And something we know about multiplication will help us. So if you look
at the next visual, we are asked a question. Six over twenty-five times ten over twenty-one.
Twenty-one. Is that equal? Notice there's a question mark over the equal sign. Is that
equal to six over twenty-one times ten over twenty-five? If it is, why is it? If it isn't,
why is it not? Stop the tape, think about it, and come on back, and we'll discuss it.
The one thing we know about multiplying numbers, whole numbers, fractions, or anything else
we can multiply, is that it doesn't make a difference to the order in which we multiply.
Seven times two is the same as two times seven. So notice, all we've done in that problem
is we've reversed the order of the denominators. We take the twenty-one and the first fraction,
and move the twenty-five to the denominator and the second fraction. So the answer is
yes, those two multiplication problems are equal, because in both cases the answer is
sixty over five twenty-five. But notice what we can do. We can reduce six twenty-ones by
dividing top and bottom by three, and getting two sevenths. We can reduce ten twenty-fifths
by dividing top and bottom by five, and getting two fifths. Now we multiply, we get four thirty-fifths.
By doing something called reducing our fractions, we have avoided reducing after we've multiplied.
We're no longer dealing with those very, very large numbers. Well, every time we multiply,
we don't have to be swapping numerators and denominators. There's an even easier way to
do that, which is in the next visual. And that shows us something called canceling.
Canceling really is a form of reducing. What we see, we have six twenty-fifths times ten
over twenty-one, and we look to see if there's a number that divides one numerator and one
of the denominators. We see a six and one numerator, a twenty-one and the other denominator,
and recognizing that we can divide by three, we cancel. We divide six by three and twenty-one
by three, thus getting the two and the seven. We look at the other numerator and the other
denominator. We see that both can be divided by five, and we do that. Okay? Now, we multiply.
So we save that step of swapping numerators or denominators, and made the problem very
simple. Now, can we always cancel? Of course not. Sometimes, sometimes we can cancel both
fractions as we did here. Sometimes only one numerator and one denominator will cancel,
and sometimes we cannot cancel at all. But let me say this. If we cancel completely, then
the answer we get will not have to be reduced. If we cancel completely. Now, if you forget
to cancel or you miss seeing some place where you can cancel, that's not the end of the
world. It's no different than we say yesterday, or whenever you watch the tape on adding and
subtracting fractions. If we don't use the lowest common denominator, it's not the end
of the world. Same thing here. If you do not cancel, it's not the end of the world, but
you'll be working with larger numbers, and you'll have to check to see if you can reduce.
So cancel when you can. Now, we're not always going to be multiplying simple fractions.
Sometimes we need to multiply mixed numbers. If I was multiplying two mixed numbers, let's
say four and three-fifths by six and three-sevenths, why could I not simply multiply the four
times the six and then the fraction three-fifths times three-sevenths? And that would be my
answer. When we added, we added whole numbers and whole numbers and the fractions and fractions.
Why not do the same thing with multiplying? Well, I'd like you to stop and think about
that, and then come back to the tape when you've thought about it, and we'll discuss
why you can't do that. Well, we can't do that because when we multiply, each part of each
number is multiplied by each part of the other number. If I was multiplying forty-two times
thirty-seven, I just wouldn't multiply the one's place digit by the one's place digit,
and the ten's place digit by the ten's place digit. I have to multiply each part of the
two numbers by the other parts of the other number. So let's see. What would I do? One
way to do it is the next visual shows is to simply multiply the four times the six, the
four times the three-sevenths, the three-fifths times the six, and the three-fifths times
the three-sevenths. And what we get is a long-winded addition problem. Four times six plus four
times three-sevenths plus three-fifths times six plus three-fifths times three-sevenths.
That is a lot of work. And it's unnecessary. It's really unnecessary because of one thing
we learned in the lesson we introduced fractions. We talked about changing a mixed number to
an improper fraction. That was the last item we had to learn in that particular lesson.
Here is where we'll use that. We will take the mixed numbers and change them into improper
fractions because once we have two fractions to multiply, we know what to do. So let's
take a look at the problem. The four and three-fifths becomes twenty-three-fifths. The six and three-sevenths
becomes forty-five-sevenths. Before we multiply, we see if we can cancel. Is there a number
that divides twenty-three and seven? No, there's not. There's no number that divides twenty-three
except one and twenty-three, so we cannot cancel there. But notice we can cancel the
forty-five and the five. Both of those numbers are divisible by five. We cancel, we get nine
and one. And then we multiply across twenty-three times nine. Well, two hundred and seven is
a fairly large number. But if we hadn't had to multiply forty-five times twenty-three,
it's a much, much larger number. And of course, one times seven is seven. We wind up with
the improper fraction two hundred and seven-sevenths. Are we finished? Absolutely not. We cannot
leave an answer as an improper fraction. Again, it's harder to understand. So we go to our
simplifying process. We divide seven into two hundred and seven. We get twenty-nine
with a remainder of four. So our final answer is twenty-nine and four-sevenths. Now one
thing we need to do in multiplying fractions because we're changing the mixed numbers to
fractions and in multiplying and canceling, we need to estimate. It's really important.
If you remember in the adding and subtracting lessons, we didn't talk much about estimation.
And the reason is most of those problems, the numbers you're dealing with are relatively
simple. If you have four in a fraction plus five in a fraction, the answer could be nine
or ten, depending whether you have to simplify because you have an improper fraction in your
answer. But in multiplication, it's very possible to make a small error that leads to a large
error in your answer. So what I like to do is say, look, four and three-fifths is between
four and five. Six and three-sevenths is between six and seven. If I multiplied four times
six, I'd get twenty-four. If I multiplied five times seven, I'd get thirty-five. What
that means is that my answer should be between twenty-four and thirty-five. If my answer was
less than twenty-four, I'd know it was wrong. If my answer was more than twenty-thirty-five,
I'd know it was wrong. My answer was twenty-nine and four-sevenths, which is in between. That
doesn't guarantee that my answer is correct. What it means is that I'm in the ballpark.
And since everything I did, I believe was correct, this should be the right answer.
So this kind of checking by estimation doesn't tell you you have the right answer, but it
will alert you if you have an obviously wrong answer. The only way to get the right answer,
of course, is to do it carefully. And later on, in lesson 11, we'll see how to check a
problem like this on the calculator. Well, let's take a look at the steps in multiplying
fractions or mixed numbers. The first step is to change the numbers to fractions, because
once we change the fractions, then we can deal with all the other steps. We don't have
to worry about multiplying various parts of numbers. Cancel if possible, if possible,
because we cannot always cancel, because sometimes we have numbers that cannot be reduced. Multiply.
Numerator times numerator, denominator times denominator. And you know why we do that.
I may ask you about that later on. The fourth step is to simplify. If needed, sometimes
we'll multiply and actually get a fraction, a proper fraction. Five eighths is no need
to simplify that. But if it's an improper fraction, we must simplify again to communicate
our answer most effectively. And finally, check using our estimate. Estimate what the answer
should be between and then check that your answer falls in that interval. And if it does,
at least you know you're not terribly wrong. And again, if you've done the work correctly,
your answer probably is right. I'm really always concerned about knowing if I'm wrong.
Knowing that you're wrong is more important than being right. So if I know I'm drastically
wrong, I can go back and check. If I'm close, at least I'm close and sometimes close is
good. Okay, let's take a look at a problem. This is a problem I'd like you to do. If we
need to go back and go back to the visual that showed the steps, if you haven't written
them down, write them down and work this problem. The problem is seven and one seventh
times five and five sixths. Go ahead and work that problem. Stop the tape. And when you
finished, come on back and we'll work it together. Okay, let's see. The first thing you want
to do is to change seven and one seventh to a fraction. That's 57. Then we change five
and five sixths to a fraction. That's 35 sixths. The next step is to cancel. Notice we cancel
the 50 and the six because they're both even numbers we divided by two. We have 25 and
three seven and 35 can be divided by seven and we did that. We cancel and got one and
five. Then we multiplied across 25 times five is 125. One times three is three 125 thirds
is an improper fraction. So we simplify, we get 41 and two thirds. And finally we check
our answer seven times five is 35 eight times six is 48 is our answer between 35 and 48.
I believe so 41 and two thirds is in that correct interval. And I believe it is the
correct answer. Okay, sometimes when we multiply, we don't have two mixed numbers. Sometimes
we'll have a mixed number and a fraction. So the next problem shows us five eighths
times three and one third. And notice what we do. We changed the three and one third
to a fraction. We didn't change the five eighths because it already is a fraction. Three and
one third is 10 thirds. We cancel as shown. We multiply numerator times numerator denominator
times denominator. We get 25 twelfths, which of course is improper. And therefore we simplify
to two and one 12. Now, how would we estimate there? Well, when multiplying by a proper
fraction, you always get an answer that's smaller, that's less than the other number.
So I'm expecting by multiplying by five eighths to get an answer that's less than three and
one third. Some of my students like to say, Well, let's see, five eighths is between zero
and one. So we use the same method we use before zero times three is zero. And one times
four is four. And therefore our answer should be between zero and four. Of course, two and
one 12 is. So whether you want to use that or just simply say that when I multiply by
a proper fraction, the answer will be less than the second number. Either way, two and
one 12th is correct. The next problem shows us another situation where we're multiplying
a mixed number by a whole number. The first step is still the same. Change the numbers
to fractions. Well, the question is how do you change a whole number to a fraction? We'll
remember that the denominator is the place value. And if we have the number six, what's
the place value six is in? Well, it's six ones. So that's what you do six over one. It's
now a fraction. It's an improper fraction, but it is a fraction. And of course, we multiply
six over one by 14 over eight. I'm sorry, 35 over eight 35 over eight, which is four and
three eighths. Now we can cancel. We can cancel the six and the eight. Both are even numbers.
We obviously cannot cancel the 35 and the one since the only number that divides one
is one. We multiply across and get 105 fourths. We simplify to 26 and one fourth. Let's see
estimation. Well, six times four is 24. Six times five is one fourth. So we multiply
35 is 30. So our answer has to be between 24 and 30. And of course, 26 and one fourth
is so our estimation shows us that our answer is in the ballpark. And we, of course, we've
done our work correctly. It's the right answer. There is another way to do this. And if you
find this second method, a little confusing, just regard it, but you may find the second
method makes more sense. That is easier to do than the first method. And that is what
we do is since we only have a fraction in one of the numbers, we multiply the whole
number six by four and we multiply the whole number six by the fraction of three eighths.
That's really easy to do. Six times four is 24. Six times three eighths. We can we change
six to six over one. We cancel and we get nine fourths, which is two and one fourth.
So 24 plus two and one fourth is 26 and one fourth. For many fractional problems, when
one of the numbers you're multiplying is a whole number, this is an effective way to
get the correct answer. But that I'll leave up to you. I truly prefer the first method
because it's consistent. Every time we multiply numbers that involve fractions, we do the
same steps. And if we do it that way, again, the consistency leads us to correct answers.
Okay, let's take a look at one more type of problem. And then we're going to go ahead
and work some problems, give you a chance to show that you understand what you're doing.
This last kind of problem involves three mixed numbers. Now, there's really no limit to how
many numbers you can multiply. But I thought, okay, let's take a look at three, because
sometimes in some textbooks, they have problems with three mixed numbers. And sometimes people
say, Oh, that's, I can't do that. It's too difficult. Oh, no. Hey, it's the same process.
And actually for some people, it's more fun. You have more chance to cancel. So let's take
a look at this problem. We have five and one third times two and one eighth times four
and one half. And we change the mixed numbers to fractions. First step is the same. We get
16 thirds, 17 eighths and nine halves. And now we cancel and we can cancel any numerator
with any denominator. So for example, we cancel the 16 and the eight and we get two and one.
We notice that we can cancel that two in the numerator of the first fraction with the two
in the denominator of the third fraction. And we do that we get one and one. So in effect,
we've eliminated quite a bit of large numbers there. We also recognize that the nine in
the numerator of the third fraction and the three in the denominator of the first fraction
can be reduced or canceled by dividing by three. And ultimately what we get is 51 over
51. Now, of course, that's an improper fraction, but really easy to simplify. That just says
51 ones. Well, that's 51. And the whole number, of course, is 51. By the way, we could estimate
here, of course, five times two is 10. And 10 times four is 40. So our number must be
more than 40. Six times three is 18 times five. Five times 18 is 90. So our answer must
be between 40 and 90. And of course, 51 certainly is. So it appears to be the correct answer.
So you'll notice we use the exact same process. Let's review that process one more time. The
first thing we do is we take each of the numbers and change them into fractions. If the number
already is a fraction, leave it alone. If it's a whole number, put the whole number over
one. If it's a mixed number, then change it to a fraction. If you've forgotten how to
do that, go back to the lesson on the introduction to fractions, and you'll see how to do that.
The second step is to cancel. You can cancel any numerator with any denominator in a multiplication
problem provided that there's a number that divides those two numbers. Third, multiply
numerator times numerator, denominator times denominator. If there are three fractions,
numerator times numerator times numerator, denominator times denominator. If you get
an improper fraction, simplify. Obviously, if you get a proper fraction, that's fine.
And then check using estimation to see that your answer is reasonable. Notice there is
no step called reduce. That's because I'm assuming that you are canceling completely.
If you feel that, well, you might not always recognize when you can cancel, then always
check to see if you can reduce. Now let's see if you can do some problems. Let's go to
the whiteboard and examine some exercises, multiplying fractional numbers.
The first problem is seven and one seventh times seven eighths. So we have a mixed number
times a fraction. Once you go ahead and stop the tape, use the process to multiply these
numbers, get your answer, check it for reasonableness, and come on back, and we'll work the problem
here on the whiteboard. We need to first step is to change the numbers to fractions. Well,
seven eighths does not need to be changed to a fraction. It already is one. But seven
and one seventh, let's see seven times seven is 49 plus one is 57 times seven eighths.
The second step is to cancel. Is there a number that divides 50 and eight? Well, yes, they're
both even numbers. So they're divisible by two, 25 and four. And I cannot cancel 25 and
four any further. Is there a number to divide seven and seven? Well, obviously, yes, seven.
So I can cancel and I get one and one. And now I multiply across numerator times numerator
25, denominator times denominator four improper fraction. So I need to simplify four divides
at the 25, six times with one left over six and one fourth. Now I need to go back to an
estimation to see if this number makes sense. Well, let's see seven times zero is zero eight
times one is eight. So my answer has to be between zero and eight. I also know since
I'm multiplying by seven eighths, a fraction, a proper fraction, my answer has to be between
seven and one seventh, six and one fourth meets both specifications. It's certainly
less than seven and one seventh and it is between zero and eight. Okay, you get that
right. If you did not get it right, go back, be sure you've written down the five step
process, work the problem again and come back to this part of the tape to check your work.
But we're going to go on to do another problem. Okay, the next problem is nine and one third
times three and one seventh. Again, same process, work the problem, then turn the tape back
on, we'll go over it together. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and do the same thing.
Okay, let's see the first step as always change the mixed numbers to fractions. Well, see three
times nine is 27. One is 28 thirds. Seven times three is 21 plus one is 22 sevenths. Can
we cancel 28 and seven? Absolutely. 28 is in the seven times tables. As we used to say,
we can divide by seven. We get four and one. How about three and 22? Well, you know the
only number to divide three other than one is three. Can 22 be divided by three? Nope.
Why not? Because two plus two is four. And remember, if the number can be divided by three
when we add the digits, we'll eventually get three, six or nine. So that's it. We multiply
across. We get 88 over three. Let's see improper fraction. We get 88 over three and
we need to simplify. Three goes into 88 29 times. You'll notice we can't do fractions
if we can't do whole numbers. If you can't add subtract, multiply and divide whole numbers.
It's really tough doing fractions. For example, dividing three at the 88. If you can't do
that, you kind of stuck with 88 thirds, which is not a complete answer. Let's say we have
a remainder of one. So that's 29 and one third. Now we need to check. Well, nine times
three is 27. 10 times four is 40. So our answer should be between 27 and 40. Certainly 29
and one third qualifies and it is the correct answer. Okay, let's try another problem. Let's
try one of those problems with the three numbers just to see if you enjoy it as much as I do.
Three and one half times two and one seventh times five and one fifth. Now there's nothing
special about the fact that all three fractions have a numerator of one. This is the problem
I came up with for you to play with. So turn the tape off, work the problem and come on
back when you're done. Okay, first thing we need to do, change the mixed numbers to
fractions. See three and one half is seven halves. Two and one seven, it's 15 sevenths.
Five and one fifth, 26 fifths. And notice we have three numbers. We don't get it set
because they're more than two. We just take them one at a time. We do that throughout mathematics.
I think you'll find that the answers will be more easy to obtain. Can we cancel? Well,
I think so. I see a seven here and a seven there. I can cancel those sevens leaving
ones. I see a five and a 15 divided by five. Let's say that's three times five is 15. Two
and 26 are both even. Divide and I get 13. One times three times 13 is 39 over one and
of course, whenever I have a one in the denominator, it means I have a whole number. So the answer
is 39. Does that make sense? Well, let's see. Three times two is six. Six times five is
30. So the answer must be more than 30. 39 is more than 30. Four times three is 12. 12
times six is 72. The answer must be less than 72. 39 is less than 72. So I believe that 39
is a reasonable answer. And if it's a reasonable answer, then since I think my work is correct,
I believe I'm right. And of course, 39 is the correct answer. So I think you can see
that these problems aren't very difficult and multiplying fractions for some people
is a difficult area. And of course, if you understand the basis, that multiplication is
always digit times digit and place value times place value, then what we do when we multiply
numbers involving fractions is quite simple, almost childish. The whole idea is to again
have confidence in what you're doing. And one of the ways to build that confidence is
to use a consistent set of steps, consistent procedure. And we were very consistent. The
first thing we did was to change any number that was not a fraction to a fraction, mixed
number to a fraction, whole number to a fraction by putting the whole number over one. Then
we cancel using our knowledge of reducing fractions by dividing a numerator and a denominator
by the same number until we could no longer cancel. Then we multiply numerators and denominators
again, digit times digit, place value times place value. Once we had an answer, if it
was a an improper fraction, we simplified changing it into either a whole number or a mixed
number. And then we went back and used our estimation skills to ensure that our answer
was where it should be. There was not an obviously incorrect answer. And then knowing we did our
work correctly would make us believe our answer was correct. Well, we're ready for the last
fractional skill, which is division. And that'll be lesson eight, where we learn to divide
fractions and review all of our work with fractions. See you then.
