Welcome to Lesson 8.
In Lesson 8, we will discuss the vision of fractions and then review all four operations,
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions.
Before we start talking about the process we use to divide fractions, we need to look
at some problems and find a pattern.
Our first visual shows us four multiplication problems with the multiplier missing.
That is a question mark.
What I'd like you to do is two things.
Turn the tape off and figure out what number replaces the question mark in each problem,
and then look for a pattern.
When you see a pattern, after having worked the four problems, come on back and we'll
discuss the pattern that I see.
Well, you should have done this.
Five times one-fifth is one, because the fires cancel.
Seventeen times one-seventeenth equals one.
One-half times two equals one, and three-fifths times five-thirds, since the fives cancel,
the three cancels, that equals one.
What was the pattern?
The pattern was that in every case, in order to multiply the number by another number and
get one, we actually exchange the numerator and denominator, because we can write five
as five over one.
We flipped it over, one-fifth multiplied, got one.
Seventeen over one, flipped it over, one-seventeenth times 17 is one.
One-half becomes two over one, or two, so two times one-half is one, and three-fifths,
we exchange the numerator and denominator, and got five-thirds, and five-thirds times
three-fifths equals one.
There is a very special name for the fraction we get when we flip it over.
We exchange the numerator and denominator.
It is called the reciprocal.
Now, in many of my class, we call it the flip.
It's so much easier to say, but the official mathematical term is reciprocal.
That is going to become quite important.
By the way, there is one number that does not have a reciprocal.
That number is zero.
Hopefully you said zero with me.
Why does zero have a reciprocal?
Because one over zero, we can't do that.
If you recall, we talked about dividing by zero.
We said that any number other than zero divided by zero is undefined, and therefore, since
the reciprocal of zero would be one over zero, and that's undefined, zero does not
have a reciprocal, which is very fine, because we will use the notion of reciprocal to divide,
and obviously we cannot divide by zero.
Now let's look for a pattern among division problems.
The next visual shows us three division problems with three matching multiplication problems.
Work the problems out, and again, look for a pattern.
When you've worked all six of the actual computations and see a pattern, come on back to the tape
here and we'll discuss the answers and the pattern that you should see.
As we see, we can certainly, the division problems, eight divided by two is four.
Now notice the whole numbers are written as fractions, eight over one and two over one,
but still the answer is four.
Twelve divided by three is four, and fifteen divided by five is three.
The matching multiplication problems, we can cancel, and we get the same answers.
Eight times a half is four, twelve times one third is four, and fifteen times one fifth
is three.
Now before we discuss the pattern, I want you to take a look at this next problem, five
sevenths divided by two thirds.
I want you to use the pattern you thought you saw to do this division problem, and then
come on back to the tape and we'll see if you had the right pattern.
Well the pattern that you should have seen is that dividing by a number is the same as
multiplying by its reciprocal.
That is dividing by two is the same as multiplying by one half, dividing by three is the same
as multiplying by one third, dividing by five is the same as multiplying by one fifth, and
therefore dividing by two thirds is the same as multiplying by three halves.
So we change the five sevenths divided by two thirds to a multiplication problem, five
sevenths times three halves.
We already know how to do that from lesson seven.
We cannot cancel, we multiply, we get fifteen fourteenths, and the answer is one and one
fourteenth.
So five sevenths divided by two thirds is one and one fourteenth.
Let's take a look at some additional problems and to see exactly the process we use for
dividing fractions.
The next problem is five and one seventh divided by two and two thirds.
This problem is a little different than the five sevenths divided by two thirds because
we have mixed numbers.
What are we going to do?
Well, we know eventually we're going to multiply, we know that.
We know we're going to have to get the reciprocal of the second number.
In both cases, we need to get fractions.
To multiply mixed numbers, we need to change them to fractions.
To get a reciprocal of a number, we have to write it as a fraction so we can exchange
the numerator and denominator.
So the first step here will be exactly the first step as we did in multiplication, and
that is to change the numbers to fractions.
Again, the consistency of mathematics.
We said before the division is really the opposite of multiplication and should have
very similar rules.
And indeed, in this case, we have the same first step.
Change the mixed numbers to fractions.
Well, five and one seventh is thirty six sevenths, two and two thirds is eight thirds.
Once we have the numbers changed to fractions, we now can use the pattern we saw earlier.
Multiplying by a number gives us the same answer as, if you will, multiplying by its
reciprocal.
What is the reciprocal of eight thirds?
Three eighths.
So thirty six sevenths divided by eight thirds is the same as thirty six sevenths multiplied
by three eighths.
And now we're back to multiplication.
We cancel, which of course we could do with the thirty six and the eight dividing both
by four.
We multiply numerators and denominators, get twenty seven fourteenths and we have our answer.
Once we've simplified twenty seven fourteenths to one and thirteen fourteenths.
And now it's time to check.
We are dividing five and one seventh by two and two thirds.
We could say we're dividing six by three, so our answer should be around two.
More importantly, we're dividing a larger number by a smaller number, so we should get
a number more than one.
Our answer of one and thirteen fourteenths is certainly close to two and it's certainly
more than one.
So that's one way to check, but notice our answer is more than one.
We divided a larger by a smaller.
Let's take a look at another type of division problem involving fractional numbers.
In this case, we're going to be dividing by a proper fraction, eight and one third divided
by five eighths.
The steps are identical.
The first step changed the numbers to fractions.
We don't have to change five eighths to a fraction.
It already is a fraction, but eight and one third becomes twenty five thirds.
Now that we have fractions, we are next step is dividing by a number is the same as multiplying
by its reciprocal.
Well let's see the reciprocal of five eighths is eight fifths.
So now we have a multiplication problem, twenty five thirds times eight fifths.
We cancel dividing both twenty five and five by five multiply numerators, multiply denominators.
We get forty thirds.
That's an improper fraction.
We simplify and get thirteen and one third.
When we divide by a proper fraction, that is the same as multiplying by its reciprocal.
The reciprocal of a proper fraction must be an improper fraction.
Let me say that again.
The reciprocal of a proper fraction must be an improper fraction because the proper fraction
has a larger denominator numerator.
When I flip it over to get the reciprocal, the larger number is now in the numerator.
So it's improper.
So dividing by a proper fraction is the same as multiplying by an improper fraction.
Thus, the answer will be larger than the other number.
That is, if we divide eight and one third by five eighths, we should get a number larger
than eight and one third because five eighths is a proper fraction.
And obviously thirteen and one third is a larger number than eight and one third.
Okay, let's take a look at one more type of problem.
In this problem, you'll notice we're dividing a smaller number by a larger number.
They're both mixed numbers, but the second number is the greater number.
Okay, we have two and two fifths divided by five and one third.
Okay, first step, still the same.
Change the numbers to fractions.
Twelve fifths divided by sixteen thirds.
Over the many years of teaching this, a number of my students try to do two steps at once.
They try to both change the fractions and do the second step of flipping over the second
number.
Please don't do that.
I have found that that typically leads to mistakes and it's much easier to go back over
your work if you've done it step by step, not doing two steps at one time.
Sometimes in a haste to get finished with the problem, we make mistakes.
A wrong answer is done quickly is not very good.
A correct answer to have done efficiently is quite good.
So we're going to take the number of twelve fifths divided by sixteen thirds and dividing
by sixteen thirds is the same as multiplying by three sixteenths.
We cancel.
We can divide both twelve and sixteen by four and we get three times three is nine, five
times four is twenty.
It's a proper fraction.
We cannot reduce it since we've already canceled in the multiplication process.
But notice why did we get a proper fraction?
Because when we divide a smaller number by a greater number, the answer must be less
than one.
It must be a proper fraction.
And that's how we check this type of problem.
So in checking division problems involving fractions, we want to look at the nature of
the numbers we're dividing by.
If we're dividing a larger number by a smaller number, our answer will be less than the first
number but more than one.
If we're dividing by a fraction, a proper fraction, our answer will be bigger than the
first number.
And if we're dividing a smaller number by a larger number, our answer should be a proper
fraction.
Let's take a look at a few problems.
So we'll go to the whiteboard and see if we know what we're doing here.
Okay, the first problem, and again we'll do a few division problems and then we, as promised,
will review fractions typically.
Let's say six and one-half divided by three and one-fourth.
I'd like you to work that problem at the stopping of the tape.
Be sure to check the answer that it's reasonable.
And come on back when you've finished your work and we'll go over it at the whiteboard.
Okay, six and one-half, we need to change to a improper fraction, thirteen-halves divided
by, we need to change three and one-fourth improper fraction, thirteen-fourths.
Again remembering that the first step is change all numbers to fractions.
The second step in the division process is to remember that dividing by a number is the
same as multiplying by its reciprocal.
So thirteen-halves times four-thirteenths, the reciprocal of thirteen-fourths is four-thirteenths.
By the way, I should mention that sometimes people get confused about which number to reciprocate.
If you simply recall that the words were dividing by a number is the same as multiplying by
its reciprocal, the number we divide by is always the second number.
So that's the second number is what we reciprocate.
By the way, probably if you flip over the first number, you will realize your answer
is incorrect.
It will not be reasonable.
But the easiest thing to do is remember dividing by a number is the same as multiplying by
its reciprocal.
Well, we're not finished yet.
We need to cancel.
Four and two can both be divided by two.
Thirteen can be divided by thirteen.
That makes this problem rather nice because what we're left with is one times two, which
is two, over one times one, which is one, and that gives us an answer of two, the whole
number two.
Does that make sense?
Well, we're dividing a larger number by a smaller number, so our answer should be smaller
than six and one-half, but more than one.
And in terms of estimation, six divided by three is two.
Hey, we got two.
That's pretty good.
By the way, what that means, you're talking about the meaning of the answer, is that six
and one-half, of course, is twice three and one-fourth.
Another way, of course, to check, as always, is to multiply your answer by the number you
divided by, and you should get the number you started with.
In this particular case, that's rather simple.
Two times three is six.
Two times one-fourth is two-fourth, which is a half.
So if you get an answer of two, it means the first number is twice the number you're dividing
by.
Okay, let's turn to the problem.
And this problem is nine and one-seventh divided by eight-elevenths.
Same process.
Stop the tape, work the problem, check it for reasonableness, and come on back.
Okay.
First step, always the same.
Change the numbers to fractions.
Nine and one-seventh, let's see, nine times seven is sixty-three, and one is sixty-fourth
sevenths.
Eight-elevenths is already a proper fraction, we just leave it alone.
Next step, dividing by eight-elevenths, is the same as multiplying by its reciprocal
eleven-eighths, sixty-four sevenths times eleven-eighths.
The next step is to cancel, if we can.
We cannot cancel seven and eleven.
The only number to divide seven other than one is seven, and certainly seven does not
divide eleven.
But sixty-four and eight are both even numbers.
Even more importantly, they're both in the eight-time statement.
We can divide by eight, and we get eight and one.
By the way, if you simply divide it by two, and then by two, and then by two again, that's
okay.
As long as you get the complete cancellation, and you get eight and one, and now we multiply
across.
Eight times eleven is eighty-eight, seven times one is seven, eighty-eighths-sevenths is an
improper fraction, and we're going to have to simplify.
Well, let's see, seven goes into eighty-eighth, twelve times, twelve times seven is eighty-four,
we have a remainder of four, so twelve and four-sevenths is our answer.
Now does that make sense?
Well, let's go back to our original problem.
Nine and one-seventh divided by eight-elevenths, when we're dividing by a proper fraction,
our answer is always going to be larger than the number that we're dividing into, larger
than this case, than nine and one-seventh.
Twelve and four-sevenths certainly is larger than nine and one-seventh.
Now remember, it's only true when we divide by a proper fraction, and we go back and look
at the first number and ensure that our answer is a greater number.
So this looks good, in fact, it is the correct answer.
Let's do one more problem, okay?
Let's see, how about this problem?
This is a problem we haven't really looked at before, divided by three and one-fifth.
What we haven't seen before is where the first number is a proper fraction.
I'll let you figure out what the pattern might be.
Go ahead and divide, see if you can estimate, check your answer, and then come on back.
It's ought to tape up again.
Okay, let's just go ahead and use our steps, and then we'll go back and look for a pattern
here.
Nine-tenths is already a fraction.
Three and one-fifth is sixteen-fifths.
Now at this point in time, some of my students want to cancel because they see the ten and
the sixteen and say, hey, we can cancel, no you can't.
The only time you can cancel is when you are multiplied.
You cannot cancel in any other type of fractional problem except multiplication.
So we need to follow our steps.
The next step after changing the numbers to fractions is remembering that dividing by
a number is the same as multiplying by its reciprocal.
So nine-tenths, we leave alone, dividing by sixteen-fifths is the same as multiplying
by five-sixteenths.
Okay, we can cancel.
Not the nine and the sixteen, but the ten and the five can be divided by five.
You multiply nine times one is nine, two times sixteen is thirty-two, and our answer
is nine-thirty seconds.
Let's go back to our original problem.
In reality, we have seen this type of problem before.
We just hadn't seen one with a proper fraction as the first number because we said when you
are dividing a smaller number by a greater number, the answer must be a proper fraction.
Only three and one-fifths is greater than nine-tenths, and therefore our answer is a
proper fraction and in fact is less than nine-tenths, and certainly nine over thirty-two is a lot
less than nine over ten.
Okay, now it's time to review what we've done in these last few lessons on fractions.
So let's go back and I think the best way to review is to work a problem and make sure
that you remember how to do it.
And at any point in time, any of these problems adding, subtracting, or multiplying you have
forgotten how to do, well go back and watch the appropriate lesson again to ensure you
can do it.
First, let's take a look at an addition problem.
How about nine and three-fourths plus seven and five-sixths?
What I'd like you to do is stop the tape, work the problem, we'll come back, work it
together to ensure that you remember how to add mixed numbers.
Stop the tape now, please.
Okay, first thing we need to do, the first step in adding mixed numbers or fractions
is to get a common denominator.
I'm going to write down the nine and the plus and the seven.
We could use twenty-four, four times six, but I'm going to use the lowest common denominator,
which of course is twelve.
Adding the equivalent fractions, four times three is twelve, three times three is nine,
six times two is twelve, five times two is ten.
And now, since I have a common denominator, I can add.
Nine and ten is nineteen-twelfths, nine plus seven is sixteen.
I have an improper fraction.
I know that when I add two proper fractions, I get an improper fraction.
When I simplify, the whole number has to be one.
I add the one to the sixteen, I get seventeen.
What's left?
Nineteen minus twelve leads me seven-twelfths.
My last step is to see if I can reduce.
Can I reduce seven-twelfths?
Well, I know that the only number to divide seven other than one is seven, and seven
does not divide twelve, so our answer is seventeen and seven-twelfths.
As I referred to earlier, if I wanted to check this problem, I would just say, well,
G is nine plus seven is sixteen, so the answer is either going to be sixteen in a fraction
or seventeen in a fraction.
And of course, it is seventeen and seven-twelfths, so the answer makes good sense.
Let's take a look at a subtraction problem.
I'll erase this.
Okay, a subtraction problem.
How about nine and one-eighth minus two and five-sixths?
Go ahead and work that problem out and come on back, turn the tape back on after you've
completed the computation.
The first step in subtracting, just as an adding, is to get the common denominator.
I'll write down my whole numbers and my subtraction minus sign.
The common denominator, well, I could use eight times six, which of course is forty-eight,
but I'll again choose to use the lowest common denominator, which would be twenty-four.
My next step is to get the numerators to have equivalent fractions.
Eight times three is twenty-four, one times three is three, six times four is twenty-four,
five times four is twenty.
The next step is to borrow if needed.
Do I need to borrow?
Yes, I do.
I cannot subtract three minus twenty.
So I borrow one from the nine, making it eight.
And then I simply add the twenty-four, since twenty-four, twenty-fourths is what one is
equivalent to, to the three twenty-fourths, and I get twenty-seven, twenty-fourths.
And I subtract twenty-seven minus twenty is seven twenty-fourths, eight minus two is six.
And the final step in subtraction is to reduce if possible.
Can I reduce?
Nope.
Again, I have a seven, and I know the only number other than one that divides seven is
seven, and seven does not divide twenty-four.
So my answer is finished.
It's correct.
Nine minus two is seven, so my answer should be either seven in a fraction or possibly
six in a fraction, and it is six and seven twenty-fourths.
Okay, let's try a multiplication problem and see if you recall from the previous lesson
how to do that.
Five and oh, five eighths times two and one ninth.
Go ahead and try that.
Five and five eighths times two and one ninth.
When you finish, come on back, we'll work the problem out.
The first step in multiplication is to change the numbers to fractions, okay?
Eight times five is forty plus five is forty-five eighths.
Nine times two is eighteen and one is nineteen ninths.
The second step is to cancel if possible.
Well, eight and nineteen have no common number that divides them.
Two divides eight, but two does not divide nineteen.
In fact, nineteen is one of those numbers that can only be divided by one in itself.
But forty-five and nine can be canceled because both are divisible by nine.
Nine goes into forty-five, five times nine goes into nine one time.
And now I can multiply.
Five times nineteen is ninety-five, eight times one is eight.
This is an improper fraction, so I simplify.
Eight goes into ninety-five, let's see, goes in all about eleven times.
And with a remainder of seven, which gives us seven eighths, eleven and seven eighths.
Again, checking by estimating five times two is ten, more than ten, six times three
is eighteen.
The answer should be between ten and eighteen and it is.
Hopefully you got all those questions, answers corrected, or correctly.
And now we have completed our study of fractions.
We know how to add, we know about the common denominator, we know how to subtract, also
using the common denominator.
We understand how to multiply and of course understand how to divide.
Next it's on to less than nine and decimals.
