This is lesson nine.
In lesson nine, we'll introduce decimals and talk about how we add and subtract them.
Before we can talk about decimal numbers, we need to talk about zero,
because decimal numbers are based on place value.
And without the zero, we could not have a place value
that we could not have a place value that we could not have.
Zero originally was a symbol used as a place holder.
If there was nothing in the one's place or nothing in the ten's place,
then a zero is placed in there.
Philosophically, people disagreed about whether we could have a symbol that stood for nothing.
So originally, zero did not stand for nothing.
It was just a way to show that there was nothing in that place.
It may seem hard for you to understand, but this is actually what happened in the history of mathematics.
Eventually, as people became more aware of what was happening,
it became obvious that it was important to have a number that stood for nothing,
and zero was that number.
Because of zero, we have place values,
and place values in whole numbers are the one's, ten's, hundreds, thousands.
We notice as we go from the smaller place value to the larger place value,
we multiply by ten.
Ten times one is ten.
Ten times ten is a hundred.
Ten times one hundred is a thousand and so on.
If we go in the opposite direction, we are dividing by ten.
One hundred divided by ten is ten.
Ten divided by ten is one.
The question was, what happens if we keep dividing?
Obviously, one divided by ten is a fraction, one tenth.
And once we discover that, we have our decimal place values.
The first visual shows you those decimal place values.
And we could see that the whole numbers and the fractional place values,
one tenth, one one hundredth, one one thousandth, et cetera.
And it was thought that we need to separate the whole number place values
from the fractional place values.
And in the United States, we use a decimal point.
Other places, a comma can be used.
In fact, any symbol you'd like, a star or a picture of yourself,
could be used to separate the one's place and the ten's place,
thus separating the whole number of places from the fractional places.
But obviously, a decimal point is what we use.
It's quite simple.
And we don't have to worry about drawing your face
every time we write a decimal number.
So, let's take a look at some decimal numbers
and see how we read them.
The first decimal number is point two three.
The two is in the tenth's place.
The three is in the hundredth's place.
And the number is read twenty-three one hundredths.
Notice we read the number as the numerator.
And the denominator is really the last place value.
Or, if you'd like, the number of zeros in the denominator
is the number of places behind the decimal point.
Point two three, twenty-three hundredths.
The next number looks very similar.
But notice there's a zero, point zero two three,
using our notion that the numerator is the number twenty-three.
And the denominator is the last place value.
Well, let's see.
The three is in the thousandth's place.
Or, of course, we could say there are three decimal places,
zero, two, three.
So, there are three zeros in the denominator.
That is twenty-three thousandths.
And that is exactly how we would read a decimal fraction.
Now, the question is, how can we compare two decimal numbers?
The next visual shows us two decimal numbers.
Point zero six two, which, of course, is sixty-two thousandths.
And point one, which is one-tenth,
is a blank space with a question mark between the two numbers.
What symbol, less than, greater than, or equal to,
will go between those two?
We need to compare those two decimal fractions.
What I want you to do is stop the tape.
Think about what you already know about decimals
and write a symbol, less than, greater than, or equal to,
between the two decimal numbers.
Stop the tape now, please.
Now, notice what we've done in the next visual.
We see that point zero six two is the same,
but we've made point one into point one zero zero.
That is, we want both numbers to have the same number
of decimal places.
We want the same number of decimal places.
Both numbers to have the same number of decimal places.
This is very similar to having a common denominator in fractions.
In fact, it is a common denominator.
They're both now thousands.
Now it's simple to see which is bigger,
sixty-two thousandths or one hundred thousandths.
Well, obviously one hundred thousandths is a bigger number
and the symbol you should have put between the two numbers is less than.
Sixty-two thousandths is less than one hundred thousandths,
and therefore sixty-two thousandths is less than one tenth.
Okay, I think we're ready to begin adding decimal numbers.
Remember that adding is counting and when we count,
we must only count things of the same so that when we add,
we must line up place value so we add in the same place values.
The nice thing about decimal numbers is that we have something
to help us align those places, and that is the decimal point.
So if we were going to add 2.48 to 3.76,
I would write those numbers vertically, one under the other,
line up the two decimal places,
but also line up the decimal place in the answer
to ensure that the answer that's obtained
by adding the eight hundredths and the six one hundredths
goes in the hundredths place.
And of course eight plus six is fourteen,
we carry the one, one plus four plus seven is twelve,
we carry the one, one plus two plus three is six.
So two and forty-eight one hundredths plus three and seventy-six one hundredths
is six and twenty-four one hundredths.
The next problem involves adding three decimal numbers,
and those three numbers have a different number of decimal places.
Seven point two, ten point two eight, and point seven to six.
So the first one has one decimal place,
the second one two decimal places,
and the third one has three decimal places.
Notice how we add the numbers.
We line up the decimal points including the one in the answer.
That's even before we add at decimal points in place.
Then we fill in as many zeros as we need
so that each decimal fraction has the same number of places.
This is no different than getting a common denominator.
Of course it's a lot simpler than working with fractions
and common denominators.
All you got to do is put in the correct number of zeros,
which we've done, and then we add.
And assuming our adding skills are fine,
notice we get eighteen point two zero six.
Can we use our estimation skills here?
Absolutely.
We could simply say seven plus ten is seventeen,
so our answer should be a little bigger than seventeen.
Notice the zero point seven to six.
We didn't consider as far as we just simply dropped off
the decimal fractions and added the whole numbers.
And again, we're close.
Notice I said zero point seven to six,
although there's no zero on the screen.
And the reason for that is that zero means nothing.
So sometimes we might want to write zero point seven to six
just to show something in the ones place.
We don't have to.
Point seven to six is fine.
So the answer, of course, is eighteen and two hundred six one thousandths.
Subtracting.
We said early on that the rules for subtraction
and the rules for addition are much the same.
They're both counting and we must align our place values.
Again, in subtracting, we use the decimal point.
So here's a problem.
Six point two seven minus three point seven five.
We write the problem, align the two decimal points
and the decimal point in the answer.
Notice they both have the same number of decimal places,
in this case two.
So we simply subtract.
We borrow where necessary and get our answer of two point five two.
Two and fifty two one hundredths.
Again, estimating six minus three is three
and two and fifty two one hundredths is relatively close to three.
Now the next problem is one for you to do eight minus point nine two.
I want you to try the best you can to figure out how to do this problem.
If indeed you can't do it, that's OK.
But try to do it then turn the tape back on when you completed your effort
in subtracting eight minus point nine two.
You may have been confused because the eight did not have a decimal point.
But remember the decimal point always goes between the ones place
and the tenths place since there was no decimal fraction in eight.
The decimal point goes after the eight which is in the ones place eight point minus point nine two.
We line up the decimal places and notice that we need to add two zeroes to make it eight point zero zero.
So we have a common denominator in this case hundredths and then we subtract.
We borrow we get seven point zero eight seven and eight one hundredths since we had eight
and we subtracted a number pretty close to one point nine two is pretty close to one.
We would suspect that our answer would be around seven and of course it is next.
There are five problems for you to do those five problems should be done after you turn off the tape work each problem
and then come back and we'll work the problems one by one to see if you have successfully understood
the notion of adding and subtracting decimals.
Be very careful to note is an addition problem is a subtraction problem.
Line up the decimal points including the one of the answer.
Ensure that you have the same number of places in every number so that you can add subtract easily
then do your adding and subtracting and check your answer to make sure it appears to be reasonable.
Stop the tape and do that now.
The first problem is an addition problem.
You'll notice that the numbers look very similar.
They really do.
We have six point three eight sixty three point eight and six hundred thirty eight.
That was designed to make sure that you lined up the numbers in the proper way.
That is by using the decimal point the three decimal points plus the one of the answer are lined up.
We add zeros where necessary.
We add one zero in sixty three point eight.
We added two zeros in the whole number six hundred thirty eight.
Now that everything is lined up we have the common denominator in this case hundredths.
We simply add and the addition answer is seven hundred eight and eighteen one hundredths.
Does that answer make sense?
Well let's see six plus sixty three that's sixty nine and we had sixty nine plus let's say
sixty nine seventy again round numbers and let's take six hundred thirty eight make it six hundred forty.
So seventy plus six hundred forty would be seven hundred and ten.
And certainly seven hundred eight and eighteen one hundredths is very close to seven hundred ten.
The next problem involves also addition.
This is a problem I like to give as a tricky type problem to my students
because there are no whole numbers but you better be careful about where you put the decimal point in your answer.
Point four seven plus point nine eight four.
We line up the decimal points all three of them including the one in the answer.
And then we add a zero to the end of point four seven so we have a common denominator of one thousandths.
And zero plus four is four.
The seven plus eight is fifteen.
We write down the five and carry the one one plus four plus nine is fourteen.
We write down the four and we carry the one into the ones place because that is ten tenths and ten tenths equals one one.
And of course the answer is one point four five four or one and four hundred fifty four one thousandths.
If you had point one four five four that's incorrect.
Again estimating will tell you this.
We have two numbers that are less than one but one is very very close to one.
So we add them up.
We should get a number more than one and certainly point one four five four is less than one and makes no sense at all.
By looking at our numbers we realize that one point four five four one and four hundred fifty four thousandths makes a whole lot of sense.
And in fact it's the correct answer.
Let's take a look at the third problem.
The third problem is the subtraction problem.
Eleven point two minus four point seven six.
Writing the problem so that the numbers are aligned with the decimal points including the decimal point in the answer.
We put a zero in the hundredths place in the first number so we have eleven point two zero minus four point seven six.
Again a common denominator of one hundredths.
We subtract and we get six point four four six and forty four one hundredths.
Does that make sense?
Well eleven minus four is seven.
So our answer should be around seven and certainly six and forty four one hundredths is close enough to seven to make us believe that this is the correct answer.
And of course that belief is right.
This is the correct answer.
The fourth problem is a subtraction problem nine point three seven two minus eight point four.
We line up the decimal points to line up our place values.
Notice that we need to put two zeros in.
Eight point four becomes eight point four zero zero.
Again the common denominator here is one thousandths.
We subtract of course two minus zero is two seven minus zero is seven.
We have to borrow thirteen minus four is nine and eight minus eight is zero.
If you wrote zero point nine seven two that answer of course is equally correct point nine seven two nine hundred seventy two one thousandths.
Some of you may be saying well she was why did I have to put the zeros in the eight point four.
I could just subtract two minus blank is two.
Well I like to be consistent.
I think consistency in mathematics lends itself to correct answers confidence and the ability therefore to do more advanced level of mathematics.
And my consistency says always put those zeros in.
If you don't want to do it I can't force you but I really believe that's the best way to guarantee not only correct answers now but
understanding and correct answers later on as you study more advanced levels of mathematics.
By the way our estimation nine minus eight is one so our answers should be around one and of course point nine seven two is very very close to one.
Okay let's take a look at the very last problem of the set of five problems point seven minus point oh three oh nine.
Well notice the first thing we did after we lined up the decimal points including the one of the answer is to put three zeros in that first number making it point seven zero zero zero.
So we have a common denominator of ten thousandths seven tenths and seven thousand ten thousandths are the exact same value they are equivalent decimal fractions.
We subtract using borrowing and get point six six nine one six thousand six hundred ninety one ten thousandths checking the reason of this of our answer.
We see that point seven minus a very small number should be just a little bit less than point seven and of course point six six nine one is just a little bit less than point seven.
So our answer is correct.
We've looked at addition and subtraction problems and now it's time to actually use decimal addition and subtraction into something that's very important.
Nothing is more important than money and of course in a modern society we control our money through a checking account checking accounts of course must be accurate.
You must keep an accurate balance.
You need to know exactly how much money you have in your account.
If you write a check that's too big it bounces.
The bank says we cannot pay that check because there's not enough money in the account.
The check is returned to the person or store that you gave it to and you've got problems.
You've got people who are angry with you.
The bank charges you money.
If it's a store they may charge you money all because you didn't maintain the balance in your checkbook.
On the other hand if your balance is actually more than you think it is you may stop from buying something because you don't think you have enough money to purchase that item.
So to me it's very important to maintain an accurate checkbook balance and we do this with something called the checkbook register.
It's an opportunity to add and subtract decimals.
Here is a sample of a checkbook register.
You'll notice at the very top right hand part of the register it shows a balance of 207.48.
You don't see the decimal point but that thin vertical line separates the dollars and cents because dollars and cents of course are decimal numbers.
So we have 207.48 and according to this register on September 15th we made a deposit $752.65.
Again the vertical line is where the decimal point would go.
It separates the dollars and the cents.
The whole numbers from the fractional places.
So what do we do?
When we make a deposit what does that do to our checking account?
Does it increase or decrease the amount of money?
Well obviously it increases.
The deposit is an increase to our account and therefore we need to add.
So we add 207.48 plus $752.65 and we get 960.13.
Now many people will do this on a calculator.
I myself don't like to do it that way.
I do it on paper and pencil and then check it on a calculator because if you do it on a calculator
you may make a mistake and not realize it until it's too late and you get a charge to your account
for what's called an overdraft that is writing a check that was too big.
By doing it by hand and then checking on the calculator I almost guaranteed, almost guaranteed
that the answer in my balance column is correct.
$960.13.
This is what this person's checking account has to spend.
On September 19th they write a check to big deal stores.
When you write a check that is decreasing your account balance.
When big deal stores deposits that check in their own account their bank sends the check to your bank
and I want to get into how that happens and your bank subtracts that money from your account
and of course pays the bank for the stores.
Well, we got to subtract that amount $49.19.
$49.19.
The nice thing about dollars and cents you're only dealing with tenths and hundredths place.
So we subtract 960.13 minus 49.19 and we get 910.94.
910 and 9400 or $910.94.
Which is now what this person has to spend on September 24th.
According to the check register a check is written to the Metro Electric Company.
The amount of the check is $79.87 79.87.
Again, every time we write a check it's a subtraction.
We no longer have that money in the account.
So we subtract 79.87 from 910.94.
We should get 831.07.
$831.07.
In fact, I would suggest that what you might want to do at the end of this tape is to go back,
look at the check register and do all the addition and subtraction problems.
We're going through here now to ensure that you have the right answers.
Also in terms of the use of the calculator in lesson 11 as promised,
we will look at the calculator and how we do these decimal problems.
But I would sincerely suggest that you don't only use the calculator to balance your checkbook.
And if you don't have a checkbook now, when you get a checkbook,
balance it by hand and check your work on the calculator.
Okay, September 29th, a payment is made to Joe's used cars.
I don't know if you ever bought a car from those people.
Very nice folks.
And the payment is $257 and no cents.
Notice the zero zero for no cents.
Okay, again, a check is a subtraction.
831.07 minus 257.00, common denominator of hundreds.
And we subtract and we get 574.07.
We have $574.07 in the account.
And of course, this goes on forever and ever.
I just wanted to give you an example of what we're going to do.
In the remaining minutes of this lesson,
let's work a few more problems to ensure that you know what you're doing.
So let's go to the whiteboard at this time.
And we'll take a look at some problems, addition and subtraction problems.
But first, I'd like to take a look at a problem that we did early in this tape,
and that is a comparison problem.
Here is .04 and here is .03978.
And I want you to put a symbol less than, greater than or equal to between those two numbers.
Stop the tape, decide which symbol goes there,
write the symbol down on your piece of paper,
and then we'll come back and see if we both agree.
The first thing we do to compare any kind of fractional numbers,
be they the kind of fraction we saw in earlier lessons,
are sometimes called common fractions.
Or decimal fraction is to get a common denominator.
Notice in the second decimal, there's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 places,
which means I need to have 5 places in my first number.
So I'll put in 3 zeros.
The fact that those zeros are smaller is irrelevant.
I just only had enough space there, so I wrote 3 smaller zeros.
They still shows us that .04 is the same as .04000,
or 4,000, 4,000, 100,000.
With 5 places, we have 5 zeros in our denominator.
The other number is 3,978, 100,000.
In actuality, since we have the same denominator, 100,000s,
we can disregard that and simply look at the numerators.
Simply look at the numbers there, which is more, 4,000 or 3,978.
I believe the answer is at 4,000s more, just a bit more,
but enough for us to say greater than is the correct symbol,
and allow me to erase that blank because that blank,
some people think that meant greater than or equal to.
Strictly greater than.
.04 is greater than .03978.
Now, many of my students over the years are confused by that.
They think, well, look, 3978 has a lot more numbers in it than 4 in .04.
It has nothing to do with the number of numbers.
It has to do with place value.
That 4 is in the hundredths place.
And the other number in the hundredths place is a 3.
So another way, in fact, of doing it is to disregard the numbers
beyond the hundredths place and look at .04 compared to .03.
Because no matter what is beyond the hundredths place,
it does not affect the comparison.
And .04 is greater than .03, and therefore,
.04 is greater than .03978.
In fact, we could have numbers going on,
well, to the end of the world here, wouldn't make a difference,
because the .04 would be the greater number.
Okay, let's try an addition problem.
And this addition problem is similar to one we did earlier,
but I'm not sure you can do it.
Only this time, let's go ahead and put three numbers.
.27 plus .408,
plus .71, which is .71.
That's good.
Turn the tape off, add those three decimal numbers up,
and let's see if we can agree.
Okay, the first thing I need to do is to write my numbers vertically.
.27, .408, plus .71.
Line up the decimal points, including the one in the answer.
Do I have common denominators? No, I don't.
I need to fill in some zeros here,
so that all the numbers have three decimal places,
so that we're adding numbers, thousands.
Same common denominator, thousands.
And now I just add 0 plus 8 plus 0 is 8.
7 plus 1 is 8.
2 plus 4 is 6, plus 7 is 13.
When I carry that one, it goes into the ones place,
and therefore it better be to the left of the decimal point.
1.388.
1 and 388,000.
Okay?
If we want to estimate, well, I don't know,
.2 plus .4 is .6, plus .7 is 1.3.
That's one way of estimating.
The fact is that we've done it correctly,
and obviously I would also check on my calculator.
Let's go ahead and do one subtraction problem.
Just to be sure we got that down.
Let's try this.
.6 minus .049.
Go ahead and do that.
Now, some people want to put the .049 on top,
because it has more numbers.
.6 is still more than .049.
We understand that.
And of course, the first number is the number that we write on top.
.6 minus .049.
Line up the decimal points.
Fill in the zeros.
Subtract.
I can borrow.
10 minus 9.
9 minus 4.
5 minus 0.
The answer is .551.
Hopefully you got that correct.
And you now understand about adding and subtracting decimal numbers.
That the key thing is lining up the decimal points
to line up the place values, because adding is counting,
and we can only add place values that are the same.
In our next lesson, we will talk about multiplying decimals.
See you there.
