After many promises, we're now at lesson 11.
In previous lessons, I've indicated that in this lesson,
we will discuss the use of the calculator.
We'll use the calculator to add, subtract,
multiply, and divide whole numbers, fractions, and decimals.
The calculator that we are going to use is a very special one.
It's called the Math Explorer.
It's manufactured by Texas Instruments.
It is the calculator that I use in all my classes
where I teach fractions and decimals.
Many of you may not have access to this calculator,
and therefore, at first, we're going to work problems
using the calculator as if it was a standard
for function calculator.
Some of these methods may be a little complex,
and if it doesn't work out for you,
that's okay because we will use the calculator primarily
to check our work.
The types of problems that we covered in the first ten lessons
and the problems that are in the workbook,
I expect you to be able to do by hand using paper and pencil.
So the calculator is used to check.
Therefore, if there's a certain one of the problems
that you have difficulty understanding,
when I go through it, don't worry about it.
Don't check it on the calculator.
But obviously, if you have what can get a Math Explorer calculator,
we'll see how easy it is to do fractions,
and especially long division problems on this calculator.
So the second pass through the problems
will do using the options and special buttons
available on the Math Explorer.
Let's take a look at the calculator.
What we have here, you see, is a poster.
It's just a poster that shows what the calculator looks like,
and we'll use that.
Actually, I'll be pointing to the various buttons,
and as I point to the buttons,
you will see on the screen also the actual numbers
and symbols appear on the screen.
The screen of the calculator, you'll notice,
will not change if you see the screen of this poster
because it is just a poster, and it will not change.
But on the screen that will have superimposed on the TV,
you will see the actual numbers and symbols and the answer.
Okay, so we're going to use this calculator,
and like I said, first we'll try to use it
as if it was a four-function calculator.
Let's go ahead and use the first problem.
The first problem is an addition problem
using whole numbers.
437 plus 98 plus 6410.
So let's go ahead and go to the calculator.
We press the four, followed by the three,
followed by the seven, for 437.
Then the plus button, the second number is 98.
Nine, eight, plus.
The last number is 6410.
One, zero.
And then we hit equals, and we get our answer,
which is 6,945.
The second problem we're going to do
is a whole number subtraction problem.
8,472 minus 2,936.
8,472 minus,
we hit the minus button, 2,936.
Pressing the equal button gets our answer,
which is 5,536.
Let's do a whole number multiplication problem.
We'll do 647 times 39.
So first we press the six,
followed by the four,
followed by the seven, for 647.
Then the times button, and then 39.
Equals, and the answer is 25,233.
Now these first three types of problems,
adding, subtracting, and multiplying whole numbers,
the four function calculator does quite well.
It's with the long division,
we run into our first seeming problem.
Let's take a look.
Let's go ahead and do 347 divided by 19.
Three, four, seven,
and hit the divided by button,
as a division symbol, okay,
divided by 19.
One, nine, equals.
And notice what you have is 18.263158.
And if there was more space,
you'd have more numbers up there.
That's pretty silly, especially if we were doing this
and we hadn't talked about decimal numbers yet.
Well, let's see.
I don't think we want to use this for a division problem.
It's quite difficult.
So as we talk about fractions,
we'll see how to change one of these decimal numbers
into a mixed number and see what the fraction is
on our four function calculator.
You can see that using this kind of calculator
to do a long division problem can be a bit messy.
The second time through,
we actually use the options available
on the math explorer calculator.
The answer is done and seen very nicely and very easily.
But let's go ahead and go on to some fraction problems.
And remember, the four function calculator
does not allow us to enter fractions as such.
So we'll have to enter them
and eventually get decimal equivalents,
and that's where we run into some problems,
but we'll muddle through and show you how to check
your adding, subtracting, multiplying,
and dividing fraction problems
on a standard four function calculator.
Our first problem is five and two-thirds
plus seven and five-eighths.
So first we touch the five and then plus
and then two divided by three.
That is how we put five and two-thirds in
as an addition problem.
Five plus two divided by three
is five and two-thirds.
Then we touch the plus button.
And you notice as soon as you do that,
you see five point six, six, six,
whole bunch of sixes with a seven at the end.
That is the decimal representation of five and two-thirds.
What are we going to add to five and two-thirds?
We said it was seven and five-eighths.
So we touch seven plus five
divided by eight equals.
And the answer we get is 13.2916667.
Well, what does that mean?
We want an answer with a fraction in it.
What we have to do now is convert that decimal
back to a fraction.
So the first thing we need to do is subtract the 13.
So hit minus one, three equals,
which leaves us with our decimal point 291667.
We recognize that our common denominator,
we're using three and eight as our two denominators,
would be 24.
So we multiply by hitting the times button,
24 equals.
And what we get is seven.
Now, on some calculators, you might get 7.0000001
or even 6.999999.
But you should recognize that that's very close to seven.
We're going to get a whole number.
So the final answer is 13 and 7.24.
We have to do it this way, again,
because we can't do fractions on a standard
for function calculator.
Let's do a couple of subtraction problems.
The first subtraction problem is going to be
eight and two-sevenths minus three and four-fifths.
So, of course, we put in eight plus two
divided by seven.
And we're going to subtract minus three
and then minus again and four-fifths
before divided by five.
The reason we had to put the minus a second time
is we're subtracting the three,
we're also subtracting the four-fifths.
When we touch equals, we get our answer,
which is 4.4857143.
Now, that's not the answer we want.
We want a mixed number with a fraction at the end.
So we'll do the same thing.
We'll hit the minus button and four equals.
And that will get rid of the four
and we'll be left with the decimal.
Now, we look at the two denominators,
they're seven and five.
So we'll go ahead and know that our common denominator
will be 35.
So we want to multiply by 35 times 3.5 equals.
And what we see is 17.
Four and 17.35 is the correct answer.
Let's try one more subtraction problem.
This is going to be nine and one-half minus five and five-sixths.
So first, we'll put in nine plus one divided by two.
That's nine and one-half and we want to subtract.
We hit the minus button, five, hit the minus button again,
five divided by six for five-sixths, hit the equal button,
and we should see on the screen is three point,
a bunch of sixes with a seven at the end.
But again, we want to get a mixed number with a fraction,
not a whole bunch of sixes and a seven at the end.
So what we need to do is get rid of the three by subtracting.
So we hit minus three equals,
which gives us the decimal for which we want to find the fraction.
And now the common denominator for two and six will be six.
So we hit times six equals.
And what we get is four, three and four-sixths.
Now, we need to reduce that to three and two-thirds.
And of course, the machine is not going to do it for us.
The typical four-function calculator will not reduce those fractions.
But we can check.
As you can see, it's a bit complex.
Let's go ahead and see how we do a multiplication of mixed number problems.
Here, your calculator is going to need to have parentheses.
Most four-function calculators do have parentheses.
If your calculator does not have parentheses,
then you cannot use your calculator to check either multiplication
or division of fraction problems.
The first problem we're going to do is a multiplication problem,
seven and four-fifths times three and two-thirds.
So the first thing we need to do is put a parentheses in.
So we touch the parentheses and we want to put in seven plus four divided by five.
And we have to close the parentheses by hitting the close parentheses button.
Times parentheses three plus two divided by three closed parentheses equals.
And now we see that seven and four-fifths times three and two-thirds equals 28.6.
28.6.
And that's a decimal we can deal with because the 28, of course, is 28.
And the 0.6 from previous lessons on decimals we know is six-tenths.
So the answer appears to be 28 and six-tenths.
But of course, six and 10 are both even numbers.
So we can reduce that to 28 and three-fifths.
Okay, let's take a look at a dividing problem.
We're going to divide eight and two-fifths by three and eight-nights.
Again, we'll need the parentheses.
So the first button we'll touch is the open parentheses button,
followed by the eight, followed by the plus,
and then two divided by five closed parentheses.
Since we want to divide, we hit the division button.
Open parentheses three plus eight divided by nine closed parentheses equals.
And the answer we get on our screen is 2.16.
But again, we want our answer to be a mixed number.
But again, 0.16 is easy to translate, two and 16 one-hundredths.
But 16 and 100 are both even numbers.
So we can reduce by dividing by two and get two and eight-fiftieths.
But eight and 50 are both even numbers.
So we can divide by two again.
And we get our final answer of two and four-twenty-fifths.
That means that eight and two-fifths divided by three and eight-nights
is two and four-twenty-fifths.
And that's how we do adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing
fractional number problems on a standard four-function calculator.
I don't know about you, but I'm not very satisfied with that,
which is exactly why I use the Math Explorer.
Let's take a look now at some very special buttons
that are available on the Math Explorer to do long division
as well as fractional problems that I believe make those problems
and the computation they're in much easier to do.
And we get an answer much more quickly.
So the first button I want to look at is called INT Divide.
It's right above the division button.
And it means integer divide.
It allows you to divide numbers and get an answer with a quotient,
that is the answer, plus a remainder.
No decimals, no fractions.
Just as we did it, we did long division way back when
at the beginning of these lessons.
The other buttons involve fractions.
The button marked unit, U-N-I-T, when you strike it,
puts a little U on the screen that separates the whole number
and the fractional part of a mixed number.
To create a fraction, we need to use this fraction bar or slash,
so that, for example, if I wanted to type 2 thirds,
I would hit 2 slash 3, and 2 thirds would appear on the screen.
Another button is this SIMP button, S-I-M-P.
When you strike SIMP and then equals,
it reduces any fraction that's on the screen.
Again, you'll say, well, why did they call it a reduce button?
Some teachers don't like the word reduce.
They feel some students will think it means
we're actually making the fraction smaller.
We know better, so we can use the word reduce,
but Texas Instruments tried to meet the needs of all teachers,
called that button the simplify button.
SIMP equals, how would you know when to use it?
Hopefully, you'd recognize that a fraction can be reduced,
but this calculator even gives you a clue.
In the left part of the screen,
you'll see if you need to reduce a capital N slash capital D,
arrow, small n slash small d.
That means your fraction can be reduced
using the SIMP equals sequence.
The other button over here is A, B, C.
You'll notice the A is capitalized.
The B slash C are small letters.
The B and C are lowercase letters.
Now, what that button does is that button simplifies.
It changes an improper fraction to a mixed number,
whether that or also change a mixed number
with an improper fraction to the correct mixed number.
It will not reduce the fraction,
so if you simplify and you see you still need to reduce,
then you have to use the SIMP equals button.
Well, let's go back now and do those problems we just did,
the long division problem and all the fraction problems,
once again, using the power of the Explorer calculator.
We're not going to do the adding, subtracting,
or multiplying whole number problems
because as we saw, the four function calculator
does them very well and the Explorer does them in the same manner.
So let's go back to our long division problem,
which was 347 divided by 19.
So what we're going to do is touch 3 and then 4 and then 7
and then integer divides.
We can get an answer with a remainder.
1, 9 equals.
On your screen, you see that the answer is 18
with a remainder of 5.
The 18 and the 5 are separated.
So we can actually get an integer answer,
18 remainder of 5, much easier than dealing with decimals.
Okay, let's go ahead and take a look at the first fraction problem
we had, which was 5 and 2 thirds plus 7 and 5 eighths.
We'll touch 5, unit to put the u up there
to separate the whole number from the fraction,
and then 2 slash 3 plus 7 unit 5 slash 8 equals.
We have on the screen is 13.
I'm sorry, we shouldn't have 13 yet.
The reason is that when we add the two fractions,
two thirds and five eighths, we get an improper fraction.
So we have on the screen is 12 and 31, 24ths.
What should we do?
We know it's improper.
We need to simplify.
And on this calculator, we use the A, B, C button.
So we touch the A, B, C button,
and we should see 13 and 7, 24ths.
Can we reduce to 7, 24ths?
I don't think so.
7 can only be divided by 1 in itself,
and 24 cannot be divided by 7.
So our answer is 13 and 7, 24ths.
Not very difficult to do.
Okay, let's take a look at the subtraction problem.
In the subtraction problem, we had 8 and 2 sevenths
minus 3 and 4 fifths.
So we touch 8, unit 2 slash 7 minus 3 unit 4 slash 5 equals.
And what we see on the screen is 4 and 17, 35ths.
We don't simplify mixed numbers when we subtract,
and we cannot reduce it.
17 and 35 cannot be reduced.
So 4 and 17, 35ths is the correct answer.
Okay, let's do the second subtraction problem
we did earlier in this lesson.
That was 9 and 1 half minus 5 and 5 sixths.
So we touch 9 and then unit 1 slash 2 for 9 and 1 half minus 5 unit 5 slash 6
for 5 and 5 sixths equals.
Now what we see on the screen is 3 and 4 sixths.
We should recognize that 4 sixths can be reduced.
If we don't recognize it, if you look on the left side of your screen,
you'll see we have a capital N slash capital D, small n, small d.
And what that means is we need to reduce.
And again, we reduce by touching the simp equals,
and that gives us 3 and 2 thirds, our final answer.
You'll also notice the capital N, capital D, et cetera,
are gone from the left side of the screen.
Okay, let's go ahead and do the multiplication problem.
And remember we had to deal with parentheses and all kinds of stuff here.
No parentheses, just put the mixed numbers in, multiply.
But something very magical happens, you'll see.
We put in 7 unit 4 slash 5, 7 and 4 fifths times 3 and 2 thirds.
3 unit 2 slash 3 equals.
Now we don't have a mixed number on the screen,
we have an improper fraction.
When you multiply on this calculator,
two mixed numbers, you get an improper fraction
just as you would if you were doing it paper and pencil.
So it's another way you can kind of check your work.
So we need to simplify that improper fraction.
How are we going to do that?
Using the A, B, C button.
And what we see is 28 and 9 15ths.
28 and 9 15ths can be reduced.
So we hit the simp equals button,
and we get 28 and 3 fifths,
which is our final answer.
Now let's take a look at the last problem,
which is a fraction dividing problem,
dividing two mixed numbers.
The problem was 8 unit 2 slash 5
for 8 and 2 fifths divided by,
and notice we used the regular division symbol,
not the integer divide,
3 unit 8 slash 9 for 3 and 8 ninths equals.
And once again, we see an improper fraction.
In this case, 378, 175ths.
We know we're going to have to simplify that.
So we hit the A, B, C button,
and what we get on the screen is 2 and 28, 175ths.
Now you might not recognize that 28 and 175
can both be divided by 7,
but the calculator recognizes that,
and you see that with the capital N, capital D, et cetera,
on the left side of your screen.
So we need to reduce our fraction.
We touch simp equals,
and we have 2 and 425ths, our final answer.
I think you'll agree in terms of long division
and mixed number types of problems,
the explorer calculator offers us a great deal.
But we're not done yet.
We have one or two other kinds of problems
I want to show you,
actually in advance of our next lesson.
But first, I thought it would be a good idea to discuss
when we use the calculator.
Now I said earlier, the calculator should be used
to check your work.
Absolutely right.
Now there are other times when the calculator
is quite beneficial.
If you were doing a problem,
especially a real-world problem,
that involved fractions that were very, very large,
75 over 9,112,
or decimal numbers,
like, for example, 2.784615,
or very large whole numbers,
such as the population of the United States,
I don't think you need to do that by hand.
At that point in time,
you should use the calculator to compute your answers.
Where I want to see students using paper and pencil
is when typical kinds of problems,
the types of problems we looked at in lessons 1 through 10,
that can and should be done that way.
If we strictly rely upon the calculator,
what happens is we forget how to do things.
And then if the calculator's batteries run out
or the little screen that allows light
to turn the calculator on is broken,
we are very, very lost.
The analogy I like to give is most pilots on most airplanes,
especially major airliners,
fly using very sophisticated electronic gear.
But in reality, those pilots must know how to fly
for what's called the seat of their pants.
That is, the pilot can use certain basic instruments
in case all the avionics, the fancy electronic gear,
breaks down.
I would not want to be on an airplane
where the avionics broke down
and the pilot had forgotten how to use the basic instruments
that are not affected by the loss of electricity.
So, same for you.
I would hope that although you could use the calculator
to do problems where calculators must be used,
if a simple, typical, whole-number fraction and decimal problems,
you would use paper and pencil
and use your calculator to check for correctness.
Now, let's take a look at one more button
that the calculator has that's quite interesting.
That is the FD button.
This is a button that allows us to change a fraction to a decimal
and a decimal to a fraction.
Something we'll do in lesson 12,
but I thought at this point in time,
it would be a good place to see how it does that.
Actually, some of you may ask,
how does it go to change a fraction to a decimal?
How does it know when it's a decimal to change to a fraction?
Well, that's something we'll leave up to the computer engineers to explain.
But basically, what we're going to do
is we're going to put in some decimal numbers,
hit the FD button, and it'll give us fractions.
Then we'll put some fractions in, hit the FD button,
and it should give us a decimal.
Let's go ahead and do a few of those.
Let's start with 0.3, 3-tenths.
So, I put in 0.3,
and I hit the FD button,
and what I see on the screen is 3-tenths,
because 0.3, of course, is exactly 3-tenths.
Let's try 0.35.
0.35 FD.
Now, what you see on the screen now, of course, is 3,500.
That's exactly what 0.35 is.
But, of course, you'll notice that you can reduce 3,500,
so if we hit simp equals, we get 7-tenths,
which is the fraction equivalent reduced for 0.35.
Let's try 0.047.
0.047 FD.
And on the screen, we see 47 1-thousandths,
which is exactly what it is, and we cannot reduce it.
That is our final answer, 47 1-thousandths.
One last problem.
This is to demonstrate something very important.
We're going to put in 0.333333.
A whole lot of 3s.
Now, we know that that should be approximately 1-third.
When we touch the FD button, nothing happens.
We have point in all those 3s.
What the calculator is telling us is that it is incapable
of translating a decimal with that many places.
It has great difficulty.
It can do problems with tenths and hundreds and thousands.
Once you start putting too many numbers out there,
it tells you, sorry, no can do,
and therefore, you're stuck trying to do that by hand.
Let's go ahead and see how to change a fraction to a decimal.
Our first fraction, we 3-fifths.
So we hit 3 slash 5, the fraction 3-fifths,
hit the FD button, and we get 0.6.
Of course, 3-fifths is 0.66,
which of course reduces back to 3-fifths.
If you want to go around in a circle, let's try 5 7s.
We touch 5 slash 7 and hit the FD button,
and we get 0.7142857.
Actually, that goes on forever and ever,
but at least we have a very good estimation.
We can use our rounding skills to get a decimal equivalent
of 5 7s rounded to some place of thousands or 10,000, et cetera.
The last one we want to try is 9 40ths.
9 slash 4 0, 9 40ths,
hit the FD button, and what we get is decimal 0.225.
That is 9 40ths, decimal equivalent, is 0.225.
So in lesson 11, we've seen how to use the calculator,
especially the special functions of the Math Explorer calculator,
to check our whole number and fraction problems.
We also, of course, can use it for decimals,
but that's quite simple, quite straightforward.
In our next lesson, lesson 12, we'll start,
we left off here looking at changing fractions to decimals,
decimals to fractions, and introduce the notion of percent.
