This is Lesson 12, Fractions, Decimals and Percents. In previous lessons, we've worked
with fractions and we've worked with decimals. In the last lesson, Lesson 11, we saw how
to change a fraction to a decimal and a decimal to a fraction on the calculator. In this lesson
we'll actually see how to do that by hand in many different ways as well as introducing
the idea of percent and how we can change percents into fractions and decimals, decimals
and fractions into percents. All three fractions, decimals and percents are ways of writing
fractions. In fact, as I mentioned in the earlier lesson, sometimes what we call the
fraction is called a common fraction. Three different ways to find out as far as parts
of a whole or ways to get ratios. Alright, let's start off with something we know. We've
seen a fraction which is three-fifths. Three-fifths can be made into tenths, very simply. We learned
about equivalent fractions. If we multiply the top and bottom by two, we'd get six-tenths.
Of course, six-tenths we can write as a decimal, 0.6. That would be certainly one way. If we
could take a fraction and make an equivalent fraction whose denominator was tenths or hundredths
or thousands, we could then write that as a decimal. But that is not the most common
way of changing a fraction to a decimal. The best way to do that is to divide. In our first
visual, we see that we can divide five into three. That's what three-fifths means. Three-fifths
is the incomplete division problem, three divided by five. And when we divide five into three,
actually 3.0, using our decimal division process, we get 0.66. And of course, 0.66 can be reduced
to three-fifths, so we know that three-fifths, six-tenths, and the decimal, 0.6, are all the
same. Here's another example. Five-sixteenths. We divide 16 into five. Actually, we divide
16 into five, 0.000. And we get 0.3125. I'll not go through the entire division process,
but on the screen, you can see where we actually, we've multiplied, subtracted, brought down
until we ran out of things to divide. And 0.3125, that is 3,125-10-thousandths, is the
same as five-sixteenths. If we wrote it as a fraction and then reduced it, eventually
we'd get to five-sixteenths. So 0.3125 is the decimal equivalent of five-sixteenths. Once
again, we're dealing with equivalent fractions, two fractions, one of common fraction, one
a decimal, that have equal value, but look different. Okay. Now, here are some additional
fractions, seven-eighths, 13-twentieths, eight-twenty-fifths, and eleven-fortieths. Using the method
of division, that is decimal division, I would like you to divide the denominators into the
numerators, and for each of those four common fractions, come up with the decimal equivalent.
Drop the tape and do that now. As you can see on the screen, we have the answers. Seven-eighths
is 0.875, eight-hundred-seventy-five-one-thousandths. Thirteen-twentieths is 0.65, sixty-five-one-hundredths.
Eight-twenty-fifths is 0.32, thirty-two-one-hundredths, and eleven-fortieths is 0.275, two-hundred-seventy-five-one-thousandths.
On the next visual, we see how we can sort of check that our work is correct. If we take
seven-eighths and multiply by one-hundred-twenty-five top and bottom, we get eight-hundred-seventy-five-one-thousandths.
If we take thirteen-twentieths and multiply top and bottom by five, we get sixty-five-one-hundredths.
If we take eight-twenty-fifths and multiply the numerator and the denominator by four, we
get thirty-two-one-hundredths, and eleven-fortieths top and bottom multiplied by twenty-five gives
us two-hundred and seventy-five-one-thousandths. Now, so far, we've looked at fractions whose
denominator can be divided into ten, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a ten-thousand.
That is, we multiply top and bottom by some number, we wind up with a new denominator
that is a place value in our decimal place value system. Is that true for all numbers?
I don't think so. What we're going to do now is to look at what we, how we deal with
other situations, such as thirds and sixth and sevenths, where the denominator does not
divide evenly into ten, or one-hundred, or one-thousand, or any other one of those numbers
would want in a whole bunch of zeros after it. Let's go ahead and sit down and take
a look at a few things so that we can ultimately be able to change any fraction into a decimal.
And the first fraction we'll look at is two-thirds. And we can see that two-thirds, we divide
three into two-point-zero, zero, zero, zero. We get point six, six, and those dots mean
those sixes go on forever. Now, you may have a whole lot of time to write sixes for the
rest of your life, but I think there are better things to do. So, someone said, we got to
have a way to show that, rather than writing an infinite number of sixes or those dots.
And somebody, and I really don't know who it was back a long time ago, decided to have
a symbol for what's called a repeating decimal. And that is two-thirds equals point six bar.
The bar is over the six, which symbolically means we're going to repeat the six forever
and ever. So, again, two-thirds is not point six. It's not point six-six. It's not point
six-six-six-six. It goes on forever and ever. The interesting thing, if you have a few different
calculators in your house, you might, in each calculator, do two divided by three. Some
of the calculators will have all sixes. Some of the calculators will have sixes with a seven
at the end. And really, that's called whether they round off or truncate, and there's two
different kinds of systems in the calculators commonly found. But the idea is, in both cases,
those are representations, because in reality, what they should have on the screen when you
do two divided by three is point six bar. Okay? Now, let's take a look at seven-elevenths
and five-sixths. Seven-elevenths is point six-three, six-three, six-three, forever and
ever and ever. Again, eleven cannot be multiplied by something, by anything, and getting a hundred
or a thousand or ten thousand or a million. So, the decimal goes on forever and ever.
And again, you'll notice on the screen it says point six-three bar, because that means
the six-three is repeated forever and ever. The five-sixth is point eight-three-three-three-three,
et cetera. You'll notice that in the visual, the eight does not have a bar over it, only
the three. That tells us that we have point eight followed by an infinite number of threes.
So the bar is only over those digits that are repeated. What I'd like you to do is to
think about what point nine bar means. It may seem quite easy at first, but it really
is not difficult, but it takes some thought. So I'd like you to stop the tape, write down
point nine bar and decide what that means. Well, we know that point three bar is one-third
because we divide three into one, we get point three-three-three-three-three. We know that
two-thirds, we already saw the earliest lesson, is point six bar. So therefore, point nine
bar would be three-thirds. What's three-thirds? Three-thirds is one. Now, a lot of people have
difficulty with that. That here's this decimal, point nine-nine-nine-nine-nine, continuing
forever, and it's equal to one. Proving that, other than saying that, you know, point nine
bar has to be three-thirds, is really left the calculus, which is another lesson we'll
do sometime in the distant future. Also, you'll notice on the screen, it shows you that point
nine bar can be written as point nine plus point oh nine plus point oh oh nine, et cetera,
forever and ever. And every time you add another nine, it gets closer and closer to one. You
can say, well, you'll never get there. Well, you'll have to wait around for an infinite
amount of time to get there. And like I said earlier, we don't have that kind of time. So
you can believe it or wait for calculus. Three-sevenths is the next fraction we want to look at. I
want you to divide seven into three and keep dividing until you get to a point where you
think the decimal numbers are repeating. We know they have to repeat. The reason is that
seven does not divide it to 10 or 100 or 1,000. In fact, at this point, we might say,
what kind of numbers do divide into 10 or 100 or 1,000? Well, since 10 and 100 and 1,000,
all those other numbers, one with a bunch of zeros, can only be divided by two and five
because two times five is 10 and two times two times five times five, et cetera, is 100.
We need to have denominators that basically are made up of twos and fives when multiplication.
Seven is not like that. Seven can only be divided by seven. It cannot be divided by two and
five. So therefore, seven could never be multiplied in any way and be able to get a 10 or 100
or 1,000. So we know it's going to repeat. So stop the tape, divide three by seven, and
stop your division when you believe the decimal has begun to repeat. Well, as we can see on
the screen, seven goes into three point, but a bunch of zeros, 0.428571. And the next division,
that three down there is what we started from. That remainder, after we divide it and got
the one, that happens to be in the millions place, the three is what we started from.
We bring down a zero, we have 30, and we're back to 28, the whole thing. So 0.428571 with
a bar over all six digits is the correct answer. And it's a very interesting thing about sevens.
Take a look at one seventh and five sevenths. One seventh is 0.142857 with a bar over it.
Do you see any similarities in these repeating decimals? What you should say is all six digits
are the same, and the order is the same. It just depends where you start. For example,
if you look at one seventh, you'll see that if you go to the end, the seven in the millions
place, what would come after that would be a one. So you'd have seven, one, four, two,
eight, five, which is exactly what five sevenths is. Look at six sevenths. They're all the
five sevenths. Look at six sevenths. Six sevenths is 0.857142. Something very interesting about
this kind of repeating decimal is if you take the first three digits, eight, five, seven,
and the last three digits, one, four, two, and add them, you get nine, nine, nine. This is always
true in the sevenths and some other answers too. In fact, what I'd like you to do is to look at
10 thirteenths. Now I'll give you a hint. 10 thirteenths has a repeating decimal. It has six digits
in it. So after you've divided six times, you should begin all over again with the same division
problem you started with. So turn, turn the table up at this time and change 10 thirteenths to a
repeating decimal by dividing 13 into 10. 10 thirteenths is 0.769230 and then it starts to repeat
because after you've multiplied the, actually divided the 13 into 10 and got zero, you bring down a
zero and you have 100 and we start all over again with the 91. So basically 10 thirteenths equals
0.769230. And as you can see, when we take the first three digits, 769, and the last three digits,
230 and add them up, we get 999. This will be true for all thirteenths. So look at seven thirteenths.
If I tell you that the first three digits of seven thirteenths was 538, I want you to write down
what the last three digits in that six digit repeating cycle is. So stop the tape and write the
three digits down and come on back and we'll check your answer. Well, we know that the first three
digits and the last three digits in the six digit cycle should add up to 999. Well, the question is
what do I have to add to 538 to get 999 and that will be 461. So the answer you should have had
was 461, which means that seven thirteenths is 0.538461 bar. That is 0.538461 repeating forever
and ever. Now, at times, we don't want to write a bar. At times, we don't want to take forever.
We don't want to have little dots. We want to do something else. And there's something we've
already seen in our discussion of the division of decimals that can be very helpful. And that
is rounding off. For example, two thirds, we know is 0.6666 forever and ever or 0.6 bar.
But if I wanted to round that off to the thousands place, well, again, I go to the 10
thousands place. I see a six there. That six is five or more. So I add one, I get 0.667.
And as you can see, four sevenths is 0.571428 bar. But if I wanted to round it off to the
hundredths place, I'd look in the thousands place and see a one. That one is less than five.
So I forget it. And I would round off four sevenths to 0.57 if I was rounding off to the
hundredths place. So now we've seen how to change a fraction to a decimal. We've actually already
seen how to change a decimal to a fraction. Because we've talking about decimals, we wrote
them down. So we had 0.27. We said that's 2,700. And we also saw that some cases after you wrote
the fraction down, you could reduce it. So for example, 0.25, 2,500 reduced to one fourth.
I think it's time now to introduce the third type of way of writing a fraction. And that is a percent.
Percent literally means out of 100. We know that sent, century, centurion, centennial,
all means 100, and per means out of. Percents are probably the most widely used way of expressing
a fraction. And the reason is very simple. Many people, as we said earlier, have difficulty
with fractions. Different denominators, common denominators, rules, etc. We understand why
those rules work. But still, we're faced with the fact that much of our population who has not
seen these tapes does not understand fractions as well as you do. So they have a hard time dealing
with something like 7 eighths or 9 fifteenths. Decimals, although easier to understand than
fractions, pose one problem. Many people think that 0.328 is greater than 0.4. Because 0.328 has
three digits in it and 0.4 only has one. We've seen earlier in a discussion of decimals that 0.4
is the greater number. So we had to devise a way of expressing fractional information in a form
that most everybody can understand. And percents solve that problem. Why? Because percent is nothing
more than a fraction with a common denominator. All percents have the same denominator, 100
out of 100. For example, 32 percent means 32 one hundredths. 100 percent means 100 one hundredths.
150 percent means 150 one hundredths. Notice 100 percent and 150 percent are improper fractions.
100 percent is equal to one and 150 percent is equal to three halves or one and one half.
So when the coach says to you, I want you to give 110 percent either one of two things. He's
lying to you or she's lying to you. Or the coach knows very little about percents because 110
percent would mean giving more than you have. Now, I always, my coach asked my students,
our players to give 100 percent and hopefully you're giving 100 percent in your efforts
in this tape series. But now let's take a look at how we operate with percents.
First, let's take a look at how we change a percent to a fraction.
Really, it's quite simple. A percent already is a fraction. We have the numerator. That's the
number in front of the percent sign and the denominator is 100. So as you could see, 18 percent
is 18 one hundredths. 50 percent is 50 one hundredths. In both cases, we can reduce those
fractions. 18 one hundredths becomes nine fiftieths and 50 percent, 50 one hundredths
becomes one half. Okay. How do we change a percent to a decimal? Well, it seems easy enough.
The denominator is 100, right? So we can write 18 percent as 18 hundredths and then write that as
0.18. 50 percent, 50 one hundredths, 0.50. Six percent. Now, some people want to write that
as 0.6 when they hear it, but think about it. Six percent is six one hundredths. Remember,
the denominator 100 has two zeros in it, which means six one hundredths must have two decimal
places. Point zero six is the correct answer. Okay. Now, if you look at those three answers,
you'll notice something very, very similar. If you, in your mind, put a decimal point behind
the 18, the 50 and the six, because, of course, 18.0 percent or 6.0 percent, and then you look at
the decimal equivalent, 0.18, 0.50, 0.06. You'll notice that to go from percent to a decimal,
we actually move the decimal point two places to the left. Okay. So for example, if I had
0.4 percent, a very small fraction, four tenths of 100. 0.4 is four tenths. Percent means out of
100. We move the decimal point two places to the left. And as you can see that decimal equivalent
to 0.4 percent is 0.004. You also could see on the screen another way of verifying this.
If we write 0.4 percent as a fraction, 0.4 over 100. Now, I know we're not really familiar with
having decimals in our fractions, but that's okay because we want to get rid of the decimal. We can
do that by multiplying top and bottom by 10. If we multiply 0.4 by 10, we get 4.0 or four.
And of course, if you multiply the top of a fraction by 10, we must do the same thing to
the bottom of the fraction. And we get four one thousandths. And of course, four one thousandths
written as a decimal is 0.004. Well, we verified our answer that 0.4 percent as a decimal is 0.004.
Now, what I'd like you to do is take 45.6 percent and write that as a decimal. Stop the tape,
write it as a decimal, come on back and we'll check it out.
Well, 45.6 percent, we see the decimal point between the five and the six,
which means we need to move the decimal point two places to the left. And 45.6 percent becomes
0.456, 456 one thousandths. Okay.
0.23 as a percent. How do we write 0.23 as a percent? Well, again, if we move the decimal
point two places to the left to change a percent to a decimal, changing a decimal to a percent
should be the opposite. I mean, it makes sense. We'd move it two places to the right.
And therefore 0.23 moving decimal point two places to the right gives us 23 percent.
Think about it. 0.23 is 23 hundredths and 23 percent is 23 out of 100. They are equivalent.
0.23 and 23 percent are identical in value. They just look different. They are equivalent fractions.
Okay. Four fifths as a percent. Now we're changing a fraction to a percent.
Well, there's a couple of ways to do that. I recognize that five can be multiplied by 20
to give me 100. If I multiply the denominator of the fraction by 20, I've got to multiply the
numerator of the fraction by 20. Okay. And therefore I get 80 one hundredths. Now I have
a fraction whose denominator is 100. I can immediately change that into a percent. 80
one hundredths, 80 out of 100 equals 80 percent. So changing a fraction to a percent is simple
if the denominator is such that we can multiply it by something and get 100. But of course,
that's not always going to be true. And a method that always works is the next one you see on
your screen. And that is we multiply the fraction by 100 over one. Notice we're back to using our
multiplication of fraction skills. Hopefully you haven't forgotten that. The first thing we do is
we cancel since both numbers are already written as fractions. And we can cancel the five and the
100 by dividing by five. We get one and 20. We multiply across. Four times 20 is 80.
One times one is one. We get 80 over one, which is a whole number. But remember,
we're changing a fraction to a percent. Four fifths is not equal to 80. It's equal to 80 percent.
If you don't believe that, think about 80 percent as a fraction. 80 over 100 reduced it. You get
eight tenths. Reduce it again. You get four fifths. So indeed, four fifths is equal to 80 percent.
But wait, when I threw, there's always an alternative method. If you don't like multiplying
fractions, that's fine. We can do it using decimals. That is, we can write four fifths as a decimal.
And as you can see, we divide five into 4.0. And we get 0.8. And we know how to change a decimal
to a percent. We move the decimal point two places to the right. Okay? So 80 percent. So four fifths
is equal to 80 percent. And actually, we can do that one of three ways. We can recognize that four
fifths is a fraction whose denominator can be changed to 100 by multiplying, multiply top and
bottom by 20. We can do it by taking the fraction and multiplying it by 100 over one, canceling,
multiplying, simplifying our answer and writing it as a percent. Or we can change four fifths to a
decimal by dividing and then change that decimal to a percent by multiplying by 100. I'm sorry,
by moving the decimal point two places to the right. Now, which one of those methods works?
Well, the first method would only work if the denominator was divisible into 100, which is not
always true. The second and third method work all the time. In the second method, you would wind
up in some cases with a percent that has a fraction, perhaps 16 and two thirds percent.
In the decimal method, you would wind up with a percent that has a decimal, perhaps 16.6 bar
percent. So you decide what you like. And some of my students like to use different methods,
depending on what the fraction is. Well, here's your chance to see what method you like. Here are
two problems. Change two thirds to a percent, change three eighths to a percent. And what I'd like you
to do is to use every method. In fact, you might want to use more than one method and then turn
the tape back on when you've got the answer to both questions, both problems, answers as percent,
equivalent percent to the fractions, two thirds and three eighths. Go ahead and stop the tape and
work those problems now. Okay, well, let's see what you did. Let's talk about what we did here,
because really, if you can do this, then you could probably do anything we've talked about in this
lesson. Let's take a look at two thirds. In two thirds, there's a couple of ways we can do this.
First of all, we recognize can three divide into 100. Can three do it? No, of course not.
It certainly cannot divide it to 100, because three times 33 is 99 and three times 34 is 102.
If you know your three times tables, 100 is not there. So we couldn't use the first method. If you
tried that, you failed. But the other two methods work very easily. We can take two thirds and
multiply by 100 over one. If we do that, we cannot cancel. The three and 100 don't cancel.
The two and the one do not. So we simply multiply across. In multiplying across, we get 200 thirds.
That's an improper fraction. We need to divide three into 200, which goes in 66 times with
the remainder of two, or 66 and two thirds percent. If you wrote down 66 and two thirds,
that is not correct, because then you'd be saying that two thirds equals 66 and two thirds.
That's not right. Equals has a very specific meaning in mathematics. 66 and two thirds percent
is the correct answer. If you did this problem with the second method, that is you divide three
into two, 2.0. You recognize, of course, that it's 0.6 bar. We get 0.666, et cetera.
Now we want to change that decimal into a percent. How are we going to do that? Well,
we have to have those two places to move the decimal point. So you'll notice I wrote 0.6 bar
as 0.6666, dot, dot, dot, dot, forever and ever. And now we move that decimal point
two places to the right, and we get 66.6666, forever and ever, percent. But to write that
correctly, write it as 66.6 bar percent. Now, depending which one you like, I personally
prefer 66 and two thirds percent. I think it's easier to understand. Some people still have a
problem with that bar, and I have a problem writing an infinite number of sixes. How about three eighths?
Does eight divide into a hundred? No, it doesn't. You may recognize that eight divides into a thousand,
but that's not going to help us with percent. So if we had some thing called a per mil,
which would be out of a thousand, we could do that. So let's use the fractional method.
And the fractional method, we multiply three eighths times 100 over one. Here we can cancel,
and we wind up with 75 halves, which, of course, improper fraction. We simplify and get 37 and
one half percent. Of course, we can't reduce that. That's fine. 37 and a half percent is
three eighths. If we do it using the decimal method, we divide eight into 3.000. We get 0.375.
We move this a point two places to the right, and we get, what do we get? We get 37.5 percent.
Is 37.5 percent the same as 37 and a half percent? Of course it is, and we're done.
And now we've successfully looked at fractions and decibels and percents,
interchanging them, changing one to the other. In our next lesson, Lucky Lesson 13,
we'll talk about using percents in problems, especially problems that affect our daily life.
We'll see you in Lesson 13.
