This is lesson 14, ratios and proportions.
In this lesson, we'll discuss what a ratio is,
what a proportion is, how to solve proportions,
and as promised in lesson 13,
we'll see how to use proportions
to solve different types of percentage problems.
The first question, of course, to be answered, is what is a ratio?
A ratio is a relationship usually between two numbers.
In other words, a fraction is a ratio,
a decimal is a ratio,
a percent is a ratio,
and now we're going to introduce a fourth way to write a ratio.
In fact, ratio is the key word in the word rational.
A rational number is a number that can be written as a ratio.
Now we see on the screen different types of rational numbers.
Three-fifths, a common fraction,
.07, a decimal,
21%, a percent,
and 8 colon 11,
generally read 8 to 11.
That is one way of writing a ratio.
And typically when we're talking about ratios, we write it that way.
Although, as we'll see,
we'll tend to then translate that into a fraction.
We could have written 8 to 11 as 8-elevenths,
or even converted that to a decimal or a percent.
Okay, so let's take a look at different ways of looking at a ratio.
Here are three-fifths, three to five, and three over three plus five.
Sometimes three-fifths can mean three out of five.
For example, there were five people, three were female,
and therefore three-fifths of the people were female.
That could be written as three to five,
but also that three to five could mean there were three males
and five females.
The ratio of males to females was three to five.
And if you want to know what fraction of the people were male,
we'd say that's three out of three plus five, or three-eighths.
So we have to be very careful.
We use ratios to understand that ratios can have different meanings.
You must understand what the ratio is about.
Well, here's some ratios,
and we are concerned with looking at these ratios
to recognize that if they were written as fractions,
we could talk about a common denominator.
We have 10 sixteenths and we have 10 to 16.
Both are ratios, one written as a fraction, one written as a ratio.
Now, we notice that we can reduce 10 sixteenths to five-eighths.
We also could have multiplied 10 and 16,
let's say by two and gotten 20, 30 seconds.
And what we can do to a fraction, we can do to a ratio.
But instead of multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number,
or in this case dividing the numerator and denominator by the same number,
we multiply or divide the two numbers in the ratio by the same number.
So 10 to 16 can be reduced, if you will, to five to eight.
Given all that, we can begin to talk about this common denominator,
which will come into play in terms of solving proportions.
Well, we see four to six and five to eight.
Are they comparable? Are they equal?
Which one is more?
Well, one way to look at that is if they were fractions,
and we said four sixths and five eighths, which is a greater fraction,
we'd say get a common denominator.
Well, what is a common denominator for sixths and eighths?
The second number in the ratio is like the denominator.
Well, we could use 48, but the lowest common denominator would be 24.
So as you can see, we've changed four to six into 16 to 24
by multiplying both the four and the six by four.
We've changed five to eight into 15 to 24
by multiplying the five and the eight by three.
Now the question is, which is a greater ratio, four to six or five to eight?
Well, we answer that by saying four to six is 16 out of 24.
Five to eight is 15 out of 24, and therefore four to six is the greater ratio.
So we use a common denominator to determine what a ratio, which ratio is larger.
Now, what is the proportion?
And we had to know about ratios to discuss proportions because the proportion
is simply an equation, something with an equal sign it that has two ratios
that should be equal.
Here we have one.
You'll notice something different about this equation.
It has a letter and in fact here in lesson 14, we're beginning to talk about algebra
and you'll see it isn't that difficult.
Very basis of algebra.
And of course, the design of this basic math course is to lead you towards
algebra one and beyond.
The X represents a missing number.
Past we've used a question mark or a blank.
I chose to use an X here.
We need to find what number makes that proportion true so that three over seven
equals X over 35, or as a ratio, three is to seven as what is to 35?
Well, you'll notice that seven can be made into 35 by multiplying by five.
And if we multiply the bottom of a fraction by five, we must multiply the top of the fraction by five.
Three times five is 15 and therefore three over seven is the same as 15 over 35,
which means the letter X represents 15.
Any other number replacing the X would make that equation, that proportion, false.
But three is to seven as 15 is to 35 is a correct proportion and therefore we've solved the proportion.
Now, here's another type of way to solve a proportion.
We have eliminated the colons.
Now we're back to fractions, but we can read it nine-twelfths or nine is to 12 as 33 is to X.
Notice we cannot multiply nine by anything and get 33.
What we can do, of course, is recognize that nine-twelfths can be reduced.
And if we reduce nine-twelfths by dividing top and bottom by three, what we get?
We get three-fourths.
And now three-fourths equals 33 over some unknown number.
We use the X to represent that number.
Well, three times 11 is 33.
If we multiply the top by 11, we must multiply the bottom by 11.
And of course, four times 11 is 44.
So the only number that will make that proportion correct is 44.
Now, sometimes you have a situation where you can multiply a fraction top and bottom to solve a proportion.
Sometimes you can reduce a fraction and then multiply in order to solve a proportion.
But we need to look at situations in which you cannot do that.
So let's go ahead and we'll sit down over here and take a look at various types of problems
that can be solved with the knowledge we already have about fractions and about decimals.
And later on, we'll go ahead and see how we can do percents.
Okay, let's see.
The first problem we look at is 14 over 8 equals X over 12.
Now, this is a problem that we solve by recognizing that we can make 8 and 12 into a common denominator.
And of course, rather than doing 8 times 12, we simply use the lowest common denominator of 24.
We multiply the top and the bottom of 14 eighths by 3 to get 42 over 24.
We multiply the top and the bottom of X over 12 by 2.
And we get 2 times X.
A little dot means times.
And the reason we use a dot is because if we use the symbol, the X symbol that we generally use for multiplication,
we might get confused between that and the X letter.
2 times X over 24.
Well, we know that the denominators are the same.
And if the two fractions are equal, the numerators must be the same.
2 times some number X equals 42.
And of course, 2 times 21 is 42.
So the correct answer is 21.
14 is to 8 as 21 is to 12.
But there's another way to do this problem.
Another way to do this problem.
What we did in the next visual is we said, let's go ahead and get a common denominator by getting 8 times 12.
And we multiply the top and the bottom of the 14 eighths by 12.
That is the denominator of the other fraction.
In the second fraction, X over 12, we multiply top and bottom by 8.
So now we have a common denominator of 8 times 12.
And even if we didn't know what 8 times 12 was, it didn't make a difference.
Because you see 8 times 12 is the same as 12 times 8 is the same as 8 times 12.
So the two denominators are equal.
The original problem being a proportion had an equal sign between the two fractions, which means the fractions are equal.
The denominators are equal.
Well, therefore, the numerators must be equal.
14 times 12 must equal 8 times X.
And all we have to do is say, OK, what's 14 times 12?
And whatever that number is, 8 times something equals that number.
Well, when we have a missing multiplier, we divide.
So simply 14 times 12 divided by 8.
And what we would get when we did that arithmetic would be 21.
The answer we got above.
And you may say, well, G is the first method was so much easier.
Ah, but there is a purpose to this method.
The first method is easier because we had two numbers that we could get a lowest common denominator for.
There are some situations you can't do that and will need to use this.
But this gets to be a little messy when you have to multiply top and bottom.
There's a much easier way to do that.
And we see here that what we've simply done is cross multiply.
We've multiplied the 14 by the 12 and the 8 times the X.
And you'll notice the little lines with the arrowheads show us that we've cross multiplied.
Now, in many books, when you deal with proportions, they introduce cross multiplication as if it was a magic trick.
Here's how to solve this problem.
Cross multiply.
And when I ask students why cross multiplication works, well, because you get the right answer.
No, getting the right answer means it works.
But why does it work?
And they don't know.
But now you know the reason cross multiplication works is because when you cross multiply,
what you are really doing is getting a common denominator.
That is, you're multiplying the numerator of the left fraction by the right fractions denominator,
the numerator of the right fraction by the left fractions denominator.
And actually what you're doing is multiplying top and bottom of the fraction by that number.
You now have the same denominators in equal fractions.
So all you've got to do is set the two numerators equal.
And of course, 14 times 12 is 168.
8 times X is written 8X.
Another thing kind of stealing some thunder from the Algebra 1 tapes is that when you have a number and a letter,
you don't have to put any symbol in between them.
8X means 8 multiplied by X.
So 8 multiplied by X equals 168.
That is a missing multiplier problem.
We divide 168 by 8 and we get 21.
Now again, I realized the first method I showed you was much easier.
But in general, this method always works.
Whatever the denominators are, you cross multiply and then whatever is multiplying by the X,
so the question mark or the red square, whatever you're using to represent the missing number,
you divide that number into the product of the two numbers on the other side and you get your answer.
Okay, so now we understand hopefully how to work proportions.
Perhaps later on we'll have a chance to work some problems.
And of course, you have the workbook to do problems in that would make sure that you understand that.
But now what I'd like to do as promised in lesson 13,
to take a look at how we can use our knowledge of proportions to solve percentage problems.
Here's a typical percentage problem.
We've talked about this before.
Blank percent of blank is blank.
Remember that two of those blanks are filled in and we solve for the missing blank.
Notice is over of.
We know that is over of is the fraction equivalent to the percent.
Remember the percent number that percent symbol in the proportion stands for the percent number is a number over a hundred.
Twelve percent is twelve hundreds.
Forty seven percent is forty seven hundreds.
One hundred and twenty percent is one hundred twenty hundreds.
So we now have an equation involving two ratios.
We have a portion is over of equals percent over one hundred.
All we've got to do now is fill in the two we know and solve for the one we don't know by cross multiply.
Well, here's a typical problem.
Twenty five percent of thirty two is what?
What type of problem is that?
It's a type one problem.
And how we do that?
Well, we would cross multiply or we could recognize that.
Hey, twenty five one hundredths can be reduced one fourth.
And notice I've used question mark here to stand for the missing number.
In this case, the is number could have used X.
Certainly could have used a purple triangle.
Absolutely.
I chose to use question mark just to be different than what we've done earlier.
Did I need to do I need to cross multiply here?
Well, not really, because what I have is blank over 32 or question mark over 32 equals one over four.
I could simply multiply the top and the bottom of the fraction one fourth by eight.
Doing that, I'd get eight over 32 equals one over 32.
And obviously question mark equals eight.
But I could also solve this problem by cross multiplying.
That is, I could take four times question mark equals one times 32.
And since I want to know what times four equals 32, I divide four into 32 and I get eight.
So again, the cross multiplication method always works.
But if you see an easier way to do it, there's nothing wrong with doing it that way.
All right, here's another problem.
What percent of 90 is 15?
What percent of 90 is 15?
Okay.
And how what kind of problem is that?
Well, the percent is missing.
That's a type two problem.
But again, with our new method now, what we say is is over of equals percent over 100.
Notice we have the is we have the of number.
We're missing the percent.
So 15 over 90 equals what over 100.
Once again, we can reduce 15 over 90.
That becomes one sixth.
So now the question is one over six equals what over 100.
Now, I don't care what you try.
You cannot multiply six by a whole number and get 100.
So here's where after we reduced to make the problem easier,
cross multiplication makes it very simple.
We simply multiply the question mark by six and the one by 100.
And we get six times question mark equals one times 100.
Well, one times 100 is 100.
And to get six times what equals 100, we divide 100 by six.
We get 50 thirds, which of course can be simplified to 16 and two thirds.
And since what we're going for is a percent, the answer is 16 and two thirds percent.
Well, obviously we've done a type one problem.
We've done a type two problem.
Now it's time to do a type three problem.
And here it is 30% of what number is 42?
30% of what number is 42?
Well, the first thing we do is write it as a proportion is over of 42 over blank over a question mark equals 30% out of 100.
What do we do?
Well, the first thing we do, of course, is reduce wherever possible.
And 31 hundredths can be reduced to three tenths.
So we have 42 over question mark equals three over 10.
What can we do now?
Simply cross multiply.
42 times 10 equals three times question mark.
Three times what equals 420?
Well, to find it out, we divide 420 by three.
And we do that, we get 140.
140 is the correct answer.
140 is the missing of number.
30% of 140 is 42.
Now you've seen these three ways, the three methods, type one, type two, and type three done using proportions.
I will let you judge when you see a percent problem, whether you'd prefer to use portions or one of the methods seen in lesson 13.
Again, it really doesn't make a difference which method you use provided you get the right answer and you understand what you're doing.
Let me show you another method that I've seen that for some students is very successful in solving percent problems.
And that is using this sort of magic circle.
Notice the circle has been divided into three not equal parts.
The top half has the word is.
The bottom half is divided in half again.
And the left hand side has the percentage symbol.
The right hand side has the word of how do we do this?
Well, what we need to do is to decide which is missing in a type one problem.
The is number is missing.
And as you can see, we sort of cover it up.
I've shaded in the top part of the circle.
And what we have left is percent and odd side by side.
When two numbers are seen side by side, that means we multiply.
And of course, we never multiply by a percent.
We multiply by a decimal.
We change the percent to a decimal and multiply.
So what we have here is a visual cue as to how to solve the percent problem by using this magic circle.
Okay, let's take a look at a type two problem.
We cover up the percent symbol and we see is and underneath it up.
Well, top and bottom means a fraction or a division problem is over.
We want to change it to a percent.
We know how to change a fraction to a percent.
We can multiply it by 101 or remember, we could also divide the bottom into the top,
get a decimal and change the decimal to a percent.
Again, this is all in case you don't like the proportion method.
And some people love it and some people do not like it.
And in this last visual, we see that we have a type three problem.
The of number is missing.
We have is over percent.
We're going to divide.
We would never divide by a percent.
We change the percent to a decimal and we'd divide the decimal into the is number and get our of number.
So again, we could use these circles as visual cues.
Well, what I'd like to do now is do a few problems to ensure that we know what we're doing.
The first problem is a ratio problem.
12 is the 35 as means equals question mark is to 175.
Stop the tape, solve this proportion for the missing number question mark
and come on back when you are convinced you have the right answer.
Okay, what's the first thing I'm going to do?
The first thing I'm going to do is write this as a proportion equation using fractions.
12 over 35 equals question mark unknown number over 175.
Can I reduce 1235?
No, I can't.
Can you?
Well, let's see.
12 is divisible by two, but 35 is not.
12 is divisible by three and 35 is not.
35 is divisible by five and seven.
So what kind of stuck?
So we got to do is cross multiply and probably you had to do some work.
You had to go ahead and multiply 12 times 175.
And I believe that 12 times 175, a little trick way of doing this,
what's 10 times 175?
Well, multiplying by 10, we just simply put a zero on the end.
And now we have to do two times 175 and that's 350.
And what we have, of course, is 2100.
So it's another way of quick multiplying without actually getting out the multiplication process.
And of course, 35 times question mark is just 35 times question mark.
And now what we have to do, we have to divide 35 into 2110.
35 into 2100.
I said 110.
I meant 2100.
We divided 2110.
We get the wrong answer.
Well, 35 does not go into 21.
It does go into 210.
And it does go in exactly six times.
And of course, six times 35 is 210.
We cannot leave a blank space.
We bring down the zero.
35 goes into zero, zero times.
And our answer is 60.
That is 12 over 35 equals 60 over 175.
Now, if you were sharp and you knew your 35 times tables,
you would recognize that 5 times 35 is 175.
And you could use that to solve this proportion.
But I believe that the cross multiplication method is the method that should be used.
You might have said, well, I can cancel 35 and 175.
You're wrong.
The only way to do this problem successfully is to cross multiply.
And of course, it involved some basic multiplication and basic division using whole numbers.
And the idea was to get a chance for you to review and ensure that you knew and remember
how to multiply and divide whole numbers.
Again, this series is cumulative.
Everything we learned early will use later on in the tapes.
Let's take a look at a second problem.
Okay, the second problem, 18% of 400 is what?
18% of 400 is what?
And what I'd like you to do is stop the tape and work this problem any way you'd like.
And then we'll come back.
We'll take a look at working it a number of different ways.
Stop the tape, work the problem, and come back when you have an answer.
Okay, one way to do it is using the first method we saw in lesson 13.
It's a type one problem.
We change the percent to a decimal.
18% becomes 0.18.
Of means times, and we multiply that by 400 is equals.
Well, let's see now.
0.18 times 400 gives us 72.
You don't believe it?
Hopefully you multiply that.
It's not something you need to do on a calculator.
That certainly is an easy enough multiplication.
So what we have is 72.
18% of 400 is 72, which, of course, is a correct answer.
What if we hadn't remembered what to do?
Well, again, we have our circle.
And what would have had, of course, is, percent, and off.
And of course, we cover up the is number.
Let's put the marker above it.
And what we have is percent times off, which is exactly what we did.
We multiplied 18% by 400.
0.18 times 400.
Okay, let's go ahead and see how we solve this using our proportion method.
So go ahead and erase this same problem here.
And now we're going to use proportion method to see that we get the same answer.
72.
And remember the proportion method says is over of will is is question mark or X
or purple triangle of is 400 equals the percent number over 100.
Now, what would I do first here?
Well, the first thing I would do is recognize very quickly that I don't need
to cross multiply if I don't want.
I could simply recognize it four times a hundred is 400.
And therefore four times 18 is 72.
If I didn't recognize that, I could certainly reduce 18.
One hundredths and make it nine fiftieths multiplying 50 times question mark equals
nine times four hundred nine times four is 36.
So nine times four hundred is 3600.
What times 50 is 3600 divide 50 into 3600.
And what I get is 72.
And how you do this problem, you get 72.
So hopefully we've seen a number of different ways in which you can successfully obtain
the correct answer to a percentage problem using proportions.
And proportions are simply obtained by setting two ratios equal.
And a ratio is a relationship between two numbers.
We can now write that relationship in one of four ways.
As a fraction, as a decimal, as a percent or as a ratio using a colon.
In our next lesson, we're going to discover the world of exponents
and find out about the order of operations.
It sounds something out of a military textbook, but it really is quite important
if we're going to use mathematics in real world settings in which we have more than one thing to do.
See you in the next lesson.
