Welcome to Lesson 15.
In Lesson 15, we are going to discuss exponents and begin to discuss the order of operations.
What is an exponent?
Well, if you recall, we talked about multiplication.
We said that actually human beings created multiplication.
That multiplication was repeated addition, and someone way back in history discovered
that we could multiply instead of adding numbers over and over again.
Well, the same thing happened when we started multiplying numbers repeatedly.
That is 3 times 3 times 3 or 17 times 17 times 17 times 17 times 17.
And I really don't know who decided that we needed to have a way to show multiplication
that was repeated.
And they created, or this person created, the exponent.
As you see, we have 3 times 3 times 3 times 3 times 3.
We have 5 3's that are multiplied.
And we write that as 3 to the 5th, 3 to the 5th power, power is a word we use for exponent.
Now that power tells us that we're multiplying 5 3's.
So 3 to the 5th literally means 3 times 3 times 3 times 3 times 3 times 3.
Now the fact that that answer that 3 to the 5th is 243 is simply a way of giving a numerical
value to 3 to the 5th.
We're considering primarily in what it means.
Later on in this lesson, we'll use numbers in exponential form to actually do arithmetic.
And then finally, we'll go ahead and take a look at the beginning of order of operations.
Very important notion.
We start applying mathematics to complex problems.
We look here, we see 5 to the 4th, 5 to the 4th, where the 5 is the base and the 4 is
the exponent or the power.
We could say 5 to the 4th, 5 with an exponent of 4 or 5 to the 4th power.
What is 5 to the 4th power?
It is 5 times 5 times 5 times 5.
Now here we have a picture of a square.
This square is a square that has a side of 5 meters.
That is, each of its 4 sides is 5 meters long.
If I wanted to find the area of the square, and we'll discuss the area of various geometric
figures later on, but I think at this point in time, you know that to find the area, we
multiply 5 times 5, and we get 25 square meters.
This led to a very interesting terminology.
We square the 5 to find the area of the square.
That is, the second power became known as the square.
When we talk about 7 squared, what we mean is 7 to the second power, or 7 times 7.
8 squared is 8 to the second power.
That is, 8 with an exponent of 2, which means 8 times 8, which is 64.
Notice that only certain numbers can be obtained by squaring a number.
Zero squared is zero.
One squared is one.
And thus, we have a series of numbers called the square numbers, 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36.
And the dot, dot, dot means, as always, it goes on forever.
There's no end to the number of square numbers.
But again, not all numbers are square.
If we wanted to find the volume of a cube, and that cube having a side of 4, that is,
all the edges of the cube were 4 centimeters.
We would multiply 4 times 4 times 4 and get 64 cubic centimeters, the volume of that cube.
Notice what we've done is we've multiplied 4 times 4 times 4, that is, 4 to the third
power.
We've cubed the 4.
So the third power became known as the cube.
And therefore, 7 to the third power is more commonly said to be 7 cubed.
Of course, if there are square numbers, there are also cubic numbers.
Those are numbers obtained by taking a number and raising it to the third power.
So 0 cubed is 0, 1 cubed is 1, 2 cubed is 8, and then we have 27, 64, 125, 216, and so
on and so forth.
I believe later on in this tape series, in a lesson, we will look at the cubes of numbers
and find something very interesting about them.
But right now, we're just dealing with terminology, the idea that if you raise a number to the
third power, you are cubing it.
Nothing special, it's simply an easier way to multiply a number repeatedly.
But there are some very interesting things that happen when you investigate the powers
of the simple numbers.
On your screen, you see the powers of 2 and the powers of 8.
That is, 2 squared is 4, 2 cubed is 8, 2 to the fourth power is 16, and so forth.
Up to 256, which of course is 2 to the eighth power.
I say, of course, because I know.
Then we have the powers of 8, 8 squared is 64, 8 cubed is 512, and so on and so forth.
We have up to 262,144.
What you first notice is the powers of 8 get bigger a lot quicker than the powers of 2.
One of the reasons I believe they call the exponent a power, it's a very powerful number.
As we raise larger and larger numbers to powers, the numbers get huge.
But there's something more important we see here.
There's a pattern, and I'm a strong believer in pattern recognition.
That's one way to solve problems.
You'll notice, if you look at the last digit, the last digit in the powers of 2, you'll
see 2486, 2486.
What number is missing?
Why is there number missing?
Well, they're all even numbers.
There's some even digit that's missing, 2486.
Zero is missing.
Why is there no zero?
Because numbers that end in zero are divisible by five.
We learned that quite a while ago.
And of course, we couldn't possibly get a five in there because all these numbers are
obtained by multiplying 2s.
They're powers of 2.
But you'll notice in the 8, there's a similar pattern, 8, 4, 2, 6, 8, 4, 2, 6, and so on
and so forth.
It is the exact same pattern only it's backwards.
In fact, if you start at 128 in the powers of 2 and go backwards, 128, 64, 32, you have
8, 4, 2, 6, 8, 4, 2.
It's interesting.
Look at the powers of 3 and 7.
Same idea.
Notice the powers of 7 grow much quickly.
And by the end of the powers we've listed there, we have a number that's greater than
800,000.
But notice again, there's a pattern to the endings.
For the powers of 3, we have 3, 9, 7, 1, 3, 9, 7, 1.
Notice they're all odd, powers of 3 are all odd.
And there is an odd digit that's missing, the 5.
Why is the 5 missing?
Because again, numbers that end in 5 must be divisible by 5.
And no power of 3 can be divisible by 5.
The only numbers that are used to create powers of 3 are 3s.
3 times 3, 3 times 3 times 3, et cetera.
And again, you'll notice that the powers of 7 are quite similar.
And just like the powers of 2 and 8, the powers of 7 have the opposite pattern, where 3 goes
3, 9, 7, 1, 3, 9, 7, 1.
If you start at the 823,543 in the powers of 7, which is, of course, ends in 3, and go
to the left.
That is, go to the smaller numbers, you get 3, 9, 7, 1, 3, 9, 7.
The exact same pattern in the opposite direction.
It's interesting also, powers of 6 always end in 6.
Powers of 5 always end in 5.
Powers of 4 are quite simple to find.
They're every other number in the powers of 2.
That is 4, 16, 64.
And powers of 9 are every other number in the powers of 3, 9, 81, 7, 29, et cetera.
So there's a lot of interesting patterns that are to be found when you look at powers of
the various digits.
But there's something else that's quite interesting.
That is powers of 10.
Look at the powers of 10.
10 to the 1 is 10.
10 squared, 10 times 10, is 100.
10 cubed is 1,000.
10 to the 4th is 10,000.
10 to the 5th is 100,000, et cetera.
But what I want you to see here are two facts.
The first fact is that as we proceed with the higher powers of 10, we can see that the
power of 10 tells us how many zeros are in that number.
10 to the 1 has 1, 0.
10 to the 2, 2, 0s.
10 to the 3, 3 zeros.
10 to the 4, 4 zeros, et cetera.
If I said to you what is 10 to the 50th look like, 1 with 50 zeros after it.
What's its name?
You can look that up in a book.
But the fact is we know what it looks like.
But also we notice when we look at these numbers, these are very familiar numbers.
10, 100, 1,000, 10,000, 100,000, these are all place values.
Now if they're place values, there's a place value missing.
What common place value is not seen in this vision?
We see 10, we see 100, we see 1,000, 10,000, 100,000, we don't see 1.
Now what I'd like you to do now is stop the tape and using the notion that the power of
10 tells us how many zeros are in the number and that powers of 10 are the place values
right down the power of 10 that's 1.
Stop the tape and come back when you're ready.
I think you find that the number 1 has no zeros in it, just 1.
And therefore 10 to the 0 power is 1.
Now that makes no sense to a lot of people.
And later on in this lesson, we'll see why it's true.
And to do that, we need to look at the various arithmetic operations using numbers in exponential
form.
So I'm going to walk over to the desk and we'll take a look at a number of problems
that hopefully will prepare us to do exactly what we're talking about.
Okay.
The first thing you want to look at is multiplying numbers in exponential form.
And what you see is 8 to the 3rd times 8 to the 2nd.
Well, 8 to the 3rd is 8 times 8 times 8, 8 to the 2nd is 8 times 8.
So what we have are 5 8's multiplied.
And the way to write that is 8 to the 5th.
Now what I'd like you to do is looking at that and try to generalize what the process
is that we will do anytime we have numbers multiplied that are in exponential form.
So stop the tape and see if you can come up with a general rule.
Well, it appears that the power tells us how many of the base we have.
So therefore 8 to the 3rd times 8 to the 2nd is 8 to the 5th.
We added the powers, but this is only true if the bases are the same.
Had the base of one been 8 and the other been 7, if we had 8 to the 3rd times 7 to the 2nd,
we could not have combined them, only when the bases are the same.
So if we're multiplying numbers in exponential form and the bases are the same, we keep the
base and we add the powers.
Not because it's a magic trick, not because it's a rule that came down from the mountain
top because we can see that it's true.
How about dividing?
Here we have 6 to the 7th divided by 6 to the 3rd.
And you'll notice we've written 7 6's multiplied in the numerator, 3 6's multiplied in the
denominator.
And like any good person who can operate with fractions, we have canceled what we could.
We've divided by 6 times 6 times 6.
In the denominator, we now have 1.
In the numerator, we have 4 6's multiplied.
That is 6 to the 4th.
Another way of looking at can be seen in the next visual.
We had 7 6's.
We canceled out 3 6's.
It left us with 4 6's multiplied, which is 6 to the 4th.
Again, notice the bases were the same.
What I'd like you to do is stop the tape and write down a rule that when you're dividing
two numbers in exponential form and the bases are the same, what should you do?
What you should do, of course, is subtract.
And the reason, again, is not magic, not because it's a rule, because in actuality,
the power in the denominator, the power in the dividing number, is going to cancel out
that many in the first number.
For example, we had the 6 to the 7th divided by 6 to the 3rd.
The 3 6's in the denominator canceled out 3 of the 6's in the 6 to the 7th, leaving
us with 6 to the 4th.
Next, we see 4 to the 5th to the 3rd.
This is raising a base to a power to a power.
What does it mean?
Well, it means 4 to the 5th, which, of course, is 5 4's multiplied, times 4 to the 5th,
times 4 to the 5th.
How many 4's do we have?
We have 5 and 5 more, and 5 more.
That's 15 4's multiplied.
That's 4 to the 15.
OK, if that makes sense as it should, I want you to stop the tape and write down a rule
for raising a base to a power to a power.
Do that now, please.
Well, the rule is, when you have a base to a power to a power, multiply the powers keeping
the base.
And the reason is very clear when you see what the powers mean as we saw in the demonstration
of what 4 to the 5th to the 3rd is.
Now it's time to talk about the zero power.
Now if 8 to the 1 is 8, and 8 to the 2 is 8 times 8, to many people it makes sense that
8 to the 0 is 0.
We already have seen with 10 to the 0, it appears to be 1.
Now let's ensure that we understand that it is 1.
This next visual shows us a multiplication and a division problem.
8 to the 3rd times 8 to the 0.
The bases are the same.
We keep the base and add the powers.
8 to the 3rd.
But wait a second.
We multiply 8 to the 3rd by a number, 8 to the 0, and got 8 to the 3rd.
There is only one number in our number system that allows us to multiply and get the same
answer, and that number is 1.
So it appears that 8 to the 0 is 1.
The second problem we have is 6 to the 5th divided by 6 to the 5th.
And we get 6 to the 0 because the bases are the same with dividing.
We subtract the powers.
But wait a second.
What do I get when I divide a number by itself?
I get 6 to the 5th divided by 6 to the 5th is an example of dividing a number by itself.
I get 1, which means 6 to the 0 must be 1.
So we've seen that 10 to the 0 is 1.
8 to the 0 is 1.
6 to the 0 is 1.
Three different examples.
Now they're all even numbers, but OK, let's try 5 to the 0.
5 to the 0 times 5 to the 4th is 5 to the 4th.
4 plus 0 is 4.
So 5 to the 0 must also be 1.
And in fact, although it makes no intuitive sense, that is at first glance, you say, well,
it's got to be 0.
But any number, any base to the 0 power is 1.
And that's a fact that you need to remember.
OK.
The other thing about it is that 1 has no zeros in it, and therefore 10 to the 0 is
1, since the first place value, a power of 10 is the 1's place.
Now it's time to talk about order of operations.
Before we even define what that means, I'd like you to do a very simple two-step problem
for me.
On your screen, you see 6 plus 4 times 3.
I want you to stop and come up with an answer.
That's pretty simple.
Three very small numbers.
We don't know how to add and multiply whole numbers.
So stop the tape and come up with the answer to 6 plus 4 times 3.
Now, you may have gotten one answer.
You may have said, well, I think there are two answers.
Or you may have said, I'm not sure how to do this.
Well, many years ago, and again, I'm on force.
You do not know which person history first came up with this idea.
The question was asked, how do you do this problem?
Well, if you're going left to right, you could do 6 plus 4, which is 10.
And 10 times 3 is 30.
But someone else said, wait, wait, wait a second.
Let's multiply it first.
4 times 3 is 12.
And 6 plus 12 is 18.
So the question is, which way is right?
And the actual answer is neither way is right.
But if neither way is right, and neither way, therefore, is wrong, I
would hate to be building a bridge and in the computations involved in building
that bridge, we had 6 plus 4 times 3.
And the person who was building the bridge from the East Bank said 6 plus 4
times 3 is 30.
And the person who was building the bridge from the West Bank said 6 plus 4
times 3 is 18.
It's possible that the bridge would not meet.
And that would be a really silly bridge to have a bridge that didn't meet in the
middle of the river.
We no purpose to use the bridge unless you wanted to drive your car.
So someone came along and said, hey, there's got to make sense out of this.
And what they said, look, it's very simple.
Multiplication and division are a much higher level of mathematics than adding
or subtracting.
Multiplication and division really are repeated addition and subtraction.
And while addition and subtraction are counting.
So since multiplication and division are a higher order of multiplication,
addition and division are a higher order, let's do them first.
And we have what's called the order of operations.
And we see on the screen M, D, A, S.
And notice the D and the A are separated.
That says multiply and divide before you add and subtract.
That doesn't mean multiply before you divide or add before you subtract.
The M and D go together because dividing by a number is the same as
multiplying by its reciprocal.
We know that.
And it turns out adding and subtracting are really the same thing.
It just simply says, you know, any kind of problem you're doing,
if you have a number of things to do, do all the multiplications and
divisions before you add and subtract.
So wait a second.
What if I wanted to add or subtract before I did some multiplications and
divisions?
Am I lost?
Can I have to go to another number system?
Indeed not.
What you would have to do is use parentheses.
The next slide shows us that we're going to have PMDAS.
The P is for parentheses.
If I want to add or subtract before I multiply or divide,
put that addition or subtraction in parentheses.
Simple enough.
Now, what if I had powers or exponents involved?
Well, we see PEMDAS.
We use exponents before we multiply or divide, because the exponent is a
higher order of operation.
Because exponentiation or using exponents is really repeated multiplication.
So just as multiplication was a higher order operation in addition,
because repeated addition is multiplication, exponent is a higher
order of operation in multiplication.
So we parenthesize any time we want to break the order.
That is, we use parentheses if we want to multiply before we're doing
exponents or we want to add before we're doing division, et cetera.
Some people to help us remember PEMDAS have come up with a little saying,
please excuse my dear Aunt Sally.
Now, if you don't have an Aunt Sally, perhaps you have an Aunt Sharon,
an Aunt Shirley, an Aunt Sarah, an Aunt Sybil, if you spelled with an S,
or some Aunt who has a name that begins with S.
But that is nothing to worry about, because why would you get excused
from anything?
But the only thing is to remember PEMDAS.
And if please excuse my dear Aunt Sally, helps, that's fine.
But again, remember what it means is we'll use parentheses and do parentheses
first, then we'll use exponentiation followed by multiplication and division,
addition and subtraction.
You might ask what happens if you have two or three adding or subtracting
problems in a row or two or three modifications or divisions in a row.
Then you go left to right.
Here is a simple problem, 18 minus 2 times 3 plus 4.
I'd like you to stop the tape and use PEMDAS order of operations
to compute the final answer to this multi-step problem.
In looking at this problem, we see we have a subtraction, a multiplication,
and an addition problem.
What do we do first?
Well, there are no parentheses.
There's no exponents, so we multiply.
Two times 3 is 6.
And notice I've done one thing at a time.
I have 18 minus 6 plus 4.
Now I have additions of subtractions.
I don't add before I subtract.
If I did that, I'd get the wrong answer.
What I do is I go from left to right.
18 minus 6 is 12.
12 plus 4 is 16.
OK?
Let's look at another problem.
This problem has parentheses.
Parentheses 5 times 2 plus 6.
Close parentheses divided by 4.
Again, fairly simple numbers.
But let's see if you can do it.
Stop the tape, work this problem using the correct order of operations,
and come back when you're ready with an answer.
OK, we have parentheses.
We go inside the parentheses first before we divide.
But inside the parentheses, there are two operations.
Multiplication and addition.
Which one do we do first?
If you said multiply, you're right.
But the question now is, why do we multiply?
Because it's on the left?
No, because we always multiply before we add,
unless the addition is in parentheses itself.
So 5 times 2 is 10.
And notice, all I did was that one step, 10 plus 6, still in parentheses,
is the next line divided by 4.
What do I do now?
Do I divide before I add?
Absolutely not, because the addition is in parentheses.
I simply add 10 plus 6 to get 16.
And 16 divided by 4 is 4.
OK, assuming you can do those problems,
let's try one that's a little bit more involved.
How about this one?
How about 2 plus 3 to the second times 4?
2 plus 3 to the second times 4.
Stop the tape and come on back when
you have a solution to this problem.
Well, the first thing I do is recognize there are no parentheses,
but there is an exponent, 3 to the second.
So that's what I do first.
I leave the 2 alone.
I leave the plus alone.
3 to the second is 9 times 4.
What do I do next?
Well, multiply before I add, so I must multiply 9 times 4.
So 2 plus 36, and of course, 2 plus 36 equals 38.
Let's try one more.
How about, oh, let's see, 4 times 2 plus 1 in parentheses,
second power minus 3.
Go ahead and do that, and come on back when
you have the correct answer.
Now, I do have a power in this problem.
I have a power in this problem, but I don't have a power in this
problem.
The second power, but it's outside the parentheses.
And parentheses always say, do me first.
So we'll enter the parentheses, and I multiply before I add 8 plus 1
to the second power minus 3.
Notice, I only did one operation at a time.
Now I add, because it's in parentheses, 8 plus 1 is 9.
9 to the second power minus 3.
9 to the second, of course, is 81.
81 minus 3, I believe, is 78.
So our answer here is 78.
Let's try one more.
We have time for one more problem before it's time to end the lesson.
How about 6 plus 2 divided by, oh, let's see, 8 plus 1.
Let's do that problem and return to the tape when you have an answer.
Well, see now, what are we going to do first?
We're going to work in the parentheses first.
Which parentheses?
Actually, since the parentheses are separated, we can work in the two
parentheses at the same time.
That's kind of nice.
6 plus 2 is the first one.
We can work in the two parentheses at the same time.
That's kind of nice.
6 plus 2 is 8.
Actually, I wrote a parentheses.
We don't need a parentheses any longer there.
We're just going to erase that.
Air's 8 divided by, and 5 minus 1 is 4.
And now we have the very simple problem of 8 divided by 4, which, of course,
that is equal to 2.
So assuming we did all those problems correctly, we should have a real good
feeling for what we're doing with order of operations.
And let's review what we've learned in this lesson.
What we've seen is we've learned about these things called exponents.
That is, powers, which is a simple way to show repeated multiplication.
We've seen how to multiply numbers in exponential form by adding the powers.
We've seen how to divide numbers in exponential form by subtracting the powers.
We've seen how to raise a number to a power to a power by multiplying the two powers.
We've also seen a number of different ways that any number, any base raised to
the zero power is 1.
And then we've looked at the order of operations.
We've learned a rule, a rule that really is quite arbitrary in the terms of
if someone decided this is how we're going to do things.
But the arbitrary nature is based on the order.
That addition and subtraction was the earliest type of arithmetic.
Then came multiplication division, and then came powers.
So we have P-E-M-D-A-S.
We do parentheses first.
We do exponents.
Then we multiply and divide, and we add and subtract.
And if we're multiplying and dividing a bunch of numbers or adding and subtracting
a bunch of numbers in a row, we go left to right.
And our next lesson, we'll take a look at a new type of number, maybe new to you, called
the integer.
That is positive and negative numbers, and we'll see how to add and subtract them.
We'll see you in adding and subtracting integers in our next lesson.
