This is Lesson 21, Graphing in the Coordinate Plane.
I should mention even before we start that one necessary piece of material you'll need
for this lesson is some graph paper.
If you don't have it, you might want to skip this lesson, go on to Lesson 22 and come back
when you've gotten some graph paper or if you're bold and adventurous, you might want
to do some of the graphing we do in this lesson on regular paper.
What is the coordinate plane?
The coordinate plane actually was the ingenious invention of René Descartes, a French mathematician
who lived in the 17th century and it allows us to graph equations and since equations
as we'll see are used as models, it allows us to visually see what's happening in a
particular situation.
Before we get to the idea of graphs as models, we need to find out what the coordinate plane
is about, how we graph points, how we turn points into lines and the meaning of the various
numbers in a particular equation.
First of all, what is the rationale and what was the rationale for René Descartes to create
what's called the Cartesian plane or graph paper, is named the Cartesian plane of course
in his honor.
Well, it's very similar to latitude and longitude.
Every point on the earth has a unique latitude and longitude.
It's north or south latitude, east and west longitude and obviously there's a point someplace
that's zero, zero.
That point is on the equator since it has zero latitude and on the Greenwich meridian since
it has zero longitude and from that point we can then get the latitude and longitude
of any point on the face of the earth.
If I give you a specific latitude and longitude, you can go to a map and determine exactly
where that point is.
We transfer that idea to graph paper where each point on the plane has a unique pair
of numbers similar to latitude and longitude and those numbers indicate a location when
you start at what's called the origin where the two axes, the two lines that we use to
graph our points start.
We'll see what that means as we get to some visuals in a moment.
First of all, let's start off with an application that is quite, quite important.
Perhaps you're vacationing in Europe and you wake up in the morning the first day you're
there and you hear that the temperature is 30 degrees.
You're really concerned about this because it's the middle of the summertime.
You're on vacation.
You would plan to go to the beach and the temperature is 30 degrees and you rush down
to the concierge in the hotel lobby and you say, what's going on?
Why is it so cold here?
And the concierge gives you a quizzical look.
It's a beautiful day.
It's been a great day to go to the beach and you really puzzle down yourself.
And the reason, of course, is that you were thinking they were talking about degrees Fahrenheit,
which is the temperature we use in the United States.
But of course, the radio was using degrees Celsius and 30 degrees Celsius is a very pleasant
summer temperature.
Let's look at a chart, a chart comparing temperatures in Celsius and Fahrenheit.
And you'll notice we have five different Celsius temperatures, zero, 10, 20, 30 and 40.
In addition, we have matched to those temperatures, the temperatures equivalent in Fahrenheit,
32, 50, 68, 86 and 104.
Now we can take this and just like we have latitude and longitude, we can take the Celsius
and Fahrenheit and graph points where each point is defined by the two numbers, the Celsius
temperature and the Fahrenheit temperature.
And here's a picture of that graph.
The horizontal line segment or axis is marked C for Celsius and it's marked off zero, 10,
20, 30, 40.
The vertical axis is marked F for Fahrenheit and it starts at 20 and goes up to 100.
And we have plotted points.
There are five points, one for each pair of temperatures.
So for example, the first point is lined up with a zero on the Celsius axis and is lined
up with 32 on the Fahrenheit axis.
What do you notice about these points?
Well, you should notice that the points appeared to be lined up and indeed we can draw a line
through those points as we have now done.
And that line contains many other additional points and every other point on that line
will be defined by two numbers.
One number will be the Celsius temperature and the other number will be the equivalent
Fahrenheit temperature, which means now instead of having just five relationships, five points,
five pairs of numbers, we can find the Fahrenheit temperature for any Celsius temperature that's
on this graph.
Similarly, we can reverse the process and given a Fahrenheit temperature, we can start
on the vertical axis, go to the line and come down to the Celsius axis and find the equivalent
Celsius axis.
Obviously, a European would have to do that visiting this country and listening to the
temperature outside is 86 degrees.
And if that person thought 86 degrees was in Celsius, they would of course hide in the
refrigerator because 86 degrees Celsius is more than uncomfortable.
Now, the key thing, I'm mentioning these pairs of numbers.
The key thing in plotting points is the notion of the ordered pair.
It's called an ordered pair because there's order.
The first number is the location on the horizontal axis, like we had Celsius.
The second number, which is separated from the first number by a comma, is the point
on the vertical axis.
In our first example, that was the Fahrenheit.
And the two numbers with the comma in between are enclosed in parentheses.
So it's a pair of numbers with a given order.
An ordered pair, usually the first number is called the X number.
The second number is called the Y number.
And in many cases, that X number is the input.
The Y number is the output.
Notice that horizontal, vertical, X, Y, input, output are all in alphabetical order.
The one that comes first alphabetically is the one that comes first.
X comes before Y, horizontal comes before vertical, input comes before output.
Well now that we've looked at an idea of what a graph can do for us, and we've looked at
the notion of ordered pairs, let's see how to plot some ordered pairs.
Here's our first point.
You'll notice the point is labeled four comma two.
That's the ordered pair, and it's determined because the X axis, we have the point at four,
which of course is four away from the point where the X and Y axis cross by that point
is called the origin, where the X and Y axis cross, it's ordered pair, of course, to be
zero, zero.
So X axis were four at the Y axis vertical, we're at two, and therefore the point is four
over, and two up, or four comma two.
The next point is labeled negative one comma three.
Negative one means on the X axis, we go one to the left.
Negative being left on the X axis, positive being right.
And three up, since the Y is still positive.
And that point is one to the left, and three up.
What I'd like you to do now is if you have a piece of graph paper, or possibly even on
a regular piece of paper, draw your two axes, your X and Y axes, and plot the point negative
three, negative two.
And after you've plotted that point, come on back and we'll take a look at it.
Here's the point negative three, negative two.
Since both are negative, X is negative, left three, Y is negative, down two.
So three to the left and down two, and our point negative three, negative two is plotted.
Our last point we're going to look at is five negative three.
Five negative three, the X is positive, so it's to the right.
The Y is negative, so it's down.
And notice the point five negative three is five to the right, and three down.
We noticed we looked at the temperature chart graph.
We saw that we could draw a line through these points.
And when we draw a line, it has a very specific equation.
Now, a lot of the things we'll be doing in this lesson are really a beginning of some
things we talk about in Algebra 1.
And of course, part of the rationale for this tape series is to prepare you for an Algebra
1 type class.
So if some of the things seem a little complex at first, that's okay.
Just introduction.
Just go with the flow, as they say.
And I think you'll find that at least you'll see a rationale for going into Algebra 1.
Well, the equation that typically gives us a straight line is Y equals AX plus B.
Now, in some books, the A is an M, and we'll worry about that when you get to Algebra 1
class.
Right now, we'll just use AX plus B. Recall from earlier statements that in Algebra, we
have a number and a letter or two letters without a symbol like plus or minus in between
them.
It means to multiply.
So we're going to take some number and plug it in for A and then multiply it by whatever
number it stands for X and then add B. And now what we want to do is we want to look
at some very specific examples of equations and look at the points and see that the points
form a line and draw the line.
So our first equation is Y equals 2X plus 3.
And you'll notice on the screen, we have a roster of points, a roster of ordered pairs.
But some of the values for Y are missing.
We have X values from negative 3 to 3, all the integers from negative 3 to 3.
And for some of the X values, we have gotten the Y value.
When X is negative 3, Y is negative 3.
And that's because the equation 2 times X plus 3, 2 times negative 3 is negative 6 plus
3 is negative 3.
When X is negative 1, 2 times negative 1 plus 3 is positive 1, and the Y is 1.
When X is 0, 2 times 0 is 0, plus 3 is 3.
And when X is 2, 2 times 2 is 4, plus 3 is 7.
What I would like you to do after you've written down this table is to fill in the missing
values of Y by taking the values of X, plugging them into the equation, multiplying by 2,
adding 3, and coming up with the value of Y.
Do that now, please.
Here you can see the values you should have obtained.
For X equals negative 2, the Y is negative 1.
For X equals 1, the Y is 5.
For X equals 3, the Y is 9.
If we plot these points, as we see here, they line up, and we can draw that line.
And that line is a representation of the equation Y equals 2X plus 3.
And therefore, we have a visual or geometric model of this abstract equation Y equals 2X
plus 3.
Now, I want you to take a look at that line because we're looking at lines of similar
equations, and if we look at all the various lines and equations, we'll come back and try
to see if we can make sense out of what A and B do for a particular equation in terms
of what the line appears to look like.
The next equation is Y equals 2X minus 3.
And what I'd like you to do is to actually write down the integers negative 3 through
3 in a table for X, and then using Y equals 2 times X minus 3, find the values of Y, plot
those points on a piece of graph paper using the coordinate plane.
Those points should line up, and I want you to draw the line.
And when you've done that, come on back and we'll take a look at what your line should
look like.
Here's what your line should look like.
Y equals 2X minus 3, you'll notice goes through the Y axis, that is, when X is 0, at Y is
negative 3.
That makes a whole lot of sense since 2 times 0 is 0, minus 3 is negative 3.
If your points are different, if your line, your points did not line up, and therefore
you couldn't draw a line, go back and try it again.
But you'll notice that all you've got to do is multiply by 2, each X value, and in subtract
3, the points will line up and you should be able to draw the line.
Our next equation is Y equals minus 2X plus 3.
Y equals minus 2X plus 3.
And what I'd like you to do is exactly the same thing.
I would like you to stop the tape, write down the equation first, of course, Y equals minus
2X plus 3, take the values of X from negative 3 to positive 3, put them at a table, plug
them in one at a time into the equation, come up with the values of Y associated with each
of those X's, plot the points, they should line up and draw the line.
When you've done that, come on back and we'll take a look at the line for Y equals negative
2X plus 3.
Notice this line appears quite different than the first two.
The first two, as it went from left to right, were rising.
This line, as we go from left to right, is falling.
And it does go through the Y axis at 3.
And the reason, of course, is when X is 0, negative 2 times 0 is 0 plus 3 is 3.
The last equation that we'd like to look at is Y equals negative 2X minus 3.
And I want you to do the exact same thing.
Take the integers negative 3 to positive 3, put them at a table, plug the numbers into
the equation, get the points, plot the points and draw the line.
Do that now, please.
Here is our last graph.
Y equals negative 2X minus 3.
Notice like the previous graph, as you go from left to right, it appears to go down.
But this graph goes through the Y axis at negative 3.
So looking at Y equals 2X plus 3, we see that when A was positive and B was positive,
that is, remember, the equation was Y equals AX plus B.
A was 2, B was 3, both positive numbers.
The line goes up, called the slope.
The slope is positive.
It goes up as you go from left to right, and it crosses the Y axis at 3.
In the second graph, Y equals 2X minus 3, the line was still sloping up, but now it
went through the Y axis at negative 3.
When A as was negative and B was positive, Y equals negative 2X plus 3, the line was
sloping down.
The line actually decreased as you went from left to right, and it went through the Y axis
at 3.
The final of the four graphs, Y equals negative 2X minus 3, where both A and B were negative,
the slope was down, and the line went through the Y axis at negative 3.
What it appears to me, and hopefully appears to you, is that the sign of the number in
front of the A determines whether the line goes up or down, and the sign of the number
in front of the B determines whether the line goes through the Y axis above or below the
X axis.
Further investigation of this will be left to Algebra 1.
I just wanted to introduce you to notion of graphing points and lines in the Cartesian
plane or on graph paper, because what I want to do now is show you a use, actually two
uses, of the points plotted and lines graphed on the Cartesian plane or on graph paper.
We're going to do this using the TI-83 graphing calculator.
This is not a calculator I would assume one would use for a class such as this, a arithmetic
pre-Algebra kind of class.
I'm not going to show you the buttons I'm pushing or even talk about how I do what you'll
see on the screen.
I'm using the calculator simply to demonstrate the power of the graph and the graph of a
line and plotting points and using the graph of a line to build a model to predict or evaluate
real world circumstances.
And the first thing we're going to look at has to do with the 1988-89 Chicago Bulls.
As well known, Chicago Bulls had become an elite basketball team, probably one of the
best teams there has been in the NBA.
If you don't follow basketball, you still probably have heard of Chicago Bulls and Michael
Jordan.
1988-89 was before they became a championship team.
In fact, for those of you who are basketball aficionados, I believe 88-89 was Scotty Pippin's
rookie year.
And the data I have obtained is the top 10 players on that Chicago Bulls team, the number
of minutes they played during the regular season, and the number of points that they
scored in that regular season.
And what we're trying to do is establish a relationship to predict points based on minutes
played.
And therefore the minutes played, the input will be on the horizontal or x-axis.
The point scored will be the output on the vertical axis.
Well since no one scores negative points or plays negative minutes, we will not worry
about negative values of x and y.
We'll be what's called in the first quadrant where x and y are both positive.
So now let's go to the TI-83 graphing screen to take a look at the scatter plot.
That is the plot of 10 players' points evaluating their minutes played and their points scored.
And here's the graph of those points.
There are 10 little plus sides.
Each one represents a player.
Your first look should tell you something.
Something is different about the players on this team.
There's one player who sort of stands out, and as we see when we discuss statistics in
a later lesson, a lot of times when some value in a set of data stands out, it's called an
outlier.
I think we obvious, even to someone who knows nothing about basketball, but has heard the
word Chicago Bulls, that that outlier is probably and is Michael Jordan.
The question is, how does that one point affect a model that we might make of an equation
of a straight line to represent the relationship between how many minutes a Bulls player played
that season and the points that he scored?
We can do that very quickly, and again, you'll see some things flash on the screen.
And please don't be concerned about it.
We'll say, wait for that.
It's a much more advanced class, even than Algebra I, but what I want to do now is use
what's called a regression package here in the TI 83 to come up with a line that best
represents those points.
So let me go ahead and do that right now.
You'll see things flashing across the screen.
And there's the equation, y equals ax plus b, a is 0.7789, et cetera, a decimal number.
Let's kind of round it off to 0.8.
You remember how to round off decimals.
And what that a says is that for every additional minute, x was minutes, that a player played,
we'd expect him to score about eight tenths of a point, which means if I played 10 more
minutes, the coach would expect me to score about eight more points.
Now the coach might not be concerned if I only scored six or seven point more, but what
if I only scored three or four points more than I usually do?
Coach might say, sit at the end of the bench, you're not playing anymore.
Well, the fact is that that outlier, Michael Jordan, did he affect this equation?
We'll see that in a moment when we look at the graph of the line for this equation.
But notice the b is negative 655.
That says when x is zero, when you don't play any minutes, you score negative points.
And of course, that's quite silly.
But the reason is, is that basically this is simply a model.
And we're not worried about people who play minimal minutes.
These are the 10 most score, highest scoring players and who played the most minutes on
this team.
So let's look at the graph and there's our points and there's our line.
That is the line of the equation that best model these points.
Does that line look very satisfactory to you?
Probably not.
What has happened, it appears, is that the outlier, Michael Jordan, has totally affected
the line and increased the slope of the line so that this line is actually has a higher
slope than it probably should be.
The question is how much higher?
Well, what we can do is simply remove Michael Jordan and we'll do that right now.
And here are the data.
It's easy to find Michael Jordan.
Michael Jordan has the most minutes and we'll delete the minutes and Michael Jordan has
the most points.
We'll delete his points and then we'll go back and we will recalculate this line, this
equation that will tell us what the model is that compares minutes played with points
scored without Michael Jordan being on the team.
So let's do that now.
And there's the equation.
Notice what the slope is, 0.375.
If you've been working with your fractions and decimals, you should recognize that 0.375
is about three eighths.
So that would say that if I played 10 minutes, you'd expect me to score about three or four
points.
So instead of being upset with me as the coach was when he expected me to score eight points,
the coach would be very happy with me that I scored three or four points based on an
equation, a model, a line that disregarded the superstar Michael Jordan.
Now let's take a look at the graph.
And here's the graph that we had before.
Notice we're still not satisfied with it.
Look at the graph that was made without Michael Jordan being considered.
It just about goes through all those points.
Now as I tell my students, we can't just toss Michael Jordan out because his numbers make
our graph not very good.
We've got to have justification.
And the justification I always give is that Michael Jordan is not a mortal basketball
player.
All those on this team were good players.
And to demonstrate how exceptional Michael Jordan is, I tell the story of my wife.
See, my wife does not like to watch sports.
She thinks watching shopping on TV is better than watching sports.
And she would go to sporting events only when one of our sons was playing on the field or
in the band.
Otherwise, she would not go.
Well, some years ago when Michael Jordan was still basically a fairly young player in
the NBA, I called her into one night.
I was watching a game.
I said, let's sit and watch.
I don't like basketball.
Just sit and watch.
And she watched the game.
And after a minute or two, she said, that guy is amazing.
I said, well, that's Michael Jordan.
And of course, she'd heard the name.
But now she was so actually sat there for two or three minutes and he didn't advertise
a single shopping bargain during the game.
And yet she watched because he certainly is a unique player.
And therefore we can be justified with tossing out his numbers.
And then we have a model, an equation of a line that will tell us exactly how many points
we should expect on average, given the number of minutes a player plays.
Well, perhaps you're not interested in sports.
Let's take a look at another set of data that is has nothing to do with sports.
And this set of data comes with one of my favorite books.
I just like to mention again, not a book I'd recommend for someone looking this course.
This is called the Introduction to the Practice of Statistics.
It is the second edition and it's authored by two gentlemen named Maura McCabe.
It's published by Freeman Publishing.
And I've used the book, especially the data from this book, in many of my mathematics
classes, including elementary school classes.
But really it is a high school or college text.
And we're going to use some data from this book that relates itself.
It's from page 141 in case you want to go out and get the book and verify the data.
And it has to do with the weights, the average weights of young infants, what are old infants,
of young children in a village in Egypt, in Naya, Egypt, and they track these children
over the first few months of their development and looked each month at the weight of each
child in kilograms.
Of course, of course, the rest of the world doesn't use pounds, they use kilograms.
And then they average each month the weight of these children and we have the values.
And we'll take a look at that right now.
And here is the graph.
You'll notice there appears to be a plateau period during the seventh, eighth, ninth,
and tenth month after birth.
The average weight of these children in kilograms seem to stay about the same.
But if we were trying to approximate the growth in weight of these children with a line, we
could go ahead and find a line using the values of these points, but notice each point is
plotted with the x-axis is their age in months and the y-point is their weight in kilograms.
For example, here's a young person who was four months old whose weight is 6.3 kilograms.
Now 6.3 kilograms is probably close to 15 pounds and I guess that's a decent size weight
for a child of four months.
OK, now let's go back and use the calculator to come up with the equation of a line to
represent the growth in weight of these young children.
OK, so we'll clear the screen and we'll clear that stuff and we'll go ahead and compute
a modeling equation.
And again, don't worry about the buttons I'm pushing, but there's what we want.
Y equals AX plus B.
See the calculator knows how to write an equation and it says the A is 0.267.
Let's call that 0.3, 0.3.
What does that 0.3 mean?
It means that for each month as the child ages, we expect the infant to gain about 0.3
a little bit less than 0.3 actually of a kilogram.
So that and on average for month to month during the first year after their birth in
this village in Egypt, I don't have any relatives in Naya, Egypt.
In fact, I'm not even sure where that is, but I'm sure someone out there might know
exactly where that town is and maybe even have a cousin who lives there has a child
and you could probably email them or call them up and find out if that child weighs
this much at a particular age in months after birth.
The B, 4.8.
Well again, the B value is we saw when the X is 0.
So we would predict that the typical child would weigh about 4.9 kilograms at birth.
You'll notice if you thought, remember the data had us that at the one month of age,
the infant weighed 4.3 kilograms.
Now what that probably means is either they lose a little weight in that first month or
again since we didn't actually measure their weight at birth, this is just caused by the
model.
But let's take a look at what that graph looks like.
There's our points, there's our line and you'll notice that the line really isn't the world's
greatest model, but it certainly gives us an idea and doctors might use that to typically
look at the average growth of an infant in this part of the world.
So as you can see, we have used the equation of the line and graphing points in the coordinate
plane to build models in two cases of basketball players in the NBA and the development of
the weight of infants in a town in Egypt.
And this is only two examples of how we can use the idea of this graphing coordinate plane
to build these models.
This is in fact one of the reasons why we take algebra and I wanted to introduce this
at this point in time to ensure that you saw that the mathematics that we're learning
in basic math really has a place in our analysis of the real world, that indeed positive and
negative numbers, fractions and decimals, all of which come into play if we're going
to look at problems and situations that take place, be they in sports, be they in medicine,
in business or other areas.
In lesson 22, our next lesson, we'll discuss number theory.
If you don't know what that is, then jump ahead to lesson 22 and you'll find out.
