Welcome to lesson number 23, the first of two lessons on number patterns.
In this lesson, we'll look at some very basic number patterns and then get in some exotic
type patterns in lesson 24.
The first thing we want to look at is something I feel very strongly about as a mathematics
teacher and that is the understanding of odd and even numbers and how odd and even numbers
interact as we use them in arithmetic.
Because many students don't even understand that an answer they obtained was incorrect
because they should have had an even number and they wound up with an odd number.
So I'll have to go back and talk about the basic structure of odd and even numbers.
An even number is a whole number that can be divided by two and it has a factor of two
and therefore any even number can be obtained by taking a whole number, odd or even, and
multiplying it by two.
Two times one is even, two times two, two times seventeen, two times a thousand, two
times four million seven hundred forty six thousand one, all those numbers obtained
by multiplying two times a whole number are even.
An odd number is a number that cannot be divided by two.
It has a remainder of one.
An odd number is obtained by taking any whole number, multiplying it by two and adding
one.
If we start with an odd number such as three, two times three is six, we add one, we get
seven, an odd number.
If we start with an even number, ten, two times ten is twenty, we add one, we get twenty
one.
So two times a whole number gives us an even, two times a whole number plus one gives us
an odd.
Now what happens when we add odd or even numbers?
What sort of results do we get?
Well here are some examples.
We're adding two odd numbers, seven plus three.
Notice that seven is six plus one and three is two plus one.
Each is one more than an even number.
Adding six plus two is eight, plus one plus one is ten, seven plus three is an even answer.
Ten.
Now, is it always true an odd plus an odd is even and the answer is yes.
So the reason is because if we take the two odd numbers and make them into an even number
plus one, we add the two even numbers, the answer is even, and one plus one is two and
therefore we get an even number.
Which now we can look at seven plus six, an odd plus an even.
Let's see, six plus one is seven, so six plus one plus six, the six plus six is even plus
one is odd.
So if we add an odd and an even number, we always get an odd answer.
As we've already seen, two even numbers will add to be an even number.
For example, as we see here, six plus eight.
Now let's take a look at some addition problems with odds and evens that involve more than
two numbers.
The first problem on the graphic is five plus thirteen plus seven.
Each of those is odd and each of those can be written as an even plus one, as you can
see.
Obviously, in adding those up, we'd wind up with an even number obtained by adding the
three even numbers, four, twelve and six plus three from the three ones that would add up
to be three and an even plus an odd is odd.
So anytime we add three odd numbers, the answer will be odd.
The next problem involves two evens and an odd, eight plus six plus five.
Well, five is four plus one.
So we wind up with three even numbers, eight, six and four plus one.
That will be 18 plus one or 19, which will be an odd number.
If we're adding two even numbers plus one odd, we have an odd answer.
How about two odds plus one even?
Well, seven plus nine is the sum of two odds plus eight.
And again, we've broken it down into each of the odd numbers being written as an even
number plus one.
We have six plus one plus eight plus one plus eight.
Well, the six plus the eight plus the eight is an even number, 22.
And one plus one is even and even plus even is even.
So if we have two odd numbers plus an even number, the answer is even.
Okay, how about four plus 10 plus eight?
That is a circumstance with three even numbers.
Obviously, if we add a bunch of even numbers, we always get an even number.
So how can we generalize this?
Well, it appeared that when we added two odds, we got an even.
We had four odds, we should get an even.
And therefore, when we're adding a bunch of numbers, if we have an even number of odd
numbers in the addition problem and all the other numbers are even, we have an even number.
As an answer, if we have an odd number of odds in our problem and the rest of numbers
being even, then the answer is odd.
Now, that isn't very difficult to remember, and it really does make sense.
The idea, of course, is that when we look at an addition problem, this gives us an
extra clue as to what we might be looking for in our answer.
Is our answer odd?
Is our answer even?
Okay, let's take a look at the next visual.
And the next visual is a question that I have, and that is why we only look at the one's
place when we look at a number whether it's even or odd.
The first number in the graphic is a very big number with all the digits except the
last digit being odd.
But the last digit being six, that number is even.
The second number, similar circumstances, is a very big number where all the digits
are even except for the last digit, the seven is odd, and the number is odd.
As a young child, that seemed unfair.
Here are all these odd digits, and one stinking even digit at the end makes the number even.
Now, you know, again, I mean, we're looking for unfairness in life, and there is an example
of unfairness.
And the question was why?
But again, as I think I've mentioned earlier, I did not become a wise guy until I became
a teacher.
As a student, I was sweet, did my work, and didn't ask embarrassing questions.
And certainly, asking most of my teachers, how come only the last digit makes a number
odd or even would have been embarrassing?
But it's very obvious why this is true.
If you look at the place values, for example, look at 7,352.
This is an even number, even though it has an odd number, an odd digit, in the thousands,
hundreds, and tens place.
And that is the key.
The thousands, hundreds, and tens place are all numbers, that is, 1,110, and zero.
In fact, every other place value beyond the ones place among the whole number place values
ends in zero.
By definition, each of those place values is even.
It doesn't make a difference whether we have an odd or an even digit in the tens or hundreds
or thousands place.
The value of that place value will be even.
For example, 7,000s, 7,000 is even, 300s, 300 is even, 5 tens, 50 is even, and the two
in the ones place, the only odd place value, two ones, is even.
When we add up a bunch of evens, we get an even number.
If the number in the ones place was odd, for example, in 8,043, we would now have an odd
number because the 8,000, zero hundreds is even, I guess zero, four tens, 40 is even,
and the three in the ones place, three ones is an odd number.
And we add one odd to a bunch of evens, the answer is odd.
So the mystery is solved, and you may not worry about unfairness, but really, as a child,
I did always worry about why things worked and why things were as they were, and I never
accepted in my brain that that's how it was.
I accepted it on the outside because I wanted to get a good grade and get out of school.
But once I became a teacher, I decided to look into these things and answer these questions
to myself and for my students.
And the notion of looking at odds and evens is quite important.
Next, let's take a look at multiplication of odds and evens.
The next graphic shows us if we multiply an odd times an odd, what we really are doing
is multiplying an even plus one times an even plus one.
Now, let's break that down knowing for multiplication that we multiply each part of one number by
each part of the other number.
The even times the even, well, that's even, the even times the one, one times the even
number is even.
You don't believe that?
Take any even number, multiply it by one, you get itself, it's of course even.
And then the, excuse me, the one times the even is even, and the one times the one is
odd.
So you have an even plus an even plus an even plus one.
By our previous work, we see that number is odd.
So an odd times an odd will always be odd.
Next we look at an odd times an even.
The odd, of course, is the even plus one, and I multiply even plus one times the even.
Even times even is even, one times even is even, and if I add up to even numbers, I get
an even number.
So an odd times an even gives me an even answer.
It turns out that as long as I'm multiplying only odds, the answer will be odd.
But if I have a whole bunch of numbers I'm multiplying and all but one of them are odd,
one is even, the answer will be even.
So a multiplication, if you're multiplying and you have at least one even number in the
multiplication problem, the answer must be even.
Well now that we've taken a look at odd and even numbers and how they operate, let's take
a look at some patterns of multiples.
We talked about fractions, we looked at rules or ways to find if a number is a multiple
of two or three or five or seven, so we can reduce a fraction by dividing the top and
the bottom by the same number.
We also looked at the least common multiple in our journey into number theory.
Now I'd just like to look at some patterns in the multiples, because I'm a big believer
in pattern recognition.
We see the numbers one through fifty, and I've highlighted and read the multiples of
three.
Immediately I believe you can see a visual pattern.
The numbers are lined up in diagonals, because when we get to nine, we add three to nine,
we have twelve, which of course is in the column to the left of the three.
And then we add three, we get fifteen, which is in column to the left of the six.
So this may give us a clue as to why the numbers that are multiples of three, the digits always
add up to three, six or nine, because notice that one plus two of course is three.
When I add three to that, I get fifteen, therefore I get six.
When I add three to that, three plus fifteen is eighteen, and of course I get three more
than six, I get nine, one plus eight is nine.
And when I add three to that, I start all over again, because I'm adding three to nine,
and basically now getting twenty-one, that is I'm adding three to eighteen, the eighteen
being one plus eight, and this cycle continues, and therefore I have the visual pattern of
the diagonal that you see on your screen, as well as the numerical pattern of adding
the digits and always getting three, six or nine.
The next set of numbers is exactly the same set of numbers, one through fifty, but it
has, what it has on it, is the highlighted number of nines, a multiples of nine, nine,
eighteen, twenty-seven, thirty-six and forty-five.
Obviously we see the visual diagonal.
What I'd like you to do is to stop the tape after looking at this or freeze frame, if
you can, on your VCR, this graphic, and I'd like you to stop and think about what patterns
other than the visual pattern you see among the nines.
Please do that now.
Okay.
Other than the visual pattern, what did you see?
Well, what thing you should see is that where multiples of three can add up when you add
the digits to three, six or nine, the multiples of nine always, when you add the digits, add
up to nine.
One plus eight is nine, two plus seven is nine, three plus six is nine, four plus five
is nine.
So notice when you add a nine to a multiple of nine, what you get, of course, is the
number in the one's place is reduced by one.
That is thirty-six plus nine, six plus nine is fifteen, the number in the one's place
goes from six to five, and we add the one.
We carry the one and add that in the tens place, so we get forty-five, three plus one
is four.
And thus, because we're subtracting one from the digit in the one's place, adding one
to the digit in the tens place, our sum of nine stays the same.
So all multiples of nine, when you sum the digits, will become nine.
Now, as you get to larger multiples of nine, for example, ninety-nine, ninety-nine, of
course, nine plus nine is eighteen, but we still have two digits, one plus eight is nine.
You'll always wind up with nine.
Next we'll take a look at multiples of seven, and here is the numbers, one through fifty,
with the multiples of seven highlighted in red.
And you'll notice the pattern is not quite as obvious, and if we had a lot of time, if
this was a class we were worrying about patterns and we were spending our thirty lessons looking
at patterns, we could look at this and say, well, is there a pattern there?
Of course, you could see a pattern, of course, every seven numbers is red, because multiples
of seven are every seven numbers.
But there's no quite apparent pattern, and I showed you this to make you understand what
mathematicians might do.
A mathematician might say, OK, I want to look for a pattern, and to find a pattern so that
instead of simply remembering my multiples of seven, my seven times tables, when I look
at a fraction and want to reduce it by dividing top and bottom by seven, wouldn't it be nice
to look at the numbers and use some pattern recognition fact to identify multiples of seven?
We have that for three, we have that for nine, but in this series we'll let the sevens sleep.
And all we'll say is when you're trying to reduce a number by dividing by seven, you
need to recognize the seven times tables numbers.
The next visual shows you arithmetically how we work with multiples of three.
Five hundred seventy-three, if we add five plus seven plus three, we get fifteen.
We add one plus five, we get six.
Five hundred and seventy-three is a multiple of three, because the sum of the digits eventually
becomes six.
Eight hundred sixty-four, eight plus six plus four is eighteen.
One plus eight is nine.
So not only is eight hundred sixty-four a multiple of three, it is also we have discovered
a multiple of nine.
Now we, of course, therefore might recall our divisibility rules.
One more time, we use them with fractions, but I have to reinforce that the divisibility
rules for two, we're looking for even numbers.
Numbers that end in two, four, six, eight, or zero.
We only look in the ones place to determine if a number is divisible by two.
For numbers that are divisible by three, we add the digits and keep adding the digits
of the succeeding sums until we get a one-digit number.
If it's three, six, or nine, the number is divisible by three.
If it's not, if it's one, or two, or four, et cetera, then the number is not divisible
by three.
For dividing by five, a multiple of five is very easy to see.
It ends in five or zero.
And of course, multiples of nine, when we add those digits together, we get eventually nine.
So not only is it a multiple of three, but if the sum of the digits is nine, it is a multiple
of nine.
Also multiples of 10, of course, are easy to see because they end in zero.
So anything else like, for example, the sevens, we just have to know the multiplication tables
to use for reducing fractions.
Another example of patterns in arithmetic are sequences.
And sequences turn out to be very, very important.
They're important in computers.
They're important as we get into physical characteristics and the science of physics.
Now we look at simple sequences.
What is a sequence?
A sequence is simply a set of numbers, one after the other, that has some pattern, some
order.
How would you determine that pattern or that order?
Well you'd say, can I look at the numbers I see in the sequence and select the next
number in the sequence, and the next number after that, and the next number.
If you can, then you have a sequence.
If you can, you should be able to write down in words or numerical symbols how to get succeeding
numbers in that sequence.
One type of sequence is called an arithmetic sequence.
You should know that when the word arithmetic is a noun, it's pronounced arithmetic.
When it's used as an adjective, like an arithmetic sequence, it's pronounced arithmetic.
Don't ask me why.
I've talked to the people, probably again, those advertising folks who decided how to
pronounce the words.
But an arithmetic sequence is a very simple type of sequence.
It is a sequence in which you simply add the same number to get the next number.
So in the sequence on your screen, 6, 10, 14, 18, what do we add to 6 to get 10?
We add 4.
Do we add 4 to 10 to get 14?
Yes, we do.
It's an arithmetic sequence, and therefore, you can find the next two numbers in the arithmetic
sequence.
And that's exactly what I'd like you to do, stop the tape, and write down the next two
numbers in that sequence.
Well, obviously, if this sequence is obtained by adding 4 to each number to get the next
number, 18 plus 4 would give you 22.
22 plus 4 would give you 26.
So the numbers you wrote down should have been 22 and 26.
Another kind of sequence that has a name is a geometric sequence.
A geometric sequence, such as the one you see on your screen, is one in which we get
each succeeding number by multiplying by the same number.
5, 15, 45, 135, and then we add the same number to get the next number.
135, let's see, we start out with 5, and what do we do?
We multiply it by 3 to get 15.
Is 15 times 3, 45, yes it is.
Is 45 times 3, 135, yes it is.
How would I obtain the next two numbers?
I'd multiply 135 by 3, and then I'd take that number and multiply it by 3 to get those succeeding
numbers.
And I could continue getting numbers by multiplying by 3.
How far will this sequence go?
It will go on forever.
We don't have that much time, so we'll go on to the next sequence, 8, 16, 48, 192.
What kind of sequence is that?
Can you figure out what the sequence is and what the next two terms are?
Well let's see if it's arithmetic.
The graphic on your screen shows you that 8 plus blank is 16.
What did we add to 8 to get 16?
We added 8.
8 plus 8 is 16.
Is 16 plus 8 the next number, 48?
No, 16 plus 8 of course is 24, so this cannot be an arithmetic sequence.
Absolutely not.
Could it be geometric?
Well let's see.
8 times 1 is 16.
8 times 2 is 16.
Is 16 times 2 equal to 48?
That's the question that's asked.
What is the answer?
The answer is no.
16 times 2 is 32, so this sequence is neither arithmetic nor geometric.
It's not geometric because there is not a common multiplier that we multiply each turn
by to get the next term.
So let's analyze the pattern of this sequence.
As you can see, I've looked at what number we add to each number to get the next number.
We added 8 to 8 to get 16.
We added 32 to 16 to get 48.
We added 144 to 48 to get 192.
And then we looked at the next sequence, what we added to those addition terms.
That is, what did I add to 8 to get 32?
I added 24, and I added 108 to 32 to get 144.
So it appears that this method of investigation is not getting us very far.
We looked at addition.
Let's take a similar investigation using multiplication.
What did we multiply 8 by to get 16?
We multiplied by 2.
What did we multiply 16 by to get 48?
We multiplied by 3.
What did we multiply 48 by to get 192?
We multiplied by 4.
Do you see the pattern?
If you do, you should be able to tell me how to get the next number.
Not what the next number is, just simply how to get it.
So stop the tape and think for a second or two as long as it takes, and write down how
you would get the next number, please.
Well, if you look at the pattern, I multiplied by 2, I multiplied by 3, I multiplied by 4.
To get the next number, I would multiply 192 by 5, the next number in our sequence of multipliers.
So sometimes in the sequence, there are other sequences built in.
In recognition of sequences becomes a very important problem solving technique.
Look at the next sequence, 1, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 200.
What is the next two terms in this sequence?
Stop the tape after you've written this sequence down and write down the next two terms after
200 in this sequence.
Well, this is sort of a trick.
It's not arithmetic, it's not geometric, and there really is no pattern except there is
a pattern.
The pattern is, this is the amounts of money in the succeeding value of currency and coins
in the United States.
Any nickel dime, 1, 5, 10, quarter half dollar, 25, 50 dollar bill, $2 bill, obviously the
next must be the $5 bill, which is 500, 1,000, and 2,000 for the 10 and the 20.
No one said this had to be mathematical.
The next sequence, 8, 5, 4, 9, I'll give you a clue, all the numbers in this sequence are
one digit numbers.
Can you fill in the next two or better yet, can you fill in all 10 one digit numbers in
this sequence?
Stop the clock and try.
Once again, this was not a mathematical sequence.
If you look at the next graphic, you see that the entire sequence is 8, 5, 4, 9, 1, 7, 6,
3, 2, 0.
How did you get that sequence, you may say?
It's obvious if you wrote down the words 8, 5, 4, 9, 1, 7, 6, 3, 2, 0, you see these numbers
or the words that describe them are in alphabetical order.
Ha-ha.
Sometimes we look at patterns that involve sequences of pairs of numbers.
For example, we have an input and an output set of numbers, 3, 5, 14, 19, 20, 25.
When we input 3, we get out 6.
When we input 5, we get out 10.
When we input 14, we get out 28.
Look at the last three input numbers, 19, 20, and 25, and write in the output line what
the output is for those three numbers based on the sequence that you can see.
Stop the tape and do that now, please.
What you should have seen is that the output numbers that were given, 6, 10, and 28, were
each twice the input numbers.
So it's seen that this sequence is obtained by doubling the input numbers, and the answers
you should have written down were 38, 40, and 50.
Symbolically, you could have said that the output equals two times the input, and this
is sometimes, actually always, called a function, a mathematical function, where you have a
rule that you can always get your output when you've given your input.
I would suggest if you find function interesting, you might look at the Alger 1 tape where functions
are discussed at length.
But here is a function, y, the output, equals two times x, x being the input, plus 6.
That is, you take an x of 3, an input of 3, you double it, you get 6, you add 6, you get 12.
You take 7, you double it, 14, plus 6, you get 20.
Take negative 3, and multiply it by 2.
Positive times a negative is negative 6, plus 6 is 0.
Stop the tape and find the output, the y values, for the three remaining input values, 0, 5,
and negative 4.
As you can see on the graphic, all we've done is multiplied by 2 and added 6.
Two times 0, 0, plus 6 is 6.
Two times 5 is 10, plus 6 is 16.
Two times negative 4 is negative 8, plus 6.
Positive 8 plus a positive 6, sine of larger, and subtract, we get negative 2.
And thus, the outputs are determined.
And in fact, if you've seen what we're doing here, obviously, hopefully you have, the notion
of functions and notion of filling in numbers in an equation is part of what algebra is
all about, and will be discussed at length in our Algebra 1 tape.
Well, what have we looked at in our first of two lessons on number patterns?
We've looked at a number of basic ideas about odd and even numbers.
We've looked at sequences and multiples, and attempted to get an idea of how we can use
pattern recognition to solve problems.
Really, what we're doing is we're building up a skill at pattern recognition.
In the next tape, number 24, we'll look at a second set of patterns, a little more exotic,
that are really interesting, and use addition, subtraction, multiplication, and cubes.
We'll see you then in the second pattern recognition lesson.
