This is Lesson 24, the second of two lessons on number patterns.
In this lesson, we'll look at some very interesting number patterns
that use a lot of the arithmetic we've already learned.
The first type of pattern we'll look at is something called a palindrome.
A palindrome is a word, a series of words, or a number
that is read backwards or forward as the same thing.
For example, words that are palindromes will be the word radar or race car,
the names Otto or Anna.
In preparing this lesson, my wife wanted me to mention her favorite palindrome,
which is a sentence, a man, a plan, a canal, Panama.
If you write that down and read it backwards,
it says a man, a plan, a canal, Panama.
It is a palindrome.
There are also palindrome numbers.
1,441 is a palindrome.
33 is a palindrome.
474 is a palindrome.
50,705 is a palindrome.
All those numbers, if you read them from the one's place up
and it's reversed the numbers, you get the same number
as if you read it the normal way.
One thing of interest to me a few years ago,
I was teaching at a school,
and one of the buildings had been built in the year 1991.
And when I walked into that building,
on the left of the entrance doors was a 19,
on the right was a 91.
And I recognized, hey, that was a palindrome.
Well, no big thing except the obvious question is,
when is the next year that's a palindrome?
Well, the next year if the 1991 that would be a palindrome
is the year 2002.
Notice there are only 11 years between 1991 and 2002.
I would suspect most of the people alive
and understanding what the year was in 1991
would be alive and understanding what the year was 2002.
What was the closest palindrome year before 1991?
That was 1881, 110 years before 1991.
I sincerely doubt there were very many people alive
who understood what the year 1881 was,
who were alive and still cognizant,
fancy word for understanding,
what 1991 was as a year.
So, and in fact, the next palindrome year after 2002
is 2112.
So, in other words, most palindrome years
are separated by 110 years.
Those of us who were fortunate enough to be alive
in the year 1991 and in 2002
saw two palindrome years in our lifetimes.
How wonderful.
But what is important about these palindromes
are all numbers palindromes.
Well, obviously they are not.
Let's take a look at the next graphic.
We can see that 32 is not a palindrome
because we read it backwards, it's 23.
But if we take 32 and add it to 23, we get 55.
That is a palindrome.
107 is not a palindrome.
But if we reverse it, 701 and add it to 107,
we get 808, which is a palindrome.
245 reversed and added gives us 787.
So, these are three examples of numbers
that after one reversal and addition,
and for now I'll just say after one addition,
we get a palindrome.
Is that true for all numbers?
Not quite.
Here's two examples, actually one example, I guess,
of a number that is not a palindrome after the first edition,
but is after the second edition.
And in reality, there really are two numbers there
because 377 is one number, and of course, it's reversed.
773 is the same tail.
In each case, if we reverse and add, we get 1150,
1150, if we reverse and add 1150,
we get 1661.
Notice when we reversed 1150, we got 0511.
The zero has to be there in the thousands place,
so we have a four-digit number.
Well, are all numbers palindromes after only one or two editions?
And the answer is no.
Here is 793.
If we reverse and add it, we get 1190.
Reverse and add that, we get 2101.
So after two editions, it is not a palindrome,
but after three editions, it is.
It becomes 3113.
In fact, my wife and I have over the years
challenged students to find numbers that could be reversed
and added and not ever be a palindrome.
And some of our students have gone well beyond 30 editions,
and every single time we've come up with a palindrome, eventually.
The fact is, is that true for all numbers?
Well, that's a question that a mathematician would answer.
What we want to do now is we want to look at patterns
among two-digit numbers and their palindromes.
Here we have the two-digit numbers, 11 through 99, arranged in columns.
We want to know is what the pattern looks like
if we attempt to see how many editions we have to make
before each of these numbers becomes a palindrome.
I should mention that some of these numbers,
when you reverse them, you get a one-digit number.
For example, as the graphic shows,
70 when reversed is 07 or 7.
So 70 plus 07 is 77, which is a palindrome.
Now, what we want to do here is take this array of numbers
and by using a color code to see if we can find a pattern
among the two-digit numbers.
If a number is a palindrome, like 11 or 22 or 33,
we'll remove the number, or in the square that that number is in, color it black.
If a one-step addition is required to make the number into a palindrome,
such as 34 plus 43 equals 77, we'll shade that square o-box red.
If a two-step addition process is needed,
for example, 57 plus 75 is 132,
and 132 plus 231 is 363, we'll shade that box green.
If a three-step addition is required to get a palindrome,
such as with 59, where it takes three additions until you get 1,111,
we will color that blue.
And any number that is still not a palindrome after three additions,
we will simply leave the number in its little box.
It turns out that some of these numbers take quite a while before you get a palindrome.
If you want to take the time to investigate the remaining numbers
and how many additions each takes, that's fine.
But for purposes of this lesson,
what I'd like you to do now is write out the numbers 11 through 99
and examine each of the numbers.
And again, color in the palindromes,
the ones that are immediate palindromes, black,
the one-step palindromes, red, the two-step palindromes, green,
the three-step palindromes, blue,
and leave the numbers that are still not palindromes
after three additions as the numbers themselves.
And either one of two things,
either do that now and stop the tape and come back and look at the pattern
or skip over where I show you the pattern
and can finish the rest of the tape and do this at a later time.
But in either case, let's go ahead and stop the tape
and we'll look at what the pattern looks like momentarily.
As you can see, it's a very interesting pattern.
There are big areas of red and green and a few areas of blue,
almost in a diagonal with one number missing.
And there are some numbers that are still outstanding.
69 and 96, 78 and 87, 89 and 98, and 79 and 97.
I've said that once already, but that's okay.
Those are the only numbers in the lower right-hand corner
that are still not palindromes after three additions.
The idea is that a mathematician would look at this and say,
can we forecast how many additions it will take to make a palindrome?
If you look at three digit numbers, four digit numbers, five digit numbers,
can we begin to understand how long it takes until a number becomes a palindrome?
That's not a question you will answer here.
I just wanted you to see the notion of palindrome
and that by using a simple process like whole number addition,
we can create an interesting pattern full of color
and full of questions for the future of mathematics.
The next type of pattern we're going to look at is called a black hole.
If you know anything about astronomy, you know that when a star implodes,
it is made very dense.
It becomes so dense that the gravitational pull of that matter is so great
that nothing can escape, even light can escape.
Any light passing by is sucked in to that imploded star.
And therefore, theoretically, people thought about these black holes
and I believe that scientists have since found evidence of black holes
places where there should be light and there is no light.
Of course, we haven't visited one yet.
There are all kinds of theories about what happens if you happen to enter a black hole.
I just assume not to find out.
But mathematically, there are things called black holes.
That is numbers where eventually you cannot escape.
Let's see what that means.
Here's the number 6,174.
A four-digit number, each of the four digits having a different number, different digit.
If I wanted to write the largest four-digit number,
I could write using those four digits, it would be 7,641.
The smallest number I could write with those four digits
is the reversal of that, 1,467.
Notice that if I subtract the larger minus the smaller, I get 6,174.
I'm back where I started from.
If you take any four-digit number,
and let's just start with four-digit numbers where each of the four digits is different,
you write down a four-digit number,
then write down the largest four-digit number that you can obtain with those four digits,
reverse it to get the smallest four-digit number, and subtract.
You will not necessarily get 6,174.
Whatever number you get, if you do the same process,
write the largest four-digit number and the smallest four-digit number using those four digits,
and subtract, and keep repeating that process.
Eventually, you will get to 6,174.
That is true for all four-digit numbers of the type where all four digits are different.
You get to a black hole.
Once you get to 6,174, you cannot escape.
If you want to, you might want to, at this point in time,
stop the tape and pick a four-digit number of the type I just talked about
and try doing that and see how long it takes you.
If you don't want to do it now, then you could, after the tape is over,
sit down and do it as an interesting exercise in subtraction.
Be very, very careful with both black holes and palindromes.
It's very easy if you are careless with your addition in terms of palindromes
or your subtraction in terms of black holes to get lost and find yourself some place
where you shouldn't be because you made a careless error.
You might want to check your work on a calculator.
What I'm interested in looking at at this point in time are black holes for three-digit numbers.
Here's a three-digit number, 703.
We're going to do the exact same thing.
We are going to take and write the largest number that we can, 730, using those three digits
and then reverse it to write the smallest number, 037.
And when we subtract, we get 693.
We take that number, 693, write the largest three-digit number, 963.
The smallest three-digit number, 369, subtract, we get 594.
When we repeat that process again, we get 495.
As you can see, 495 has the same three digits as 594.
And therefore, 495 is a black hole.
6174 was the black hole for four-digit numbers.
This is the black hole for three-digit numbers.
And it was very interesting because I was working with my students this past.
These were fourth-grade students, so they weren't very sophisticated mathematically,
looking at these black holes and the question was asked, you know,
what's the pattern here?
Because they knew I was very much interested in patterns.
And one of the things we noticed is that if we look at the four-digit black hole, 6174,
the four digits add up to 18.
If we look at the three-digit black hole, 495, the three digits add up to 18.
Very interesting.
We further looked at a typical three-digit number.
In this case, 871.
And it was, of course, subtracting 178 since the three-digit numbers were arranged
in order of the largest digit being in the hundreds place and then the tens place
and then the ones place.
When we reverse that, the middle digit would be the same in both numbers.
In this case, a 7.
Since the digit in the ones place of the larger number would have to be less than the digit
in the ones place of the smaller number, in this case, 1 is certainly less than 8,
we would wind up borrowing in order to subtract.
11 minus 8, of course, is 3.
That is, we'd borrow a 110, make it into 10 ones, 11 minus 8 is 3.
Notice that in the hundreds place, 8 minus 1 is 7.
That is, those two numbers, the 11 minus 8 and the 8 minus 1, always will add up to 10.
But of course, you understand that we have to borrow.
And when we borrow, instead of having 8 minus 1, we're going to have 7 minus 1.
And therefore, the number in the answer in the hundreds place and the number in the answer
in the ones place will always add up to 9, 1 less than 10.
And since we had to borrow in the tens place, in this case, making it a 6,
and then borrow from the hundreds place, 16 minus 7 would always give us a 9.
So once we get into this, the tens place number after we subtract will always be 9.
The ones place number plus the hundreds place number will always add to 9.
And eventually, we'll get to 495.
It works for all numbers.
Believe me, we checked that.
We also did look at some five digit numbers, but that gets really involved.
And if you'd like to pursue that on your own and find out what the black hole is for five digit numbers
or for six digit numbers, if you've got nothing else to do with your time, that'd be wonderful.
But I just think it's interesting mathematically that we see patterns in our numbers
in very simple things, adding and subtracted that are consistent
and that mathematicians would look at and see the beauty and see the questions.
Is this always true?
Why does it work?
Does it work for this kind of number, for that kind of number?
And that's exactly what a mathematician might pursue.
And you might say, well, when will I ever use this?
Well, for example, knowing something about patterns of numbers can be very helpful in cryptology.
Making up codes.
Actually, I guess it's called cryptography.
And making up codes.
And in any case, codes are made up using number patterns.
If you know the number pattern and no one else knows it except the person sending you the message,
you'll be able to decode the message.
And it's getting much more difficult with computers today to encode and decode messages.
Sometimes number patterns can be very helpful.
So if a mathematician finds a particularly generalization of a number pattern,
it can be used, for example, in creating new codes to keep secrets secret.
Another interesting pattern has to do with cubes and the sum of the cubes of the digits in a number.
We see the 10 digits, 0 through 9, and there are cubes.
That is 0 to the third power, 0 times 0 times 0 is 0.
1 to the third power is 1.
By the way, those are the only two digits or only two numbers that when you cube them, you get the same number.
2 cubed is 8, 3 cubed is 27, 64, 125, 260.
Notice how quickly these numbers get quite big up until 9 cubed, which is 729.
Now, every number, every whole number is made up of one or more of these 10 digits.
If we take any whole number and take each of the digits in that whole number,
cube it and add them up and then take the answer, the sum, cube the digits in that sum and add those numbers up,
eventually it turns out that there are only a limited number of numbers or situations we could wind up in.
I knew nothing about this.
I mean, to me, this is very nice.
It's very simple to understand.
Once you understand adding and you understand the third power that is multiplying a number by itself, by itself,
this is quite simple to do.
I mean, I've had third and fourth graders do this, but I went to a mathematical talk some years ago
and a mathematician was talking about the fact that the sum of the cubes of the digits of any number
will always wind up in one in a limited number of ways,
either at a number or something called a loop that we'll see shortly.
So I thought I would pursue this with some of my students and I did both in elementary and middle school.
And for example, let's take a look at our first number, 153.
We take each of the three digits, one, five and three.
We cube the digits and add up those cubes.
One plus 125 plus 27 is 153.
We're locked in.
So one of the numbers that you wind up at when you do this process until you get locked is 153.
Does every number wind up in 103?
Obviously not.
Let's take a look at 152.
The sum of the cubes of 15 and two, as you could see is 134.
So we take the cubes of 13 and four, which of course are 127 and 64.
Add them up and we get 92.
92 is nine cubed plus two cubed.
That adds up to 737.
Seven cubed 343 plus three cubed 27 plus a second 343 gives us 713 and seven cubed plus one cubed plus three cubed is 371.
You may recognize that 371 has the same digits of 713, which means when you add the three cubed, seven cubed and one cubed, you'll get back to 371.
Another lock.
One of the limited number of numbers at which you can wind up.
In this case, it took us 12345 additions to do that.
Now, at this point in time, I was teaching a sixth grade class.
This is a few years ago and we were looking at this and I said, OK, I want you each to pick a three digit number and using a calculator for your addition.
We had the list of the cubes.
I want you to see where it locks, where you wind up.
And it was very interesting.
These students each did their work and some finished fairly early because it took a few additions and some, it took quite a few additions as we'll see later on when we look at some of these numbers.
But just so happened that one of the nut people had picked 111.
I believe this student picked 111 because he or she thought it would be a very easy one to do.
Another student picked 999.
And this was a student who was very curious and I think this student wanted to do what was thought to be the most difficult problem.
But they both wound up at the same answer.
They both wound up at 153.
Well, the question was asked, is this true for all three digit numbers where the three digits are the same?
Because we had 111 and 999.
Well, one bright student immediately said, of course not.
And I said, why not?
Well, because 0000 is a three digit number.
And when you add 0 cubed plus 0 cubed plus 0 cubed, you get 0.
Well, of course, other than that, for all three digit numbers without zeros, where all three digits are the same, is this true?
And of course, no one knew.
I didn't even know at that point.
So what do we do?
Well, we go out and check it and we divided the numbers up among the various students.
And we had more than one student do each number so we could check each other.
And for example, here are the results.
111, we know, becomes 153.
And what I've done, what you see on the screen is rather than showing the summation of the cubes, it just shows the answer.
So when I add up the cubes of 1 plus 1 plus 1, I get 3.
The cube of 3 is 27.
The cube of 2 plus 7 is 351, et cetera.
We want 153.
222 also goes to 153.
And in fact, it takes approximately the same number of steps.
333 very quickly goes to 153.
At this point, the first three three digit numbers with the same digits all go to 153.
Let's take a look at the next graphic, which has 444, 555 and 666.
As we can see, quite a few steps are involved.
Quite a few steps are involved.
And it's, of course, you make a careless error in terms of addition, you'll wind up on some wrong path.
But each of those numbers, 444, 555 and 666.
Eventually, as you add up the cubes of the digits, winds up at 153.
Finally, we looked at 777, 888.
And of course, we knew about 999.
And what did we find?
We found that all three of them go to 153.
So the question was answered.
And I told my students, I said, we had just done some mathematics.
I have never read any place.
I'm sure there's an article in some mathematical journal going back some years to show that the
sum of the cubes of any three digit number that has the same three digits other than 0, 0, 0,
will always wind up at 153.
And this was done by a bunch of ordinary sixth graders.
This is not a special gifted class, just a normal group of sixth graders.
Pursuing real mathematics, using what they knew, in this case about cubes and adding,
to make a statement and prove it to be true.
Well, a few weeks later, I was doing something like this with a group of fourth graders.
And the question I asked these fourth graders, I said, OK, we've seen that all the three digit numbers
that have the three digits the same all wind up in this process at 153.
Do you think this will be true for two digit numbers?
And they didn't know, of course, and wouldn't even try to guess.
And I said, OK, let's go ahead and do it.
And that's exactly what I'd like you to do right now.
I'd like you to stop the tape and take each of the nine, three, nine, two digit numbers with a digit the same.
11, 22, 33, 44, 55, 66, 77, 88, 99.
Take the cubes of each of the digits, add them up until you get into a lock.
And when you get into a lock, stop.
Go to the next one.
When you finish all of them, come back and let's take a look and find out if all nine of those two digit numbers wind up at 153.
So I'd stop the tape and do that work now, please.
Well, right away, if you did this, you discovered that no, it does not.
These numbers do not all go to 153.
Because as you could see, 11, of course, goes to two, two cubed is eight, eight cubed is 512.
And we eventually get to 371.
371 was one of the numbers we looked at.
And we saw that in addition to 153, it was a lock.
So 111 does not go to 153.
22 is even more interesting because 22 eventually gets to 352.
Which goes to 160, which goes to 217, which goes to 352.
This is an example of a loop.
Instead of locking at a single number, you lock at a loop.
That loop is made up of 352, 160 and 217.
But 33 does go to 153.
The next graphic shows us 44, 55 and 66.
Notice only 66 goes to 153.
44 went to 371 and 55 went into a loop that wound up in itself.
55, 250, 133, 55.
Okay, how about 77, 88, 99?
Well, 77 and 88 do not wind up at 153, but 99 does.
And, okay, that was an interesting discovery.
But the question was, what happened?
Let's take a look at the three numbers that did wind up at 153.
33, 66 and 99.
And my fourth grade has said, well, look, it's obvious those numbers are all multiples of three.
The other two digit numbers were not multiples of three.
Well, what happened with the three digit numbers?
Well, one of the students said, remember, remember now, you said that when you add up the digits of a number,
if they add up to three, six or nine, the number is a multiple of three.
Well, any three digit number where all three digits are the same,
when you add them up, it's the same as multiplying that digit by three.
All of those three digit numbers from 111 to 999 are multiples of three.
And now we had a new hypothesis, a new idea.
Perhaps 153 is where all the numbers that are multiples of three lock.
So each student took a couple of multiples of three that we knew,
one digit, two digit, three digit, multiples of three.
And we saw that indeed every single one of them stopped at 153.
153 when you did this process.
Now, what did this all mean?
I'm not sure, and I may pursue more of this with classes in the future.
The interesting thing is, and what we've seen in this particular lesson,
is that mathematics is filled with patterns.
And in looking at those patterns, we discover not only the use of mathematics we know,
but we may discover new uses of mathematics and even new mathematics.
Of course, some patterns we never can figure out,
and there are mathematical patterns that people are still looking at.
The next lesson, we'll look at another practical application of mathematics,
and that is statistics.
We'll see you in statistics.
