Welcome to Lesson 25.
This lesson is all about statistics.
Now statistics is a course that you can take in high school or college or even graduate
school when I can go that deeply into it, but statistics is also a wonderful use of
the kinds of mathematics we've seen in basic math.
So what we're going to do is take a look at some statistical analysis of data, but first
we're going to find out what statistics is, and I just gave you a clue with the word analysis
and data.
Statistics is the gathering display and analysis of data.
Data is information.
Actually, data is a plural word, so data are information, I guess.
It can be numerical, for example, your heights or weights or grades on a test or the number
of people who went to see a certain sporting event or an opera show, whatever it was.
It could be non-numerical, it could be your favorite color, or it could be what particular
religious organization you belong to or in what city you live, but what we're talking
about numerical data, since this is a mathematics course, and we said the display, the data
gathering, and the analysis of data.
Gathering of data.
How do we gather data?
Well, there's two basic ways.
We can take a sample, or we can take a census.
A sample is where we go out and select a small group of people, maybe a hundred, maybe a
thousand, maybe a few thousand, to represent an entire population.
And by gathering and displaying and analyzing data from that sample, we make decisions about
the population.
For example, we might make a decision about whether or not to open a store at a certain
location.
We might make a decision as whether or not to use a certain advertising campaign for
a particular politician.
We may also be looking at it as a survey to see what people think about a certain product,
a certain political idea, or whatever we might be interested in knowing about the population.
For example, the TV ratings are based on a sample.
They don't ask everybody in the United States what TV shows they watch.
They take a sample of a few thousand people, and from that, they make a judgment about
all the millions of people who watch TV in this country.
A census is when you actually get information from the entire population.
And we know about a census.
We have one every ten years in this country.
It's very interesting to note that statisticians tell us that it would be much more accurate
and much more timely to take a sample.
Every couple of years, a nice sized sample of the population of the United States, we
would get better information, more accurate information, and of course, more timely information
because we take that sample every two or three years that we get from a census every ten
years.
But we will continue to have a census every ten years.
The question is why, and the answer, of course, is because it's in the Constitution.
The United States Constitution requires us from 1790 on to have a census of the entire
population, primarily for the apportionment of Congress, that is, getting how many seats
each state gets in the House of Representatives.
And that will occur until an amendment to the Constitution is brought forth.
And I don't think in the near future we're going to get our politicians to amend the
Constitution to do away with the census, despite the fact that statistically a sampling
every two or three years would be much better.
So we have a sample.
We have a census.
We gather information.
We take the information and display it.
Charts, graphs, we'll look at a type of graph, actually a couple of types of graphs, and
actually numerical values, statistics, averages, and other measures of statistical information
about the data.
And then we'll do some analysis.
And analysis is used to make decisions in the business world, in the scientific world,
in the world of education, and actually even in the world of sports.
Do you throw the left-hander against the team, left-handed pitcher, or the right-handed
pitcher?
There are managers of baseball teams who use statistics, use analysis of data to determine
which pitcher pitches and which circumstance, and the same thing in other sports.
Also we use analysis to predict what might happen, who's going to win the election, what
TV shows we put in the eight o'clock time slot, and that kind of thing.
So what we're going to do is look at a couple of sets of data and see how we use statistics
combined with the mathematics we already know about to make some decisions, to analyze,
possibly to make predictions, and even to discuss differences between things, and that's
one of the things we'll do.
So our first set of data involves the heights of tall buildings, buildings taller than 300
feet, in two cities.
We're not going to name this thing.
We're going to kind of keep it a secret.
But the city number one and city number two, and here are the heights of those buildings.
You will notice that city number two appears to have more tall buildings, and it also appears
to have more buildings that are over 700 feet tall.
We want to do a finer analysis than that.
The first thing we do is we like to have a picture, and the word graph means picture.
We'd like to have a picture to compare the two cities, not a picture of the cities, but
a picture of the data.
And what you see on your screen now is what's called a line plot.
We have a line plot for each of the two cities.
Each X represents a building, and the location of the X on its particular line, line segment
actually, is based on the height of the building.
So if there are three or four X's, one on top of the other, that means there are three
or four buildings at that height.
And again, we're not interested in precision here.
We're looking for a picture of what's happening, and I think you can see that in the city
number one, there are sort of two big clumps or clusters of data.
There's one in the four hundreds, and there's one at the upper five hundreds and lower six
hundreds.
And there's really is a gap between that, in fact, there's only one building, a little
bit taller than 500 feet, in fact it's 512 feet, between the buildings at 456 and the
building at 550.
And then there are a couple of buildings, one in the 700s and one in the 900s.
City number two, there isn't quite as discernible a grouping or clusters.
Really the buildings seem to spread out throughout all of the numbers, except for the three exceptionally
tall buildings at 899 feet, and the two in the 990s.
So and since the two graphs are lined up, we can see that indeed there are more buildings
in city two, and there appear to be more tall buildings in city two.
And the next graphic, which is looks the same, except we've identified certain buildings
as outliers, their heights are so great that it's very possible that these buildings are
outliers.
And later on, we'll use the graphing calculator to determine that.
But these are buildings that are removed from the most interested buildings and therefore
could be outliers, that is buildings whose heights are so great that maybe there's something
special about them, kind of like when Michael Jordan was an outlier, because he's quite
special.
What we want to look at now is how we can get a numerical value, that is a number to
stand for all the heights of the buildings.
Well one way to do that, of course, is what's called a measure of tendency.
And one of the most common measures of tendency, that is a typical number, is the mean.
Many of you might refer to the mean as the average.
But really the official name is the mean.
We add up the numbers and divide by the number of numbers.
Well here are the means for city one and city two.
We've taken the total heights of all the buildings and divided by the number of buildings.
There are 23 buildings in the table for city one and 35 buildings for city two.
The average or mean height of a building in city one is 554.2 feet.
The mean height of a building in city two is 598.9 feet.
About 44 feet, 43 feet different.
The fact is, actually about 45 feet maybe, but the fact is that there isn't that great
a difference.
I mean 45 feet, that's about four stories, four and a half stories.
We need to analyze this further.
The next thing we need to know about is the median.
The median is the measurement in the middle when the data are put in order.
So here's a set of data.
Notice on the top line, the data are not in order.
We put the numbers in order and since there are two, four, six, eight, nine numbers, the
number in the middle is the fifth number, which happens to be five.
And notice there are four numbers that are less than five, two, two, three and four.
And there are four numbers that are greater than five, six, seven, nine and 10.
So for those numbers, the median would be five.
For the next set of numbers, we have added an eight and now we have 10 numbers.
There is no number in the middle, but you'll notice what we've done.
We've taken the two numbers that are in the middle five and six and sort of split the
difference or we added them up and divided by two and got 5.5.
So so that is the median of those numbers.
Now the interesting happens is sometimes we use the mean and sometimes we use the median
and sometimes we can get different values that give different information if we use
either the mean or the median.
Let me give you an example and here's an example in our next graphic.
We have the numbers one through nine.
Obviously there are nine numbers there.
The number in the middle is five.
If we add up the numbers, we get 45.
We divide by nine and we get five.
So the mean is five and the median is five.
But in the second set of data, we've added 100 to those nine numbers.
What I'd like you to do is stop the tape and find the mean and the median of those 10 numbers.
You'll notice they are lined up in order.
So finding the median should be simple.
The mean just add them up and divide by 10.
Please do that now.
Well, we added up the numbers and divided by 10.
We got 14.5 quite a jump from five.
The median only went to 5.5.
And that's a very important notion.
When you add an extreme value to the data, like we added 100, the median barely changes.
In this case, it went from five to 5.5.
It's even possible for the median to stay the same.
But the mean is affected by extreme values.
And in this particular case, the mean jumped from five to 14.5.
For example, when they give information about the average family income in a community,
a county, a state, or the country, it is given as a median because a few very wealthy people
would drive the mean up.
And it would be a number that is really not representative of the typical family income.
The same thing if they publish in a local paper the average price of a house sold during
the past six months in a community.
That average is a median, not a mean.
Again, a few really expensive houses would drive the mean up.
The median would be hardly affected.
The data we just looked at, if that 100 was a million, the median would still be 5.5.
But the mean would be a huge number, most unrepresentative of the data.
And we want our average to represent the tendency of the data.
Okay.
Now, let's take a look at the mean and median of city one and city two.
We saw the means already, and they're having change, obviously, but the medians are very
close.
Notice that it's very interesting that despite the fact that city two has more buildings and
more buildings in the 700 foot and above category, the medians are very close and the
means are somewhat close.
So we may have to do some further analysis.
And the next kind of analysis you want to do has to do with variation because in addition
to wanting to know about tendency, we'd like to know about variation, about consistency,
how close are the typical buildings to all the buildings?
And one of the ways to do that is something called the range.
The range is very simple.
It's a subtraction process.
You take the largest number in the set and subtract from it the smallest number in the
set.
In this case, we take the largest building in each city and subtract the smallest building
in that city, and that difference is the range.
As you can see, the range for city one is 539 feet, and for city two is 596 feet.
Again, not a whole lot of difference in terms of the range.
Range has a problem, and the problem is that it is affected by those extreme values.
So that if you had one value, for example, in city number one, you had that one rather
tall building and very few buildings, actually no buildings in between that building and
the next building at around 700 feet or so.
What happens is that your range is totally affected by that one extreme value.
So we need to do something else, and we need to do is get a range of the middle 50%.
In order to do that, we need to find what's called the quartiles.
And here you can see how we found the quartiles of a set of numbers we've already dealt with.
That was the 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10.
So what we found was that the medium of those four numbers, that is, what is the medium
of the lower half of the data?
Well, since four is an even number, we took the second and third number, which happened
to be two and three and got the average, which is 2.5.
And that's called the lower quartile.
Similarly, we got the upper quartile by taking the average, which is 2.5, and that's called
the lower quartile.
Similarly, we got the upper quartile by taking the second and the third number in the upper
half of the data, 7 and 9, and getting the average, which was 8, and our upper quartile
was 8.
We now get the range between the two quartiles.
That is the inter-quartile range, or IQR.
And that IQR, of course, is 8 minus 2.5, which is 5.5.
Now, what does that 5.5 tell us?
Well, it's a measure of the variation in the middle 50% of the data.
So let's take a look at the inter-quartile ranges for our two cities.
And now we finally see a difference.
The inter-quartile range for city number one is only 180 feet.
The inter-quartile range for city number two is 273 feet.
So the inter-quartile range for city number two is 273 feet.
The inter-quartile range for city two is 50% larger than the inter-quartile range for city
number one.
Now, what does that mean?
What it means is that the middle 50% of the buildings in city number two are much more
spread out, 50% greater variation than the middle 50% of the buildings in city one.
It's of course, the inter-quartile range is not affected at all by the extreme values.
Well, we have range which is totally affected by extreme values.
We have inter-quartile range which is not affected by extreme values.
And somebody usually named Goldilocks would say, well, one is too big and one is too small.
We need something just right in between.
And we have something called the standard deviation.
Again, how we find the standard deviation, I'm going to worry about that in some future
course when you're in high school or college.
But let's just look at what the computer tells us the standard deviations for these two cities
are.
The standard deviation of a city one is 123.39 feet.
The standard deviation of a city two is 165.59 feet.
So standard deviation which is somewhat affected but not totally affected by extreme values
still shows us that city number two has much more variation.
But the range we looked at earlier, the city number one's range was almost, you know, it's
quite large, was caused by that one very tall building.
But using the inter-quartile range and the standard deviation, we can see that the variation
in city one is much less than the variation in city two.
Where is this all leading?
Well, it's leading again to a graphical display.
And the statistician who was responsible creating this next graphical display told a class that
I was in at Princeton that what he wanted was a graphical display with intraocular impact.
He wanted the graph to hit you right between the eyes.
And this gentleman created the box plot or the box and whisker plot.
And you could see a typical box plot on your screen.
The L E is the lower extreme.
That is the smallest value of the data.
The L Q is the lower quartile.
That is the 25% location.
The MD is the median, the 50% location.
The U Q upper quartile is the 75th percent location.
The U E is the upper extreme, the highest value that is not an outlier.
And that little box to the right of the box plot is the outlier.
You'll notice that on this box plot, we visually can see a measurement of tendency, the median
right there.
We can also see the interquartile range because that's the width of the box.
We can also see the range.
That is the value from the lower extreme to the outlier.
Or if you want to discount the outlier, the range would be from the lower extreme to the
upper extreme.
So we get a picture of the variation as well as the typical number for a set of data.
But the wonderful thing about the box plot is that we can use it to compare two sets
of data.
And let's do that now.
Let's go ahead and look at box plots on the TI 83 graphing calculator for the two cities.
And here are those box plots.
You'll notice the top box plot is for city number one.
The bottom box plot is for city number two.
You'll notice that the medians are not very different.
And of course, the lower values are about the same, but it's quite obvious that the
upper end of each box plot is quite different.
City number two has a lot of buildings that are well beyond even the upper extreme, not
counting the outlier in city one.
By the way, you'll notice there appears to be only that one outlier that those very,
very tall buildings in city two that we thought we looked at the line plot where potential
outliers are not because of the large amount of variation among the heights of the buildings
in city two.
So if you were asked to say which city is taller, you might even say, well, the cities
are quite the same because the medians are almost identical.
But I would think you'd have to say that city two was taller.
And I don't use it to have more buildings that are over a 300 feet tall or certainly
even over four feet tall.
It has more buildings that are over 700 feet tall.
But visually there's no question looking at the box plot that city number two has a lot
more buildings in the upper reaches in terms of height.
Now why might that be?
Well, it's very possible that city number one is located in a very flat area, an area
where there's no reason to build very tall buildings.
It's also possible that city one is located in an area where there are earthquakes or
other things which how buildings could be damaged.
It's also conceivable that city number one is a smaller city in population and doesn't
need as many buildings.
City two might be located in an area where the number of buildings is restricted, the
total number of buildings, and therefore the city must build very tall buildings to compensate
for the fact that the land mass available to build office buildings is rather limited.
Also again, city number two can have a much larger population.
I will not tell you what two cities these are.
It's really unimportant.
But the idea is you can see we can analyze the data with numerical statistics and visual
graphical displays and then even talk about what might be the reason for differences we
see based on the numbers and graphs we have.
Let's take a look at a second group of sets of data to compare the sets using our statistical
analysis.
This second set of data has to do with politics and once again, the comments from a book we
used in an earlier lesson, that is the introduction to the practice of statistics, the second
edition by Moore and McKay which is published by Freeman Publishing.
Again, a book I've used in many courses.
I would not recommend it for the basic math course, but it does have some wonderful data
and between its data and the power of the TI-83 graphing calculator, we'll take a look
at the 1980 and 1984 election for President of the United States.
These box plots represent the percentage of people in each state that voted for the Democratic
candidate in 1980, that's the top box plot, and 1984, the bottom box plot.
Looking at the data in terms of the box plots, one might say, well, there's some difference.
I mean, the box plots look quite different.
Before we go into a analysis of what the box plots might tell us and what we might know
from a political history that would explain similarities and differences in the box plots,
let's talk about what the data are.
The data are from page 99 in the book I just mentioned, and it lists on that page each
of the states in alphabetical order from Alabama to Wyoming, and it has the percentage of the
population who voted in the 1980 election, who voted for the Democratic candidate, and
in the 1984 election, who voted for the Democratic candidate.
And now what we see is those numbers displayed as a box plot.
The box plot for 1980, the box plot for 1984.
What is similar about the two box plots?
Well, it appears that the medians are very, very close.
If you don't believe that, we could see that the median for 1980, that is the median percentage
by state who voted for the Democratic candidate in 1980 was about 40.5%.
And the median for 1984 was 38.95%, rather close, not a whole lot of difference.
Now, the question now comes about is what is really different about these two plots?
Well, it appears that the 1980 plot has a much more variation.
Because there are no outliers and no little boxes out there, 1980 has a greater range
and a much greater interquartile range.
What does it all mean?
Well, it would appear that in 1980 and in 1984, the percentage, typical percentage by state
who voted for the Democratic candidate in the presidential election was quite similar,
typically.
But that the variation from state to state of those percentages varied much more greatly
in 1980 than in 1984.
Let's go back to the first statement in terms of the two typical numbers, the medians, were
about the same.
Yet the results of the two elections were quite different.
And the fact is that the median therefore can tell us one thing that is not necessarily
true when we look at the total results.
Let's examine that because we've got to be careful when we use statistics.
As we know, a former 19th century prime minister of England said there were three kinds of
lies.
There was lies, darned lies, he didn't use darned, but you can imagine what he said,
and statistics.
That is, statistics can be used to confuse.
So in this particular case, we have our box plots which show us that the two medians,
that is the percentage, the average percentage of people who voted for Democrat, the Democratic
candidate in 1980 and 1984 were quite similar.
Yet in 1984, if I remember correctly, President Reagan, winning his second term in office,
I believe won almost every state in the country.
And yet in 1980, if I remember correctly, the even right prior to the election, it was
considered too close to call.
So what was the difference?
How come there's such a little difference in the median, yet the results were quite
different?
Well, that's what a little bit of knowledge will do for you.
The median only tells us about the Democratic candidate.
In 1980, President Reagan was running against President Carter, actually he wasn't president
yet.
Ronald Reagan was running against Jimmy Carter who was the president of the United States.
But there was a third party candidate, an independent candidate named Anderson, who
took away many of the more liberal Republican votes who might have normally voted for the
Republican candidate.
Also in the South part of the United States, where by 1980, many Southerners were becoming
more conservative and would vote for Republican candidates because Jimmy Carter was from Georgia,
they voted for Carter as a matter of loyalty to a Southerner.
In 1984, the Democratic candidate was former Vice President Mondale, who was not from the
South.
In fact, he was Minnesota and was considered a rather liberal fellow.
In fact, he had indicated that he would raise taxes if he was elected president and therefore
people in the South did not feel obliged to vote for the Democratic candidate and voted
for the Republican.
There was no significant third party candidate and therefore, despite the fact that the percentage
of the votes on average by state for the Democratic candidate didn't change very much, the percentage
of the votes by state for Reagan changed quite a bit so that he won a significant election.
And therefore, the use of this data is such that we have to be concerned.
We simply look at statistics, whether it's a graphical display or the use of numerical
values such as mean or median, they can be used to confuse.
They can be used to even sort of lie.
I guess a good example would be many, many years ago in the state of Georgia, when I
began teaching, the argument was the teachers need a significant raise.
The state teachers organization indicated that the average salary of a teacher in Georgia
was about $8,200 a year, it's quite a few years ago.
And the state education department indicated the average salary was about $8,700 a year.
How could they both say something different?
Well, the fact is, one was using mean and one was using median for average.
I'd allow you to decide who was using what.
But, well, we've looked at statistics.
We've seen how statistics can clarify.
We've also seen how statistics can confuse or cover up.
And therefore, when people use statistics, be it graphical displays of data or numerical
statistics like the mean or median or range or other measurements, one must be careful
to understand exactly what they're telling us.
In the next lesson, lesson 26, we'll discuss the cousin of statistics probability.
