This is Lesson 26.
In Lesson 26, we are going to investigate probability, the cousin of Lesson 25 statistics.
Probability has to do with chance, uncertainty, not knowing what's going to happen.
Probability affects us all the time, and in fact, in this lesson, what we're going to
do is first get a feeling for what probability is, then take a look at how it's used and
how important it is in our daily lives, and then we'll take a look at some rules of probability
using good mathematics, and finally, we'll look at a problem that might seem a little
bit childish, perhaps, I think it's an interesting problem, that uses a lot of good mathematics
using probability, and in fact, since probability involves chance, it turns out that we're going
to use fractions and decimals and percents, all those things we studied about towards
the beginning of this series.
First of all, what is probability?
Probability is a measure of chance.
How often we expect something to happen, and sometimes that's called uncertainty.
And one of the ways we can measure probability is by looking at an event A. Event A might
be the chance of our team winning, the chance of it raining tomorrow, the chance of our
airplane leaving on time, the chance of getting a raise, some event, and we could say that
the probability of A is equal to the number of ways to get A divided by the total number
of ways to get anything, the total number of outcomes.
For example, if I was going to flip a coin, and I said, okay, there are two possible outcomes,
heads and tails, assuming that each one could occur equally, what's the chance of getting
ahead?
Well, I could get ahead in one way, flipping ahead out of the two possible outcomes, one
out of two, or a half.
If I was rolling a standard six-face die, a cube, that has one dot on one side, two,
three, four, five, and six dots on the other five sides, and I said, what's the probability
of rolling a number that is a factor of six?
Well, let's see.
I have six total outcomes of those six outcomes, one, two, three, four, five, six, which numbers
are factors of six, one, two, three, and six.
And therefore, the number of ways to get A, this case, a factor of six, was four.
The total number of outcomes is six.
The probability of getting a factor of six would be four out of six, four, six, which
of course we know reduces to two-thirds.
Now, the two basic foundation probabilities we're concerned about is the probability associated
with something that we are certain will happen.
For example, you may be certain that the sun will rise tomorrow, and most of us certainly
are certain of that.
But rather than getting involved in things of faith or really worrying about whether
it's 0.999 or one, let's talk about rolling a die.
If I roll a die and it comes with one face up, this is a standard die, what's the probability
of getting a number less than seven?
Well, I'm certain to get a number less than seven.
The probability, you might say, is 100% or one.
On the other hand, the other kind of thing I'm certain about is certain something will
not happen.
If today is Tuesday, I am certain tomorrow will not be Thursday.
But then again, if the legislature is in session, who knows, they could change the
days of the week.
But if I roll a die, a fair standard die, and I know it comes up one face, what's the
probability of that face having a picture of me on it?
Well, since a standard die has dots and not a picture of me on it, I am certain that will
not happen.
The probability is zero.
All other probabilities, all situations of uncertainty are between zero and one.
And we know that all numbers between zero and one are proper fractions, at least the
numbers we've dealt with so far.
So therefore a probability will always be a proper fraction.
Therefore fractions, decibels, and percents are something that we are going to use in
probability.
So let's go back to that graphic and once again see that all probabilities will fall
between zero and one.
In discussing those probabilities, we understand that there are two ways of finding out what
a probability is.
One is called a theoretical probability.
The other is called an experimental probability.
Experimental probability is based on an assumption.
We assume a coin to be fair and therefore we say the probability of getting ahead is
one half.
An experimental probability is obtained by actually doing an experiment, flipping the
coin perhaps a thousand times.
If indeed we get pretty close to 500 heads, we could say it's a fair coin.
So if your probability is based on knowledge by actually doing something, by conducting
an experiment, that's experimental probability.
If you're just taking a scientific guess or your belief system is being used to come
up with a probability, that is theoretical probability.
There's a very special name for when we get an experimental probability.
It's called relative frequency.
And relative frequency is the frequency that something happens.
How many times an outcome happened over what's called the sample size, the number of times
the experiment was done?
For example, if I flip the coin a thousand times and I got 400 heads, the experimental
probability would be 400 1,000s or 0.4.
Obviously, 400 1,000s reduces to four 10s.
That would be an experimental probability based on a relative frequency.
Now, at this point in time, before we get involved in the rules of probability, you
might say, okay, you promised us that probability would be useful, that in fact it affects our
everyday life.
And I'm certainly going to do that right now.
But I should mention that indeed if when you learned about fractions and decimals and
fractions earlier in this tape series, you said I'm still waiting for him to show us
when we're going to ever use this, why I need to know about this, now is the time.
Because as we see the common uses of probability, and we realize that probabilities are fractions
which can be written as a common fraction, a decimal or a percent, we can see that fractions
decibels of percent are rather important as we go through our lives.
Well, for example, think of anything that you deal with that involves chance, something
as simple as the chance of rain.
Typically, if you listen to a news broadcast, radio or television, you'll get the probability
of rain or the chance of rain today, tonight, tomorrow.
More officially, that's called the probability of measurable precipitation.
And of course, Julia's given to the nearest 10%.
They rarely say the chance of rain is 16 and two thirds percent, or the chance of rain
is one fifth.
They say the chance of rain is 20%, 30%, 40%.
If you heard on a Saturday morning that the chance of rain this afternoon was let's say
60% or 70% maybe, and you had plans to go on a picnic, would you change your plans?
Most people would because the probability of it raining was large enough that they realized
that most probably their picnic would be ruined, so they changed the date.
Think about this.
If you are or have anybody in your family or know somebody who was a teenage boy, somewhat
of the age enough, old enough to drive, one of their biggest concerns is the cost of automobile
insurance.
Well there are a number of things that a teenage boy can do to reduce his cost of automobile
insurance.
Obviously, one of them is to drive an old beat up car that's not worth very much.
Another thing is to drive with such care that one never has an accident and one never gets
a ticket.
Fine.
Let's just assume that the young man is a careful driver and will not have an accident
and will not get a speeding ticket.
But certainly in nowadays, you find very few teenage boys driving around old junkers.
In fact, at most of the schools I've taught at, the high schools I've taught, you can
always tell the teacher's parking lot from the student's parking lot, and I guarantee
you the student's parking lot have newer and fancier cars.
So let's assume this young man has a very nice car that costs a great deal to insure.
What can he do to reduce his cost for insurance?
And of course, why would that affect his cost?
Well, the first and most important thing that that young man can do in almost any state,
not every state, there are some states that's not true, is to have a B average or better
in high school or in college.
You may say, I'm saying that because I'm a teacher and I want everybody to go home and
study or do their homework and get good grades.
No, it's true.
And the question I ask my students is why?
Why does the insurance company lower your cost of insurance if you are a high school or
college age male and you have a B average or better?
And the students say, well, if you're home doing your homework, you won't have an accident
or you're a careful driver because you study real hard.
That has nothing to do with it.
In fact, the insurance companies probably don't know and certainly don't care why good
students have fewer accidents.
What they do care about is indeed that the probability of a student with a B average
or better, having an accident that the companies get to pay out on, is significantly less than
a student whose average is lower than B. All they care about is the probability.
The second best thing that teenage boy can do is to take drivers education.
And again, I ask my students, why does drivers education lower your insurance cost?
And again, because many students really don't pay attention, they say, well, because you
learn how to drive better, you learn all of the board accidents and so on and so forth.
Nonsense.
The insurance company knows from their past statistics that students who have drivers
education will have fewer accidents and fewer accidents that lead to the insurance company
having to pay a claim than students who have not had drivers education.
So a young male in high school or college age will benefit by having reduced insurance
cost if he takes drivers education.
It's interesting what the third best thing he can do, something I would definitely not
recommend to most teenage boys, but that is to get married.
Because married males have lower accident rates, a lower probability of having an accident
with the insurance company have to pay a claim than single males.
And in fact, I relate the story to my students that when I was 20 years old, approach, actually
I was 21, I guess.
I had my 21st birthday and I was getting married.
And I wrote to my insurance company to announce to them the great event and to be sure to
put my wife on our automobile insurance policy.
And not only did they send me a nice note of congratulations, I was getting married,
they sent me a check.
The check was for the lower premium, the lower insurance cost I would have now that I was
married.
See, even before I got married, I was benefiting from my relationship with my wife.
But the fact is, it was strictly based on probability.
The probability, magically, of my having an accident with insurance company have to pay
out had been decreased the moment I said I do.
Now, what else?
Life insurance is strictly based on probability.
The probability of your dying, the older you are, the greater the probability of your
dying sooner, the greater your insurance costs will be.
If you smoke, if you drink, if you have a hazardous occupation like working in construction
on very tall buildings or jumping out of airplanes like crazy people, if you have a history of
disease, if you are sick right now and have a disease that could kill you, obviously your
insurance costs will be much higher than a person who's healthy, young, who has a very
safe job and has no record of diseases that could cause a premature death.
The insurance company is concerned with the probability of your living long enough for
them to make a profit.
Other kinds of insurance are based on probability.
Homeowner's insurance.
When you buy a house, or in fact, I guess if you rent an apartment or rent a house and
you want to get insurance, one of the questions the insurance company wants to know is where
is the nearest fire hydrant?
Where is the nearest fire station?
What kind of rating does the fire department in your community have?
All these questions answer the, in terms of the probability of, if you have a fire in
your house or apartment, of the fire company getting there, being able to put out the fire
before their severe damage.
If the rating of the fire company or the distance to the fire company are such that it will increase
the probability of having severe damage, your cost of insurance will be greater.
How can you reduce the cost of your homeowners or renters insurance?
You certainly can't build a fire station across the street from your house or apartment
house.
What you can do is install a smoke alarm system, a burglar alarm system, or do something that
will reduce the probability of your having a claim that the insurance company have to
pay for fire or theft from your house or apartment.
Insurance in fact is based on probability.
And there are people who are actuarial scientists, who actually are math majors in college, who
make big money by figuring out those probabilities for the insurance companies.
Kind of sounds a little boring to me, but they make really good salaries, and of course
you've got to take lots of math exams to be able to have that kind of job.
So you can decide whether actuarial science sounds like something you'd like to do.
Probability is also good to measure risk.
When do we measure risk?
Well, if we're investing, we want to know what's the probability of the company we're
investing in going bankrupt?
What's the probability of a making 10, 20, 30% profit over the next year?
We may be concerned about the risk of lightning.
What is the probability of being struck by lightning?
Obviously that probability is enhanced if you're standing on the only hill while a thunderstorm
is going on, and you're wearing golf shoes with metal cleats and a metal hat on.
Or worse to have a metal cane that's stuck in the ground, because you are increasing
the probability of that lightning finding you.
Obviously, if you want to reduce the chance of being struck by lightning when the chance
of a thunderstorm increases, you stay in the house.
New businesses, when you start a new business, people entrepreneurs start new businesses
all the time, and they're concerned about the risk.
What's the probability of the business being successful?
What's the probability of them losing all their investment?
The sad thing is for many small businesses, the probability of the business being successful
is fairly small, but that doesn't stop people because, again, they want to have a chance
to become wealthy.
In fact, the lottery, which many people think is the magic trick to becoming wealthy, the
lottery is certainly a very risky business, and they even tell you what the probability
is.
I mean, the probability might be one chance in 17 million of winning the money.
But of course, the answer is that someone's got to be winning it.
It might as well be me.
But the fact is, if you're spending money on the lottery that you don't need to spend
on food or on rent or something vital, that's fine, because usually the lottery money is
going to improve education or whatever it might be doing, it's replacing additional
tax money.
But obviously, people who get so entranced by becoming a millionaire with the lottery
and go out and disregard the probability, disregard the very, very small fraction that
represents your chance of winning those millions of dollars, and they spend money they should
be spending on something more important, they're having a problem, they're really having a
problem.
Okay, another use of probability is in polls.
We have companies that have only job is to go out and poll people, samples of people
to try to predict the probability of someone favoring something, buying something, voting
for someone, being in support of a particular idea, and it's an estimation of the percentage
of the population who feels a certain way or would vote a certain way.
To me, it's really interesting looking back at some of the political polls that have occurred
over this 20th century.
In 1936, there was a poll that showed that Alph Landon, the Republican who was running
against Franklin Roosevelt, would win by a landslide.
It turned out that the literary digest magazine that came up with this poll had mailed its
polling letters, the sample it obtained was gotten from lists of people who owned automobiles,
who had telephones registered in their name, and who got this magazine.
Well, in 1936, most people were rather poor.
A lot of people didn't have a car, didn't have a telephone, and didn't spend money on
some literary magazine.
So generally the people who they polled, there were millions of people they polled, but they
were all wealthy, they were all successful, and they all wanted to see Franklin Roosevelt
defeated.
A statistician from Iowa came up with a poll and proved that this magazine was incorrect
and indicated that not Landon, but Roosevelt would win by a landslide, that statistician
was correct, his name was George Gallup, and the rest, of course, is polling history.
In 1948, George Gallup, along with everybody else, messed up.
They all said that Dewey would be president, and, of course, Harry Truman won.
The reason there was the probabilities were based on the census of 1940, how they selected
people to sample, to see what the population probability looked like was based on the 1940
census, because that was the last census, every 10 years we have a census.
Well, by 1948, World War II had changed the population of this country.
People had moved out of the south to the west and to the industrial north.
People had moved out of the cities to the suburbs, and many, many more people belonged
to unions, and all this affected how people voted, and, in fact, Truman won in a very
close election, but Errol the Pulse thought that Dewey would win.
In 1980, the election was too close to call, and yet it was a fairly significant victory
for President Reagan, that was his first term in office, and the reason for that was because
the probabilities were hard to judge because there was the third party candidate, an independent
candidate running along with Reagan and President Carter.
TV ratings are another use of probability.
When you see a show has a rating of 15.8, what that means is according to the sample
done by the rating service, 15.8% of all the homes in the sample had that show turned on.
At that time, at that day, and therefore they estimate that 15.8% of the population of homes
with TV sets had that show turned on.
If the show was turned on, hopefully the people who are watching that show, it is a probability.
It's the probability of picking a household with a TV at random, and they're watching
that show at that time on that day.
Again, we talked about polling and public attitudes.
You see in the newspaper all the time that the percentage of people who favor raising
taxes or lowering taxes, or whatever it might be, electing the school superintendent, appointing
the school superintendent, is such and such a percent.
That is a probability.
Marketing surveys are done, companies bring out new products, and they test market.
What's the probability of someone who likes peanut butter trying our brand new type of
peanut butter?
If that probability is relatively low, and we can't increase the probability through
advertising, we don't come out with the product.
Sometimes those surveys are incorrect, but they're done, and they're all based on probability.
Let's take a look at the rules of probability, because there are some very basic rules involving
the addition, subtraction, and multiplication of products.
Subtraction and multiplication of fractional numbers.
As we see in our first graphic here, we're looking for the probability of selecting a
face card.
The FC stands for face card, and we know that the probability of picking a face card in
a standard 52 card deck is 12 out of 52.
There are 12 face cards out of 52 cards in the deck.
The probability of picking a 3 at random, a well-shuffled deck, is 4 out of 52, and
the probability of picking a heart is 13 out of 52.
What if I said, what's the probability of picking one card out of that deck, and you
would win if you picked a face card or a 3?
That is, what's the probability of a face card or a 3?
Well, we'd add the 12 out of 52 for the face card, plus the 4 out of 52 for getting the
3, and we'd have 16 chances at a 52 of picking a face card or a 3.
How about a face card or a heart?
12 out of 52 plus 13 out of 52 equals 25 out of 52.
But there's a question mark after that fraction.
I want you to stop the tape and think about, is there something we haven't considered that
might make 25 out of 52 the incorrect probability?
What we have not considered, of course, is that there are 3 cards that are both face cards
and hearts, the king, queen, and jack of hearts.
So we have to subtract 3 out of 52 because we double counted those 3 cards.
And the correct answer, of course, is 22 out of 52.
In many cases, by the way, in dealing with probability, we aren't concerned with reducing our fractions.
Thus, we come to our first rule.
The probability of A or B, where A and B are 2 events, is the probability of A plus the probability of B
minus the probability of A and B.
If the probability of A and B are 0, this is called a disjoint set of events or mutually exclusive events.
So having a face card or 3 are mutually exclusive or disjoint,
the probability of both of them occurring on the same card is 0.
The next thing you want to talk about is independence.
Certain events are independent of each other.
This next graphic shows us visually what that means.
Let's say, for example, we have the world divided into males and females.
And let's assume that 20% of the population had, we considered, a above average IQ.
And indeed, if IQ and gender were independent, that would mean approximately 20% of the males
and 20% of the females would have an above average IQ.
IQ was independent of whether you were male or female.
Notice the proportion.
The area shaded in green is the same for both males and females.
But what if we said we were concerned about whether or not you wear earrings?
Now indeed, there may be a small percentage of males who wear earrings,
but the percentage of males and the percentage of females who wear earrings are not the same.
And they're certainly not the same as the proportion of the entire population.
It would depend on whether I knew you were male or a female
before I decide whether or not you were probably wearing earrings.
Wearing earrings and gender are not independent.
If two events are independent and we want to find the probability of A and B occurring at the same time,
we simply multiply the probability of A times the probability of B, only again if they're independent.
If the events are not independent, then we'll save that for a course on probability and statistics at some later date.
We'll only consider at this point things that are independent.
So with the probability of or and the probability of and,
next we want to talk about the probability of not.
If it's a 30% chance of rain today, what's the chance of being sunny?
If you said 70%, you fell for the trap. You're wrong.
70% is not the chance of being sunny.
70% is the chance of not raining.
The chance of not raining includes being sunny, partly cloudy,
maybe even sprinkling a little bit, less than measurable precipitation.
This is called the complement, similar to the complementary angles of two angles whose sum is 90 degrees.
The probability of not A is 1 minus the probability of A.
If there's a 30% chance of rain, there's a 70% chance of it not raining.
Let's put this all together in a problem.
You'll see a graphic on your screen that shows a car coming up to what's called a T intersection,
stopping at the stop sign, and you want to know what's the chance,
what's the probability of after you're stopping being able to immediately make a left turn.
You can see that the probability of a car coming from the left is 0.5, 5 tenths.
The probability of a car coming from the right is 3 tenths.
They're independent. That is, if you knew a car was coming from the right,
it wouldn't help you determine whether or not there was a car coming from the left.
We want to find the probability of being able to make an immediate left turn.
That turns out to be the probability that there are no cars coming from the left or from the right,
which is 1 minus the probability of a car coming from the left or the right.
Again, it's the complement.
Now, let's see how we do that.
The probability of left or right, according to our formula,
is the probability of left plus the probability of right minus the probability of left and right.
But what is the probability of left and right?
Well, are the two events independent? We said they were.
And therefore, the probability of a car coming from the left and from the right
is the product of those two decimals, 0.5 times 0.3 or 0.15.
And therefore, now we can compute the probability of being able to make a left turn.
It's 1 minus, and then we have these square brackets which act like parentheses.
Do me first. 0.5 plus 0.3 minus 0.15.
We subtract and add from left to right.
And 0.5 plus 0.3 is 0.8 minus 0.15 is 0.65.
So 1 minus 0.65 is 0.35.
If you're really sharp, you may recognize we could have done this a lot more easily
by simply multiplying the probability of not a car coming from the left 0.5
and a car not coming from the right 0.7 and getting the same 0.35.
This is another example of a rule called the Morgan's Law.
And we'll worry about that in some advanced high school class.
We have looked at probability.
And in looking at probability, we've seen things like theoretical probability
and experimental probability.
And in doing an experimental probability, we look at relative frequency.
We've looked at many uses of probability.
And we've also examined rules of probability, the probability rule for or,
the probability rule for and, and the probability rule for not.
And then we've looked at a somewhat practical situation
in which we could compute a probability.
In this case, we used decimals. We could have also used fractions.
We added, we subtracted, and we multiplied those fractional numbers.
All skills that we should retain from the earliest lessons in this tape.
We've now concluded our look at statistics and probability.
In lesson 27, we'll talk about measurement.
