This is Lesson 28, in which we'll discuss problem-solving techniques.
One of the reasons we learn mathematics is to be able to help us solve problems, whether
they're small problems, personal nature, or giant-sized problems that involve governments,
businesses, or what have you.
The fact is that mathematics, because we can use it to model situations, both as numbers
or with graphs or with charts, we use mathematics to solve problems.
There are various courses you can take on methods of problem-solving.
The purpose of this lesson is just to introduce you to a couple of methods of looking at fairly
simple problems that use some mathematics and that allow you to see that there is no
one right way to solve a problem.
We'll look at, like I said, a few different problems and we'll see how we can use a method
to solve that problem.
The first problem involves a farmer.
So even if you live in New York City or Chicago, you can imagine a farmer.
The farmer has 100 animals.
Some of those animals are cows, the rest of the animals are chickens.
All together, the 100 animals have a total of 372 legs.
The question is, how many of each type of animal are there?
Well, we can do this by guessing.
We certainly won't do it that way.
We can also do this using algebra, but this is not an algebra course and we certainly
will not do it that way.
We will try to do it in an organized fashion using a chart.
So again, let's take a look at the problem.
Once again, we have 100 animals.
Some are cows, some are chickens, they have 372 legs.
What are we going to do to find this out without playing the guessing game?
Well, as I said, we'll use a chart and here's the chart.
We have a number of columns, one marked cows, one marked cow legs, a third column marked
chickens, the next one chicken legs, and finally total legs.
We know that the number of cows plus the number of chickens must equal 100 and the total number
of legs must be 372.
So what we start off with is let's take a look at if all the animals were cows.
100 cows, each cow has four legs, that would be 400 legs.
With 100 cows, there'd be no chickens since the number of chickens plus the number of
cows must equal 100 and the number of chicken legs, they have four zero and the total is
400.
Obviously, this is too much, but let's take a look at what happens if we have no cows
and all 100 of the animals are chickens.
So we see that with zero cows, zero cow legs, 100 chickens, each with two legs, 200 chicken
legs, there's a total of 200 legs, that's too small.
So someplace between this, we have a combination that will give us 372 legs, but at least
we have someplace to work with and this chart should be very helpful in terms of getting
us fairly quickly to the solution.
The next step is let's take the halfway point, 50 cows, 50 chickens, 50 cows must have 200
legs, 50 chickens have 100 legs, all together 300 legs, 300 is too few, we need 372, which
means we need to probably add more cows, because when we had 100 cows, we had 400 legs, when
we had 100 chickens, we had only 200 legs.
So we try 60 and the next line shows what happens if you have 60 cows and of course
40 chickens, 60 cows would have 240 legs, 40 chickens, 80 legs, all together 320, still
too few legs, we need more cows.
How many more?
Well, one of the things we could do at this point in time is to analyze what we gain when
we add a cow.
Obviously, we add a cow, we lose a chicken, since the sum of the animals must equal 100.
So notice what we have here is 61 cows, 39 chickens, total of 100 animals, 61 times 4,
244.
So we've gained four cow legs by adding one cow.
Well that makes a great deal of sense.
We have now 39 chickens with 78 legs, so we've lost two chicken legs.
Well that makes sense because we've lost one chicken and each chicken has two legs.
Our net gain is two legs.
We've gained four cow legs, but lost two chicken legs and therefore went from 320 to 322 legs.
The question is now, we want to get up to 372.
Every time we add a cow, we add two legs.
So what's the difference between 372, 322?
The difference is 50, a little subtraction problem.
Now the question is, how many times do we have to add two legs to get those 50 additional legs?
Well obviously we divide by two and 50 divided by two is 25.
So we need 25 more cows, but we had 61 cows, 25 plus 61 would be 86 cows.
As you can see, 86 cows would give us 344 legs, that is cow legs, and the 14 chickens
would give us 28 legs, a total of 100 animals and a total of 372 legs.
Using the chart, we did not have to guess.
We were in organized fashion and one of the most important things in problem solving is
organizing your procedure so that you don't skip over something, you don't miss something.
And here, once we got far enough, we were able to analyze numerically what happened
every time we added a cow and took away a chicken.
And then we were able to, using very basic arithmetic subtraction and division, determine
exactly how many cows there were.
Now, even if you are a farmer, you probably don't care about how many cows, how many chickens
in combination like this.
The purpose of this problem was not that it's a real problem, something we should be concerned
about.
The idea is it's a problem that demonstrates the use of an organized problem solving technique.
Another technique that's commonly used in solving problems is to make the problem simpler,
make it smaller.
And here's an example of that kind of problem.
You have a school and the school has exactly 1000 students.
It also has exactly 1000 student lockers and every year on the first day of school, all
the students line up in alphabetical order.
And student number one, which is probably, you know, the first Amy Arkwright or something
like that, Amy Ardvok, I guess, her first name begins with A, her last name begins with
A, Amy Ardvok walks through and opens up all the lockers and then she goes on to wherever
she goes.
The second student, alphabetically, student number two, walks through and closes all the
lockers that are divisible by his or her number by two.
That is, all the even number lockers are now closed.
The odds are still open.
The question is, if this continues so that the third student goes through and changes
the position of all the locker doors where the lockers are numbered, a number that's
a multiple of three, and student four does the same thing, changes the position.
Open locker is closed, a closed locker is opened for all the lockers where the number
is divisible by four.
By the time the thousandth student goes through, which lockers will be open, which lockers
will be closed?
Well, that's a heck of a problem.
Let's make it smaller.
Let's take the first 10 lockers.
Make believe this was a small rural school that only had 10 students and 10 lockers.
And then once we get an opportunity to look at what happens when that if it had 10 students
have walked through, we may be able to generalize and make an answer, create an answer for a
problem, the larger problem with 1000 students and 1000 lockers.
Well, here we can see what happens after the first three students have gone through.
Student number one, we noticed we have, we have 10 lockers indicated one through 10.
And if the student number one has passed through, they're all open.
The O is steady for open.
Student number two walks through and closes lockers two, four, six, eight and 10.
The odd numbered lockers remain open.
Student number three closes locker three, opens locker six and closes locker nine because
three, six and nine are all divisible by three.
What I'd like you to do is at this point in time to copy down that list of, of, of locker
numbers one through 10 and the results after the first three students walk through.
And then what I'd like you to do is complete the list for students four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine and 10.
And when you've gotten that done, come on back.
We'll take a look what happens and we'll see if we can figure out which lockers remain
open after the students have marched through.
Stop the tape and work that problem, please.
Okay.
Here we see the results that you should have gotten.
Student four, remember, changes the situation for the doors of the lockers that are divisible
by four.
So he or she opens locker four and opens locker eight and has the only lockers that
are touched by student four.
Student five comes in and can only change the doors on locker five and 10.
So locker five door is closed, locker 10 door is opened.
Student six can only affect one locker, locker number six, because in the numbers one through
10, six is the only number that has six as a factor.
And of course, since six was opened, student six closes locker number six.
Similarly, student seven closes locker number seven, student eight closes locker eight.
Student nine comes through and since locker nine had been closed ever since student three,
I guess, closed it, then basically student nine opened locker nine.
Student 10 closes locker 10.
If we look on that last line, we can see what has happened after the 10 students have marched
through with this procedure.
Let's see which lockers are open.
One, four and nine.
Now, one, four and nine.
You see something common about those three numbers.
If you wanted to describe those three numbers, what might you say?
You wouldn't say they're even because one and nine are not even.
You wouldn't even say they're prime because one is not prime.
Four and nine are composite numbers.
What adjective might you use to describe these three numbers as opposed to the other
numbers two, three, five, six, seven, eight and 10.
Well, hopefully you remember our discussion of exponents and the discussion of square
numbers.
One is one squared, four is two squared, nine is three squared.
These three numbers are the three square numbers from one through 10.
Now why is that true?
Why are the square numbers the ones with the locker door still open?
I want you to think back to lesson one.
Seems like a long time ago.
In lesson one, we looked at rectangular arrays to represent the multiplication facts for
various numbers.
We looked at 12 and we saw that 12 could be shown as one times 12, two times six or three
times four.
We looked at nine.
We saw that nine could be done as one times nine, but also was three times three.
Nine was a square number.
The rectangular representation of three times three was a square, a very special rectangle.
Now think about that.
The square numbers have one set of factors that are the same.
That is the factors of nine include three, one, three and nine.
So if one times nine is nine and three times three, so there are only three factors.
The number eight has one times eight and two times four.
Therefore four different factors, therefore four students, student one, two, four and
eight will change the position of door eight.
One will open it, two will close it, four will open it and eight will close it.
So all non-square numbers will have an even number of factors and therefore an even number
of students will affect the position of that locker's door.
And therefore half of them will open the locker.
The other half will close it and the last student to touch that locker door, which will
be the student whose number is the same as the locker number, will close the door.
Square numbers have an odd number of factors.
For example, 16, one times 16, two times eight, four times four.
And therefore one, two, four, eight and 16 are factors of 16.
So therefore an odd number, five factors, three of those students, one, four and 16
will open the lockers, two of those students, two and eight will close the lockers.
And therefore when 16 is finished, the locker is open.
So the answer is, among the thousand lockers in the original problem, the square number
of lockers, one, four, nine, 16, 25, 36, et cetera, will be open and all the other non-square
numbers will be closed.
Now think about that problem.
Not only do we show a method of making the problem simpler to see, we also use the notion
of multiples and factors.
We talked about square numbers and rectangles, rectangular rays and square rays.
So quite a few things we've talked about previously had it to be known to be able to solve this
problem.
The knowledge of various mathematical facts, concepts and methods is very helpful in problem
solving.
Okay, let's consider another problem.
This is a problem that really isn't as mathematical as it is the ability to visualize.
We have a cake.
The cake must be cut using exactly three cuts.
It has to be cut into eight equal pieces.
Hopefully many of you have not seen this problem before because I'd like you to stop and think
about how you would cut this cake into eight equal pieces using only three cuts.
Stop the tape and consider your answer to that problem now, please.
Many people say it's impossible.
They try to cut the cake and cut it again and you wind up cutting it either into unequal
pieces or not into eight pieces.
That's because you're limiting your visualization to making cuts from the top down.
Then cutting the cake halfway from the top down, then rotating the cake 90 degrees, we
know what that means, and cutting it again from the top down.
You now have divided the cake into four equal pieces.
The third cut is not done from the top down.
It's done halfway up the cake across the cake.
And as you can see in the cuts demonstrated in this graphic, you would cut the cake into
eight equal pieces.
In effect, what we've demonstrated here is that a cake is three dimensional.
Each of the three cuts is in a different dimension.
One cut is really top down.
The other cut is really left to right and then side to side.
The three cuts give us eight slices, eight equal pieces.
And the reason, of course, is that two to the third power is eight.
So there's a case where visualization was important.
Understanding about powers of two was also important.
As long as we're talking about food, let's continue with another kind of cake.
This is a cubic cake.
You can see this is a cake that basically is been sliced or divided up into smaller
cubes, three cubes on each side, each face.
Obviously we have a total of 27 cubes.
The cake is frosted on its top and its four sides.
The bottom is not frosted.
We are, uh, like I said, we created 27 small cubic pieces of this cubic cake.
The question that is asked is how many pieces are frosted in how many different
ways that is how many sides are frosted.
Well, what's the largest number of sides that could be frosted as you take one
of these small 27 cubic pieces out?
The answer is three because only a maximum of three sides can be seen on
any one of the smaller cubes.
The other sides are really on the interior of the cake.
And here you see a picture of a cubic piece of cake that has been
frosted on three sides.
Where are these three sides located?
Looking at the cake, we could see the only place where you would actually see
all three sides of a piece are at the corners at the top.
So one, two, three, four corners of top, there'd be four pieces that would
have their three sides frosted.
Okay, the next visual shows us a piece with two sides frosted.
And the question now is where are those sides located?
And you can see in the next graphic exactly where those sides are.
The sides that have two, I should say, I said side, the two cubes that have
two sides frosted, excuse me.
Again, the cubes, the small cubes that have two sides frosted.
If you count, you will see there are 12 pieces, 12 cubic pieces that have
exactly two sides frosted.
Okay, next we have pieces that have one side frosted.
Where are those?
Well, as we see in the graphic, they're located at the very bottom in the
middle and the very center of all the faces and also at the very top, the
centerpiece in the top of the cake.
There are a total of nine pieces that have exactly two, sorry,
exactly one side frosted.
So let's see, we had four pieces that were frosted on three sides, 12 pieces
that were frosted on two sides and nine pieces that were frosted on one side.
That's a total of 25 pieces.
The question now is where are the missing two pieces?
Well, what you must consider when you visualize is that there are pieces,
obviously two of them that have no sides frosted.
These are two pieces in the interior of the cake, the one right in the middle
of the cubic cake and the one below it that has no outside is no, no surface
of that, those two pieces are on the outside of the cake.
And obviously 25 plus two would give us 27.
So by visualizing and examining cases, we can solve the problem.
Again, none of these problems are of great significance.
The key thing is to take simple problems and to show you the power of organized
techniques and then using the appropriate mathematics to solve the problem.
Okay, like to take a look at now is a couple of problems and we'll work
those at the whiteboard.
And these are problems that I believe will demonstrate not only problem solving
techniques, good mathematics, but interesting enough, uh, show that
mathematics and knowledge of mathematics help make you a better consumer.
The first has to do with pizzas.
As indicated earlier, I really love pizza, one of my favorite foods.
And many years ago, my wife and I frequented a pizza restaurant that had
something very interesting.
As you walked in, they had the pizza trays, the trays, the pizzas came on,
nailed to the wall.
So you could see exactly what the pizzas look like, how big a pizza was.
And the basic, they sold two types of pizzas.
They had an eight inch pizza and a 16 inch pizza.
And they had the prices indicated.
So we have an eight inch pizza and the eight inch pizza, eight inch pizza
cost five dollars.
This was a few years ago.
Pizza was a lot less expensive.
They also had a large 16 inch pizza.
And the 16 inch pizza cost $10.
Now I want you to stop and think and determine which pizza is a better deal.
Is the eight inch pizza, eight inch pizza for five dollars or the 16 inch
pizza for $10, a better deal.
And again, you want to eat as much pizza as you'd like.
So it's not that you don't want the smaller size pizza, uh, because it's
smaller, you want to know which one is the better deal.
Stop the tape and consider the problem and come up with an answer.
I would imagine that many of you said it makes no difference.
I can buy two eight inch peaches for five dollars each.
That'd be $10 or a 16 inch pizza since two times eight is 16.
Now this would be okay.
If you promise to only eat a long one diameter of each pizza, because you
see the measurements, eight inches and 16 inches are distance measurements.
And those are the measurements of the diameter of the circular tray that the
pizza is conserved on.
We generally don't eat across the diameter.
We eat the entire pizza.
We need to do is compare the areas of the pizza.
And therefore, if we don't know about area and don't know the formula for the
area of a circle, we're kind of stuck with believing whatever we're told.
Remember that the area for a circle is pie times the radius squared.
Now, what's the radius of an eight inch pizza?
Well, eight inches of diameter, the radius is half of eight, which
is four inches, we square four inches.
We get 16 and we'll just leave pie alone.
So we'll call that the area of the five dollar pizza is 16 pie.
Now, since pie is about 3.14, that would be around 50 square inches.
Okay.
Pie are squared for the 16 inch pizza will be pie times eight squared from
eight would be half of 16 eight squared is 64.
So the area of the larger pizza is 64 pie or about 200 square inches of pizza.
Now we can see that indeed the 16 inch pizza was four times the area of the eight
inch pizza.
It would take four five dollar pizzas to equal the amount of pizza in a 16 inch
$10 pizza.
So if you said they were about the same and therefore why not buy two eight
inch pizzas, you got ripped failure to know mathematics will cost you money.
Another example, another food example, but this time from the cereal area of
your grocery store, let's take a typical cereal box.
Cereal box is shaped as a rectangular prism or rectangular solid or a box.
And let's say we had this box and we'll draw a little rectangular solid here.
And let's say that this box was six inches across three inches deep and 12 inches high.
What I'd like you to do first is to find the volume of that box.
We talked about the volume of a rectangular solid.
So stop the clock and compute the volume of that box.
The volume of this box of cereal is simply 12 times six times three or a
total of 216 cubic inches.
Now we know that 216 we should remember the 216 is a cubic number.
It is six cubed, which means we could have a box that was six by six by six, a
cubic box, six by six by six, and it would have the same volume.
Now each of these boxes have six faces.
We want to do is find the surface area, the amount of cardboard that is used to
construct the box.
The rectangular box at the top obviously has two front, two pieces front and
back that are 12 by six.
The two sides are three by 12 and there's two of them.
So two times three by 12 and the top and bottom, of course, are three by six.
So two times three times six.
The cubic box has six square faces, all of which are six by six.
So there's six times six times six.
The surface area is also 216, but it's 216 square inches.
I'd like you to stop the tape and compute the total area, surface area for the
rectangular box.
Do that multiplication and addition now, please.
Two times 12 times six.
Well, that's the same as 12 times 12.
That's 144 square inches.
Two times three times 12 is six times 12.
That's 72 square inches.
Two times three times six is the same as six times six.
That's 36 square inches.
And we add that up.
We get 252 square inches.
Now the question is this, if you were manufacturing cereal, would you want to
spend the additional money for 36 more square inches of cereal?
I'm not sure if I would, but they do.
And that's the amazing thing.
That's the amazing thing here is that the cereal companies actually could
have cubic boxes and save 36 square inches of cardboard multiplied by millions
of boxes of cereal.
But of course they are solving a different problem.
They're solving the problem of how to sell the cereal.
And of course the rectangular box makes the box look bigger, as well as small
hands probably couldn't grasp a cubic box.
But the whole idea of knowing about volume and area presents an interesting
consumer question to us.
We've looked at various types of problem solving techniques, certainly not all
types of techniques, but hopefully you've gained some insight into organizing
yourself to solve problems and using your knowledge of mathematics to help
you solve those problems.
In our next lesson, number 29, we'll talk about solving simple algebraic equations.
