We've finally reached Lesson 30, the last lesson in the Basic Math series.
In this lesson, we'll take a brief introductory look at Algebra I.
Actually, we've already seen some aspects of Algebra I in previous lessons.
We've looked at plotting points and graphing the lines for equations.
We've looked at solving equations.
We did that in the previous lesson.
So those are aspects of Algebra I.
What I wanted to discuss in this last lesson were polynomials, something we spend a great
deal of time on in Algebra I.
Algebra I, you see, is a generalization of arithmetic.
That's why it's so very important to understand the foundations of arithmetic to be able to
understand Algebra I and beyond.
Well, what are these things called polynomials?
Well, remember we said that numbers really have two parts.
They have digits and place values.
In a polynomial, such as the one you see on the screen, you have place values that are
actually powers of a variable.
We have a 2 in the 1's place.
We have a 5 in the x's place and a 3 in the x's squared place.
Very similar to 352.
In fact, if you allow x, the variable, to be equal to 10, then 3x squared plus 5x plus
2 is 3100's plus 510's plus 2 1's, 352.
In fact, what I tell my students is to always check problems, and we'll do that later on
when you're adding something or multiplying polynomials, by after you have an answer,
replace the x with 10 and see if your answer is correct.
So in reality, it's a generalization.
We're not restricted any longer by having only the digits 0 through 9 as digits.
Because we're not having our place value given by location, the place value is shown.
Therefore, we can have any kind of number for our digit.
That is, the coefficient of x or x squared can be positive or negative, a fraction, a
decimal, a square root, anything you'd like it to be.
Let's take a look at a couple of examples and see how by generalizing arithmetic with
polynomials, we also get a really better feel of our understanding of our number system.
The next number we look at, the next polynomial, 3x squared minus 5x plus 2.
The only difference is we change the number in front of the x, the coefficient of x, into
negative 5.
Now, no big deal except look at the number to the right of it.
It says 3 minus 5, 2.
That is 300, negative 52.
I want you to stop the tape and decide what number in our number system would be equivalent
to 300, negative 52.
Stop the tape and find that answer now, please.
Well, again, using our place value system, the 3 is in the hundreds place.
The negative 5 is in the tens place and the 2 is in the ones place.
300 minus 50 plus 2 is 252.
We would normally not do that with our whole numbers.
Our whole numbers only have the positive integers, that is from 0 through 9, actually the positive
integers 1 through 9 plus 0, as the digits.
But because polynomials are generalized and can have any type of number for a digit, we
could have these negative numbers.
Here's another polynomial, 3x squared plus a half x plus 2.
We've replaced the 5 or the negative 5 with a fraction.
Again, in polynomials, the coefficient or digit for the place value can be a fraction.
To the right of that polynomial, we have the number 300 halfty 2.
You may laugh when I said halfty.
But again, a number in the tens place, if it's a 3, that's 30.
If it's a 6, it's 60.
So if it's a half, it's halfty.
What I'd like you to do is stop the tape and decide what number is equivalent to 300 halfty
2.
Once again, we use our place values, 300, half of 10 is 5, plus 2, well, that's 307.
Now again, we never write the number 300 halfty 2.
But typically, when students can't even figure out what that number might be, that means
they really truly don't understand the importance of place value.
If you do not understand the importance of place value in whole numbers, you may have
difficulty understanding the importance of what we do when we work with polynomials.
What we're going to do now is look at a couple arithmetic problems involving polynomials.
Our first problem is an addition problem, 3x squared plus 7x minus 5 plus 2x squared
minus 4x minus 3.
The parentheses that are shown are really not necessary, but I've written them in because
I want to really emphasize the two polynomials that are being added.
Thinking back to our first lesson, addition is counting.
When we add, we only can add things that are the same, therefore, we line up place values.
Notice I've rewritten the second polynomial, so the place values, x squared, x, and 1's
places are lined up.
And now I simply add negative 5 plus negative 3, negative 8.
Negative 7 plus negative 4, positive 3, 3 plus 2, 5, 5x squared plus 3x minus 8.
I can check this answer by plugging in 10 for x.
The 3x squared plus 7x minus 5 is 300 plus 70 minus 5, 365.
The 2x squared minus 4x minus 3 is 200 minus 40, 160 minus 3, 157.
When I add those two numbers up, I get 522.
My answer of 5x squared plus 3x minus 8, 500 plus 30 minus 8 is also 522.
My answer checks.
Now let's take a look at a multiplication problem.
We're multiplying 3x minus 2 times x squared minus 4x plus 5.
Multiplication is not counting.
We don't have to worry about place values.
What we have to worry about, of course, is ensuring we multiply each part of the first
number by each part of the second number.
So just like we multiplied the old-fashioned way before we learned about lattice multiplication,
we multiply negative 2 by each of the three parts of this other polynomial.
And we get negative 2x squared plus 8x minus 10.
Again, a negative times a positive is negative, and a negative times a negative is positive.
Then we multiply all the terms by 3x.
Notice just as with whole numbers, we move everything over one place, not because it's
magic, but because when I was multiplying by negative 2, I was multiplying by the number
in the 1's place, and 1's times 1's is 1.
So negative 2 times 5 is negative 10 1's, and 1's times x's is x's.
Negative 2 times negative 4x is positive 8x's, and 1's times x squared is x squared, giving
us the negative 2x squared.
But now I'm multiplying by x's.
3x times 5 is 15x, and that goes in the x place.
3x times negative 4x, digit times digit, 3 times negative 4 is negative 12, place value
times place value, x times x is x squared.
So that would be negative 12x squared.
And similarly, 3x times x squared would be 3x cubed.
So everything is lined up, my addition, where I can only add along similar place values,
and I wind up with 3x cubed minus 14x squared plus 23x minus 10.
Okay.
Is this the correct answer?
Well, again, we can check our answer by substituting 10 for x, 3x minus 2 becomes 28.
x squared minus 4x plus 5 becomes 65.
28 times 65 is the arithmetic problem, similar to 3x minus 2 times x squared minus 4x plus
5.
The answer is 1,820.
If we take our answer of 3x cubed minus 14x squared plus 23x minus 10, we get 3 1,000s
minus 1,400s plus 2310s minus 10.
That of course turns out to be 1,820.
Our answer is correct.
Notice that our coefficients, our digits are multi-digit numbers, 14, 23 and 10.
That is, there's no limit to what you can use in polynomials for your coefficients.
All right.
Let's take a look at a fraction problem.
Fractions in algebra are no different than fractions in arithmetic with one exception.
In arithmetic, when we wanted to reduce a fraction, we would say what number divides
both the numerator and the denominator?
And we had certain rules, we knew our seven times tables, possibly we recognized numbers
in the 11 times table.
Here unfortunately, if I wanted to know about the x plus one times table, it would take
a very long time because there's an infinite number of facts in the x plus one times table.
It's a mess.
So what we do is something called factoring.
I'm not going to even explain what factoring is except to say it enables us to separate
numbers out into their factors.
But instead of having factors that are prime numbers like 2, 3 and 5, we now have prime
polynomials such as x plus 1 and x minus 3.
So here we have a fraction, x squared minus x minus 6 over x squared minus 9.
And we'd like to know if we can reduce this fraction.
Well, the first thing we need to do is factor.
How we do that, I'll leave up to your algebra one course.
But we do see that x squared minus x minus 6 is equal to x minus 3 times x plus 2.
X squared minus 9 is equal to x minus 3 times x plus 3.
We are able to cancel the x minus 3's dividing top and bottom by the same number, in this
case, x minus 3.
We'll left with x plus 2 over x plus 3.
Those are both prime polynomials, and therefore we cannot reduce the fraction further.
To double check to see that indeed we have the correct answer, we substitute 10 for x
and x squared minus x minus 6 becomes 84.
X squared minus 9 becomes 91.
X plus 2 is 12, x plus 3 is 13, when x is 10.
Is 84, 91 the same as 12, 13's?
Well, 84, 91's we might recognize if we're really sharp, both numbers can be divided
by 7.
84 divided by 7 is 12, and interestingly enough, 91 divided by 7 is 13.
So indeed 84 over 91 is equal to 12, 13's in value.
And therefore our answer is correct.
Reducing x squared minus x minus 6 over x squared minus 9 is done by getting the answer
of x plus 2 over x plus 3.
By simplifying the polynomial fraction, we're able to work with it and to use it as an answer.
So just as with arithmetic fractions, we want to reduce all our answers to lowest possible
terms.
Okay, now we can see some of the things in terms of using polynomials, adding, multiplying,
we can also subtract and divide of course, and we even dealt with polynomial fractions.
But the question is, what is the importance?
When will we ever use algebra?
So many parents I talk with of students of mine say, well, I didn't do well in algebra.
I don't need algebra.
My child doesn't need algebra.
Well, they're wrong.
Algebra is in our ever growing technological world, algebra is the key to understanding
models.
It's the key to understanding using a computer to predict what's happening, using statistics
as we saw in a previous lesson.
So algebra is rather important.
Equations are used to solve problems.
In many cases, those equations are solved by computers because they're much too complex
to solve by hand.
But if you don't understand how to solve them by hand, you will be unknowing when it comes
to recognizing what the computer is trying to do.
Plus, you'll be unable to talk to the engineers and scientists with whom you might have to
talk because they can understand algebra and you don't.
Models.
We've talked about models before.
Model is simply an equation or a set of equations to explain something.
A model about a particular company and its growth and its profits.
So we can examine that model to predict possibly whether the stock price will go up or down.
A model about population.
A model about the number of students in our school system.
A model about the future of social security and Medicare and the costs and what we might
do to prevent inflation or recession or any other economic catastrophe that we could possibly
do something about.
Now, we build an economic model, a series of algebraic equations, to try to predict what's
happening in the future.
Sometimes we solve systems of equations, more than one equation.
That's a very important thing in many areas when you have a number of equations and you
must get the solution that solves all of the equations.
That's something we talk about in Algebra I.
Again, another important thing I'll reemphasize this is if you do pooling in Algebra I and
the only reason you do pooling in Algebra I is either A, you didn't learn what you needed
to do beforehand.
That's the purpose of this course or you just didn't do your work.
You said, ah, who cares?
Well, that truly limits your career options.
In terms of computers, engineering, science, any of the technological skills, even in the
area of finance, so much of that is now technologically based.
You are immediately reducing the opportunities of the kind of mathematics and the kind of
science you can take in high school and therefore limiting your choices in college.
Even if you know you want to be a writer, an English teacher, a historian, a logician,
a philosopher, a politician, it's still vital to understand Algebra because as the key to
mathematics, high school and college mathematics, if you don't aren't successful in Algebra
I and therefore limit your math and science that you take in high school or college, as
a consumer, as a citizen, you will be limited in your understanding of what's happening.
You will be limited in understanding about choices that were made by our national government
in terms of space exploration, in terms of air and water pollution.
You will be limited in terms of your understanding of the various biological and chemical and
physical events that happen that we have to make decisions and indicate opinions upon because
you will be limited without the ability in Algebra I, your knowledge of science, mathematics
and technology will be severely limited.
So if I haven't sold you on the idea that you need to be successful and knowledgeable
in the area of Algebra I, then I haven't done my job.
But my primary job, of course, on this tape series was to ensure that you had a firm foundation
upon which to build to be successful in Algebra I.
And I believe we've done that.
And in fact, we probably need to review some of the important facts that we've seen that
relate to this foundation.
We have certainly seen the consistency, the consistency of mathematics.
And we've seen that adding and subtracting are counting, adding and subtracting are counting
whether you're adding or subtracting whole numbers, fractions, decimals, or as we have
seen here, polynomials.
We do the same thing.
We line up the place value and add only numbers with the same place value.
When we multiply, we're not concerned with counting.
Multiplication, we worry about digit times digit and place value times place value, no
matter what we're multiplying.
In division, division is the opposite of multiplication.
No matter what we're dividing, this is always true.
The long division algorithm that we look way back towards the beginning of this series
has a very logical order.
It's not just a sing-song set of four steps that we will memorize in fourth grade.
It is an order that you should understand and be able to later on in Algebra I or Algebra
II transfer into division of polynomials.
A fraction is a number.
A common fraction is a number, where the numerator is the digit and the denominator is the place
value.
And of course, the rules for adding, subtracting, multiplying fractions are no different than
the rules for adding, subtracting, and multiplying all numbers.
The decimal point separates the whole numbers, place values, and the fractional place values,
and helps us line up decimal points when we add, subtract decimal numbers.
We also can help us determine the decimal point location in multiplication and division
of decimals.
Now, what are some things that I think you should know?
Well, I think you should know how to work with decimals.
What should you know?
Well, to add or subtract decimals, you line up the decimal points, including the one in
the answer.
To multiply decimal numbers, you simply count the number of decimal places in the two numbers
you're multiplying, and add that number of places up, and that is the number of decimal
places in your answer.
To divide, change the divisor, the number you're dividing by, into a whole number by
moving the decimal point a number of places until it's at the back of that number.
As many places as you've moved the decimal point in the divisor move the same number
of places in the number you're dividing into, and put the decimal point in the answer right
above the decimal point in the dividend.
That is the number that you're dividing into.
Rounding off is another skill I think it's very, very important, how we round it off.
We went to the place value one beyond the place that we needed to round off.
We looked if it was a five or more there, we added one to the place value that we're
going to round off to.
If the number in that last place was less than five, we didn't change.
We just left the number in the rounding off place to itself.
We remember, please excuse my dear Aunt Sally.
We always do parentheses first, and then we use exponents, and then we multiply and divide,
and then finally add and subtract.
We have a number of multiplications and divisions in a row, or a number of additions and subtractions
in a row.
We start from left to right.
We know that any number to the zero power is one, not because it's a rule, because we've
seen it.
We understand that eight to the zero times eight to the three is eight to the three,
and therefore eight to the zero must be one.
We also know that eight to the three divided by eight to the three is eight to the zero,
and therefore eight to the zero must be one.
We know that if we have fractional powers, that the numerator of that fractional power
is the power, and the denominator is the root, and if we have a negative power, the negative
power means we're taking the reciprocal, so that, for example, three fourths to the negative
two is four thirds to the positive two, or sixteen ninths, or one and seven ninths if
you'd like.
These are some of the things I believe you should understand, but also that you should
feel confident in.
As I said in the very first lesson, 85% of success in mathematics is confidence.
If there are areas that you still feel less confident in that we covered in this series,
you need to go back and review the tape.
If you haven't done the problems in the workbook, well, you should go back and do the problems
in the workbook.
And then check the solutions to see that not only did you get the right answer, but your
method of getting the right answer sort of matches up with the method that we've decided
is the correct way to do that.
Now in some cases, you may have a method that's somewhat different, and that's okay as long
as you get the right answer, but the solution method is provided to enable you to see that
indeed either A, you did it right and got the right answer, or for some reason, you
messed up, and messing up is okay, but then looking at how to do it correctly, one should
be able to say, aha, now I see how to do this.
And if you don't see how to do it, what do you do?
You go back to the lesson in the tape where we discussed that particular concept or method
and you watch the tape again.
That's the one little thing about video is if there's something you need to learn, you
can watch me over and over again until it clicks because in mathematics, sometimes it
takes a period of time before a particular concept makes sense, but you need to be doing
those problems.
Of course, if you have access to a textbook, and especially if the textbook has answers,
then it would be really good for you to work as many problems as you can do in that textbook,
checking your answers to make sure that you're getting the correct answer.
The textbook might not supply the method of solution, but again, you can always come back
to the lesson in the tape to see how I did it and ensure that you're doing it correctly.
Let's assume you've been successful in the lessons of this tape, especially the early
lessons, the ones involving whole numbers, fractions, decimals, percents, integers, powers,
and square roots.
If you've been successful, what should you do next?
Well that really depends upon who you are.
If you are a person about to enter high school or junior high school and taking Algebra 1,
then a very good thing to do would be to purchase the teaching company's Algebra 1 tape series.
The instructor there is Dr. Monica Neogoy, and she does a wonderful job explaining not
only Algebra and how to solve equations and how to graph things, but also the use of the
graphing calculator and much of the history behind the words and the methods that we use
in Algebra.
But perhaps you're an adult and perhaps you're thinking about maybe getting a GED or going
back to college and you're trying to prepare for college mathematics.
Then you might want to skip Algebra 1 and go right to the Algebra 2 tape, and the instructor
in that tape is none other than me, and there you can look at materials a little more advanced
than Algebra 1 that would prepare you for college mathematics, because quite frankly,
one of the courses people who are weak in mathematics take in preparation at the college
level, but in preparation for college mathematics, is a course called intermediate Algebra, which
is nothing more than Algebra 2.
So rather than spending the money for that, you might want to buy the tape and the same
process.
Do the problems, watch the tapes, and I think you'll find that the method of explanation
and the kind of problems shown should prepare you quite well to meet the requirements of
more advanced high school mathematics, as well as the typical college Algebra pre-calculus
mathematics that one might take in college.
If there is one thing that you have learned from this tape, beyond place value, beyond
consistency, beyond applications, it's the fact that there's nothing in arithmetic, there's
nothing in pre-Algebra mathematics, and in fact, there's nothing in Algebra that is
so difficult that an average person can't do it.
If you say, I cannot do something, you're right.
And along the way, students of mine, both children and adults, I've had students who
said, I can't do that.
I don't understand this.
I'll never be able to do that.
If those are your words, then you are consigning yourself to the garbage heap of those people
who will not be out there in our technological age.
What you need to do is modify that statement.
I can't do it yet.
I don't understand it yet, because indeed, if it's important to you to understand the
kind of things we've discussed in this tape series, the kind of things that are discussed
in our Algebra I and Algebra II series, you can do it.
This is not brain surgery.
This is not something limited to the top 1,000 to 1% of all the PhDs in the world.
This is something that every average to above average person can do, but you cannot do it
if you don't allow yourself to do it.
So if there's one thing that I have taught you in this tape series is that you can do
whatever you want.
The only limitations that are placed upon you in mathematics are the limitations that
you place upon yourself.
And I can say to you now, take this tape series, take your knowledge, and go out and take on
the mathematical world.
