And there is no transition going on in the energy markets.
It's just not visible in the data.
So in my world also data, data matters.
And the idea that we're in the middle of an accelerating transition is not showing up
in the data.
In fact, if we then go one step further and talk about aspirations, which is the aspiration,
that's when you get to the delusion.
My guest today is Mark Mills.
Mark is a physicist, senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, and was named energy
writer of the year by the American Energy Society.
He has written several award-winning books, including his latest, The Cloud Revolution,
and The Convergence of New Technologies will unleash the next economic boom and a roaring
2020s.
The Binding Administration plans to eliminate fossil fuels as a form of energy generation
in the U.S. by 2035.
Not so, says Mark.
I recently sat down with him and he shared with me why the administration's transition
to green energy is a delusion, in fact, impossible.
And here we are going to need fossil fuel for at least the next several decades.
Mark, thanks so much for coming on the show.
Greatly appreciated.
This is your second time.
I remember the first time you came, it was about a year ago or so.
It seems like yesterday.
Yeah.
It's our anniversary.
Anniversary.
We're going to have to get a cake.
What's the first anniversary?
What is that?
I think paper or something.
I don't know.
Okay.
I know.
You didn't send me any flowers, any any chocolates.
I got nothing.
I got buckets.
Wait till after.
Wait till after the show.
All right.
So you were on the show about a year ago, and you totally enlightened me as to fossil
fuels, EVs, green energy.
And I remember at the time you just went through, because you just went right through with how
green energy isn't so green or clean, especially when we talk about electric vehicles.
So before we even begin, before we even begin, I want to bring you back to the state of the
union address.
President Biden is giving the state of the union, it was February 7th, so not too long
ago.
And he goes totally off script.
It's not on the transcript.
It's not anywhere.
He says, we are still going to need oil and gas for a while.
And then he tells a little anecdote, an oil executive asked him why his company, why his
company should invest in fossil fuel projects in light of the negative business atmosphere
for oil and gas projects.
And Biden responded, we're going to need oil for at least another decade and beyond.
You coined this a while ago, the energy transition delusion.
Tell me why.
Well, in the world that I live in, and this is not universal, not universal, I like to
believe words have meaning.
So I sort of, let's start with, and I recognize that words are elastic and we change their
meanings over time.
But usually it takes a long time.
So a transition means going from something from one place to another, it's a transition.
There is no transition going on in the energy markets.
It's just not visible in the data.
So in my world also data matters.
And the idea that we're in the middle of an accelerating transition is not showing up
in the data.
In fact, if we then go one step further and talk about aspirations, which is the aspiration,
that's when you get to the delusion.
It's not just that it's delusional to call this a transition because there isn't one.
And to restate what I mean by that is we're 20 years into what we could call the era of
climate awareness, at least 20 years into it.
The Western world was spent directly about $5 trillion, and I believe probably indirectly
another $5 trillion.
Well, let's say rounded up to about $10 trillion to avoid using hydrocarbons over the last
20 years.
And the share of the world's energy coming from hydrocarbons has indeed gone down in
those 20 years.
It's gone down from 86% to 84%.
So that doesn't look like a rapid transition after $20 trillion of spending.
It doesn't look like a transition.
In fact, it's not a transition because over that same time period, the quantity of hydrocarbons
consumed in absolute terms has gone up, and to put it in sort of relative terms has gone
up by a quantity equal to adding 5 or 6 Saudi Arabia's worth of oil production in terms
of energy equivalent.
So that's the world's using more of everything, so that's not a transition.
That's a feel like, you know, the better word to be transformation, we're adding new
form of energy to the broad energy mix, which is a lot of windmills and solar arrays.
This is true.
We're adding new kinds of machines like electric vehicles.
This is also indisputably true, and then we're going to add lots more of them.
But that's not a transition.
In fact, all of history, the development of new ways of producing and delivering energy
to society have been additive.
In fact, there's a sort of last point that I made many times I should make again.
It's not that I like windmills.
I've been in wind farms that stress the horizon in China.
I think they're oppressive.
I like solar arrays.
In a way, my first patent was a solar device.
It actually was a photo detector for guiding missiles, but I was a cold warrior back in
the day, so I like the technology.
I think I understand the technology.
I'm a fan of the technology.
If I were making a prediction today, I would say that the share of the world's energy coming
from wind and solar in the coming decade will at least double, at least setting aside all
the money being thrown at it foolishly.
Even without that, we're going to increase the use of it because it's more cost effective
than it ever was.
So it has an enormous role, really important.
But here we are today, to make the point again, all this excitement about wind and solar.
As of right now, after trillions of spending, wind and solar combined provide the world
one third as much energy as burning wood globally, burning wood.
Wood is the oldest energy source known to man.
We still get triple the energy globally from burning wood than we do from wind and solar
combined.
That's not because wind and solar won't take over wood.
It has an America finally.
So we now get twice to three times more energy from wind and solar than we do from burning
wood.
But it just takes time.
It costs a lot of money.
So the point of the delusion language is not meant to be an invective, although I guess
it's obviously provocative.
It's not there in the data where we are.
And the more difficult thing to answer is, well, why can't we get there?
I mean, so we heard it from the president.
In a, I guess you could call it a form of social Tourette's, maybe.
I mean, I'm not sure why Trump had social Tourette's even more epically than this president.
Any president goes off script.
So he says something that he has to know is true.
And his energy secretary has since he said that off script remark, been running around
the country, repeating that statement, actually went to the biggest energy conference in the
world is zero week that my friends, Dan Jurgen, you know, pioneered and created down in Houston.
And it brings people from all over the world and all forms of energy, not just oil and
gas.
She went there, secretary of energy, said, again, we're going to need oil and gas for
a long time yet.
And she sort of modified that, not just 10 years, when the reason she modified it with
sort of more open ended, how long we'll need it is obvious.
If you thought, if you thought as a business, pretend it's your money, that you have to
make multi-billion dollar investments today and the government is going to ban your product
in 10 years.
Would you make those investments?
Well, of course not.
And of course, the current level of investing oil and gas is at a epic, if cyclical low,
maybe lower than in relative terms than it's ever been in modern modern history.
And why, why, why are the investments down?
Is it because the oil and gas industry is afraid of competition?
I don't think they're afraid of competition.
What they're afraid of is regulation and taxation.
And so you slow down and wait to see when things calm down and being simplistic, there
are lots of factors.
But if you're on a board and you're sort of thinking about these things, you know, you're
making a lot of money now at current prices, even if even the current soften prices.
What's the hurry?
Let's just wait and see how things settle out and see what, if they're serious, I mean,
I guess I would.
This, by the way, this, this is already the same phenomenon as already in playing out
in utility scale wind and solar where investments are down as subsidies get complicated.
Nobody knows what the rules are as in as real costs have risen both for the costs of the
machines and as the financing costs have risen because of interest rates and as uncertainties
have risen with respect to if you're the developer going to put billions to work, you
might, you might begin to worry about the tolerance of markets to high cost energy.
And one of the things that is sort of central to the trope of the energy transition is that
wind and solar are cheaper.
That's just central to the thesis.
It's baked into every forecast.
And yet there is no jurisdiction in the world, in Europe or United States, no state and no
country in which the increased penetration of wind and solar has led to reduced utility
grid costs have all been associated with higher costs.
So if they're cheaper and we're at epic levels of spending, I'm waiting for the cheaper power
if you're a consumer and the inverses happen.
So I think, you know, cooler minds setting aside the hyperbole around all this stuff and
the anxiety about why we have to do this, which is beyond obvious what the motivations are.
You know, the combination of scale imposing real costs, the combination of the exposure of
the fragility of energy systems that the Ukraine invasion illustrated, because what Europe did
was build a more economically and structurally fragile energy system.
And by that I mean both by depending on an unreliable source of cheap energy, but also
failing to build in their own borders, reliable sources of cheap energy.
Right.
So all of this, let me, you packed up, you threw out a lot of great information there.
I just want to go back to one thing, that the Biden administration was talking about being,
going to zero missions, totally green energy out at 2035 or 2050.
All those dates really have been thrown out the window.
They were just dates probably just to get out there, right?
The numbers and the facts and the data didn't support any of that, right?
No, there's no, there's, I think what we have is the Energy Information Administration,
which is the Department of Energy's, I mean, tautological information agency.
It's pretty, it's pretty apolitical.
They've been very good over the, over the decades in providing data based on what's
actually happening as opposed to policy aspirations.
Their goal is not to make the policy, but to make forecasts, report data.
Make forecasts based on stated policy.
And they just issued their latest analysis and they show that pushing out to 2030, 2035, 2040,
we don't get anywhere near zero missions.
If you implement everything in the Inflation Reduction Act,
set aside the Orwellian name for that, but all the spending, which is hundreds of billions,
literally probably direct spending and mandated spending.
Cause a lot of these things have mandates that are off book spending.
So there's probably a trillion dollars of spending in the two pieces of legislation,
Infrastructure Act, Inflation Reduction Act on wind solar transmission and electric cars.
And what you get is, you know, something like 15 to 20% reduction in US CO2 emissions by
2040 or so, which, okay, I mean, that's not zero, but it's not zero missions.
And more importantly, as the EIA points out, and now there's this, that reduction,
which is about a gigatonic carbon dioxide, by the way,
we've already gone down about a gigatonic carbon dioxide in the last 20 years,
mostly because of the cheap shale gas replacing coal, of course.
But that's wiped out by three to four years of increased coal consumption
in China alone, never mind India, Indonesia and other places.
So there's, there's sort of this bizarre,
it's almost surreal ignoring of what's going, really going on in the world.
Which is CO2 emissions are going up as countries expand and chase energy that's cheap.
And the CO2 emissions reductions coming in the United States come at staggering costs
and have no effect on the overall global trends.
And even Bill Gates at the last great gathering that gets vilified in Davos,
gave a, you know, private interview and talked about all this stuff.
And he, and he said, and I don't think I'm gonna get the quote wrong.
So two things that are important.
One is that even if we get to zero emissions by 2050, he doesn't think we can.
Things we have to try, obviously he said that a lot, but we're not going to.
But even if we got there, then that would not mean that the world's warming won't continue.
The models would show the world will continue to warm roughly as much as the models purport
it will do now.
Whether you believe the models or not, it's not the point.
The models don't show any material change going out for the next century after that,
even if we spend that kind of money.
The thing that really bothers me, what animates most of my work is not,
it's not just that it's a delusionary to think that we can get rid of hydrocarbons quickly.
Not never.
Never is different than quickly, but quickly meaning in the foreseeable future in decades
is that the cost of doing this is economically and socially destructive.
It is, in my view, immoral.
And it's immoral for this reason.
The whole world has, really all of history, pursued the goal of increasing wealth
for the maximum number of people, increasing productivity.
Productivity is always defined very simplistically, but 100% accurately,
getting more outputs for fewer inputs of dollars, labor and materials.
The energy transition aspirations get the same outputs, if you're lucky,
with increased inputs of dollars, labor and materials.
This is, it puts more simply, this is wealth destroying.
And at the scales we're talking about, I don't mean having a few percent of electricity
from wind and solar and 100 million electric cars, that's irrelevant.
It's in the noise, frankly.
But the scales imagined, it's profoundly wealth destroying.
And the people who are impacted by that are not the wealthy.
So the wealthy are less wealthy.
Okay, no one cares.
It's the wealth destruction of the middle class and the people who are poor.
It's indescribably offensive to me to have a path that's doing that,
which is not the same as saying, because it always gets, one label is all,
then you don't care about what we have to try to do.
I care about changing energy systems.
I may not agree with you.
It was like, it's like an interrupter.
I haven't met anyone who would say they're pro-pollution.
They want more pollution in the future.
We're all on the same side.
It's just, as you mentioned, how much it's going to cost
and how much benefit are we going to get for each dollar spent?
It's beyond obvious the money matters, or symmetrically follow the money,
as the old ad is about saying who benefits from different policies.
But here's the problem.
It's not only is the rest of the world increasing its carbon dioxide emissions
as the West tries to reduce it at extraordinarily high costs.
It's that it's not doing what people claim.
I mean, it's dishonest, intellectually dishonest,
to pretend, for example, the electric cars are zero emissions.
They're not.
They're elsewhere emissions.
What you'd want to know is how much the emissions are today
and how much they will be in the future as you push harder on getting more EVs in the market
to result in the higher emissions to make the vehicles.
Obviously, it offsets emissions from combusting gasoline.
This is beyond obvious and infantile observation,
but it's not zero emissions.
It's other place emissions.
People know that reflexively when you say it.
I mean, they say, OK, yeah, well, I have to have a power plant
and everybody jokes about how the power plant could be coal fired.
Well, that's no joke.
I mean, it depends.
It depends on where you charge the car.
And when you charge the car, how you're filling that battery up.
I mean, this may be obvious, but it's most of the calculations that purport
an electric vehicle is zero emissions are based on average emissions from a grid.
Well, there's no average.
There's no average emissions in filling the vehicle.
When the vehicle is fueled is when the emissions occur.
So if you fuel the vehicle at night in some parts of the United States,
you're filling it with hydro hydro electricity in other places.
Let me just let me just drill down on this.
And so we're on the same page and our listeners could get this.
True, there is nothing.
No emissions coming out of the vehicle.
But fuel.
There's no tailpipe.
So apparently there's not.
But fueling by plugging in your EV, you are creating emissions by.
Somewhere.
Electricity.
Making power.
Which doesn't come from magic dust.
No.
So you would and the EV focus is important because it's the preoccupation
of governments these days, right?
We've we've moved beyond mandating 100% wind and solar.
That's sort of old news and we can't get there fast enough.
So we have the grids that we have.
Grids take time to build out.
But it gets that there's lots more wind and solar on grids,
depending where you live.
The most is in Texas.
The second most is in the midcontinent of the United States.
Lots of windmills.
How far that can go is an interesting separate discussion.
And they too don't have tailpipe, so to speak.
They don't emit anything when they're operating.
They do cause emissions when they get built.
Because windmills are built from concrete and steel,
which require metallurgical coal and coal and oil and natural gas to make and fabricate.
But you know, measured over the lifetime of the operation,
it emits less CO2 than burning natural gas.
It's true.
How much that costs you is what matters, not whether that's true or not.
But the EV has sort of become the monomaniacal preoccupation.
I think at last count, I think there's now a dozen states.
The number may have gone up in the last month.
I think the state of Maryland, where I live,
as the governor said they're going to pledge,
a dozen states that are proposing by 2035 or 2040,
depending on the state, to utterly ban the sale of internal combustion engines completely.
I think the number of countries that have made such proclamations or planned to make them
is now the dozens.
So this is all predicated entirely on that these are zero emissions vehicles.
That's the entire predication.
I want you to hang on right there.
I want you to hang on right there because when we spoke last time,
you pointed out, I said, Charles, these cars don't show up in the showroom by magic.
It took something to get there.
And you pointed me in the direction of Volkswagen,
and who had it on their site, which showed the crossover between an EV and a,
I think it was a diesel powered car.
I'm not sure what their thing was.
Right.
Yeah, it was diesel.
Close to seven years before the 70,000 miles.
70,000 miles, right?
Which is 10,000 miles a year, let's say.
So you're talking about seven years on average,
seven years before the EV makes sense in terms of emitting CO2.
Is that more or less right?
Yeah, they're studying others.
They're not alone on this.
Volvo published a similar analysis.
So what they're doing is they're doing two things.
They're counting the emissions that's needed to make the EV and its battery.
And the emissions needed to make the internal combustion engine.
And so these are the noble processes to mine minerals at copper and aluminum
and refine them and assemble them into an electric vehicle.
And you do the same with the steel to make an internal combustion engine.
So you count that.
It's called embodied emissions or embodied energy.
It's our body.
So you count what it takes just to get the vehicle to your driveway, the emissions for that.
And everything has emissions associated with manufacturing because hydrocarbons are used
everywhere.
So that's the world we live in, not the world we aspire to be in in the far future.
And then you look, in the case of both these studies, at the average, back to the average,
is the average emissions from the electricity you have available in Europe
over the coming five to 10 years to operate the vehicle.
Because the grid that exists is the grid that you're going to use,
not the grid your imagined will exist in the future.
And yes, so what they determined is that for the first seven years of driving,
if you'd driven the diesel vehicle, you would have admitted less CO2
than if you bought the EV.
Because a combination of the two emissions, the battery beam,
the mining and the battery being fabricated, and the power plants
took you that long to pay off your carbon debt.
Now, this is important.
The Volkswagen study was based on a small EV using a battery less than half the size
of a Tesla battery.
And what was the range of that?
So it was a really small range on that battery, right?
Yeah, it's a 250-mile range.
But for a light vehicle, for round town use, which is a lot of people use them for,
that's fine, perfectly reasonable assumption.
But most people aren't buying those vehicles at the moment.
The biggest sellers are the vehicles with the big batteries in the range of three to 400 miles.
So, or put it differently, that means you have a battery twice as big.
Your carbon debt is double.
So the crossover point shifts out from seven years to 10 or 12 years,
which for most people, that's never.
Now, if you assume that the vehicle has a second life and in its second life,
it's submitting less CO2, okay.
But the point is the illusion that you, as the owner of that vehicle,
have saved CO2 is totally shattered by those assumptions.
Now, here's the rub.
We actually don't know exactly how much CO2 is emitted by a specific EV.
Because we don't know exactly where the materials came from for that EV.
We know exactly how much CO2 is emitted by an internal combustion engine vehicle,
because it's the same every time you fill a tank up, there's no change.
There's no mystery.
It's transparent.
It's obvious.
What we do know about the emissions associated with manufacturing an EV
is those emissions are going up, not down.
And it's not me saying this.
This is the International Energy Agency, International Monetary Fund,
the UN bodies.
This is a geological, if you like, fact that the net new ton of copper or steel or aluminum
or molybdenum or zinc are coming from what are called lower grade ores.
You'd have to dig up more rock to get the same pound or ton of metals.
Digging up more rock means more energy and grinding more rock more energy.
Let me stop you there one second.
You put in one of your papers that you have to move 500,000 pounds of dirt
in order to mine enough metals, minerals to make one, one EV battery.
Could you just break that down for me?
So the way you sort of think about this is as you start with the point,
how big is the fuel tank and electric vehicle?
If it's the one that everybody buys, not everybody, the majority that would be purchased,
they're about a half a ton or 1,000 pounds, the battery, which is a digression tells you why
the electric vehicle uses a lot more aluminum on average than a regular vehicle because you're
trying to offset what used to be an 80 pounds of gasoline with a 1,000 pound fuel tank.
So you offset that by more aluminum, which also causes a lot of emissions.
It's a very energy intensive, emissions intensive metal.
And that often is not included in the calculations, by the way.
It's just left out and ignored by some of the analysts.
So you have a 1,000 pound battery.
Then you look at the various components of the battery.
It's copper, it's steel, and it's aluminum.
Has lithium, of course, because it's a lithium-ion battery.
Has cobalt.
It has far more graphite, by the way, than it does lithium or any other element.
It's the most common element, and it's a very intensive
material to get to make all forms of lithium batteries.
And then what you do is you chase up, this is all findoutable, if you like, in Magic Google
Machine.
You could look up, what's the average ore grade for copper?
What was it 100 years ago or 10 years ago?
What's the average ore grade for aluminum?
The ore grade for nickel and all the different metals.
It's clean ore grade.
That is what?
So ore grade, and when I was in my impetuous youth, I worked briefly for a mining company.
So I have a certain affection for mining and miners.
I like a Canadian uranium, gold, and silver mining company.
Ore grade means the percentage of the rock that you found, or that contains the stuff you want.
So the richest ore grades in the metals world is iron.
Iron can be, you can find iron, which is the rock that you're digging up that contains iron,
can be 20% iron.
So you could do the math here.
That means for a pound of iron, you dig up five pounds of rock.
Copper, however, and a lot of the other metals are much less common in the earth's crust.
So the average copper ore grade now is well below 1%.
So a pound of copper, you have to dig up 100 pounds of rock, and it's declining.
This is true for every metal.
The percentage of the rock that's the metal you want, typically the single digit percentages
are a fraction of percent.
And if it's the rarer metals, that's so-called rare earths, even more, which aren't rare,
by the way, they're actually very common.
They just, I mean, in the geology of the earth they're common, geography of the earth,
they just aren't, they have rare properties.
They're called rare earths because they're properties, not because of their,
we know where they are, we know how to find them, you have to dig up lots of dirt.
So you have to dig up two kinds of dirt.
You have to dig up what's called overburden, you have to get to the ore body.
So if you're lucky, it's an open pit mine on the surface.
You don't have to get a lot of dirt out of the way.
So you have rocks and dirt, you have to get out of the way, dig that up, it's just waste.
Then you dig up the ore and then you're digging up again.
If it's a ton of copper, you're digging up, you know, not a hundred tons, right?
You're digging over over a hundred tons of ore, which you then have to crush
with big energy consuming machines into powder.
Do you have to crush rocks?
Then you have to dissolve the rocks with sulfuric acid.
We're dissolving rocks and the more rock you have to dissolve,
the more acids you have to use, the more acids, the more energy to make the acids,
the more energy to keep everything clean.
It means this is a beyond obvious do loop of very energy-intensive activities.
And then when you get the refined metal, you have to ship it.
This is a refining process like everything else is separate from the mining.
Then you have to go to the chemical industries that convert the refined metals
or minerals into the nature of the specific material you need for the battery,
which is another chemical and energy-intensive process.
That's the most...
When you put that all together, that's where you get this,
you know, not only does it take 500,000 pounds of rock extracted for your one battery,
but all in, if you mentioned oil terms, you're going to consume between
one in 300 barrels of oil equivalent in energy to make a battery that can hold
about one barrel of oil equivalent of energy.
Amazing.
I looked at two points I just want to share with you,
but I don't want to hear you keep talking because I just keep learning so much.
These earth-moving machines, huge, huge, huge machines that move all this earth you mentioned,
I looked up and the average one is 237,000 gallons per year,
12 feet high off the ground.
These are huge.
And that's why I guess, you know, in mining, energy costs are such a big factor,
you know, you have to move this stuff.
And it just boggles my mind that people do not take this into account.
They think it's fairy dust that it comes here and I did too.
I got to admit when I got two of my two Teslas and I traded them,
I thought I was doing something great for the environment.
And then now every night that I plug it in, I realized that it didn't come here by magic.
All of the fuel that was needed to do that.
The second thing I just wanted to touch on for us is that most of this refinery
is done in China because who the heck wants a refinery in their backyard?
Is that right?
Yeah. Well, back to your machines, by the way, I love these big mining trucks.
They're literally the size of a house, these trucks, the size of a house.
They're great.
And the idea that we're going to convert those mining trucks to not using diesel in their future is...
What are they going to do on solar?
You know, these things are huge.
You can make them, you can run them on batteries too, if you make enough batteries.
But to say it's impractical to do it is a breathtaking understatement.
We're not going to be running these trucks anything other than big diesel generators
and diesel engines for a very, very long time.
And by that I mean, you know, many, many decades.
The machines themselves have a life, a useful life of 30 to 40 years.
Once you spend millions of dollars, tens of millions of a machine,
you're going to run it for a long time.
But, you know, back to your question of where the refineries are.
I mean, so they're elsewhere.
They're not in America or Europe by and large.
There's some, not many, very, very few.
So what we're doing is we're making an interesting trade.
Right.
The United States in particular is domestically self-efficient.
In fact, in hydrocarbons, we're a net exporter of hydrocarbons if we count all in.
We were almost, we were briefly a net exporter of oil and oil products.
Right, in 2018, wasn't it 2018 or so we were a net exporter?
Well, it was 2019, 2020, into that year, we were still, if you count, you know,
we still import because there's an arbitrage, you know, you import crew,
you export refined products.
But we are functionally independent of the need for imports functionally.
I just remember back in the 70s during the energy crisis and going to school there.
And it was always a dream that one day America would be self-sufficient.
And we had OPEC with a gun to our head.
And after the the Arabs really were of 1973, when they placed it in Bargo,
the oil was there, but they didn't ship it to us to the United States.
We were, we didn't have production.
We were way, way behind.
And now it seems that we traded off OPEC for China.
We're now reliant on China refining our metals and lithium batteries.
And this whole green energy seems like to be playing into the hands of China.
Is it might be a little crazy on that?
Or is that those are the facts?
No, it's that you're just stating, let's, let's put aside the geopolitical implications.
You could just look at the facts first, right?
I mean, the U.S. is a net export of hydrocarbons.
China is a net importer of hydrocarbons.
China has a market share in refining what the IEA, the International Energy Agency,
calls energy minerals, the things like copper and lithium carbonate.
So the refining of energy minerals, that capacity in China, in terms of global market share, is
double OPEC's global market share in oil.
So China by itself is the OPEC on steroids of energy minerals for refining.
Hey, if you're a reasonable person, would say, well, can we do something about that?
Can we do something about that?
Couldn't we resharrow those refineries?
Of course we can.
You first, you have to want to, you have to put in place the kind of regulatory environment
that makes it possible to build them economically.
That hasn't happened in any of the legislation by any president, by the way, in decades.
So we don't have the appetite politically to do that, and we're not doing it, even if
tomorrow we decided to do it.
The velocity of demand for those minerals, the mandating batteries be put in cars instead of gas
tanks, vastly exceeds the velocity with which we could reshor the supply of those minerals.
So the mining is elsewhere.
We can't open mines easily in America.
The administration last year reversed permits that were millions of dollars in years in
development for copper and nickel mines, three of them in the United States, just reversed
the permits after many years of trying to get the permits in place and passing all the tests,
if you like.
They passed in flying colors, they were failed anyway.
So the path that we're on is unequivocally one of increasing dependencies on foreign sources
for the premier materials and the refined materials.
But we're sort of hiding behind the fig leaf of subsidizing what are called EV factories or
battery factories.
These are assembly plants, which are still dependent on importing metals and materials
and minerals refined elsewhere.
So it would be no different than the symmetrical equivalent is what you described going back
to the dawns of the energy embargoes, oil embargoes, is that we were assembling cars
in America and we, in fact, had very few foreign cars sold in America at that time.
But we were very dependent on gasoline and oil imports, the fuel cars.
So what we're doing now is replicating the exact situation we were in 50 years ago.
We just replaced refined minerals and metals and these things with the lithium
cobalt, I think with 17 or so of minerals that we need are none of the friendliest places in
the world for us.
Well, we're, you know, we used to be one of the primary suppliers of many of these metals and
minerals.
US is geophysically rich in all these metals and minerals.
But like, you know, there's nothing wrong.
Count me in the free trade camp, right?
I'm happy to trade with other countries.
When you get trade concentration is when you get geopolitical risks and problems.
And of course, the risk with China is beyond obvious.
You don't have to be anti-China or pro-China to observe the fact that we're in economic
conflict with them for sure.
I hope it stays just an economic, we're certainly in political conflict with them.
And so we've handed them and they've made this decision 20 years ago.
It was public information.
They published the fact of their goals.
So we knew what they were planning to do.
So now we have this sort of odd balance to pick up on what President Biden said and his
Secretary of Energy have said, world's going to use oil for a long time.
Another point to make is China is going to be dependent on oil and gas imports for a long time
too.
They can't, they can't match what we've done in the oil and gas world.
They're not anywhere close to it.
So they, they actually have a bargaining chip now.
I mean, if you think about it in this simple geopolitical terms, they had no bargaining
chips. They were very deeply dependent on vital energy imports to keep their economy running.
We could, we could cause them a lot of pain both directly and indirectly in oil and gas
markets, natural gas markets.
Well, you know, they could cause an awful lot of pain to the world as the world increases
its dependency on energy minerals to build windmills, solar arrays and electric batteries.
So it's, it's not an accidental strategy.
It's actually a brilliant strategy, especially when you consider they,
they now have price control over those energy minerals, because they utterly dominate the
market far more again, far more than OPEC.
And we, we don't have any effective way to offset that price control,
except to do the equivalent of what we did in the gas industry with minerals.
Turns out that's a lot harder.
I mean, the velocity of opening a mine versus the velocity of getting a oil well in place
are profoundly different.
They're just the different.
This is like, I mean, to put it very simplistically, it's like the difference in the
velocity of building a mining truck and building a go-kart.
I mean, mines are huge.
They take decades to, to build typically.
The average in the world is 16 years to go from discovery to to happen.
I recently heard you speak about a copper mine.
How long does it take from start to finish to start to digging was 16?
Yeah, the average IEA says is 16 years, but it could be,
it could be 10 years in some, in some jurisdictions, if, if you're lucky, and it could be
30 and others, infinite in the United States apparently.
But if you wanted to compare that to the oil and gas world, the, the slowest,
the most difficult projects in terms of velocity are offshore, offshore rakes, offshore oil projects.
And one of the most remarkable accelerations that's occurred, sort of untold stories,
is that that's been cut in half from a decade to five years roughly.
But still five years to do a billion dollar offshore oil platform to go into production
from, you know, discovery to production.
A shale well from, you know, you don't have to discover a shale.
We know where it is.
I've always known where it is.
But the decision, let's say decision to production in a shale well depends on where it is,
but six months to a year, it's very, very quick.
So you're looking at velocities in the oil and gas world
that are literally 10 times faster than the velocities in the minerals world.
And, and the minerals world's velocities are all attached to foreign jurisdictions,
which are opaque, often corrupt, subject to bribes.
It's, to, to labor practices that we, we, we would, when we know about them, find offensive.
Child labor is rampant in the mining minerals world in Africa and South America.
It's not, it's not up to say it's not a nice thing.
It's a breathtaking understatement that, but it's generally ignored.
As you know, I reviewed a book for the Wall Street Journal recently called Cobalt
Red, which the author, professor of human trafficking and slavery in England,
was pretty, pretty gutsy.
He, he went down to Congo into East and Congo and went visiting the mine sites,
which you're not supposed to visit to try to document the extent to which the cobalt
mining in particular is done, what's called as euphemism, artisanally,
which means by hand with a shovel and how much of that's with children.
And of course, he reports that he thinks that the percentage that it's artisanal
and child labor is vastly higher.
The official estimates are something like 20% of the mining in, in Congo for cobalt is artisanal
and maybe half that's with children.
He thinks it's far higher, but even if it isn't far higher, it's pretty,
it's pretty grotesque when you think about it.
Does that matter?
Well, yeah, because as he points out correctly, pretty much every lithium battery and every
portable device has cobalt because you need it for the energy density.
The majority of the world's electric car still use cobalt.
And of course, those that don't use cobalt in their batteries, you can,
you can switch up the chemistry.
There's lots of different chemical soups you can use.
You use typically more nickel, for example.
So you're shifting your demand for one metal to another,
which still takes you on the same path of foreign minds, foreign refining,
questionable labor practices, all of which in principle can be fixed and made transparent.
In principle, it's just, it's not there right now.
It's not where we are.
So, yeah, Siddharth Rathkarra, you're referring to a cobalt red.
I'm going to have him on the show.
He's just fascinating.
He read his book.
It was just unbelievable what he did exposing.
And most of those minds in Congo were in partnership with the Chinese.
They were there in 0809.
They saw the opportunity right there that the world's going to need cobalt.
And every lithium battery, I think it is, cobalt is part of.
Well, in every high performance device, lithium battery.
But the big, you can, you know, one can make lithium batteries with no cobalt at all.
There's lithium iron phosphate batteries.
There's nickel manganese batteries.
There's lots of different chemical formulations.
But as you change the chemical mix, you trade off things like temperature tolerance, fire,
safety, range.
The now favored lithium iron phosphate, which the pioneered in China,
is a very clever battery chemistry, very safe chemistry, relatively speaking,
and safer than the cobalt class batteries.
But it has lower energy density.
So you have to either have a bigger battery to get the range, which so instead of a thousand
pound battery, it's 1200 pounds, which means more metals.
Which means more aluminum, more FIFO, everything would be.
Yeah, more copper, more aluminum, or.
Pick your poison.
Or you have less range, and everybody's trying to sell range.
So in China, you don't have to sell range because there's lots of people without cars.
So really small cars with okay range, which is what's going on as a first vehicle
with arguably features and safety standards that most Americans won't buy and tolerate.
It's a big market for them in China.
So that'll be true in India.
So I expect there's going to be lots more of those cars.
In fact, China's export of their electric vehicles, if you track that data,
they have become a powerhouse and not just producing electric vehicles,
but exporting electric cars and vehicles in general.
They're not to us.
We're not buying them yet here.
I think that'll happen, but to emerging markets, of course.
Yeah, I think EYD just put a showroom together somewhere in the United States with their electric
bus, which looks unbelievable.
They're going to get a flip to the toehold here.
I think probably one of the best engineered batteries for a car in the world is still a Tesla.
Dick Elon Musk's focus in this early before everybody else gave him a huge head start,
terrific team.
The engineering is absolutely brilliant.
It really is the level of the energy density and safety and quality on the battery.
I'm not talking about the car overall.
The car is fine, but it's not a standout in terms of quality.
It's just fine.
But the battery is impressive.
And the rest of the world is catching up.
They'll probably get to pair up a suit with him in due course.
I would say BYD's batteries probably pretty much on par with Tesla's engineering, getting there.
Chinese engineering on this stuff is very good.
They've been at it a very long time.
I've traveled to China several times.
I've been in maybe, I think, 12 or 14 Chinese cities, visited battery factories there and
electric car factories and bus factories.
This was pre-epic lockdowns, of course.
This is the last few years.
It's a little more difficult lately.
A friend of mine just went there and told me he was put into quarantine 10 days anyway,
despite negative tests, passports, visas, vaxes.
He still had to be quarantined.
So I hope it was a nice hotel.
Probably was, knowing him.
Here's the thing that's sort of puzzling to me about,
and I think it's in people's heads about electric cars.
I'll come back to the mythology of this.
There are elsewhere omissions and lots of omissions.
It's elsewhere dependencies, elsewhere jobs.
All those things are all true.
But there's this sort of naive belief that it's a simpler vehicle.
I mean, look, it's just a battery and electric motor.
What could be simpler?
Look at that.
It's got to be inherently cheaper to make eventually.
If that were true, if they were inherently simpler,
that might be true.
It would be inherently cheaper to make.
But it's not true.
The battery is not like the little double-A cell
you stick in a child's toy.
This half-ton engine, it's actually an electrochemical engine,
has thousands of parts in it.
If it's a Tesla battery, maybe tens of thousands of parts,
but lots of batteries, thousands of parts, tens of thousands of welds,
cooling systems, electronic control systems, structural systems.
It's a complicated, multi-thousand-part electrochemical engine.
The motor is simple.
Electric motor has two moving parts.
In an internal combustion engine, we just flop the complexities.
The fuel tank has two moving parts.
It's an electric motor that pumps your fuel, two moving parts.
A little tiny one.
The tank has nothing yet.
It's just fluid.
The engine, on the other hand,
instead of being an electrochemical engine with thousands of parts,
it's a thermochemical engine with thousands of parts.
We've just swapped mechanical, thermo-mechanical complexity
for electrochemical complexities.
They're both complex.
They both wear out at the molecular level.
Wear and tear on an engine with reciprocating parts
is literally at the molecular level.
Batteries wear out, electrochemistry wears out at the molecular level.
They both have performance characteristics that vary with temperature,
all kinds of both have safety issues.
The difference between them is that the complicated fuel tank
in an electric car is made of expensive minerals
as opposed to cheap iron ore and steel.
The mineral costs that go into a battery constitute about 70% or 80%
of the cost to make the battery.
Once you know that we now are making batteries so efficiently,
if I took all the labor out and said the labor was free,
the capital and the overhead for the automated machines is free,
that would reduce the cost of a battery by 20%, 25%.
That's it.
It's not game-changing.
What you're left with is, put differently,
is the future cost of batteries for electric cars,
which dominates the cost of the electric car,
is entirely dependent on the future of the mining industry.
What we're making a bet on when we tell people
they won't be able to buy internal combustion engines
is a bet that the mining industry will cooperate
and provide both enough minerals and metals
and cheaply enough to keep consumers happy.
The mining operations in parts of the world
which are not the friendliest in the United States.
Well, they're not here.
And they're also, I mean, the most important point, of course,
is that the cost of these minerals has been rising.
So a lot of the 2022 price spikes and everything
have come off of the highs, including inflation overall.
Inflation is still at a 40-year high.
In fact, it's a 50-year high,
but it's below the peak of last summer.
Mineral prices similarly are still at highs.
They're about, depending on the basket you choose,
but the kind of metals that go into batteries,
electric cars, nickel, copper, aluminum,
they're all about 200% to 300% more expensive
than five years ago.
Aluminum is at multi-decade highs still.
The lithium is still, instead of being 1,800% more expensive,
it's only 900% more expensive than it was five years ago.
So all the minerals and metals are going into
making electric vehicles and solar arrays
have become more expensive,
which is driving up the cost of those machines.
So the last year and this year and next year,
batteries are getting more expensive,
have got more expensive, wind turbines are got more expensive,
are going to get more expensive.
Same with solar and all of them have the same characteristic.
They all depend for their price forecasts
on the availability and price of the input minerals and metals.
So the most important thing that's being missed
in all the ambitious plans to make this energy transition
is acknowledgement that every one of the plans,
there's no exception, all plans in all countries,
all the aspirants to this transition,
a certain belief that the costs of these machines
will get cheaper, not a little bit, by a lot in the future.
All of them are asserting and model all of their forecasts
on every declining costs for electric cars,
their batteries, windmills and solar arrays.
That model, those claims are profoundly and completely dependent
on the cost of the metals and minerals.
And about that, I would take the bet.
Those are not going to go down,
but I just want to know on what basis they're assuming
these things will get cheaper at the rate that they're claiming.
That is, put differently, for the battery to go down by 50% in price,
electric car batteries about $10,000 to make, roughly.
So for it to become,
and that's about what the average price premium is
for electric car over conventional car.
This roughly, setting aside the really expensive high-end cars
which comprise 5% of market.
We're talking about the cars that people drive every day,
the $22,000 Nissan, the $22,000 Toyota.
To make that an electric vehicle,
you basically increase its cost by $8,000 or $10,000.
The input costs.
To cost parity, the battery has to be free, essentially.
Because internal combustion engines don't cost much.
The government has to give a subsidy.
Well, okay.
But what's going on, and we've already seen this,
is when the government gives the subsidies,
the car doesn't get cheaper.
The automaker keeps the price at that,
and they raise the price and extract the benefit for themselves.
But you're right.
In principle, you could subsidize it enough to make it cheaper.
Sure.
I guess the real question is,
what percentage of cars are governments willing to subsidize?
100% of them, apparently,
because if we ban internal combustion engines entirely,
unless the electric car gets cheaper,
then we're going to have to subsidize every car everybody buys.
But Mark, do we have enough minerals in the world
to make these cars?
Or do we have enough copper to replace 1.4 billion light vehicles throughout the world?
Yes, Howard.
The question has to be phrased carefully,
because for this reason, and this is not to criticize you, Charles,
is because the answer to the question,
are there enough minerals in the world, is unequivocally yes.
Because I've been accused recently of something that was the deepest cut
that's ever been leveled against me in my career.
I was called a Malthusian for saying
that we don't have enough minerals in the world,
as if I'm the anti-Malthusian.
Anyway, there are enough metals and minerals in the Earth's crust.
This is not, in fact, that some researchers recently at MIT put out a study
to prove the obvious.
There are enough minerals in the world to finance all cars being electric.
Yes, of course there are.
That's not the point.
The point really implicit in this is, are we now mining enough,
and are the world's mines investing in enough expansion
to provide that quantity of copper and aluminum and nickel?
And for that, we know the answer.
And again, courtesy of the International Energy Agency,
we want to have to increase the mining of things like copper by nearly 300%,
things like lithium by something about 500%, for graphite by about 800% or 1,000%.
The increase in mining required to meet this are numbers that have never been seen,
I mean, literally in modern history.
But more importantly, even if you naively thought you could expand mines that fast enough,
you would want to ask the obvious question.
Are the world's mining industries announcing plans and investments in the coming decade
that are even close to what's required?
And there are businesses that follow this stuff, Reistad does.
There are mining analysts that follow this stuff.
Wood McKenzie has put out very good data on this.
Roughly speaking, the world's mining industry is investing about 10% of what's required
to meet 2330 goals, 10% of what's required.
Or put differently, we're going to miss the availability of the metals to make enough
electric vehicles by 2030 by a factor of 10.
Amazing.
Absolutely amazing.
And by the way, just to close with this, even if we got rid of all of the 1.4
billion light vehicles on the road today that suck up gas,
what are we saving in the world's fuel consumption?
Because like you said, the fuel is going to have to go somewhere.
We're going to need fuel in order to make all these other things.
So what would be the net savings?
If you could wave the wand, which we sort of did with lockdowns.
We stopped people from driving as much.
If you could wave the wand, you could eliminate about a quarter of the world's oil use.
If you did overnight, no more driving of internal combustion engine vehicles,
like duty vehicles, small trucks.
From a viewpoint of overall hydrocarbon use, oil, gas, and coal combined,
your total reduction is about 7% of the world's hydrocarbon use.
But remember, the wand waving is not happening.
We're looking at 20 years.
20 years from now, the increased consumption of oil for the mining machinery,
for aviation, for heavy trucks and delivery, shipping, all the other factors
would mean that even if you could get to 100% electric vehicle penetration 20 years from now,
you would eliminate, by my estimation, about 12 to 15% of the world's oil use at that time.
So that's something.
It's a lot of oil.
But the more important question that you'd have to ask if your strategist or an analyst is,
who's producing the other 80% to 90%?
Where's it coming from?
Who's investing in that?
Well, you know, OPEC is.
Russia will continue to do that.
China is investing in oil and gas expansion in their country and offshore on their shores.
I saw the last eight quarters.
On average, the U.S. oil industry has not been spending in due to the administration
and political risk into capital expenditures and to drilling.
So that's eight quarters.
So our supply is greatly lagged.
And suppose you put a big frame around this.
We're talking about 100 million barrels a day is what we're sucking up, right?
So even if the world consumes 100 million barrels a day,
so even 30 years, let's say 20 years out, so with 10% reduction,
we're still going to be using 90 million barrels or so a day at the best.
But who knows?
Maybe we'll 80%, 80 million.
It's not zero.
Anyone who thinks it's zero is.
Well, that's the problem.
Even if you imagine the scenario is wildly optimistic as you get to all,
in fact, electric cars are at price parity or subsidized to be a price parity.
And you get you get rid of 20 million barrels per day of oil.
You still have to produce at least 80 if nothing else grows.
And since other things will grow, you're still going to have to produce closer to 90
million barrels per day.
So the question that's important because it's only 20 years away that we're going to
force this quote transition, it's back to where we started.
This is not a transition, right?
This is not a transition away from oil use.
It's a reduction in oil use, even if it were to happen.
But it's not a transition away from the need for hydrocarbons.
And to make it apolitical, to your point under this administration's
hostility to oil and gas, which has been moderated by the president's
intemperate off-script remarks, okay, I'll give him credit for doing it because
he had to have been realizing as soon as he started saying it what he was saying.
He's not, whatever other people think, he's pretty aware of what he's saying.
He may have loose lips, but a lot of presidents have had loose lips when they're talking.
Here's the thing is that it's not just under this presidency or the previous presidency
where it was much more enthusiasm, oil and gas.
But if we look at the global oil and gas industry, so we get out of the United States
and we look at the behaviors of capital markets broadly where the investments come from both
both the private markets, private banks, and public banks, if you like, the international
banking system, especially the European banking system, it's been hostile to oil and gas investment
for about 15 years. And so if we charted the total capital expenditures of the oil and gas
industry globally in new production, it started going down like off a cliff 15 years ago.
And then when COVID hit and then this president was elected, the combination
accelerated down. So we're now at epic lows that began, predates US lack of enthusiasm,
let's call it. Let's give the administration credit for giving a permit to Conoco Phillips
for dealing in Alaska, even though the jury is out as whether or not they've also put it into place,
we'll call it the expedite rules or at least arbitration rules so that they can get it built
as quickly as they built the original oil production in Alaska. So they don't, it's just
it'll never get built under litigation. So that should bring in 180,000 barrels
when that's up and running. But it's a huge fine, right? I mean, a really productive
shale well, and that's like putting a couple hundred really productive shale wells in place
all at once. I mean, it's a big deal when they get it going. So we have this general
antipathy in the investment world, private and public, and a lot of social and public pressure,
a lot of overt pressure, not to invest net new money in oil and gas globally. And it's had the
effect that was intended. The investment's gone down. It's had the effect. And the fact that
sort of everybody knows if you're an analyst, but it's, you don't have to understand the
only gas industry to know this important fact. You have to, just like food, you have to plant
crops every year. In the oil and gas business, when you consume energy from oil from a well
or gas, the well eventually is exhausted. It's capacity. So you have to plant new,
the exploration each year and development is the equivalent of planting new food each year.
And we know the decline rate, the global decline rate for all the world's oil wells. If we stopped
investing in new ones tomorrow with the zero, every year we'd have about six or seven million
barrels per day less oil available to the world. So we'll put differently. We have to
find and put into production oil output pretty close to what Texas does every year globally.
Without making a prediction, because I know that's not what you're doing. I hate predictions,
my episodically get into the game of predicting. I get trapped into and
have to make predictions the case that we all do. This is simple economics 101.
Supply is shrinking and being crimped and not being replaced even at the rate of seven million
barrels a year. We're consuming, even if we stay at 100 million, but we know that's not the case.
China was reopening, India, other development countries want the same benefits we all have
is electricity 24-7 or the availability of that. No brownouts on that. Even if that stays the same,
we're in a situation the way I see it, where five years or so from now, how could oil prices not be
higher? Yeah, I think if you know, the thing about oil prices is if you're really good at
predicting them, especially in the mid-short-term, you're a very wealthy person, as we all know.
It's true for all commodities. So commodities are impacted by lots of variables, but with
oil it's easy. Oil is still utterly deeply tied to our economy, first of all, since to state an
obvious fact, 98% of all the world's movement of goods and people is moved by burning oil,
98%. And if you get all the EVs to happen in the next 20 years, maybe you get it down to 90%.
So the world moves people and goods, things we need and things we want by burning oil.
So if you have a recession, people move less and buy less stuff. So you're reduced to, in
simplistic terms, moving only the essentials, food and things you have to have and have to
replace. You just put everything off. So a really deep recession can really, really put off the
day of reckoning. And I think we're on track for a recession. I'm not a great predictor of
things, but given inflation and interest rates and market psychology and the banking challenges,
it sort of feels like we're already in a mild recession, at least. The world doesn't like
recessions. The world always comes out of recessions. Even the Great Depression, we came out of it
eventually. So the bet you're making to your point is whenever the recession is however long we delay
the oil-consuming impact of growth again, because all growth, including the enthusiastic world,
will result in more oil demand, not less. For the near future, let's forget whether we're
going to have 20 or 30 years. So for the near five years or so. Yeah, five, 10 year future.
So this is what you would look at. You'd look at the decline curve and the investment numbers.
And those are two public numbers. The decline curve we know, the investment's down. So we know
for a fact that a day in the not distant future could be 18 months, could be as soon as 18 months.
If we dodge a really bad recession, it could happen. If it's a geopolitical event,
it could be even sooner. So who knows? Can I give you a scenario? Here's an
optimist scenario, the pessimistic outcome. Peace breaks out in Ukraine and Putin leaves
office, doesn't have a heart attack, he retires, he's deposed, whatever. So that Russia gets out of
the penalty box and the world wants to buy its oil and gas again. Here's a factor that's not being
threaded into the discussion about future oil prices. Russia is one of the world's biggest
oil exporters. They export 7 million barrels per day. They export much more than we do. They are
like OPEC, the big dogs in oil export. But their oil is being sold at about a 40% discount to market.
Because they're in the penalty box. We sanctioned them so everybody else is buying a discount.
If you're, you don't have to again be an oil trader or an economist to know, if for the first time in
history, the biggest, one of the biggest exporters of a commodity in the world market
has having to sell its stuff for a 40% off of prevailing price, that has dragged the world
price down. If you add to that a mild recession, which is where we're sitting, if you get growth,
so growth will come back if peace breaks out in part because people be enthusiastic,
they have the spirits, all which would be great. Let's pray Xi negotiates a piece, pray that Putin
is exits the world stage in some fashion that we're all comfortable with, whatever that is.
And oil demand goes up and they start trading oil in the market again. Wow.
But the real price.
It just do the math here. I mean, take 7 million barrels per day, which gets you to sort of a
what's that about 3 billion barrels of oil a year going at a discount of 30 to $4 a barrel.
So there's a $100 billion a year discount in oil going on now because of the current price, right?
That's reflected on the current price. I mean, you could argue it's a good thing that there's
less money flowing to potentates who sell oil, including Putin. We're doing fine and miss record
profits for Exxon and the shale guys are making a lot of money at these prices.
But the bigger economic and political question and the one out of scare politicians witless
is growth comes back and peace breaks out.
What we don't want, and this is what I think Chairman Powell knows, by the way,
I think he's a very smart guy, when he answered a question that he was put to him last week and
Senate hearings about inflation and the tool he has, which is interest rates.
We're talking about what the other things are that might push inflation. Well,
the Federal Reserve has published pretty good academic papers on the other things like systemic
increase in commodity prices, not an episodic increase. If you push oil back to $100 a barrel,
leave it there for, I don't know, four or five years instead of four or five months.
I mean, this is inflationary. If it's high enough, it creates recessions by itself.
This is when we had our high oil prices, it acts like a tax on the American people.
It is a tax revenue.
Driving your car, you have to now figure out if I'm traveling 50 miles a day to work,
it's going to cost you X percent more. And I remember back last year in February time,
there were calculations that I don't remember ever thinking about and hearing about that I heard
in the 70s of, well, I only could fill up today and here's what it cost. All of a sudden energy
became a big factor and I'm in New York and I'm seeing what my gas bills are,
my natural gas bill each month and my electric bill, they've gone through the roof. And this is at
a discounted price of crude oil. Amazing. So let's use the language that everybody now understands
if they read papers, systemic risk, right? That when you have policies that create
quote systemic risk, so what do we do with the policy of zero percent money? We create an
systemic risk inflation. When you inflate the cost of money, you have a systemic risk and you end
up with bank failures. So we understand the bludgeoning of markets with ham-handed tools that
have systemic impacts create systemic risks. So let me just use that language. When you create
an environment in which the world is underinvesting in its primary source of moving goods and
people, oil, you've created a systemic risk and that systemic risk is calculable. We know
we have lots of data, just like in the financial markets, what happens if you create an environment
at which the markets demand for oil exceeds its supply systemically, not because there's a brief
war in the Middle East. This is a long-term trend and that's what I've been going over my
numbers and looking at this for the past year and I'm saying myself, how could oil not be higher
five years from now? I'm glad you just laid out the facts. Mark, we've got to have you on again.
I can speak to you for hours and hours and hours, folks. Mark Mills, the name of his latest book,
really definitely worth reading, even though it's, let me just say the name of it, the Cloud
Revolution, how the convergence of new technologies will unleash the next economic boom in our roaring
2020s is a fantastic, I think about six or 70 pages there about energy in that book.
Yeah, really great stuff. Well worth reading and I think it's really enlightening because you
go into research and everyone talks about but no one thinks about. I appreciate that. I mean,
I guess the reason I'm frustrated at us creating systemic risk of high cost energy
is that we're sitting on the cusp as I try to outline in my book, as you know,
of one of the greatest economic expansion opportunities in the century and growth brings
energy demand. If you make energy expensive, you constrain the growth. It's not that it
will never happen, is that you push it off in time and of course we all know time value amounting
money matters. I mean, if somebody tells you, I'm going to give you a raise in 10 years,
you're not as happy as getting a smaller raise tomorrow. Amazing. For obvious reasons.
All right, Mark, I want to thank you once again, man. Best of luck to you and keep doing the great
work that you do. I follow you when you're speaking on YouTube. You write tons of papers
and really amazing stuff. Keep going for the next 20 years.
Thank you. Thanks. Good to be on and as you know, my podcast is The Last Optimist. I'm still
a stubborn optimist. Oh yeah, Last Optimist by the way, folks. Definitely worth listening to.
Mark, thanks so much. Thank you. Take care. Thanks for listening to this episode of the
Charles Mizrahi Show. If you're a new listener, welcome. If you've been listening for a while,
we're glad to have you back. Either way, we'd love to know what you think of the show.
Please leave a review if you listen to an Apple podcast. Reviews make it easier for others to
find the show. You can also see the video of the interview on the Charles Mizrahi Show channel on
YouTube.
