And give that one to you.
Hello, and welcome to our course on the brain.
My name is Jeanette Norden, and I will be your guide on an incredible journey of discovery
about the human brain.
This course, as I've designed it, is a broad survey course for individuals without a background
in neuroscience, and in fact, you don't have to have any background in science at all to
understand it.
All you need to do is to bring to this class your interest in learning something about
the human brain.
The course itself, I've divided into four segments.
The first 11 lectures are going to introduce you to how the central nervous system is organized
at gross, cellular, and molecular levels, and how this incredibly complex structure
emerges during development.
In this part of the class, you're going to learn a new vocabulary, you're going to
learn a lot of terms and definitions.
This is basically the foundation knowledge that you need to acquire that will be important
for understanding all of the other lectures that will follow in the course.
We're going to end this segment of the course with a discussion of stroke, and this will
help you see if you've understood what we've been talking about, because if you understand
a little bit about the blood supply, and you understand this first material that's
covered, you'll be able to understand why people have the signs and symptoms they do
when they have strokes.
Now the second segment, lectures 12 through 19, are going to explore how the brain and
the mind are thought to be related.
We're going to begin with sensory systems and functions.
Here we're just going to deal with three of the sensory systems.
We're going to see how information comes into the brain about the external world through
our eyes, our ears, and our bodies.
We're going to see that the brain actually constructs mental percepts, and it will be
these percepts that we subjectively experience as seeing, hearing, and feeling.
We will use clinical cases in this part of the class that inform us about how we know
that the brain has formed these types of mental percepts, and how the brain makes meaning
of the sensory information that comes in.
Lastly, in this section, we're going to look at what brain structures are involved in movement
of the body.
We exist in the world, and we act in the world, and so we'll want to talk about movement
and how this takes place.
Here our clinical example will be Parkinson's disease, and you will be able to understand
why individuals with Parkinson's, again, show the signs and symptoms they do if you understand
this basic material that's presented.
The third segment of the course will be lectures 20 through 29, and here we're going to talk
about higher order cognitive functions.
So here we're going to include a number of things about language, about emotion, learning,
memory, executive functions.
And we're going to use many different topics, and these are going to range from depression
to drug abuse to how the brain processes music to see if you understand what this part of
the course has been about.
So we use these different examples to review material so that we can pull it all together
for you to help you understand it.
The last segment of the course, lectures 30 through 36, I've basically just chosen a
number of topics that I think are really interesting, and that will be of general interest to you.
So for example, we'll look at the question as to whether or not the brains of males and
females are different.
Sex is always a topic that people are interested in, and so I thought you might want to know
what neuroscience has to say about the brains of men and women.
We'll also talk about how the brain regulates sleep and dreaming.
We'll talk about consciousness and how modern neuroscientists define this and study it.
We're going to end this segment of our course with a discussion of Alzheimer's disease.
This devastating disorder can in fact be understood by knowing what areas of the brain
specifically degenerate in this devastating disorder.
But I won't leave you there.
The lecture immediately following the one on Alzheimer's, we'll talk about how we can
keep our brains healthy and active, what positive changes we can make in lifestyle that can
help us stave off this terrible disease.
We're going to end the course by summarizing what we've learned about the brain and neuroscience
at this point, and we'll also talk a little bit about the questions of great interest to
neuroscientists.
I genuinely mean it when I say that it's a privilege to be your guide on this journey.
I started my first research in neuroscience when I was 19 years old and undergraduate.
That was a very long time ago, and I have never lost my enthusiasm for this subject.
My goal as your professor and guide in this class is to inform you and to amaze you about
the most incredible organ in the human body.
Now since it has not always been believed that the brain was responsible or important
even for perception and cognition, we need to begin with a historical introduction to
see why it was decided that the brain is actually the biological substrate of the mind.
There's another reason why we start with a historical introduction.
Neuroscience is and always has been an eclectic field, formulating and refining theories that
come from experimental research, but also borrowing ideas, historically especially from
other fields like philosophy.
So in this first lecture, we can only touch briefly and superficially on the historical
antecedents of modern neuroscience and on some of the most important of the paradigm
shifts which have occurred from antiquity to present in our thinking about how the mind,
the soul and the brain are related.
So let's begin with ancient civilizations.
Ancient civilizations believed that the heart was the seat of perception which is our ability
to perceive an external world, also the seat of cognition which is our ability to think
and also the soul.
So the heart was seen as the seat of perception, cognition and the soul.
Records from ancient Egypt and we're so fortunate to have written records from this culture.
These records indicate that sometime around about a thousand BC when pharaohs and others
that were deemed worthy of embalming died, they had their brains extracted through the
nose and discarded.
So the brain wasn't seen as anything, an organ that was important at all.
And in fact, the organs that would be seen as vital to the afterlife and these would
include the liver, the lungs, the stomach and the intestines were often preserved in
beautiful alabaster canopic jars.
Now the heart on the other hand was believed to be the seat of the mind and the soul of
the individual and thus it was of ultimate importance.
The heart was actually left in place to be mummified with the body.
The pharaoh could enter the afterlife without a brain but not without a heart.
Now the significance of the heart is also evidenced by rituals that surrounded the entrance
of the individual to the afterlife.
So when Anni spoke of the dead, we see Anubis who was the jackalheaded god of internment
and also the guardian of the sarcophagus.
He led the dead to judgment and one of the images in Anni's book is of Anubis holding
the balance and on one scale is the individual's heart and on the other scale is the feather
of Mott and Mott was the goddess of truth, justice and order in the universe.
And in order for that individual to enter the afterlife, their sins as judged by that
heart had to weigh less than the feather of Mott.
And these beliefs were not unique to the Egyptians it turns out.
Other ancient cultures around the Mediterranean for example the Greeks but also other great
civilizations in Indian China likewise held the heart to be the organ and seat of perception,
intellect, memory, emotions and the spirit or the soul of the individual.
For example Aristotle.
Aristotle would influence science and philosophy for centuries and he firmly believed that
it was the heart that was the seat of cognition and perception.
In his philosophical system the brain's only function was to cool the passions of the heart
so it was the heart that was the seat of the important functions of perception, cognition
and the soul.
Later Galen a Greek physician in Rome who at different times in his career was a physician
to emperors like Marcus Aurelius but also to gladiators rejected Aristotle's belief
that the heart was the seat of the soul and mind but he actually didn't let go of the
idea that the soul and mind consisted of spirits that emanated from the heart.
This was a time in which people were thinking about spirits or fluids that moved around
in the body a sort of hydraulic view of the body and so Galen thought that spirits were
a part of the person emanating from the heart.
To Galen the role of the brain was to make these spirits noble in human beings so the
function of the brain was to make these spirits noble and Galen's ideas and theories or variations
on them were to dominate into the Renaissance.
In the Renaissance and after the soul and mind became localized if not always to the
brain substance itself at least in the head.
So one of the earliest theories was that perception, memory and other cognitive functions resided
in cavities in the brain which are called ventricles.
So if your mother told you once that you had holes in your head she was actually right.
This is a modern view of the ventricular system of the brain.
This is our brain from the side.
This would be the front of our brains.
This is the back of our brain and this area shows a ventricular system basically cavities
or holes in the brain that are part of the ventricles and so many of the individuals
in the Renaissance believed in fact that this was the seat of the mind and the soul.
One of the main proponents of this theory that perception and cognition and the soul
were located in the ventricular system was the quintessential Renaissance genius Leonardo
Da Vinci.
Da Vinci gave us some of the most beautiful detailed and accurate depictions of the ventricular
system of the brain and he believed that perception and cognition resided in these cavities
not in the brain substance itself.
Now again we see this idea of spirits and I sort of like this you know better to think
of spirits not moving around just in general but to think of those spirits moving in the
cavities of the brain these holes that were in the brain it's not really so far fetched
to think that.
Now there have been many philosophical influences on modern neuroscience this is a subject in
and of itself but surely one of the most influential of the philosophers was the 17th century French
philosopher and mathematician René Descartes.
His name has practically become synonymous with the idea of dualism and dualism is basically
a belief that the mind and the body are distinct entities they're independent and they're different
in nature they're made up of a different type of substance.
There were actually many antecedents to this idea that mind and body were distinct and
different but I think the idea was most elaborated by Descartes and that's why he's most associated
with it.
He spoke of the bodies of animals and humans as being like clockworks just machines that
were driven by biological processes but he believed that the mind or the soul and again
these terms are used interchangeably almost like the mind and soul as a single entity.
He referred to it as such he called it the rational soul so the mind perception cognition
and the soul of the special property of the individual he called the rational soul and
thought of it as one thing he felt that this could be found only in humans and could not
be accounted for in terms of biology.
Now what is more important probably for our discussion here is that Descartes recognized
that bodies functions of humans function similar to animals.
He believed that the rational soul however was responsible for this perception and cognition
for our subjective sense of the world and ourselves and for our essential spirit Descartes could
not imagine how we could perceive an external world how we could think his famous dictum
I think therefore I am he could not see how that could simply be a quality of our physical
bodies and that's why he had to postulate the rational soul.
Nonetheless Descartes clearly understood that somehow the rational soul and the body had
to interact so when a person made a moral judgment for example about something that
changed their action in the world clearly the morality he thought was a part of the
rational soul but it changed the actions of the body.
So Descartes became interested in looking where there might be a place where the soul
and the body might interact and he identified the pineal as that place in the body.
So the pineal is a single unpaired structure in the brain and he believed it was the seat
of the rational soul and the structure through which the spirit or soul could influence the
material body.
Now I found an image for you this is a section through the brain that's been stained it's
cut in this plane so it goes from the front of the brain to the rear of the brain and
you can see that the pineal is the single unpaired structure right here.
Now there's a reason why Descartes was interested in finding one unpaired structure in the brain
and this too is very logical in some meaningful way.
Experience of the world and our experience of ourselves seems to be unitary.
So Descartes reasoned that there had to be a single place that wasn't paired and most
structures in the body and the brain are paired.
There had to be a single place where the rational soul interacted and he chose the pineal from
that.
More interestingly however for me or more incredible I'm surprised that Descartes didn't
notice because they certainly had done dissections in animals didn't seem to notice that animals
also have a pineal gland and he didn't believe that animals had a rational soul yet they
had a pineal and I don't know how he worked through that one in his system.
We now know that the pineal is the main gland that produces melatonin in the brain and is
involved in sleep wake cycles.
Now later in the 17th century and beyond individual scientists, physicians, philosophers actually
increasingly began to believe that the brain was responsible for many of the functions
that had been previously attributed to a soul.
So one of the more important of these individuals was Thomas Willis.
Thomas Willis was an English anatomist and physician.
He coined the term neurology and became the father of neurology.
The field of medicine involved specifically with disorders of the brain.
As an interesting aside here in piece of trivia related to neuroscience, Thomas Willis was
one of the leaders of a dynamic group of individuals who happened to be at Oxford at the time and
they're referred to as the Oxford group and this consisted of physicians, of philosophers,
of individuals who contributed enormously to chemistry and physics later on.
For example, Willis, but also Robert Boyle, Robert Hook, the philosopher John Locke who
is more remembered for his ideas and beliefs in the natural rights of man and how he influenced
the United States Constitution.
Few people realized that John Locke was a physician and he was part of this dynamic
Oxford group, incredible group of intellectuals who contributed much to our understanding of
early science.
Another individual who was part of this group was an individual named Christopher Wren.
Christopher Wren, of course, being more well known for his having been the architect of
St. Paul's Cathedral.
And so this is an individual who was part of this Oxford group.
Willis was one of the first individuals to describe many neurologic and psychiatric disorders.
In 1664, he published The Anatomy of the Brain and Nerves.
And this book helped establish that perception, movement, cognition, memory were all functions
of the brain substance itself.
Now what is interesting in this regard is his observations were actually accompanied
by beautiful and detailed anatomical drawings that were made by Christopher Wren.
Again, our great architect who went on to design St. Paul's Cathedral in London.
This is one of Wren's drawings that is in Willis's book and it shows the ventral or
under surface of the brain.
It could be used today to teach medical students.
It is so accurate, just a really dynamic group of men at Oxford at that time.
Now even a superficial history of neuroscience would not be complete without the mention
of Franz Joseph Gaul.
He clearly believed that the brain was the organ of the mind.
He would postulate that there were approximately 35 mental faculties, so to speak, that were
located in the cortex.
Moreover, he would postulate that the development of these various faculties would cause a
change in the shape of the skull so that you could actually tell whether someone had a
particular type of quality of your faculty that was extremely well developed.
So when you look at the maps from these times, by the way, this was formalized in the field
of phrenology.
So you can localize various types of characteristics on the skull.
This is a little bust, that little head of phrenology, and here is, right here on the top
here is where benevolence is located.
So Gaul believed that if you were a particularly benevolent person, then that area and the
skull above it would become extraordinarily developed and you would be able to tell this
by feeling the individual's head.
The shape of the skull would reflect this.
Now we may have abandoned many of these ideas that Gaul put forth.
Certainly we've abandoned phrenology, so we no longer think that the shape of someone's
skull tells us something fundamental about the qualities of that person.
But I think it's really important that you should know that in modern neuroscience we
actually have found that some very complex functions, for example, something like empathy
and compassion, actually have sites in the brain that are pretty much devoted to those
faculties.
So while we've thrown out the idea that the shape of the skull is going to help us know
whether someone is benevolent, I think it's probably best to look at the person's behavior.
But nonetheless, we have in fact uncovered in modern neuroscience many very complex faculties
that are governed by the brain.
Now after Gaul's death, his ideas would be challenged by many individuals who actually
would provide the experimental foundation for modern neuroscience.
Many of these individuals were biologists or psychologists who would do experiments
where they might remove part of an animal's brain and then see what function was lost.
By today's standards, these experiments are very very crude.
But in fact, very similar experiments are used now to determine the same thing.
Our experimental techniques have improved.
We don't take out huge areas of the brain, generally we take out a very small area of
the brain, but we still use this basic type of method to help us understand the function
and the connections of various areas of the brain.
Now this very brief introduction can't possibly do justice to all of the individuals who have
contributed to our understanding of the brain.
In particular, throughout history, there have been physicians who during times of war have
kept incredibly detailed journals that have told us so much about the organization of
the human brain.
They kept journals where they detailed what kind of function was lost in a soldier when
they sustained certain injuries to the brain.
These are fascinating reading, but it's because individuals wrote such journals has given
us insight into the function of the human brain.
And I believe we owe a particular homage to individuals in philosophy who from antiquity
to present have asked the questions which are only now being addressed by neuroscience.
What do we know of the world in which we exist and how do we know it?
What is the mind?
What is consciousness?
These and other questions are still central to both philosophy and to neuroscience, although
they're framed differently in each of the fields for obvious reasons.
For example, a philosopher might ask, what are the categories of mind that exist and
limit our understanding of the world as we know it?
A neuroscientist might address the same question but would frame it slightly differently.
A neuroscientist who approached this question would be interested in determining the underlying
neural circuits involved in the processing of sensory information so that we could get
an understanding about how we learn about an external world through our senses.
So the neuroscientist would frame it slightly different, but they might conclude that all
we know of the external world is what the brain allows because of those underlying neural
circuits.
Now in the modern era, the brain is seen as the biological substrate of the mind.
The mind is now seen as that internal subjective sense that we have of our experience.
The current working paradigm is actually captured beautifully by the quote I gave by Simon Leves
at the beginning of the overall scopes for this course.
The mind is just the brain doing its job.
So to summarize briefly and to highlight the major paradigm shifts in our thinking about
how mind, soul and brain are related to each other, this is what has brought us to this
point and that's why it's important to appreciate this historical perspective.
According to the earliest records, the brain was irrelevant to cognition, perception and
other qualities of the mind and also irrelevant to the soul.
It was the heart in these ancient cultures that was given the central role as the seat
of the mind and the seat of the soul.
So we also saw in this brief introduction that historically the terms mind and soul
were used almost interchangeably.
It was as though the soul and the mind were a single entity.
Our ability to perceive the world and to think was tied up with this uniqueness we had, this
spirit that made us an individual, this soul that we had as part of a unique part of being
a human being.
Later the historical change, the paradigm shift was that perception and cognition were
now seen as separate from the soul and perception and cognition became attributed to the mind
and this mind now was separate from this unique quality called the soul.
And finally to our modern era where the brain is seen as the biological substrate of the
mind.
It is precisely the question as to how the brain gives rise to the mind that is the
focus of much of the neuroscience research and inquiry, not to mention it's also open
to a lot of speculation.
Neuroscience does not address and cannot address questions related to whether there's
a soul, whether there's some kind of quality present in humans that survives the death
of the brain and the death of the body.
The emphasis for us in modern neuroscience is going to be how the brain and ultimately
the mind are related.
Now I should like to end this brief introductory lecture with a quote that I think just encapsulates
beautifully the modern view of the brain.
Men ought to know that from nothing else but the brain come joys, delights, laughter
and sports and sorrows, griefs, despondency and lamentations.
And by this in a special manner we acquire wisdom and knowledge and see and hear and
know what are foul and what are fair, what are bad and what are good.
What are sweet and what are unsavory.
And by the same organ we become mad and delirious and fears and terrors assail us.
All of these things we endure from the brain.
And while this sounds remarkably contemporary it's going to demonstrate to us that there
have always been individuals who have been able to be way ahead of their times.
This quote is actually taken from On the Sacred Disease which was written in the 5th century
BC by our father of medicine Hippocrates.
Thank you.
