In our introductory lecture, it was stated that the modern view is that cognition and
perception are the result of brain processes. The truth is that every single thing you can
hear, feel, see, every thought you think is the result of brain processes. But before
we can get into talking about some of these topics, we need to define some important terms
so we're all on the same page about how we use language, and we need to understand some
very basic principles about how the brain is organized. So the next few lectures are
going to provide that foundation material on which the rest of the course is going to
be based. The terms, definitions, and other things we'll talk about and learn in this
first part of the course are going to be important for understanding all of the other lectures.
In this specific lecture, what we want to do is talk about the gross organization of
the brain, and that term in neuroscience is used to mean the external features of the
brain, what can be seen without the aid of a microscope. So when we talk about the gross
organization of the brain, it's the overall big, large organization of the brain. We're
going to return to a discussion, a function of individual areas at a later time, but here
we're going to learn some definitions and terms so that we all know where we're at when
we talk about the brain. So let's start with some of those basic definitions. The term
central nervous system refers to the brain and the spinal cord. The brain is continuous
with the spinal cord through a hole in the skull, which is called the foramen magnum.
So you all know that your spinal cord is in fact protected by bony vertebrae, and then
your brain is in this compartment here, and the brain and spinal cord have to be continuous
as there's a hole in the bottom of the skull, and this is where the brain and the spinal
cord are continuous. This course is going to focus primarily on the brain, so that part
of the central nervous system. But there is another part to the nervous system that we
aren't going to cover in this course, and that's called the peripheral nervous system.
So the peripheral nervous system is actually any neural element that lies outside of the
brain and spinal cord. So the peripheral nervous system would be, for example, you have a long
nerve called the sciatic nerve that runs down the back of the leg. This is part of the peripheral
nervous system. Any part of a nervous structure, whether it's a nerve cell or a process of
a nerve cell, that lies outside of the brain and spinal cord would be part of the peripheral
nervous system. Now throughout this course, we're going to be using what I call the handy
dandy brain model. And this beautiful model, you turn it like this, you can see it from
different sides. The one in your head is actually much more beautiful than this. We're going
to be using this when we point out different areas of the brain, so it's important that
you be able to immediately orient to this model. Now just like we have two sides to
the body, we have a right and left side to our body, we have two hemispheres in our brain.
This model is only one hemisphere. So it's used for teaching purposes, so the other hemisphere,
which would be located here, is not shown. So what we want to know is where the front
and the back of the brain are at. So whenever I talk about something and refer to this model,
then you can look at it and you'll know where we are. This is the front of the brain and
this is the back of the brain. And one of the ways you can always know that this is
the back of the brain is to orient to this little structure right here. This little
fist shaped structure is called the cerebellum and it's going to be a topic of one of the
lectures later on. But the cerebellum is here at the base of the skull and so you can always
tell where the back of the brain is. The other thing I want you to notice with this model
is that this is a right hemisphere. So this is the front, this is the back and that would
make this a right hemisphere of the brain. So when we talk about these different structures
and I point things out in this model, then you'll know basically where you're at. Now
if we looked at the central nervous system from the outside, so we imagine that this
was our brain and we're going to look at it from the outside, if we look down here we
would see the spinal cord. So again the spinal cord is part of the central nervous system
and it is part of the central nervous system and protected by that bony vertebrae. It's
connected to the brain via that hole in the skull, the foramen magnum. Now what you can
see from this external feature here, if we turn the brain model like this look, is you
see this part up here that is attached to the spinal cord is called the brain stem.
And the brain stem is an older area of the brain and it got its name from the fact that
if I take this other half, now this would be for the other hemisphere, the left hemisphere
that is not on this model. But if you took this and you looked at just this part here
and then you thought of this and all of this hemisphere sitting on top of it, it would
look like this was a stem and that's exactly where the name comes from. So the big hemispheres
and the parts of the brain here that are very highly evolved and in part that characterizes
the human brain sit upon this brain stem and that's where it got its name. So that's
a very old area of the brain. Let's turn this over this way since we're looking from
the external features here. So you see your spinal cord, you only see part of the brain
stem and the reason for that is because these huge hemispheres in the human being cover
over the rest of it. So if we looked grossly and looked from the outside, we could only
see the spinal cord a part of the brain stem and then we would see the huge hemisphere
surrounding it. Now in order to basically refer to different structures in the brain,
we have to learn a number of different reference terms and these have, you know, are given
by names that may not be familiar to you. So for example, the terms rostral caudal,
the terms rostral caudal, rostral means anterior superior or towards the face and so it would
be towards the face end of the individual. This would be rostral, so this would be rostral
in the brain. The term caudal means towards the tail end or the back or posterior and
so that would be the back of the brain. The cerebellum would be a caudally located structure.
Now there are two other terms. One is called dorsal and one is ventral and dorsal and ventral
refer to a surface, the upper surface of the brain or reference and ventral refers to
the under surface. So this would be dorsal in the hemisphere, this is ventral under
hair. For the spinal cord, this is dorsal and this is ventral and if that's confusing
to you, don't let it be confusing. I always try to explain this to my students by saying
imagine one of my doxins. So here's a long sausage shaped dog and imagine it with its
little head slightly down. Well, all of this would be dorsal and everything in the underside
would be ventral. So human beings, we have this huge, we stand upright, we have this
huge hemisphere and we have a bend in our neck. If I turn my head like this and remove
the bend in my neck, you see that this is dorsal, this is ventral and so what we have
when we return the bend to the neck, this is dorsal, this is ventral, this is dorsal,
this is ventral. So when we refer to different parts of the brain, we will often use these
kinds of this language or terminology. And to just make sure that this is very clear,
let's look at a drawing of the brain and here again, here's an eyeball drawn in and that
eyeball shows you this is where the face would be. So this is rostral, this is towards the
head end or anterior and this is caudal or towards the tail end or posterior and this
would be the dorsal surface of the brain and this would be the ventral surface of the brain
or the undersurface and you're looking through the hemisphere and here's your brain stem
down here and your spinal cord and the foramen magnet is right here or the hole in the skull
where the brain and the spinal cord are connected. Now there are two other terms that are commonly
used but these are terms that are more often used in the general vernacular and these are
medial and lateral. So medial and lateral refer to towards the midline or away from the midline.
So as I turn this model and you look at this surface of this model, this is the medial
surface of the right hemisphere because it's right where the midline would be. Remember
there are two hemispheres in the brain so this would be where the midline is at. So
this would be the medial surface. This on the other hand would be the lateral surface
of the right hemisphere. Now you're already recognizing I'm sure that the terms rostral
caudal, dorsal, ventral and medial and lateral aren't used just to refer to absolute places
but they're used to refer to different structures in relative terms. So let me give an example
of that. If I place my finger right here on this area of the brain, this is rostral to
any area back here but caudal to this area of the brain. So it's also used as a relative
term. So if I want to talk about a structure within the brain, I might say that it is lateral
to x but that same structure could be medial to another structure. So as we use these terms
throughout the course, I will try to be very specific about my use of language but just
remember that these are just basic terms that allow us to front and back, upper surface,
under surface and lateral to medial. And this is how neuroscientists talk to each other.
Now we can grossly divide the brain into five subdivisions and here specifically we're
dealing with the adult brain. We're going to talk later about how these different subdivisions
of the brain actually arise in development and that is a fascinating subject in itself
but there are five subdivisions to the adult human brain. So if we start from rostral to
caudal and remember the brain is one part of the central nervous system, if we start
rostral to caudal, the five subdivisions of the brain are the telencephalon, the diencephalon,
the mesencephalon, the mesencephalon and the myelencephalon. So these are terms you may
have heard or maybe one or more of these terms you may have heard before. And what we will
want to do when we talk about various structures of the brain, we'll always say that this structure
lies in the diencephalon or this structure lies in the telencephalon so it's important
to know what these refer to. So let's look back at our drawing now and now we have shown
on here our drawing, here's the front of the brain, here's where our eye is at. So this
is taken in this plane so you can see the front of the brain and the back of the brain
and let's look at these subdivisions again. Here's our telencephalon. Our telencephalon
is basically this huge hemisphere that we can see from the external side out here, this
huge thing that we think is characteristic of the human brain. If we could look through
this hemisphere then we could see the next subdivision of the brain which is the diencephalon
and the diencephalon is composed of two subunits, the thalamus and the hypothalamus. The next
division of the brain we come to is the mesencephalon and the mesencephalon, it means midbrain and
it's approximately in the middle of the brain and lies right here and the next subdivision
of the brain is the metencephalon and the metencephalon consists of two structures, the
cerebellum and a structure called the pons which we're going to talk about in this drawing.
And then the last subdivision here of the brain is going to be the myelencephalon and
it's the myelencephalon that's connected to the spinal cord. So I wanted to have you
look at this on the drawing. This drawing is also in the booklet that accompanies your
course. So as we talk about these different areas of the brain, if you would like to follow
along in that booklet you can or you can just follow along as I point to the brain model
and what is on the brain model. So let's begin again with the telencephalon. The telencephalon
would be the rostral most subdivision of the adult human brain. So the telencephalon is
all of this you see on the lateral surface and it's also all of this you see on the
medial surface and the telencephalon is the most recently evolved area of the brain and
its function is going to be the focus of many of the lectures of this course because it
is the outer surface of this telencephalon, just the outer rim of it which we know is
called the cortex which is believed to be the seat of the mind. So it is the outer part
of the telencephalon which will be the focus of many of our lectures. This enormous elaboration
of this outer part of the telencephalon, the cortex, is in fact what is associated with
the human brain and so we see that the cortex is very enlarged. If we look at the brains
of other animals, their cortex is much smaller and we'll talk a little bit about how our
brain differs from that of animals in some of the other lectures. The next area if you
remember as we go rostral to caudal is going to be the diencephalon. So the diencephalon,
so if I take my little part of my brain model here, here's my brain stem down that I'm
holding and then on top of that so I want you to imagine this is for the other hemisphere
so the other hemisphere would be over this. So if I take this off like this, this would
be your diencephalon. So your diencephalon is also part of what is sitting on the brain
stem. So the diencephalon is the next subdivision of the brain we come to and it is subdivided
into two different areas. A dorsal division which means up, a dorsal division called the
thalamus and a ventral subdivision right down here which is called the hypothalamus. So
what is the thalamus? What does that word mean? The word thalamus means anti-room. It means
the room before something and this is very interesting because that's exactly what the
thalamus is. The thalamus is a structure and here it is located here and if I take my
here it is located here and if I turn this you can see that it's made up of a number
of individual structures. That's what all those different colors refer to, made up of
a number of different structures. Most of the areas that are found in the thalamus are
going to communicate with the cortex and it turns out that almost all of the information
that wants to go to the cortex with the rarest exception, almost all information that
wants to get to the cortex has to go through the thalamus first. So the term anti-room
is very appropriate. It's the room before the main room and the cortex being the seat
of the mind is of course the main room. Now the term hypothalamus also part of the diencephalon,
hypothalamus being located below the thalamus. The hypothalamus is also made up of a number
of individual areas so there are many different areas in this collective term called the
hypothalamus. Now if we wanted to stand back and look at what the overall function of the
hypothalamus was, it would be to maintain homeostasis in the body. So I think the best
example of that is on temperature control. Our temperature is regulated around a normal
level and if it goes up the hypothalamus is going to try to bring it down and if it falls
the hypothalamus will try to bring it up. So we have these homeostatic mechanisms that
maintain homeostasis in the body and the hypothalamus is one of the main areas that does that.
The next subdivision of the brain that we come to is the mesencephalon or the midbrain.
This is the area which is about in the center or the middle part of the brain. It's located
right here where my finger is at and that is where the midbrain is localized. Now the
midbrain has a lot of functions but if we had to choose one thing and say that a lot
of this was covered by the midbrain, it would be reflexes. So to just give you an idea,
in this structure here and I'm going to put my, just the end of my finger on this structure,
they're very small so it makes it very difficult to see, but I'm going to put my finger right
here. It's a little blue area right here on this brain. This structure is called the
superior colliculus and it is located in the midbrain. It is one area in the midbrain.
The superior colliculus or it's also called the rostral colliculus because it's rostrally
located structure. Colliculus means little hill so it's the rostrally located little
hill is involved in visual reflexes. So for example, if there was suddenly a bright light
over here, I might turn my head, close my eyes and lift my arm like this. That reflex
is governed by the superior colliculus through its connections to other areas of the brain
that control the movement of my hands, the closing of my eyes, and the protection of
my face. And so this is a reflex. You don't say, oh look, there's something bright over
there. It could be potentially damaging to me. I wonder what I ought to do. You don't
do that. You have reflexes that kick in and this is where visual reflexes are controlled.
We'll learn that in other animals who don't have any need for doing that. Let's imagine
one. Let's think about this. In the lowly toad, which was one of my favorite research
subjects when I ran a research lab, in the lowly toad what he wants to use his superior
colliculus for is to localize prey in space. So for example, what he wants to do is when
something small and dark and jerky comes into his field of view, he wants to turn towards
it and stick out his tongue and get it. That's reflex and is controlled by the very same structure
in his brain. Fortunately, we don't do that or not many of us stick out our tongue to
catch prey in space. Anyway, most of us don't. So these reflex functions are different depending
on the niche of the animal and that should also make sense. We have the same structures
in our brain that other animals have for these types of functions, but they've been modified
because our niche is different and so the connections of these structures have been modified.
Now we have other kinds of reflexes that are also controlled by this midbrain. The next
area of the brain and again going rostral to coddle, so we've already covered the midbrain,
the next area of the brain we come to is called the metencephalon. And the metencephalon consists
of two separate structures. One is the cerebellum, which is this fist shaped structure here
at the base of the brain and we're going to be talking about this incredible structure.
It is actually responsible for the coordination of learned skilled motor movement and so it's
extremely important in human beings. The other part of the metencephalon is the pons and
the pons is this sort of little bump right here. Now to help you remember these terms,
because these probably some of them at least aren't terms that you've heard before, the
term pons means bridge. And so you can remember a major function of this area of the brain
because what the pons does is connect the cerebellum to the rest of the brain. So it
acts as a bridge between the cerebellum and the brain. And so it's named again perfectly
for what it does. Now we know that many of these areas of the brain do many more things
but the early neuroanatomists gave them the most obvious name and so pons fits very very
well. Now let me give you an example of that. Let's imagine that I want to reach over and
I want to touch this brain model. As I reach out I have a gross movement towards the brain
model but as I get close and close enough I want to touch just the top of it, my movement
becomes very very precise. In order to make that movement two things have to happen. One
I have to initiate the motor movement and that is actually done by a structure that's
located here in the telencephalon. So there's an area of the telencephalon that will initiate
the motor movement. Now once the movement is initiated however the cerebellum has to
know what movement is going to be initiated otherwise it can't coordinate it. So in the
pons there are going to be processes from this area that initiates the movement that
will connect to the pons and the pons will send the information to the cerebellum telling
the cerebellum what movement the cortex has just initiated and that allows my cerebellum
then to coordinate that movement and allow me to make this very precise controlled skilled
motor movement. And again we will have whole lecture on this structure which is just fascinating.
It's a structure that is very very well understood in neuroscience and a fascinating structure
in its own right. The myelencephalon is the last subdivision of the brain and the myelencephalon
is going to be the area which is continuous with the spinal cord through that hole in
the skull the foramen magnum. So the myelencephalon also goes by the name medulla or medulla oblongata
and the myelencephalon or medulla is a very old area of the brain and the term actually
means long white marrow structure. Now that doesn't necessarily have any inherent good
meaning for you but it will make sense when I tell you one thing. Basically you do all
your thinking, planning, perceiving and everything up here but in order to make a motor movement
for example you have to get the information down to your spinal cord because it's your
spinal cord that's going to have the neurons or nerve cells that go out to the muscle and
cause contraction. So all of the information to make that happen has to travel through
that area of the brain. Now let's think of something else. Imagine you're touched on
your leg or you have a sensation in your leg or you move your joint you know where your
leg is at. In order for you to have a conscious perception of that that information has to
get up to the brain in order for you to have a conscious perception and that means all
of those pathways that are going to carry that information also have to go through the
myelencephalon. So everything that wants to communicate down has to go through there and
everything down that wants to communicate up has to go there too and that's why the
early neuroanonymous they opened it up, they looked and they saw that it had, we'll talk
about what it means to say it was full of white matter but it's basically full of the
processes of neurons that communicate back and forth between the brain and the spinal
cord and that's why they gave it the name the long white marrow structure and so these
old names that are from long, long, long ago actually are very, very good at describing
what the structures are about. Now one more time there are five subdivisions to the adult
human brain from rostral to caudal these would be telencephalon which is what we characterize
our human brain, diencephalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon and myelencephalon and then
continuous with the spinal cord and all of this together constitutes our central nervous
system. There are a few other terms that are used, they've actually undergone some change
in how they've been defined over the years but I will use what we now currently, the
definitions we currently use, one of these terms is forebrain. So we talk about forebrain
structures, whenever you hear that term or you read that in a book forebrain refers to
the telencephalon and the diencephalon so the forebrain are going to represent the most
recently evolved and most highly developed areas of the human brain so this is what's
meant by the forebrain. When we talk about the hindbrain on the other hand, we talk about
the hindbrain, we're talking about these caudal structures so for example the medulla would
be part of the hindbrain and the brain stem in these hindbrain regions like the medulla
would be found in any animal that has a brain and they control a lot of the vital but largely
unconscious processes of the brain like breathing, heart rate, very fundamental things like that.
They're not involved in reasoning and thinking, that's telencephalic okay and the diencephalon
most of the thalamus sending information up to the telencephalon and the last term that
we need to define is brain stem and again this is just what I'm holding in my hand
where my hand is at is the stem upon which the diencephalon and the telencephalon rest
so the brain stem is the mesencephalon, metencephalon and myelencephalon upon which the forebrain
sits so that's where it gets its name brain stem okay and to summarize what we've covered
in this lecture I want to go to an MRI this is actually one of my MRIs so that's my brain
this is the front of my face you can see all this fatty tissue here that's around my eyeball
this is an aerosinus and with this method which is just an imaging method how we look
at the brain see the scalp out here then the bone is dark and then here's my brain itself
and lo and behold here's my telencephalon right here we're looking sort of at a medial
section here's my diencephalon right here dorsal would be the thalamus ventral the hypothalamus
this is where my midbrain is located here the superior colliculus and inferior colliculus
would be located right here down here we have the metencephalon which is the cerebellum
and here's my pons pons being the bridge that bridges the cerebellum with the rest of the brain
and down here the myelencephalon and my spinal cord protected by the bony vertebrae thank you
