Welcome back to our course on the brain.
In our last lecture, we looked at the external or gross features of the brain, what we could
see when we look from the outside.
And we talked about how the brain and spinal cord make up the central nervous system.
If we were to subdivide, looking at our brain model, we were to subdivide the brain going
from rostral to codle, we divided into telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon or midbrain, met
encephalon, myelencephalon and the spinal cord.
In the last lecture, we also talked a little bit about different structures that were within
these different brain subdivisions.
What we want to do now is to look at the complexity of the internal organization of these areas.
So if we look from the outside and we talked about one or two areas in them, if we actually
take the brain and cut it and turn and look at it, we see that it's very complex on the
inside.
We have to have a microscope to do that.
We have to have some other methods for doing that.
So that's what we want to talk about in this lecture is the internal organization of the
brain itself.
Now when early neuroanonymous took the brains out of cadavers, they noticed first of all
that the brain's substance was sort of like cottage cheese.
This was not very good for doing any kind of dissection.
One of the first things that had to happen so that we could understand something about
the structure of the brain was methods had to be developed so that we could look at it.
One of the most important methods was discovering what kinds of chemicals would fix the brain
or make it hard so that it could be sliced up and viewed.
So that was one of the first things they did.
When they did this and they cut into the brain and they turned and looked at it, it looked
like the brain had very little natural contrast, but there were areas that looked a little
bit grayish or a little bit whitish.
And we still use these terms in modern neuroscience, but before we get to a definition of them,
I wanted to show you a real human brain and the fact that there is very little natural
contrast.
I want you to look at this slice here, and this slice is taken in this plane so it's
like through the top like this, looking down.
And so what you can see is there would be two hemispheres.
This would be the front of the brain.
This is the back of the brain.
And one of the first things you can see is that there's very little natural contrast.
Now, these are human brain sections that were embedded in plastic, so they have a little
bit of a yellowish tint, but you can see right around the external surface, there appears
to be a very thin ridge or margin that's a little bit darker than on the inside.
And this will become clear what this means in a minute.
Also you can see these huge holes.
These are the ventricles of the brain, the place Leonardo da Vinci thought cognition
and perception were located.
So there actually are those holes in the brain.
If we look at another brain section, we see again, now in this brain section, this is
the front of the brain, this is the back of the brain, here's our cerebellum right here.
That's how we know that that's the back of the brain.
Here you can also see there's still a little bit of darker color around the outer edge,
then it's light, and then you see some darker areas again, and that's because there are
different structures located within the brain's substance itself, and when the early neuroanatomists
cut up the brain, they saw this as well.
So when they cut up the brain, they saw that there was little natural contrast, but there
was enough contrast to make some areas look a little bit darker or grayer in the natural
brain, and some of the areas looked a little bit whiter.
Now looking down here, just because we talked about this in our last lecture, and I always
like to review information, I'm going to put my finger right here on this structure right
here, which is the superior colliculus.
So that's a part of the midbrain, but it's now cut in this plane, and that superior colliculus
is one of the structures that is involved in visual reflexes.
So this is what the brain looks like in reality.
This has been fixed, and again, embedded in a plastic, so it's changed the color a little
bit, but the early neuroanatomists noticed this difference between what they called gray
matter and white matter, and for us to be able to understand what gray and white matter
refer to, we need to learn something about the parts of a neuron, and a neuron is a nerve
cell, so we need to look at the parts of a nerve cell.
This is what I call a generic nerve cell, and what you see here is a cell body, just
like any other kind of cell in the body.
There's a cell and a nucleus in the middle, and then extending from that cell body are
these funny looking structures which are called dendrites, and dendrites are nothing more
than true extensions of the cell body surface, and the name dendrite stems from the fact
that early neuroanatomists thought they looked like the branches of a tree, and in fact that's
exactly what they do look like, and we'll come back to this because it's very important,
our understanding of different neurons in different areas of the brain has come in large
part from looking at the different kinds of dendritic trees that exist on different neurons.
So here's our cell body, and here's our dendrites extending away.
Now from the other part or side of the cell, you see right at this junction here which
is called the axon hillock, there's a single structure which leads away from the cell,
and this is called an axon, and we'll come back to this in a minute.
Right now we have the cell body and the dendrites which are extensions of that cell body.
Early neuroanatomists developed stains primarily in the 19th century that were applied to brain
tissue, and what they discovered is that the areas that were a little bit darker, the so-called
gray matter, were actually groups of neurons or nerve cells, so the gray areas of the brain,
the darker areas of the brain is where the neuron cell bodies are located, and these
neuron cell bodies form functional and structural groups, and in the nervous system we call
these nuclei. Now sometimes a word is used in neuroscience in a way that is different
from how it's used in general biology or used by the general population, and this is
one of them. There's two different kind of nuclei, one we will talk about in this course
and a subject of this course, and one which is not. There's the nucleus of a cell, and
that's an organelle which is located within the cell which is where the genetic material
of that cell is located. We aren't going to be talking about that.
Neuroscientists use the term nuclei, they're referring to collections of neuron cell bodies
that form a structure with unique characteristics and function. So if I were to say the superior
calculus is a nucleus, it means it's a specific area of the brain that has a specific function
associated with it, and all it is is a collection of cell bodies into that one structure or
nucleus. So think of it that way, and if you understand the superior calculus as a single
structure that will be very good. Now we had a number of individuals in the 19th century
who developed the stains that have resulted in our understanding of gray matter, white
matter, and how the nervous system is organized. One of them was Franz Nissell. So he developed
some stains, and he didn't know why, it's kind of an interesting story. He cut up a
lot of different areas of the brain, and he developed this cool stain, and so he cut
up a bunch of sections throughout the whole body, including the brain, and he dipped them
in this stain. And lo and behold, when he pulled his sections out of the stain, the nervous
system lit up like a Christmas tree, but all the other structures in the body hardly stained
at all. And so he said there had to be something special in the brain that was taking his die,
and he named these structures, of course, Nissell bodies, okay? And we now know that
in fact, neurons have a large number of these Nissell bodies in their cytoplasm, and Franz
Nissell was able to identify a number of nuclear groups in the nervous system based on this.
So what does a Nissell stain neuron look like? So let's just look at one. So this is a very
nice example of a Nissell stain section through one single neuron. Now, when you look here
at the neuron, this is the neuron itself here, this is its nucleus, this is where its genetic
material is located, but this is just one neuron. Now these Nissell bodies, each one
of the little purple dots is where the die, the Nissell die has taken up the stain, and
what you notice is just the neuron cell bodies which are staining. Now the dendrites of this
neuron, these dendrites that extend away, they are not picking up the stain. So the reason
for that, I told you, the dendrites are actual extensions of the cell body surface, so theoretically
they would pick up the stain, but the little Nissell bodies, what is actually staining,
are too fat to fit up into the dendrites. And so that's why when you stain with Nissell,
you just see the cell body. Now, if we look down here, however, at that axon hillock,
that area where that one axonal process left the cell body, nothing at all stains there,
and the reason for this is because Nissell bodies are not found in the axon at all. So
dendrites are true extension of the cell body, so they would stain with this if we left them
in there long enough, but the axon would never stain. So this is one single neuron, and this
is the same stain that was developed by Franz Nissell in the 19th century. Now, if we wanted
to look at a nucleus in the brain, this is an example of one nucleus. So let me tell
you a little bit about this nucleus. This nucleus is called the lateral geniculate nucleus
of the thalamus. It is a single nucleus which is found in the diencephalon specifically
within the thalamus. This is the whole nucleus here, which looks like a knee, which is what
the word geniculate means, and it's located laterally in the thalamus, and you remember
the thalamus was a large structure that was made up of a number of individual areas, well
it's a number of individual nuclei, and this is one nucleus in the thalamus. Each one of
the little tiny dots you see here is an individual neuron that's staining with the nissell stain.
So this one nucleus has hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of neurons, but it forms a structure
that has a unique structure. The lateral geniculate is infamous for being a layered structure like
this, and this nucleus would also have its own individual connections to other areas
of the brain, and it also has a unique function. So let me give you an example. Here's our
lateral geniculate. We're talking a lot about the lateral geniculate nucleus. The lateral
geniculate nucleus is the nucleus in the thalamus that receives input from the eye,
and it is the neurons that are in the lateral geniculate that will be the first neurons
that will project to the cortex, so that a percept of the external world in terms of
vision can be formed. So again, this is one nucleus in the thalamus and just shows you
how these methods have been used to look at the internal structure of the brain. We can't
see the lateral geniculate from the gross view of the brain. We have to cut up the brain
and stain it in a particular way to be able to look at it. And the thalamus again has
many nuclei. Each of them look different. Each of them have different connections, and
each of them have different functions. And so this is just one example of a nucleus.
Now, using other techniques, it was discovered that the lighter areas of the brain, the parts
of the brain that in the fresh brain look kind of whitish, were made up of axons. So
let's go back again to our generic neuron. White matter is made up of myelinated axons
in the nervous system. We'll define these terms now. Let's go back and look at our generic
neuron. So NISL is going to stain the cell body, and it would theoretically stain its
extensions if they were big enough. So NISL stains this. Other stains were developed that
stained these axons. And this is how early neuroanatomists learned that the white matter
of the brain was actually made up of axons. Now, these early stains that were developed
were stains. For example, there was an individual named Carl Weigert. He was one of the individuals
who developed one of the most important of the stains. The stain that he developed actually
stains a structure which surrounds the axon. And this is called a fatty myelin sheath.
So all myelin is, is like, imagine if you had an electrical wire and it was insulated.
So all this is, think of the axon as an electrical wire. We'll come back to that. That's not
a bad analogy. And periodically, there's insulation around that wire. And that's the
myelin sheath. You notice that there's breaks in it, and we will come back to the significance
of those breaks. But these are the axon. The axon is not just an extension of the cell
body like dendrites are. It is actually a specialized structure, and that will become
very important when we talk about how neurons actually work. This is a Weigert stain section
through the human brain. And here's what you're looking at. This is a section that was just
cut through the top of a brain like this. And we're just looking at it from the under
surface. And you see that there's an outer part here which doesn't appear to be staining.
So it appears very light. Well, it's light because the Weigert stain stains axons. So
this area which is black is staining the myelin sheath of axons that lie beneath the cortical
mantle, which is made up of neurons. So the cortex of the brain, which is all this light
area here, is the cortical mantle or layer of neurons on the external surface of the
telencephalon. And beneath that lies a huge number of axons. And these axons may be traveling
up into the cortex, or they may be the axons of cells in the cortex going down. But this
shows you a Weigert stain section of the brain. Now, in the modern era, we can look at axons
or white matter in the brain in other ways. So we can actually stain, we can actually
cut a section which would basically allow for intracellular organelles to show up. And
we would be able to stain those so we can actually stain things that are inside of an
axon. So we don't now have to rely on staining of the myelin sheath of that fatty structure
that's located around the axon. We can actually stain things that are within the axon. Another
thing that we can do in the modern era is we have special techniques where we actually
inject substances into the brain. And those substances are specifically picked up by neurons
and transported only in axons. And so we visualize them by doing, you know, special techniques
with the brain and looking at them. So let's look at one. This is, believe it or not, the
superior colliculus of the toad right here. This is the superior colliculus of the toad.
Here's where his brain midline is right here. Here's part of his ventricular system. And
there'd be another big superior colliculus over here that's been cut away. But in this
animal, I injected a substance into the eye. And by cutting up the brain and treating it
a certain way, the axons, which have this substance in them, shows up dark brown. So
this shows you that in the toad, the main structure in the brain that receives input
from the eye is the superior colliculus. Now, let's just stand back for a minute. Remember
that example of a nucleus? I gave you the lateral geniculate nucleus. In human beings,
the lateral geniculate is the main structure to get input from the eye. Although our superior
colliculus, which is very small by comparison to that of a toad, also receives visual input.
So the lateral geniculate is going to project its axons to the cortex for the formation
of a percept about vision. But the eye also projects, just like it does in the toad, to
the superior colliculus for visual reflexes for us. But in the toad, those visual reflexes
are going to involve catching prey in space, whereas for us, it will be involved in other
types of visual reflexes. So this is how we are going to look at the axons in the brain.
Now, finally, there's a special method, which is developed by an Italian neuroanatomist,
Camelo Golgi. And in this method, and believe it or not, in a modern era, we still don't
know why the Golgi method works. This is just unbelievable. Camelo Golgi lived between
1843 and 1926. We still have not figured out why his method works. But in this method,
which he developed, silver impregnates a neuron and its dendritic processes. And you say,
why is this such an incredible method? Well, this is an incredible method because, lo and
behold, when it's applied to the brain, one of the reasons, for reasons we have no idea,
it only actually fills about 1% of the cells which are present. And what this has allowed
us to do is to cut very thick sections through the brain, process them as Golgi did, and
look at the dendritic arbors of neurons. And from this, we have been able to determine
that there's a large number of different kinds of neurons in the brain. And this is the
method that gave us that understanding. As a little sidelight, this method is really
kind of funny because in one particular part of it, you use something called oil of oreganum,
which means that for about a week, your lab smells like concentrated pizza. So that's
just a little aside. But the important thing about this method is that it revealed a structure
of the nervous system that neither Nissell nor Weigert revealed to us. So let's just
look at a Golgi impregnated section. Now, for the novice person, it's a little hard
to understand Golgi sections all the time. And that's because other things become impregnated
and pick up the silver. But this is where we want to focus our attention. This is a
neuron cell body. This is one of its dendrites extending away from the cell body right here,
just one dendrite. And off from the base of this cell, you see a huge number of dendrites
also extending in a huge plane around the base of the cell. Now, one of the other reasons
the Golgi method was valuable in the adult brain is because axons do not impregnate in
the adult brain. So you can only follow the axon for a little short period and then it
stops. So what this method has really been used for is to show a difference in the elaboration
of dendritic trees. And all you have to do is think about what this neuron looks like
and its dendritic trees look like and how different that is from the generic neuron
that show dendrites that look different from these. And what we're going to learn is there's
about 150 different kinds of neurons based primarily on differences in their arbor. Now
to give you a feel for this, it's a little bit like thinking in these terms. For those
of you who know something about trees, if you look at trees in the winter time and you
see their branches, anybody who's knowledgeable can tell a maple from an oak by the way their
branches look. Well this is exactly what happens in the nervous system. Very specific
types of neurons are found in very specific areas of the brain. There is nothing that
is random in the brain. And these 150 neuron types are distributed very specifically in
the brain. In the modern era, we don't use the Golgi method as much as we used to. What
we do now is inject dyes or substances into the cell body and they can be incorporated
into the dendritic trees. So let me give you an example of that just so you can see
that in fact the dendritic trees really do look different in different neurons. So here
you see this has had a dye injected into it and by using fluorescence microscopy, you
can see that in this neuron dendrites extend like a radiating star away from the cell body.
Instead of in our last example where we had one dendrite coming up like this, it was actually
going towards the surface of the brain. And we had them radiating dendrites just from
the base of the cell. In this cell the dendrites radiate in all directions. So this is how we
have learned about the tremendous diversity of neurons. And in fact, neurons are the
most diverse cell type in the entire body. And if anything goes awry in neurons becoming
specialized in different areas, then those areas of the brain do not function normally.
Now by using various methods or combinations of methods, what we can do is look at the brain
and look at its internal structure. So why don't we just start and do that and look through
some of these areas of the brain now that we looked at before, but now we're going to
see that they're a great deal more complex than we thought they were. So let's look through
our telencephalon, diencephalon. So here this is cut in this plane like this. So what you
see are two sides to the brain, all of the sections I'm going to show you are cut in
this plane. Here's your ventricular system. See they really are holes in the brain. And
one is a midline structure that would be located right here. So dorsally you have your thalamus
and ventrally you have your hypothalamus. Now I want you to look at all this. All the
pink areas are where nuclei are at. This would be the gray matter of the brain. This is gray
matter, this is gray matter, this is gray matter. Over here is another nucleus. These are all
individual nuclei that are located in this area of the brain. And it's a sort of telencephalic
diencephalic junction. Where you see black structures, these are the axons of the brain.
So the pink areas have been stained with the stain that makes the cells show pink and the
black areas are the areas where the axons are located and are shown dark. And you see
that the internal organization of the brain is indeed very complex. If we then go to the
mesencephalon or midbrain and we cut through it and we look low and behold, here's what
we're going to see. Two sides again. This is our ventricle now. It's just very small.
It's just a little hole. Dorsally these two structures right here, this is the superior
colliculus. So here's our superior little hill right here. Now in between the two superior
colliculi, wow, there's Descartes pineal right there. So you see that it was a midline structure.
There was only one of them. And so that's why he thought it was the seat of the rational
soul and where that rational soul could interact with the body. Now I want to point out one
other structure here. Again, all the pink areas are nuclei or the light areas are nuclei
and all of the dark areas are where the white matter or axons are located. Let's come down
to this light pink area right here. This is a major structure in the midbrain called
the substantia nigra. And I pointed out to you here because it will be the topic of our
lecture on Parkinson's disease because it is specifically this area of the brain that
degenerates or which is abnormally functioning in Parkinson's disease and results in the
devastating motor consequences to the person. This is a section through the metencephalon.
Again, the pink areas are where the nuclei are located or the neuron cell bodies. The
dark areas, the dark areas are where the axons are located. Here is our ventricle. This is
our hole in the brain again. Here's our ventricular system. This is our cerebellum up here and this
is our pons right here. And now you can see why the pons is called the bridge. These axons
come out of neurons in the pons and project to the cerebellum to let the cerebellum know
what movement has been initiated by the cortex. So the pons is going to get information from
the cortex that initiates a motor movement. Then the neurons here will send their axons
into the cerebellum so the cerebellum knows what the motor cortex wants to do. And now
you know why the pons is called the bridge. It's the bridge to the cerebellum between
the cerebellum and the brain. The myelencephalon, which is the area of the brain that will be
continuous with the spinal cord, the myelencephalon, most of the areas up here have been cut away.
But this is where the ventricular system would be. And all you see down here is that there
are a number of different nuclei again. Here's a huge nucleus. Let me just point out two.
One is a nucleus located right here and I pointed out to you because I kept talking about how
toads had that tongue, you know, the reflex for catching flies in space, whatever from
this is the structure that receives the input from the superior colliculus. And in the toad
it allows them to catch prey in space. This nucleus in human beings is useful for helping
us keep our tongue out of the way when we chew and when we talk. And so the nucleus still
controls the tongue, but it is specific, the mechanism by which it does it and exactly how
it does it is characteristic of the function of the niche of the animal. So what I wanted
to show you in this lecture is that if you just looked at the brain, a fresh brain, you'd
see there was gray matter and there's white matter. And when you look in the internal
structures and you stain them with different dyes, this is how the early neuroanatomists
discovered that the brain was made up of a bunch of different areas. And it's been the
modern era where we've been able to determine the connections between all these different
areas and also the function of each of these areas of the brain. There are thousands of
nuclei and thousands of pathways connecting them in the brain. And that's part of what
our course will be about is to look at specific systems and how these nuclei and areas are
connected. Thank you.
