Welcome back.
In the previous lectures we've been covering general concepts about how the brain is organized.
In this lecture we're going to talk about a little bit about the details about an organization
of the brain called the cortex.
Now you saw last time that just comparing how you might reverse engineer a circuit board
that only had 20 components to it and the difficulty that would entail, you can imagine
what it's been like for neuroanatomists to try to figure out what the different components
of the brain do.
In this lecture we're going to focus on that cerebral cortex and this is this outer mantle
of cells.
The reason we have lectures devoted to the cortex is because the cortex is believed to
be the seed of the mind.
So the fact that we can see, we can hear, that we feel anything is due to the fact that
we have a cortex.
So we want to make sure that we go into detail about this incredible structure.
Also many of the lectures that will follow in this class are going to be about higher
order cognitive functions.
These are going to include language, emotions, memory, learning and all of these functions
are cortical functions.
The elaboration of the cortex into different areas is in fact one of the most distinguishing
characteristics of the human brain.
It is because we have this elaboration of cortex that it's believed we have many of
the types of behaviors that we have that are unique to our species.
So our ability to speak language for example is because of the elaboration of specific
areas in our cortex.
So in this and the following lecture we're going to explore how the cortex is organized
and talk about how different classification schemes have been used to partition it.
So the cerebral cortex is the bark of the outer part of the hemisphere.
So it's like the outer sheet of cells.
It's a sheet of gray matter like a mantle of cells on the outside of the hemisphere.
The cortex appears wrinkled and folded because it gets squished, it gets compressed so that
it will fit into the cranium, into a bony structure.
If you were to look at the brain of a rat, its little cortex would be very smooth.
But the human brain, if you look at a real human brain or even on our model, you see
that it's all wrinkled.
If you were to take this sheet or bark, this sheet of cells off and flatten it out, you
would see that it would be about two and a half square feet in size.
So this is a lot of cortical material.
Now the wrinkles or folds which are visible on the external surface, so what we see here,
these ridges, these folds, are called gyri.
The singular for that term is gyros and this is just the crust of a fold of cortex.
When you look at the valleys that occur in between these folds of cortex, these are called
sulci or a sulcus.
And if a sulcus is very, very deep like the one that's right here in the brain, in between
this part and this part of the brain, if a sulcus is very deep, it's called a fissure.
So if we were to just look here at the brain to give a couple of examples, about halfway
back in the brain, there's a sulcus that goes right about here, it's right about in the central
area and its name is the central sulcus and it's called the central sulcus of Rolando.
And it's just an infolding of the cortex which is similar in almost all brains.
So when all of us, our brains develop in a way that this major sulcus appears, it's
called the central sulcus of Rolando named after an Italian neuroanonymous Luigi Rolando.
Another example would be in fact this infolding right here.
The cortex is going to develop and the hemispheres are going to get very large and they actually
fold around in a C-shaped.
So our heads would be very different in shape if this part of the cortex was sticking out
here, our cortex would be out here, our hemisphere would be out here.
But the brain is in that bony skull and so the cortex folds around like this, the hemisphere
folds around and this deep fissure here is named after Franciscus sylvius, so it's called
the sylvian fissure.
If we look at our viagra stain section through the cortex, we can see all of these things
we've been referring to.
This is a viagra stain section, so that means that the white matter which is beneath that
cortical mantle is black.
And you see on the outside here that this is the cortical region and it's basically
just the bark or outer mantle of cells that cover the hemisphere.
And that term bark is just like the bark of a tree, it's just that outer covering.
Look down here, this is a gyrus, this is a crust of the fold, so this is a gyrus.
And in between here where the unfolding is at, this is where the sulcus is at.
Now the cortex is very large in human beings, but it isn't uniform.
So the cortex varies in thickness, it varies in phylogenetic age, that means evolutionary
age, and it varies in cytoarchitecture.
We've seen that term before, it means in how the cells are organized.
So let's just go through each of these and talk about how the cortex varies across its
extent.
So it varies in thickness.
It varies from about 1 to 4 millimeters in thickness, and that's very, very tiny.
So again, that's why these early neuron anatomists called it the bark, because it's just the
outer covering or mantle or sheet of gray matter or neurons which is located on the
outside of the hemisphere.
Now different cortical areas, so you see these are all colored on our map, different of these
cortical areas are also going to be different in evolutionary age, and we've seen this before.
So we talked about how the brain stem, this area down here, that the rest of the brain
is going to sit upon, that the brain stem is an older area of the brain phylogenetically.
So when we get to the cortex, we see the same kind of thing.
Different cortical areas are of different ages in an evolutionary sense.
Now when we talk about different phylogenetic ages for the cortex, it turns out that we
can tell how old something is in the cortex by looking at the number of layers which are
present.
And this was a fundamental finding very, very long ago.
Which is the oldest in terms of evolution, in terms of phylogeny, is called archaeopaleocortex,
and it's made up of fewer cell layers than neocortex, which is new cortex.
So one of the examples that's always given of old cortex is the hippocampus.
And the hippocampus, that term means little seahorse, and we're going to be coming back
and talking about it a great deal more.
But the hippocampus is an old cortical area, so let's orient to this.
This is old cortex.
This is white matter here.
This is a nissle stain section, so cell bodies are stained.
And what I've shown you is that this old cortex has only three cell layers.
And I have numbered them 1, 5, and 6 for you, because when we look at neocortex, we're
going to see that it's six cell layers deep.
And it turns out that layers 1, 5, and 6 are here in the old cortex.
Neocortex will have 1 through 6.
So that means in this old cortex, if you looked here, layer 5 in the hippocampus, those kinds
of neurons that differentiate in this area of the hippocampus will also be the same kind
of neurons that differentiate in area 5 of the neocortex.
So this is the old cortex, and this is a structure that plays a critical role even in the human
brain in learning and memory.
So we have new cortex and old cortex.
We were to look at examples of neocortex.
Neocortex is six-layered cortex.
So all neocortex has six layers.
So on the one side in this picture, what I've shown you, now this is a nisselstain section
again through neocortex, and down here is the white matter.
So this is where axons would be.
And these different cell layers make up one of the areas of neocortex.
And I've labeled these for you because here it's fairly obvious what the six cell layers
are.
One, two, three, four, five, six.
So there are six cell layers.
Now the section which is shown on the other side gives you an indication, well all old
cortex is in the same.
It may only have a few cell layers.
That may be similar, but all neocortex is six layers.
But when you look at this side, you notice that it's very hard for someone to tell where
those six layers are at.
And if you stand back from this and just let your visual system see it, you will see six
clear cell layers here, but it's very difficult to see six cell layers here, but they're there.
So if you were to go to a high power on a microscope and look at the individual cells
that are in those six layers, even on this side, you would be able to see that there
were different kinds of neurons that had differentiated in each of those cell layers.
Now using nissel stains, and again nissel stains are going to stain neuron cell bodies,
the cell bodies of neurons, a number of neuroanatomas around the turn of the century, the last century
that is, divided the cortex into 50 to 200 different areas based on how the neurons were
arranged into cell groups.
And this is what we mean by cytoarchitecture.
So if you look here, the way the cells are arranged here in these six layers is obviously
different than the way the cells are arranged in these six layers.
So one of the most important of these early investigators was an individual named Corbinian
Brogman.
And what Brogman did was he divided the cortex into about 50 different areas based on how
the cells were arranged in layers.
So he did this on the basis of the cytoarchitecture.
So he identified 50 areas.
We now know that the cortex in primates and in humans can be divided into many more areas.
So 200 is probably closer to the truth, but it's Brogman's system which has been retained
in modern neuroscience.
So let's see what that entails.
This is just a drawing showing you that on the lateral part of the hemisphere, you see
numbered areas.
So this, here's our cerebellum, so we know that this is the back of the brain, this is
the front of the brain, and this is just a lateral view, just like we have here on our
brain model.
You see that different areas have different numbers, like area 17 is at the very back
or pull of the brain right above the cerebellum.
Brogman basically just cut sections through the brain, stained them with a nissel stain,
and when he kept cutting sections, they're about 10 microns thick, and he came to an
area where the cells seemed to be arranged in their layers differently.
He gave the new area a new number, and this is how he divided both the lateral cortex
and the medial cortex into about 50 different areas, and it is Brogman's numbering system
which is still retained today.
Now different cortical areas can be referred to by a number of different ways.
So Brogman's numbering system is one of those ways.
This is the bane of new people that are entering neuroscience and the neuroscience student truly,
and that's that every single structure in the brain, it seems, has more than one name.
So I wanted to give you an example because if sometime you follow up and you read some
interesting book on the brain and there's the name of the structure and you don't recognize
it, it may be just a different name for something you do already know something about.
So for example, let's look at Brogman's area 17.
Brogman's area 17 is located right back here where I have my hand.
It's right here at the very back pole of the brain.
This is Brogman's area 17.
If I say to anyone, I study area 17, that is by definition Brogman's area 17.
Area 17 also goes by other names.
It's also called primary visual cortex, and it's called primary visual cortex because
it's the first area of the cortex which is going to receive information about vision.
So it receives its input from the lateral geniculate, and so it's the first cortical
area to start processing visual information.
For that reason, it's also called V1, meaning vision 1, and we will learn later why they
started calling a lot of these areas by V1, V2, V3, and so on, but primary visual cortex
will be V1.
There are also descriptive terms that refer to exactly the same area again.
So for example, another term for area 17 is striate cortex, and striate means striped,
and there were two very early neuroanatomists who recognized that when you looked on the
fresh brain, so if you just cut a section through the fresh brain and you look down
at that area, it looked like it had two white stripes.
Now we've already learned that white matters where axons are at, and we now know that the
reason it had these stripes is because the lateral geniculate sends a massive amount
of axonal input into area 17, but these early neuroanatomists didn't know that.
They just saw the white stripes.
So these white stripes go by other names, and these names are the stripes of Genare
and the bands of Ballagé, named for these two early neuroanatomists.
And lastly, if I turn the model this way, so we're looking at a medial part of the brain,
area 17 is also called calcorine cortex, and it's called that because right here in the
middle of area 17 on the medial surface is a deep fissure called the calcorine fissure,
and so area 17 is on both banks of that fissure, so it's also called the calcorine cortex.
And when you read any book in neuroscience, the author will use one of these terms to
refer to an area, and almost every area of the brain goes by at least two names, if not
more.
And so this can be very confusing for students, but on the other hand, you see that these
names came about for different reasons.
Now if we were to look at the cortex and to think about the cortex in terms of Brogman's
numbers, so that different areas have this different cytoarchitecture, these Brogman
areas give to the brain what would we refer to as a horizontal organization.
So it's the organization of the sheet of cells in this horizontal dimension.
Well, it turns out in addition to a horizontal organization, the cortex also has a vertical
organization.
And so what we mean by that is that every one to two square millimeters of cortex, so
a little column or strip of cells that go through all of the layers, one or two square
millimeters of cortex is a functioning module unit in itself.
I want you to think about that.
It's like having a subcomponent to a component on that circuit board.
So now the complexity of the brain has gotten even greater.
So when you look at the human cortex and what we have, we have so much more than any other
animal and part of this has resulted in an increase in the number of areas in terms of
horizontal organization.
We have areas that other animals don't have, but in addition, it's resulted in an increased
number of modules, which are independently functioning vertically organized areas.
And we have a great many more of these.
And so it's clear that the human cortex is very, very complex.
So that's why we use the Brogman numbers, because we need to have a way to be able to
refer to an area in a way that others can understand what we're trying to communicate.
Now, another way that the cortex is divided up is by lobes.
So we look at the cortex divided up into lobes.
There are four of these cortical lobes.
Some of these words or names don't really mean a lot.
They really derive from the bones that overlie these areas of the cortex.
We have a frontal lobe.
So if we look at our brain model, this is the back of the brain because here's our cerebellum.
This is the front of the brain.
We have a frontal lobe, a parietal lobe, an occipital lobe, and a temporal lobe.
So these are the four lobes of the brain.
We see that the different lobes are actually demarcated by major sulci or fissures.
So for example, our central sulcus of roulando, which is about in the middle of the brain,
is going to demarcate along with the sylvanian fissure here, the frontal lobe.
And again, these names just derive from the bones that overlie these areas.
If we move caudally, if we move caudally, then the central sulcus of roulando and an imaginary
line drawn from the sylvanian fissure down to this demarcation will show where the parietal
lobe is located.
And back here, we have an occipital lobe, and then inferiorly or ventrally, we have a temporal
lobe.
So these are the four major lobes of the brain.
This drawing is also in your accompanying booklet for the course.
So if you wanted to follow along as I talk about these different lobes and their functions,
that would be fine, or you can just follow me as I point these out on the brain model.
So what I'd like to do is to give you a little taste of what we're going to do for the rest
of the course, because we're going to be talking about function of areas.
So I want to start with the frontal lobe, and again the frontal lobe is here, here's
the back of the brain, here's the front.
So let's talk about some areas that are in this frontal lobe.
There's a gyrus which is immediately rostral to the central sulcus of roulando.
This gyrus is known as area four, Brogman's area four.
It's also called primary motor cortex, and this is going to be the area of the brain
that initiates motor movement.
If we were to move rostrally now in front of area four, or anterior to area four, we
would come upon other motor areas that are involved in the planning of a motor movement.
And an area right about here would be involved in our ability to speak language.
So it's like a higher order motor area in that this is the area where we speak language.
In the very frontal part of the frontal lobe, it's a very, very complicated area that Brogman
divided into a number of sub areas.
And in modern neuroscience, it is this area of the brain that so many cognitive neuroscientists
or neuroscientists interested in very higher order functions of the brain are interested.
So we're sort of back to fred phonology here when you hear about the kind of functions
that are attributed to this prefrontal cortex, which is in the very most rostral part of
the brain.
For example, executive functions, the ability to appreciate the consequences of one's behavior.
This is the area that abstracts the mores of our culture.
So whatever culture you're raised in, the mores are abstracted by this part of the brain
and inculcated in the individual.
This is the area of the brain where you have to learn how to inhibit your behavior.
Now interestingly enough, in fred phonology, moral behavior was located here, so it should
have been farther forward.
Okay, it should have been up here in the prefrontal cortex.
So the frontal lobe has motor function and also higher cognitive function.
We look at the parietal lobe, which is back here.
If we go just coddle to the central sulcus of Rolando, we have a strip or a gyrus, which
is called primary somatosensory cortex.
And this is the area of the brain that lets us know where we're touched on our body surface.
So it's about sensory information that comes in from the body.
So it can be pain, temperature, any kind of sensory information from the body.
We go a little bit more coddily in the parietal lobe.
And what we find is that there are a lot of areas which are involved in vision and also
somatosensory integration.
And in the left hemisphere, dominant hemisphere again, located back in the parietal lobe,
also going to be two areas which are involved in our ability to understand written language.
So our ability to read and write is critically dependent on areas which are located in the
cortex of the parietal lobe.
The occipital lobe is at the very back pole of the cortex.
And the occipital lobe consists of Broughman's areas 17, 18, and 19.
And it's entirely visual in function.
Our temporal lobe is going to lie inferior to the lateral sulcus or the sylvian fissure.
It's going to lie inferior to this or ventral to it.
And the temporal lobe has a large number of functions again that are of incredible interest
and importance to this course.
First of all, deep in that fissure is an area called Broughman's area 41.
And 41 is primary auditory cortex.
So it's the first cortical area that receives information that allows the cortex to form
a percept that we experience subjectively as hearing.
And we make meaning of sounds.
And surrounding area 41 in the left hemisphere or dominant hemisphere is an area that's involved
in our ability to understand language.
And so once this area understands a particular language, you can't ever hear that language
spoken and not understand what's spoken in your native language short of having brain
damage.
So this area is critically involved in that.
Other areas in this temporal lobe are going to be involved in visual functions, some which
are very high order.
For example, our ability to recognize faces.
There's a specific area in the temporal lobe that allows us to put an identity with a face.
And we will see later what happens in an individual who has brain damage that involves this area.
Now there are two other very important functional areas in the temporal lobe.
And these are the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus.
The entorhinal cortex is a neocortical area which is involved in learning and memory.
And the hippocampus, of course, is an old cortical area which is also involved in learning
and memory.
We will later see that these two cortical areas are among the first to degenerate in
Alzheimer's disease and result in an individual not being able to remember.
So these are our four lobes of the brain.
And I wanted to give you just a little bit of an idea, a little bit of a taste of the
kinds of functions that the cortical mantle is involved in, how important our cortex is.
When we refer to a cortical area, we use this knowledge we've gained today.
So for example, if I'm speaking to someone, another neuroscientist, for example, and I
say I'm interested in looking at the connections of the hippocampus, any neuroscientist that
I talk to knows that the hippocampus is an old cortical area that has three layers and
these layers are one, five, and six, and that it's located in the temporal lobe.
And so these ways of speaking to one another allow us to have a common language so that
we know what areas of the brain are being discussed.
If I say that I'm interested in the visual system, then the minute I say that, anyone
who I'm communicating with knows that area 17, right back here at the very pole of the
brain, area 17 is primary visual cortex or calcrine cortex or striate cortex.
It's going to be the first cortical area to receive visual information.
And this is going to be absolutely critical for understanding how the brain is organized
in general.
So here we have focused on how the cortex is divided horizontally and also into modules
that are vertically oriented, very, very complexly.
We've looked at different lobes of the brain.
In the next lecture, what we want to do is to be able to explore how the cortex has been
viewed conceptually.
Thank you.
