and make the backwards communities better and better.
Welcome back.
Up to this point in the class, we've been talking about the adult brain and how it's
organized.
Now we want to turn our attention to how the central nervous system, the CNS, is formed
during development.
Development in general is just considered a wondrous process and it really is.
The development of the brain is certainly the most complexly orchestrated event that's
going to take place as part of the developmental process.
We can just think for a minute.
From a few cells, a human brain will develop that's capable of regulating the function
of every other organ in the entire body.
This is also the organ that is going to be able to generate a theory of relativity or
to understand the theory of relativity or a brain which is capable of appreciating a
Bach fugue.
And just as Hippocrates said, it is from the brain that all of the sorrows and the joys
are experienced.
And so from a few cells, this incredible structure we've been talking about is going to develop.
In this lecture, we will discuss just briefly what is known about how the adult subdivisions
of the brain arise and how some of the different cell types of the brain are generated during
development.
So let's start with early in development.
Early on about 18 days or so of gestation, proliferating cells along the future midline
of the back are going to form a structure referred to as the neural plate.
So this takes place along what will become the future back of the individual, this neural
plate.
And the neural plate really consists of a number of just undifferentiated nerve cells.
Now the neural plate cells are going to start proliferating.
And what's going to happen is they're going to proliferate at the edges and fold up into
a neural tube.
So a tube is going to be created due to this proliferation and folding up of cells.
So if we look at this process, we can see here, this is the surface of the body.
This is what will become the skin later on.
And the cells of the neural plate develop from this.
And they are going to proliferate at the edges and fold up and eventually form a tube
which is then going to separate from this surface cellular structure and take its place
internal to the back or the skin of the back.
So this is a neural tube.
Now as you look at this tube, what you see in the middle is a hole and that's going
to be critical for things that we're going to be talking about in a minute.
Because what you have here is what your future ventricular system is going to be, those holes
in your brain where cerebral spinal fluid is made, those same holes in the brain that
Leonardo thought perception and cognition resided.
So this formation of this tube is going to take place and is generally complete by about
four weeks of gestation.
The neural tube is going to close along its length everywhere except basically three places.
It's going to close all along its length except for an anterior part which is called the anterior
neural pore, an area about one third of the way down the neural tube which is called the
rhomboid fossa and at the very bottom of the tube called the posterior neural pore.
So these are the only areas where the neural tube remains open for any time and actually
the one at the posterior end is going to close very, very early so we really won't say much
about that anymore because it closes very early in development.
But these other two areas, the anterior neural pore which will be at the anterior end and
about a third of the way down the rhomboid fossa will remain open until later in development.
Now let's look just a little bit closer at the development of this neural tube.
So this is really a blown up picture of the neural tube.
Here again you see that the tube is formed, that there's a central area which is basically
a hole in this tube.
The tube obviously is in this dimension and it separates away from the surface which is
going to be the skin.
When we look at this in cross section in this way what we see is that there are cells that
are right along this border of this area right here which is the central cavity which is
retained in the formation of the neural tube.
So we have this zone right here and it's marked off here and this is the zone where neurons
are going to be born.
So this is the zone of mitosis.
Now this zone will give rise to neurons and also to other cell types which are going to
be found in the central nervous system called glial cells which are non-neuronal cells but
supporting cells.
So these cells are going to give rise to neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes all of which
are specifically central nervous system cells.
But once the cell decides it's going to be a neuron then it develops very, very differently
from these other cells which we will learn about later that are called supporting cells
in the nervous system.
Now let's focus back on the neurons.
Once a neuron is born here or a cell is born and it decides it's going to be a neuron it
moves out into this zone and so it's going to move out into this zone.
Once it takes up its place wherever it wants to be in this zone and this becomes very complicated
when we actually look at the brain but if we think of the spinal cord first for example,
once the neuron moves out here in the spinal cord and decides it's going to be a neuron
and it forms into a nucleus in the spinal cord it's going to send out an axon and on the
very outside of this you see it says the future white matter.
So first cells are born and the white matter won't develop until later.
Now in development there are a number of what we call critical periods and a critical period
is just a really important concept to understand.
A critical period is a window of time in which something must happen for normal development
to take place.
So for example, the first critical period in the development of the brain is between 12
and 20 weeks of gestation and it's in this critical period that most of the neurons are
generated and if anything interferes with that and the neurons aren't generated then
obviously the rest of development will not take place correctly because this critical
period is a window of time and that means the window can close and once the window closes
then that process cannot take place again.
Now in the spinal cord now we're just going to focus on the spinal cord now because that
will help us understand the difference between the spinal cord and the telencephalon later
on.
In the spinal cord the layer of neurons which are near that central cavity are going to
stay near that cavity.
So in the spinal cord let's think of our neural tube like this again and we have the
hole in the middle.
The neurons are generated in this mitotic zone, cell division zone right here and then
the neurons are going to migrate away but they never migrate very far.
So even in the adult brain in the spinal cord the neurons are going to stay near that central
hole or cavity which we call the central canal in the adult spinal cord so they never migrate
away.
The consequence of this will be is that if you look at an adult spinal cord and this
is a viagra stained section through a human spinal cord what you see right in the center
is what is the remnant of that hole in the neural tube.
What you see that is light in this section that looks a little bit like a butterfly are
the neurons which are making up the nuclei in the spinal cord and last of all the darkly
stained areas on the outside represent axons traveling up and down the spinal cord.
So the white matter forms on the outside.
So actually in the adult brain the organization of the spinal cord reflects what the original
neural tube really looked like a lot.
You had a central cavity or canal which we call it in the adult brain.
The neurons are born and they move away but they stay very close to this central canal
area and then the white matter develops on the outside.
So this is what an adult spinal cord looks like.
Now in the brain stem and remember what that is, it's the older phylogenetically older
areas of the brain that the rest of the brain sits upon.
In the brain stem this pattern pretty much stays the same.
You see cells don't migrate very far away from where they're born so you see a very
similar pattern but now in the telencephalon it's very different.
In the telencephalon here's what's going to happen.
Here's our neural tube again.
Here's our central cavity.
We have cells born in that mitotic area that are going to become neurons and some of them
are going to stay near that central canal area which is going to develop into the ventricles,
those holes in the brain.
But some of the neurons which are born are going to migrate out beyond the level of the
white matter to form the cortex of the hemispheres.
So in the telencephalon what you have are some neurons staying close to the central
canal area that's going to develop into your ventricular system and then white matter's
going to develop because it's the axons and then what you're going to have is some of
the neurons are going to migrate to the very outside and that's what the last two lectures
were about are the neurons that migrated out to the very outside of the telencephalon
which are the cortex.
So if we look through the telencephalon and we were to cut and this is a section cut in
this plane here.
So this is the front of the brain here, this is the back of the brain.
So in this slice it's stained in such a way that the white matter is white and neuronal
cell bodies so the gray matter is darker and what you see here's your ventricular system
and notice how large it is, it's huge in the telencephalon.
This is a hole on one side part of the ventricles, this is another part of the ventricles and
down here is another part of the ventricular system.
Now notice right around the ventricles the darker areas are the cellular nuclear groups
that never moved very far away from the ventricles.
So we have a few nuclear groups in the telencephalon that never move away from that central canal
area from that central cavity.
Now look at these on the outside here.
These are all neurons that were born near the ventricle that moved to the outside and
became the cortex of the telencephalon.
So this occurs only in the telencephalon where you have the cortex and this in itself wants
you to think about this.
A neuron is born, the neuron has to know whether it's going to form one of the nuclei near
that ventricular system or whether it's supposed to migrate a long distance to go to the outside
of the brain, the outside of the developing telencephalon and differentiate into this
incredible sheet of neurons which is responsible for all of the higher functions that we have.
Now another thing I'd like to point out and have you look at is the difference in this
ventricular system, what occurs here.
So here's our telencephalon up here, the ventricular system is shown internally here.
If you were to look down in the brainstem in the spinal cord, it just looks like a little
tiny hole and it just maintains, it's just like that central cavity in the neural tube.
When you get up here, the huge development of the cortex and the telencephalon pulls
this ventricular system and enlarges it into this large hole that is found up here in the
telencephalon and because the brain develops in this C-shape like this, the ventricular
system also develops into the C-shape and again this ventricular system is where Leonardo
da Vinci thought that the spirit of perception and cognition was located.
We now know that these are the structures in the brain in which cerebral spinal fluid
is made.
Now after neurons have migrated, their axons are going to grow out and contact other neurons.
So the neurons are born and then they migrate to wherever they're going to go, whether they're
going to stay close and form a nucleus that's closer to that ventricular system or they're
going to migrate to the outside, they're going to grow out and axons and establish contact
with other neurons. Now this is incredible, they know where to go. Think about this, there's
more than 100 billion neurons growing their axons in the developing brain and each of
those axons is going to make very specific synaptic connections or connect with very
specific other areas of the brain and these little guys seem to know where to go. Nothing
in the brain is random. So the first neurons which are going to differentiate fully, so
these neurons are going to, these baby neurons are going to migrate and they're going to
differentiate into whatever kind of neuron they're going to be so there's about 150 different
kinds of neurons. So for example, a little baby neuron is born, migrates to motor cortex
and then undergoes a further differentiation only in layers 5 and 6 and decides it's going
to be a motor neuron that's going to extend its axon all the way down to the spinal cord
and allow for the initiation of movement. Other neurons migrate to other places and
project their axons. So the first cells which are going to extend axons and fully differentiate
and become neurons are long axon neurons and remember the long axon neurons are going
to make up associational pathways that connect different parts in each hemisphere, commissural
pathways which cross between the hemispheres connecting homotopic parts in both cortices
and the projection neurons which go up and down or connect various areas of the brain.
These are all long axon neurons and they're the first ones to differentiate. So if we
look back at our drawing that we've seen before, you see our motor neuron is in motor cortex,
he's migrated, he's been born, he migrated, now he extends his axon down through the brain,
crosses in the lower medulla, enters the spinal cord, it enters say at cervical levels
to make a connection with another neuron that's going to go out that will allow me to move
my arm. So I will initiate the movement on this cortex on this side and I will move my
arm on that side because those motor neurons sent their axons to the appropriate neurons
in the spinal cord. Nothing is random and you have a hundred billion actually have more
than a hundred billion neurons doing this throughout the brain during development.
Now the last neurons to differentiate and this is an area maybe it doesn't sound quite
as interesting or something but in fact this is incredibly important. The last neurons
in the brain that will differentiate and fully become fully functioning adult neurons are
little short axon neurons. So what are little short axon neurons? Well guys that's where
the business is really taking place. So let me tell you what they are. Let's imagine that
you have a neuron that projects to another structure. That neuron when it projects to
another structure makes connection with another structure is more likely than not going to
synapse upon one of these little tiny short axon cells that's located in that structure.
Short axon cells have their cell body and their connections with other neurons only
within that nucleus. So they never project their axons out. Their axons are short. They're
little. So here's what you have. You have one area of the brain projecting to another
connecting with cells in that nucleus that differentiate into these little short axon
cells. Then those little short axon cells connect with the neuron in that structure which is
going to project out. What that means is that little interneuron which is only in that
nucleus or area is intercalated between input and output which means it's the one that's
doing all the integration of all the inputs that are coming into that nucleus or structure.
And we are learning in modern neuroscience that there are specific disorders that involve
the failure of short axon neurons to form in the brain. And one of the major disorders
that we think may have something to do with such a deficit is schizophrenia. And so if
we are able to, we might come back and talk a little bit about that. But these short axon
neurons are the last neurons to differentiate and are very, very important in the brain.
We call these interneurons because they're intercalated between input and output to a
particular area. Now, just to impress you, all of these things are going on in the brain
by different neurons at different times and it's all being orchestrated genetically. It
is estimated that 250,000 new brain cells a minute are being born in the human embryo.
And that would impress anyone, I'm absolutely certain. Now, the second critical period in
development occurs between the third trimester and two years of age. And this period is the
time when axons are growing out for these long axon pathways and they're making the
connections to other structures. So this is an important critical period as well. This
makes it all the more important if we intervene, for example, in a country where people are
starving and don't have much food. This is one of the important reasons why pregnant
women and very young children are the targets, obviously for humanitarian reasons you want
to feed everyone. But obviously this is when the brain needs to have fuel and food and
so that is why pregnant women and very young children are targeted. Up until about two
years of age, the brain is undergoing incredible growth. Now, I want you to stop just for a
second and I want you to just try to imagine the dynamics of what's happening. You've got
neurons being born, so there's birth of neurons. You've got birth of other kinds of cells from
the same progenitor cells that are going to become a completely different type of cell
in the brain. You've got migration. You've got differentiation into one kind of neuron
You've got axons growing out to other nuclei appropriately and you're making connections
with neurons, specific neurons in these structures in very specific ways and all of this is going
on in development. Now, so how do the adult subdivisions of the brain arise? What do we
know about that? That was one of the questions that we wanted to address here. Well, it turns
out that the generation and migration of neurons is significantly greater at the cephalic end
or the head end of the neural tube than the posterior end. So what we have is that at the
head end of the neural tube, so let's imagine our tube again along the back, at the head
end of it, what we call the cephalic end, it starts making neurons or being born at a higher rate
and they're migrating at a higher rate and that part of the neural tube is going to form
three vesicles called the prosencephalon, the mesencephalon and the rhombencephalon. These
are the three primitive vesicles of the brain that are going to develop into the five subdivisions
of the adult brain. So here we show that the prosencephalon, which is one of these cephalic
parts of the neural tube, is going to develop into the forebrain which differentiates into
the telencephalon and the diencephalon. The midbrain is going to become the midbrain
or mesencephalon in the adult, not a lot of change there, and the rhombencephalon is going
to develop into the hindbrain and going to differentiate into the metencephalon and the
myelencephalon. So if we look at this in terms of our neural tube, here's what we see, the
head end, which is this end of the neural tube, the head end starts making lots of neurons
and the neurons are migrating and this is all going on at an incredible pace. And the
prosencephalon is the part that's really going to develop. So these are the hemispheres here
that are going to develop and also the diencephalon and this shouldn't surprise you because a huge
part of the diencephalon is the thalamus which connects to the cortex which is telencephalic
so these develop together. The other thing I want you to notice here is that a part of
the eye which we will learn is called the neural retina actually is an outgrowth of the
diencephalon of the brain. The mesencephalon in development becomes the mesencephalon in
the adult, the rhombencephalon is going to differentiate into the metencephalon, cerebellum
and pons and the myelencephalon. So this is how these different structures develop. Now
if we look here at the development of the brain in cross sections we see what is going
on. This is at about four weeks of development, here's the posterior part of the neural tube
and now the head end starts to develop extra ordinarily. By only a few weeks later you
can see this tremendous development of the telencephalon and diencephalon. The telencephalon
is going to grow so large that it's going to come over that anterior neural pore and
close it off. So that's how that anterior neural pore gets closed off. In the back here
we have the mesencephalon, we also have these other areas back here. This little dark area
right here is that rhomboid fossa and you remember that that's one of the normal places
along the neural tube that does not close early in development. And what's going to happen
is the metencephalon when it develops into the pons and cerebellum, the cerebellum will
grow over the rhomboid fossa effectively closing it off. And that's why the entire internal
part of the brain is an entirely closed system. And by only four months you can see the C-shaped
structure of the brain, the telencephalon has closed over the anterior neural pore, the
cerebellum has closed over the rhomboid fossa. And by birth the brain is convoluted, it's
C-shaped and now the hemispheres are so large that you can hardly see any of the brainstem
from this external surface. So the hemispheres have grown so large over this brainstem that
now you can't see it from the external surface. Now, after birth a huge number of what we
refer to as regressive events occur. So regressive events mean that a huge number of neurons
die. So in some nuclei and some areas of the brain up to 70% of the neurons actually die.
Many of the connections that are formed in development will also die back. So after birth
there are regressive events which take place. And even at that, it sort of fine-tunes the system.
Even at that, the adult brain, we are left with 100 billion neurons in the adult brain.
Now, let's think about what might happen if something goes wrong in development. It doesn't take
much imagination to realize that devastating consequences occur if any part of the developmental
sequence fails to happen normally. So I've just chosen two examples, one which is devastating
and one not as devastating generally. This shows a baby who has been born and there's this little
feet and his back. You're basically looking down on the midbrain. In this baby, whose neural tube
failed to close in the rostral portion where it should have closed before four weeks, it did not close.
And because that rostral portion did not close normally, then the whole rest of the brain never
developed. The baby was born alive because the brainstem controls breathing and heart rate and all these things.
And so the baby had the midbrain down, but none of the other structures of the brain developed.
This is called anencephaly. And what you have, you also notice, is that there's a developmental sequence.
If these areas of the brain fail to develop, then the skull and the scalp fail to develop.
And so what you have is the system open and this is not compatible with life.
Now, let's imagine if something goes awry later on. And here again, we have this example.
The corpus callosum may fail to develop. So one of these long axon systems is 300 million fibers.
But just like the case where we went in when someone had epilepsy and cut the corpus callosum, the child may have a nearly normal life.
Now, this child died not because it didn't have a corpus callosum. So you notice here, the hemispheres aren't connected.
There's just an opening there. This child did not die because it failed to develop a corpus callosum.
The child died because he had a number of other developmental abnormalities and that's very common.
If one thing is found to be abnormal in development, it's not uncommon to find many other things that are abnormal.
So basically, development of the brain is just an incredible process.
And we are born with more neurons than we will ever have again. And shortly after birth, all these regressive events take place.
But nonetheless, we're left in the adult with 100 billion neurons. And that is actually interesting enough.
The adult brain then has approximately, a single brain has approximately the same number of neurons as there are estimated to be galaxies in the universe.
Thank you.
