In the preceding lecture, we were talking about development and how from a few
cells, this incredible structure the brain develops.
One of the things we were talking about is how the same progenitor cells give rise to
both neurons and to some non-neuronal cells in the brain.
Now there are actually a lot of different kinds of cells in the brain.
So there are cells that are related to lining that ventricular system.
There are cells that are related to blood vessels in the brain.
There are other cells.
And here in this course, we're going to focus on neurons, which are nerve cells, and two
types of cells called astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, which are derived from the same precursor cells.
So once a cell, however, decides it's going to become a neuron or a glial cell, their
structure and their function are very, very different.
So in this lecture, what we want to do is focus on a few of those structural and functional
differences between neurons and those two types of glial or supporting cells.
So the adult central nervous system consists primarily, but not exclusively, of neurons
and glial cells.
There are 100 billion neurons after regressive events have taken place.
Now amazingly, if this seems incredible, there are 10 to 100 times that many glial cells
in the brain.
Incredibly complex structure.
For neurons, there's at least 150 different types of neurons, making them the most diverse
cell type in the entire body.
If you were to cut through the liver, you don't find 150 liver types of cells.
So the brain has more diversity, the brain cells have more diversity than any other organ
in the body.
They differ as to size.
So for example, a motor neuron is very large, it might even be as much as 100 microns in
diameter, and it has a long axon that will go all the way to the spinal cord.
Other neurons may only be four microns, which is just tiny, and these would make up those
interneurons, which are intercalated between input and output to a nucleus.
So they're little tiny cells whose little axons never leave the nucleus.
The cell body and axons are in one structure, but they are credibly important in the functioning
of the brain.
Now if we were to look at different neuronal cell types, we can see looking with the Golgi
method that neurons indeed do come in different types.
So we've seen this neuron before, this is a neuron actually from motor cortex, and the
surface of the brain is up here, and this is where the cell is located in layer five
or six, and this cell has dendrites extending from the base of the cell out in all directions,
and it has one huge dendrite extending all the way up to the surface of the cortex.
And the cells which come to be these motor neurons will have this particular type of
structure.
Now let's look over here at this.
This is another Golgi impregnated section.
They're always difficult for the student to look at because there's a lot of partially
impregnated things and other things that are present.
But what we want to focus on is this huge neuron right here, and you see that it has
a huge dendrites that come up here, and on the other side as well, and many, many different
branches, many secondary tertiary and more branches there.
These particular types of neurons are found in the cerebellum, and they're called candelabra
neurons.
So out of the cell body on both sides come these huge dendritic branches that then break
into smaller branches and increase the surface area of that neuron.
So dendrites are just extensions of the cell body that increase the surface area of the
neuron.
So it's going to process information differently.
This neuron processes information differently than a neuron that differentiates into this
particular neuronal type.
And to just give you, this is another method which is used.
A fluorescent method shows just a different neuronal type showing the dendrites extending
in all directions from the cell body.
Now most neurons are multipolar.
The neurons you're looking at here are all multipolar, and this neuron is multipolar.
So this is another type of neuron that differentiates in the brain.
Use the cell body, and it is showing fluorescent green, and all of its dendrites are just extending.
And look at how complicated that is.
And I think these different neuronal types differentiate in particular structures in
the brain, and it's why particular neurons in the brain function the way they do.
And if those neurons didn't become those specific cell types, then they wouldn't be able to
process information normally.
Now neurons in the adult brain are generally considered to be non-mytotic, and that means
in general in the adult brain that neurons do not undergo mitosis.
Now it turns out modern neuroscience has discovered that there is a very low level of mitosis
in very particular areas of the adult central nervous system, and we're going to be returning
to that in future lectures.
But one of the consequences that there isn't much mitosis of neurons in the brain is that
neurons do not give rise to tumors in the central nervous system.
So they're not capable of undergoing cell division, so they don't form tumors.
Now let's turn to the other type of cell that arises from the same precursor cells.
At least two types of glial cells will arise from the same precursor cells that give rise
to neurons.
Neurons are going to form the gray matter of the nervous system.
Glial cells, and the word glia means glue, glial cells are supporting cells in the nervous
system, and they're found in both gray and white matter, so they're going to be supportive
cells.
Now the term glue or glial cell derives from the fact that early neuron atomists thought
that the only function that these glial cells had in the brain was to hold the brain together,
that the brain would just fall apart without its glue holding it together.
So that's where that name arose.
Now we now know that these cells have a lot of functions, and we now know in fact that
neurons would not be able to function normally without glial cells.
So these two types of glial cells, one are astrocytes.
Astrocytes are tiny little cells, they are not neurons, so they do not have dendrites,
they do not have axons, they aren't neurons, but they're derived from the same precursor
cells.
Astrocytes are known as star cells, and they have little processes that radiate around
them, but they're tiny little cells, so they operate only within a very small area.
The other type of glial cell that arises from the same kind of precursor cell is called
an oligodendrocyte, and these are also very tiny glial cells found predominantly in white
matter, and their main function in the nervous system is to myelinate axons, so they have
a very important job to do.
Now modern neuroscience, I would say that one of the most important findings in the
last how many years that neuroscience has been using modern techniques, has been to
discover all of the different things that glial cells do, and so what we think of neurons
as being the stars of the nervous system, because they're the ones that conduct information
to other areas, they're the ones that make up the gray matter of the brain, they're
what, the neurons are what we use to think with and everything.
Neurons would not function normally without glial cells, so let's just briefly mention
a few of the functions, for example, of astrocytes, and I think that this will just really amaze
you.
So for example, we talked about in development how a neuron is born in that neural tube and
how that neuron moves away and either forms a nucleus which is close to the ventricular
system or migrates away.
Now let's imagine that one of those little baby neurons has migrated out here to the
external part of the brain.
So it's actually the processes of astrocytes that guide that little neuron to the right
layer of the cortex so that cell will then differentiate into the proper type of neuron.
So to give you an example, if my arm was in cortex and it was a process of an astrocyte
here, so this would be the surface of the cortex and this is where the cell body of
the astrocyte would be, so the developing cortex would be very, very thin indeed because
all of the neurons weren't in the layers yet.
You have a baby neuron come along and that neuron literally samples along the chemical
nature along that astrocytic process and when it recognizes a particular code, a chemical
code, that neuron gets off there and it differentiates, if it's in layers five and six, differentiates
into a motor neuron.
Other neurons go up the glial cell process like this and they don't get off until layer
one and they differentiate into a different type of neuron.
And so here you have astrocytes being the guides in the nervous system.
Another function, neurons are cells so it means that they're bound by a membrane.
So inside you have cellular organelles just like you do in any other cell type.
Now outside of each cell however and in between all of the cells in the brain, you have what's
called extracellular space.
Now in the brain, in extracellular space are charged atoms called ions and this could
be potassium, calcium, chloride, different kinds of ions are present in that extracellular
space and it turns out that those ions and concentration of the gradients of those ions
in the extracellular space is regulated by astrocytes.
And if it were not, then the entire cortex would seize, the individual would die.
And those concentrations, absolutely specific concentrations of ions are regulated carefully
by astrocytes in the vicinity.
A neuron could not fire normally, a neuron could not function normally without that ionic
concentration regulated in the extracellular space.
And all of this is done by these little astrocytes.
Now another function that astrocytes have that is very, very important in the nervous
system and we're going to learn when we talk about stroke that sometimes this breaks down.
What astrocytes also do so, imagine that this podium is a neuron because they're much larger
than glial cells are and imagine a tiny little astrocyte out here.
When something neurotoxic, a chemical compound or some other neurotoxic substance is released
into that extracellular space, astrocytes will try to take it into their cytoplasm to
remove it so it can't damage neurons.
And so here your astrocytes are the front line of trying to protect the neurons in the
brain and keep them from being damaged because neurons are non-mitotic cells and that means
that if they're damaged and they die, they are not replaced.
And so the astrocytes have developed mechanisms for recognizing neurotoxic substances and
removing them.
And last of all, not really last of all because astrocytes actually do much more than just
the things we've talked about, but one of the other things they do is they form scars.
And we think of a scar as being a bad thing, but let's think of it in different terms.
So your astrocyte recognizes that something is going wrong in some part of your brain.
What the astrocytes will attempt to do is to wall off that area so that it stops it,
attempting to anyway, it walls off the area like it'll wall off a brain tumor.
And so the astrocytes form scars in an attempt to help the nervous system heal.
All of these things are being done by these little tiny cells in the brain that used to
be thought of as glue, and the way I look at it, glue indeed.
Now, the astrocytes are the other type of glial cell that comes from the same progenitor
cell that neurons will develop from.
The dendrocytes, their main function is to help myelinate axons in the nervous system.
And if they did not do this correctly, then an axon could not conduct its impulse normally.
And so most of the neurons in the human brain are myelinated.
And so this is a very, very important function, and there are actually a number of developmental
disorders in which the axons do not myelinate, and in most cases, these developmental problems
are not compatible with life.
Another consequence, which is negative, however, about astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, they
do remain mitotic throughout life.
And if you think about all the different functions they have, it makes sense because they will
want to create more of themselves if they're needed to help in the nervous system.
And so these are cells which do remain able to reproduce themselves, which means astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes are the main type of glial cells that form primary brain tumors
in the central nervous system.
So that's a negative side effect of the health that these cells try to be.
Now, we look at an image here.
What I have on one side of the screen shows you, with electron microscopy so that we can
visualize very, very tiny structures, shows you a single axon here.
And this is at such high power and resolution, it's a single axon, you can see the mitochondria
which are located inside of the axon.
The black area stains like this because we've applied a certain stain to the tissue.
And that's the myelin sheath that these oligodendrocytes make around the axon.
And you remember that the axon had breaks in it, so there's a myelin sheath and then
a little break and then a myelin sheath and a break.
So these oligodendrocytes form these segments of myelin around an axon.
Now on this side, I show a human brain cut in this section.
And this is of a young woman who died of multiple sclerosis.
That term, multiple sclerosis, means multiple scar-like areas.
And so this is stained with a cell stain.
So let's orient ourselves.
Here's the ventricular system.
Here's the cortex on the outside, which stains with a cell stain because the neuron cell
bodies will stain.
This is gray matter, the cortex on the outside.
And then you notice these two huge structures here.
Well, astrocytes are cells, so they pick up cell stain.
And in these two areas, the axons have become demyelinated.
So multiple sclerosis is thought to be an autoimmune disease in which an individual's
own body attacks particular structures.
So in this case, antibodies are being directed against oligodendrocytes and against the myelin
sheath.
So in this area, the oligodendrocytes are dead and the axons which are present are demyelinated.
And the astrocytes come in and form scars.
And so these scars, in an advanced case like this, can be picked up with a cell stain.
Glia are obviously very, very important.
Now, our focus in this course is still primarily on neurons.
So we want to learn a little bit more about neurons and their structure and their function
because neurons are, in fact, the stars of the nervous system.
And these little glial cells are just making sure that neurons live, survive, and can function
normally.
So let's look back at our generic neuron that you've seen enough now that you pretty
well know all the different structures.
But let's go through this a little bit.
Neurons are like cells in any other part of the body.
They have a cell body and they have organelles within that cell body that are involved in
making proteins, mitochondria for energy, so they're like any other cell on the body.
But neurons are different in one really important way.
Neurons are polarized.
And when we use that term in relation to neurons, what we mean is that the cell body and the
dendrites are specialized for receiving information from other areas, from other neurons.
So this is the receiving portion of the cell.
And remember, the dendrites are only extensions of the cell body surface.
Now, the axon, which arises here at the structure called the axon hillock, is not, in fact,
just an extension of the cell body.
The axon is a specialized structure for conducting information away from the cell body to other
neurons.
So you have a receiving portion here where axons from other neurons come in and make
synapses onto the dendrites or cell bodies of the cell.
Then you have this neuron sending information out to the dendrites of another cell or to
the cell body of another neuron.
And this is how neurons are connected in the nervous system via our white matter pathways,
our tracts or pathways, which are made up of axons.
As we look at this picture, we also see around axons is this fatty myelin sheath and then
a break and then another piece of myelin and then a break and another piece of myelin.
So there'd be a little oligodendrocyte out here wrapping its cytoplasm around this axon
forming that fatty sheath, that myelin sheath around that.
And then it might form another fatty myelin sheath around here.
And so the disease multiple sclerosis, antibodies, autoantibodies, attack the oligodendrocyte
and kill it, and attack the myelin sheath, which prevents the neuron from conducting
its information normally.
Over time, when the myelin is lost from the axon, the axon will die and ultimately the
neuron will die.
So in advanced stages of MS, which is largely considered an axonal disease in that it's
a demyelinating disease.
Neurons do, in fact, die.
Now what we want to do is to think about what happens down here.
Let's think about what happens down here.
These axon terminals, and they've lost their myelin sheath at the terminal ends, let's
imagine this is a motor neuron and it's entered the spinal cord and it wants to synapse onto
a spinal cord neuron.
So what does the term synapse mean?
Well this has some interesting history.
So the term synapse was coined by Sir Charles Sherrington, and this was a very bright man,
and what he was a physiologist and he noticed something.
He found that nerve conduction in a nerve like the sciatic nerve, which is part of the
peripheral nervous system, and it's just one long axon, that conduction was much faster
in that nerve than it was if he went into the central nervous system and looked anywhere
where there was gray matter.
So Sherrington, purely on the basis of a theoretical idea, postulated that in the gray matter of
the brain there had to be junctions or a gap in between neurons, so that one neuron, there
had to be a gap between one neuron and the next neuron because it slowed down conduction.
So when he looked at just an axon, it was very fast.
When he looked in the nervous system, in the central nervous system, he found it was slower,
so he said there had to be a gap there.
Well what is interesting, a synapse is then going to be defined as the junction between
the axons of one neuron and the dendrites or cell body of another neuron.
So he postulated that there had to be a gap between these two, and in fact there is.
And this is what has become known as the synapse.
So in this case you see the motor neuron coming down, crossing, entering the spinal cord, and
then that axon terminal is going to synapse onto the next neuron in that chain.
If we look at a picture of a real neuron and a real synapse, it gets very complicated.
So to the beginning student, this probably doesn't look like anything, it looks like
something very important to me, because this is what synapses look like in the nervous
system at the electron microscope level.
So this junction right here is a synapse, and this junction is a synapse.
You notice they look a little bit darker in electron microscopy.
So let me orient you to what we're looking at here.
This is a dendritic shaft, and this is a spine which is simply a protrusion of the dendritic
membrane to increase surface area.
So it's just a specialized structure that's just a little protuberance off of the dendrite.
This is an axonal ending, one of those axon terminals which has come down, and formed
synapse onto the spine.
So this is the axon of one neuron forming a synapse onto the dendritic spine of another
neuron.
Also note that a synapse can be defined as a structure that has an axonal component,
and this drawing illustrates it very well, an axonal component which is filled with synaptic
vesicles which will contain the chemicals which will be released when this axon fires
an action potential.
These vesicles will fuse with the presynaptic membrane and release their contents into this
gap between the axon and the dendrites of the next cell.
This gap that Sherrington called the synapse actually does exist.
The postsynaptic profile, which in this case is a dendrite, is going to have particular
proteins that are molecules that are going to be part of this membrane at this junction
that actually interact with the chemicals which have been released.
And so this is what's meant by a synaptic junction.
So we define a synapse as a specialized junction generally between the axon of one neuron and
the dendrites of another cell.
The presynaptic component will be the component which has synaptic vesicles which will contain
neurotransmitter that will be released upon activity in that axon, and those chemicals
will be dumped out into this cleft or this space between these profiles.
These chemicals will diffuse across this space to interact with molecules in the dendritic
membrane and thus set off a process in the second cell.
One of the other things that I'd like to point out is you also see that the presynaptic component
also has molecules for taking neurotransmitter back up into their terminals.
This is called reuptake.
These are also called transporter molecules.
They go by a variety of names, but the function of this is to take neurotransmitter that's
released that doesn't bind to this presynaptic structure and to take it back up into the
nerve terminal.
So let's think for a minute why this has evolved, why this mechanism has evolved.
Let's imagine that this axon is stimulated to release its neurotransmitter.
If that neurotransmitter were just left out in the cleft, then it would just keep stimulating
that postsynaptic structure, and remember I told you, nothing in the brain is random.
So the molecules, when they diffuse away, there are going to be transporter proteins
in this presynaptic component that are actually going to take those molecules back up, repackage
it into vesicles so it can be released again at the appropriate time.
And any molecules that actually diffuse too far away are going to get picked up by astrocytes.
This is regulated very, very specifically, and that's so that when activity comes down
that this neuron can release its chemical only under those conditions.
Now let's think of another reason why that reuptake mechanism is so important.
That axonal terminal can be this far away from its neuron cell body.
So you couldn't possibly have anything happen fast enough where new neurotransmitter would
be sent down all the way to the ending.
So what the ending has is this specialized mechanism for taking chemicals back up and
locally repackaging them by bringing membrane along with it and repackaging it so that it
can be released again.
So all of this is going on down at those tiny, tiny little synapses.
Now if you aren't impressed enough, I think that this will do it.
In the adult human brain, there are 100 billion neurons.
This is one single neuron.
This shows its cell body here and it shows its dendrites extending out.
What is impressive here and what I want you truly to be amazed at is that every place
along these dendrites where you see an orange or a yellow spot, literally these are studded
with these little orange and yellow spots onto this one neuron at every one of those
places is a synapse.
And in the human brain, they're estimated to be 100 trillion synapses.
And these are the areas where one neuron communicates with another.
100 billion neurons making 100 trillion synapses in the human brain.
I'm impressed.
Thank you.
