Welcome back to our course on the brain.
In the last lecture, we talked about how neurons were polarized and that this polarization
reflected the fact that neurons are specifically designed to receive information and transmit
information in the nervous system.
Here what we want to do in this lecture is to talk about how communication occurs between
neurons.
We want to understand what the information code is between neurons.
Now a fundamental principle of neuroscience is that neurons are the structural and functional
units of the nervous system.
This is known as the neuron doctrine.
And this neuron doctrine was championed by the most famous neuroanatomist who has ever
lived, Santiago Ramoní Cajal.
Cajal basically used the Golgi method, which is somewhat ironic we'll say, to determine
that in young animals, you could actually follow axons with that specific method to
their termination.
And from these studies, he established that neurons were structural and functional units.
The reason it's ironic that he used Golgi's method is that he and Camelo Golgi, who developed
the method, shared the Nobel Prize in 1906.
And Golgi believed that the nervous system was not made up of individual cells, but instead
was just one connected neural net.
And so it was somewhat acrimonious, but they shared the Nobel Prize in 1906 anyway.
That neurons are the individual units of the nervous system, and separate from other cells
was also suggested by Sherrington, who also, of course, won a Nobel Prize.
And Sherrington, on the basis of theoretical considerations alone, believed that neurons
had to have a space in between them, a gap in between the various neurons in the nervous
system, because when he looked at conduction as a physiologist, looked at conduction in
nerve trunks, it was much faster than if he looked in gray matter in the brain.
So on the basis of that alone, he, in fact, believed that neurons were individual structural
units that had to have a space or a gap in between them.
Now this was all the more important, since synapses were not actually seen with an electron
microscope until the early 1950s.
So we believe that synapses are the places in the brain where one neuron interacts with
another neuron.
So if we look here at our picture, we can see, in fact, this is one neuron coming down
through the brain crossing, having terminal endings, and this area right here is a synapse
where the communication takes place between this neuron and the next neuron in the chain.
If we look at one of those terminal endings, look at what a synapse really looks like.
This is the axonal ending coming down and wanting to make contact with the next cell,
which is here.
So this is the axon terminal.
These are synaptic vesicles, which are in the end of that axon terminal.
And these axon terminals will release a chemical that will interact with the postsynaptic membrane,
which is going to be the dendrites or the cell body of that second neuron.
So we do know that neurons are, in fact, structural and functional units in the nervous system.
So what we want to focus on now is talking about how neurons communicate with each other.
If there's a gap between them, then what's responsible for the communication?
And a great advance forward in understanding this came about with the discovery that axons
actually generate electricity.
And this was a very important discovery.
So why don't we start our discussion with axons, since it's axons that generate electricity,
and that was the first discovery.
So let's start there and talk about what happens in axons.
So if we look at an axon, there's an electrical signal which gets propagated, and it begins
at this place right here, the axon hillock.
One of the most important things to remember is that the axon is not just an extension
of the cell body.
It's a specialized structure, and it's attached to the cell body here at the axon hillock.
So an electrical signal is generated here at the axon hillock, and it's going to be
propagated down the axon in what we say an all or non-fashion.
So what this means is that the signal does not degrade, so it's all or none.
The all or none signal will travel down the axon in a particular way.
It jumps basically from node to node in between the myelin wrappings.
Now if all action potentials of a given neuron are the same amplitude, and they don't degrade,
so it's all or none, then how is it that intensity would be encoded in the nervous system or
encoded in a neuron like this?
And what is responsible for the quality of the stimulation?
What were we want to learn something about?
What the code is?
Well, the intensity of a stimulus is encoded in neurons by changing the frequency of the
firing.
The more intense stimulus causes neurons to increase their firing rate.
The quality of the stimulus, on the other hand, is a little bit different.
The quality of the stimulus is the result of the stimulation of different kinds of neurons,
transmission along specific pathways, and also interpretation by different areas of
the brain, especially the cerebral cortex.
So let's just think about this in terms of vision.
The quality of the stimulus and vision, what we experience ultimately as vision, comes
about because an electrical signal is started by cells in the eye that are going to absorb
light.
So these cells are going to be specialized.
These neurons will be specialized to absorb light.
Then an electrical signal is going to be transmitted to the brain along visual pathways.
That's what it means to say that the brain is made up of these various types of systems.
And ultimately, the interpretation or what mental construct we interpret as seeing is
the result of these pathways eventually reaching the cortex and being interpreted by very specific
visual areas of the brain.
But the neurons themselves, the neurons, are going to communicate always with these
potentials that are generated in axons.
So let's go back to this.
What is actually happening when this action potential or this electrical signal is being
generated in an axon?
And to appreciate this and how neurons communicate, we have to understand something about the
internal and the external environment of neurons.
And how the change in the distribution of particular atoms is going to be the signaling
mechanism for transmitting information.
So I'm going to use my arms to demonstrate this.
And right here, we're going to think of this part of space as being inside of a cell.
Remember that neurons are structural and functional units of the nervous system.
So they're cells like any other cell of the body.
So they have a membrane surrounding them that makes them a separate unit.
So this is inside the cell.
And neurons, like most all cells in the body, have organelles inside of them.
They have special structures that are involved in making proteins, for example, packaging
proteins.
They also have within them atoms, which are ions, which are basically charged atoms.
And that just means an atom, which is either gained or lost in electron.
So inside of the cell body, you have organelles, and you have ions, and you have other molecules.
Now outside of the neuronal cell membrane, so outside this membrane is what we refer
to as extracellular space.
So this would be inside, and this would be outside.
So outside in this extracellular space, you also have ions.
So you could have potassium, again, sodium, chloride, calcium, other ions.
What is important in understanding how signaling takes place in the nervous system is to realize
that the distribution of ions in a cell, in a neuron, is different between the inside
and the outside of the cell.
So the ions are distributed unequally across the neuronal membrane, so that in what we
refer to as the resting state, that the inside of the cell is going to be more negatively
charged than the outside.
And that is a fundamental principle.
So the resting state means the neuron at a time when it is not firing.
In its resting state, the ions are distributed unequally across the membrane, so that the
inside of the cell is more negative than the outside.
This charged differential, because remember, ions are basically atoms that have either
gained or lost an electron, so they're charged.
That means there's a charged differential across the membrane.
Now this differential is maintained in a number of ways.
One of the ways it's maintained is that in the membrane itself of neurons are molecules
which act as little pumps, and they make sure that the intracellular ion concentration
is regulated very carefully.
And so that's a very important point.
It's very important that the ionic concentrations be regulated because any abnormality in this
system or control mechanisms can lead to an abnormal electrical discharge, and an abnormal
electrical discharge could set up seizures in the brain or could even kill neurons.
So in the resting state, this charged differential is maintained by molecules that actually exist
in the membrane that act as little pumps that make sure the right charged ions are distributed
across the membrane in a very particular way.
In the extracellular space, which is outside of a single neuron, the role in regulating
ion concentration is going to be the job of astrocytes.
So astrocytes, those little glial cells, those little glue cells that were named star cells,
are going to play a critical role in regulating the ionic concentration outside of the neuron.
And they do this because they actually act as little sinks for particular charged atoms.
And so the extracellular ionic environment is regulated down to the atom by astrocytes,
and the intracellular charge is going to be regulated down to the atom by specific molecules
across the membrane.
So what happens when a neuron is stimulated?
Well, when a neuron is stimulated, what's going to happen is that distribution of ions,
and you remember that distribution of ions means that there's a differential charge,
that this differential in ions is going to be altered across the membrane.
So what we have is that if ions now become distributed when the cell is stimulated, when
the neuron is stimulated, if this differential charge results in the inside of the neuron
becoming more positive, we call that depolarization.
If the inside of the cell becomes even more negative than it was before, then it's going
to become hyperpolarized.
In the resting state, the charge differential is about minus 70 millivolts.
So when we depolarize a neuron, it means it moves more positive, and when we hyperpolarize
it, it becomes even more negative.
When you reach a particular point, and that is when the inside of the cell becomes more
positive to about minus 55 millivolts, you set off an action potential at the axon hillock.
And so what we have then is that depolarization, which means making the inside more positive,
is excitation in the nervous system.
And if you make the inside more negative, so it sends at resting potential more negative,
it's called hyperpolarization or inhibition in the nervous system.
Action potentials are going to be generated at that axon hillock of the neuron and propagated
down the axon in this all or none fashion.
It's going to be due to, it's going to be set off here, the action potential being generated
here at the axon hillock, and then transferred down the axon, jumping from node to node in
between the myelin sheaths.
Their very rapid and transient changes in the membrane potential are going to occur
at every place where the axon is basically bare here in between these myelin sheaths.
Because the action potential jumps from node to node, it's called saltatory conduction.
So that means a jumping conduction.
Now the velocity of the propagation down the axon is due to how large those myelin sheaths
are around the neuron.
The larger the neuron and the greater the myelin, the faster the conduction.
If your axon was unmyelinated, the conduction would be very slow, and it's actually very
easy to understand why.
If you're going to jump from node to node, then the only place you need to change the
differential charge is at those spaces in between each node.
If you have an unmyelinated axon, then you have to change the charge at each individual
point along the axon.
So synaptic transmission in myelinated axons is a lot faster than an unmyelinated, because
it just jumps from node to node.
And that's why you can have a neuron and motor cortex, and I can think I want to reach out
and touch the brain model, and I can do it almost instantaneously.
Yet those action potentials had to go from motor neurons in my cortex down to my spinal
cord, synapse in the spinal cord, and go out to cause contraction of the muscle.
But it seems almost instantaneous to us, because these are myelinated axons, which are very,
very fast.
Now this is also going to help us understand why a demyelinating disease like multiple
sclerosis causes disability in people.
This is an autoimmune disease in which autoantibodies are going to attack myelin, and they're going
to attack the oligodendrocytes, the cells that make the myelin.
So what happens is the axon becomes demyelinated, and that means it can no longer conduct normally.
So now, for example, and you could have any system involved, because in the mammalian
brain almost all of the axons are myelinated.
There's very few exceptions to that.
So what happens in a demyelinating disease is the individual now can no longer control
movement, or they're not getting sensory input the way they should, because the axons
are demyelinated.
Now we used to think that that was the only thing MS was, but we've also learned something
else.
Axons and their myelin sheath are dependent on each other.
So if you have a demyelinating disease like MS, you don't just remove the myelin and
change conduction.
The axon actually dies, as does the neuron, which is the parent to that.
So how is an action potential generated?
It's generated at the axon hillock, and propagated all or none to the terminal endings.
So our next question is, what happens when the action potential reaches the axon terminal
endings?
That would seem to be the next place to go.
So here we have our neuron, and it's propagating an action potential, which there's no decrement
in it.
It's the same amplitude at every place.
And then it comes down here, and in the axon terminals in gray matter, the axon terminals
will lose their myelin sheath, and they will form synapses with an Excel.
So what we want to know is what happens here at the synapse.
So if we look at our synapse again, what we're going to see is our action potential is coming
down the axon, and then into the axon terminal.
And at the axonal ending here, this action potential, which again is electrical charge,
causes a particular thing to happen.
It causes the pre-synaptic membrane, the terminal ending, to open up channels that allow calcium
influx.
So one of our charged ions that's out there in that extracellular space.
When calcium comes into the nerve terminal, it sets off a cascade of events which are
going to result in the movement of these little vesicles to this membrane termination point,
and these membranes fuse with that pre-synaptic membrane and dump their contents out into
the cleft, out into that space that separates one neuron from another neuron.
So this neurotransmitter is going to be released there at the axon terminal.
So our last question is, what now happens in the post-synaptic structure?
So here's our post-synaptic structure, and what we want to understand is the only way
this neuron can communicate with that neuron is there has to be some kind of signal that
it can read.
And what happens, the action potential causes the release ultimately of neurotransmitter
or chemicals from this pre-synaptic terminal.
Those chemicals diffuse across the synaptic cleft to interact with specific receptors
that are indicated here in this post-synaptic cell.
Interaction of the neurotransmitter with those post-synaptic receptors is going to do one
of two things.
It's either going to directly open channels in that post-synaptic membrane, and that channel
is just a protein that controls the flow of ions across its membrane.
It's going to do that, so it's going to open a channel, or it's going to bind to another
molecule that eventually will also result in different ions being distributed across
the post-synaptic membrane.
These changes in membrane potential occur in dendrites and spines, so it occurs in the
post-synaptic profile.
So because of that, we refer to these changes that are taking place at a synapse that take
place in the post-synaptic membrane.
We call them membrane potentials or post-synaptic membrane potentials.
So these potentials are different than action potentials in a number of ways.
First of all, they're generated in dendrites and spines, and remember dendrites are just
extensions of the cell body, and spines are just protuberances of that dendritic surface
to increase the surface area.
Synaptic potentials can be depolarizing or hyperpolarizing, so in other words, they can
be excitatory or inhibitory.
But last, unlike action potentials, synaptic potentials are graded and decremental.
So let's look at what this means.
Graded and decremental.
Here we have onto our neuron a variety of axonal inputs.
So these are axons coming from different places, other nuclei in the brain, synapsing
upon this cell right here, either its cell body or its dendrites or spines.
Graded and decremental means that the synaptic potentials, which are generated in the dendrites
or spines, are graded in that how big they are depends on how much neurotransmitter got
released.
So they're graded.
The action potential was all or none.
It had an amplitude that never changed.
Synaptic potentials are dependent on the amount of neurotransmitters released.
That's what it means to say they're graded.
Decremental means something interesting.
Note that our spines and our dendrites are not myelinated or anything.
These are true extensions of the cell body surface.
And this means that a synapse way out on here on this little dendrite, way out here, a little
tiny spine, that that signal has to change the membrane and ion distribution at any
each point along the way on its way down here to the cell body and the axon hillock.
That means as that signal is transferred, it decrements so that it becomes smaller.
Now what is the consequence of this?
What does it mean?
Well it means that it's the sum of all the excitatory and inhibitory input to this neuron
that will ultimately determine whether an action potential will be fired at the axon
hillock.
So you have thousands of synapses coming in and either exciting the postsynaptic membrane
or inhibiting the postsynaptic membrane.
And then the addition of all these thousands of synapses and their excitation and their
inhibition will determine whether an action potential will be generated at the axon hillock.
And once that's generated, that action potential will then be propagated in an all or none
fashion down here and a synapse here again, postsynaptic potentials and on and on and
on in the chain of neurons.
Now this also helps us understand something else, looking at a picture like this.
Helps us understand why it matters so much that particular axonal inputs come into certain
domains of the postsynaptic structure.
I want you to imagine an axon terminal way out here on the distal dendrites.
Well it's going to have much less effect on firing this neuron than a synapse which is
very close to the axon hillock.
Because remember as the synaptic membrane potentials are distributed down these dendrites,
they decrement or show a decremental response.
So by the time something way out on the end of the dendrite gets its electrical signal
down here, it's hardly anything is left.
So let's see if you can anticipate something about how the nervous system is organized.
If you are an axonal input that wanted to make sure that this cell didn't fire, so under
particular conditions what you wanted to do was make sure that this postsynaptic cell
would not fire, would you want your synapses way out on here on the dendrites or would
you want them right down here as close as possible to the axon hillock?
Well you'd want them right near the axon hillock.
And so you would be an inhibitory synapse that would have a major effect that might keep
this neuron from firing.
So in development it turns out and if this doesn't amaze you, nothing will.
In development different areas of the brain specifically synapse onto different domains
of postsynaptic cells where they go.
So not only do neurons know where to send their axons, which we talked about before,
but actually when they get to that postsynaptic structure, that nucleus they're projecting
into, those axons will synapse on specific domains of that postsynaptic cell.
Now there's a few errors made originally in development, but those errors are going to
be taken care of when we have those regressive events that occur shortly after birth.
So maybe onto this, if this is a dendrite and these are axons, initially these axons
may make five, that's an underestimation greatly, but some synapses onto this dendrite.
Those regressive events may result in only three of them remaining.
So those regressive events are fine tuning the connections.
You'll lose some neurons that didn't connect with the postsynaptic structure and also you
lose many, many synapses.
So we're back to understanding why when we're born we have more neurons than we are ever
going to have again.
And these regressive events that happen after birth are going to fine tune the system.
Some of them will be fine tuned by experience.
Some are just fine tuned because they're genetically programmed to be fine tuned.
So this is how neurons communicate in the nervous system.
And the take home message here that I think is so important is note.
Events don't do very much.
They fire or they don't fire.
Or if they're spontaneously active, they either increase their firing or decrease it.
That is the information code in the brain.
It's basically done by this very simple code, fire don't fire or increase or decrease your
firing.
Now if we look at our beautiful image again of a single neuron in the brain and remember
there are 100 billion neurons in the adult brain, that's after regressive events, you're
left with that many neurons.
Every single dot here on this neuron represents the synapse coming from somewhere.
And it's the addition of all the excitation and inhibition that comes into this neuron.
Integrating all of the excitation inhibition from all of the other nuclei that would project
to just this one neuron that will determine whether this cell will fire an action potential
and communicate with the next neuron in the chain.
So to end this lecture, I'd like to paraphrase Shakespeare.
To fire or not to fire, that is the question.
Thank you.
