Hello, in our last lecture we talked about how a neuron can only change its firing.
It can either fire or not fire, or if it's spontaneously active, it can only increase
or decrease its firing.
That is how information is coded in the nervous system.
And all neurons are the same in this regard.
We also say that synaptic transmission is electrochemical.
So let's talk just a minute about what we mean by that.
Here we have our dendrite of our generic neuron.
We have many different nuclei in the brain projecting axons to very specific domains
of this neuron.
And if all of the excitation inhibition is integrated and it adds up to a certain amount
and depolarizes this axon hillock, if this membrane charge differential is brought up
to about minus 55 millivolts, when that happens an action potential is generated at the axon
hillock and it travels down the axon at these nodes in between the myelin sheets in an
all or none fashion and non-decremental.
When the myelin sheet is lost here, when these axon terminals enter the gray matter
to synapse with the next neuron in the chain, then we come to the synapse.
So the synapse, here's our action potential coming down, and the synapse remember, when
this action potential reaches this terminal ending where the synapse is at, the change
in the distribution of ions is now going to cause calcium influx to take place in this
pre-synaptic terminal.
This is going to set off a series of events that cause the synaptic vesicles to fuse with
the pre-synaptic membrane and dump their contents into the cleft.
These neurotransmitters will then bind to post-synaptic receptor in the dendrite or spine
of that second neuron.
So again, neurons are functional and structural units of the nervous system.
They are separated from each other by an extracellular space and also it synapses.
We say that synaptic transmission or information coding in the nervous system is electrochemical
because the action potential is electrical which causes an event synaptic transmitter
release which is chemical and that in turn induces synaptic potentials in the post-synaptic
cell which is again electrical.
So this is how information between neurons occurs.
In this lecture what I'd like to do is elaborate a little bit on the chemical part of this
equation.
One of the most important things that I want you to think about as we're talking in this
lecture is that particular neurotransmitters are going to be released by an individual
neuron.
That neurotransmitter will only bind to a certain post-synaptic receptor.
So your neurotransmitter and your receptor have to be matched.
Now I want you to just bring up in your mind that image of that one neuron with thousands
of synapses on it and that lets you appreciate different axonal inputs used different neurotransmitters
and at every point along the post-synaptic service the appropriate post-synaptic receptor
has to be there to interact with that specific neurotransmitter.
So we want to go into more detail about these neurotransmitters because they play a really
important role in the process of communication that occurs between neurons in the brain.
So the first thing we want to talk about is what defines a neurotransmitter.
Well sometimes we call certain chemicals neurotransmitters.
Sometimes when you look at neuroscience books they talk about other molecules as being neuromodulators.
These are basically the same thing.
They're basically molecules that get released from a pre-synaptic terminal and cause an
effect in the post-synaptic cell.
So it really isn't as confusing as you think but remember everything in neuroscience has
more than one name and sometimes only among professionals is there a fine distinction made.
We'll make one here later on in the talk between neurotransmitters and neuromodulators.
Now neurotransmitters or neuromodulators can be subdivided into a number of different classes.
So we're just going to talk about a few of the classes and we're going to talk about
those that will be of interest to us later on in the class.
So what we want to do is know something about the names so that we can communicate with
each other.
So one of the first classes are the amino acid neurotransmitters.
And in the central nervous system there are two very important amino acid neurotransmitters.
One is glutamate and the other is GABA-aminobutyric acid which we just called GABA.
GABA and glutamate are the major neurotransmitters in the mammalian central nervous system.
So most of those long acts on neurons that communicate between one nucleus and another
are used glutamate as neurotransmitter.
In GABA, in the case of GABA, there are also long acts on pathways that use GABA, but GABA
is also a major neurotransmitter at interneurons.
Now remember, interneurons are tiny little nerve cells that are found within a specific
nucleus that have their cell body and their axon in that nucleus.
They never project outside of that nucleus.
So basically interneurons are intercalated between input to an area and the output to
an area.
So they're integrated, so they're called little interneurons.
Furthermore, glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter.
GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
So here again we have an example, a lot of interneurons use GABA.
When you don't want synaptic transmission to take place, you need to have neurons that
utilize GABA also in a critical position to play a role in this chain of information
transfer.
The next class of neurotransmitters are neuromodulators, and these are generally called neuromodulators.
Are the biogenic amines or the monoamines?
In the central nervous system, these would include the catecholamines, dopamine and norepinephrine,
and the endolamine, 5-HT or serotonin.
Catecholamine and endolamine just refer to the structure of the molecules.
So in the nervous system, the monoamines or biogenic amines are basically dopamine, norepinephrine
and serotonin.
5-HT is just another name for serotonin.
These neurotransmitters are really found, distributed throughout the brain in very small
clusters of cells.
And so the neurons which utilize these are much smaller than the neurons that would
utilize glutamate, for example, in the mammalian nervous system.
It's also true that the neuron cell groups that utilize the monoamines are usually very
small groups of cells.
Now, that doesn't mean that their effect is small, because we have tiny, tiny little
areas in the brain, nuclei, that utilize these biogenic amines that have massive axonal
input to the cortex and is responsible for some of the highest order functions that we
have.
So even though they may be distributed in small little nuclear groups, they have a lot
of axon collaterals which are going to go to many different areas and they're going to
be very important in modulating transmission in the nervous system.
So these small groups will actually be the topic of many of our coming lectures.
There are many other neurotransmitters, neuromodulators in the nervous system.
One that will become important when we talk about Alzheimer's disease is going to be acetyl
choline.
So, again, acetyl choline is only used by a few cell groups.
It's also used by some inner neurons in the brain.
We also have peptides that are released at synaptic sites, and peptides are a very large
and diverse group of molecules that in some area of the brain actually act as hormones.
So peptides are just large molecules that also play a role in signaling in the central
nervous system.
Central peptides can be very specifically localized within neurons so that we have particular
functions associated with them.
For example, the encephalons and endorphins that are talked about in the popular news.
The encephalons and the endorphins are found in areas of the brain that process pain information,
and they act as natural morphine-like substances to decrease the transmission of pain in the
nervous system.
So they are naturally occurring morphine-like substances found in particular cell groups
that transmit information in the pain system of the brain.
These same peptides, encephalons, endorphins, and other of these types of peptides, are
actually found in areas that are also involved in our feelings of well-being.
So for example, runners high is due to a stimulation of neurons that have these peptides in them
that cause an increased release when the person is exercising, and they have this positive
sense of well-being, the runners high, and it's due to these peptides.
Less abundant in the nervous system, but we'll come back to a lecture where we talk about
it, will be the histamine.
So their histamine is actually used as a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system.
Now you might have been able to anticipate this because anyone who's ever taken an antihistamine
knows that it affects the brain.
You can't think as well, you're sort of fuzzy up in the head, and the reason for that is
because the antihistamine doesn't just work on your body system to keep you from sneezing
and have a response to allergens, it actually blocks histamine as a neurotransmitter in
the brain, and so your ability to think and process information is altered for that reason.
And the last one I have listed for you is epinephrine.
Epinephrine would be one of the biogenic amines that would be used in the peripheral nervous
system.
Now there's approximately 60 neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that have been identified
to date.
We actually believe there are probably far more in the central nervous system.
So you have 60 different or more different neurotransmitters that play a role at individual
synapses in information transfer in the nervous system.
Now in reality, the picture is even more complex than this.
You could have an amino acid neurotransmitter like glutamate, for example, be the major
neurotransmitter that would be released at a given synapse of a given axon.
But in that axon terminal might be peptides that are co-localized that will be released
with glutamate but only under certain circumstances.
And neuroscientists literally spend their entire careers trying to figure out under
what circumstances that axon decides to release only glutamate under what circumstances it
decides to release the peptide in addition to the glutamate.
So we don't know how all of this is regulated.
We know it's regulated but we don't yet know how.
Also there are many other neuroactive substances that can be released by axon terminals.
So while we think of the neurotransmitter as being the main one that's released presynaptically
and going to interact with that post-synaptic site, those receptors in that post-synaptic
membrane, they aren't the only things that are released on synaptic transmission.
And so that's an important point too.
The picture is much more complicated than I'm presenting.
And last of all, if it wasn't complicated enough, there are certain neuromodulators,
for example, the biogenic amines that are actually released at non-synaptic sites in
the brain.
And this was like an incredible discovery.
So we think we understand what's going on but again, we don't know how it's regulated.
So release of a chemical at a non-synaptic site.
Let's think about that.
Let's imagine that this is where a synapse is at.
And so here's a presynaptic terminal coming down like this and forming a synapse at this
junction and this is post-synaptic.
Now let's imagine somewhere out here one of these molecules that can change charge across
a membrane gets released but not at that synaptic site.
It can diffuse and change the membrane properties of the post-synaptic cell.
That means that when an action potential is generated in this axon, it has a different
effect because this membrane resting state is different than it would have been had this
neuromodulator not been released.
So while I present a more straightforward discussion of this, I want you to appreciate
that this is really very, very complex.
It isn't just as simple as thinking that something's just released, interacts, and then we have
the next neuron fire in a chain.
It's a very, very complicated but always strictly regulated process.
Now it's really the properties of the post-synaptic receptor that determine whether or not something
is depolarizing or hyperpolarizing.
So it's really a property that receptor, it depends on what channels it opens for example
or what happens in that post-synaptic cell.
Even though that's true, in most cases we speak as though the neurotransmitter were excitatory
or inhibitory and in some cases it turns out to be true.
For example, glutamate is excitatory in the nervous system so we say that it's an excitatory
neurotransmitter.
Now for other neurotransmitters, for example dopamine, dopamine is excitatory at some synapses
and inhibitory at others, our picture gets even more complex because now what we're learning
is there are many, many, many different receptor subtypes that interact with molecules that
are released presynaptically.
So some neurotransmitters interact at 15 different types of post-synaptic receptor to cause different
things to happen in a post-synaptic membrane.
So again, this is a very, very complicated series of events that we're talking about.
So let's imagine here, let's imagine our action potential generated at the axon hillock
propagated down the axon in this saltatory fashion jumping from node to node.
It's like a wire that's insulated that has breaks in certain places and the only place
where the action takes place is in those breaks between the myelin wrappings.
Now this action potential reaches the end of the synaptic terminal and again that action
potential causes an influx of one ion calcium and that sets off a whole series of molecular
events that result in the movement of synaptic vesicles which are little membrane bound structures
that have chemical in them, move to the presynaptic membrane just at the site and release their
chemical into the cleft and that cleft being very, very tiny.
But indeed being the space that separates one neuron from another neuron.
So this is our axon and this is our post-synaptic cell.
Then that neurotransmitter will interact with this post-synaptic receptor to cause synaptic
potentials in the dendrites or the spines.
Now what is equally important that this process happens so that neurotransmitters released
appropriately you have something else which needs to take place and that is that the synaptic
transmitter, the neurotransmitter is released needs to then be inactivated.
So this needs to be a process that takes place and then stops and it has to be very strictly
regulated in this regard because if it doesn't happen then this post-synaptic membrane would
continue to change the ionic concentration across it and it would continue to influence
this membrane.
That's how seizures get generated in the brain.
So remember this signal is an electrochemical one so when this chemical is released it's
very important to understand how the neurotransmitter action is then stopped.
If we didn't stop it ultimately we would kill neurons and we'll be talking a little
bit about how that's thought to occur in the nervous system when we talk about stroke.
So there are a number of mechanisms that are involved in inactivating neurotransmitters
and these are very very important.
So for example bring up the image of that synaptic structure and think of a neurotransmitter
be released.
Well one of the ways that you could inactivate that molecule after it's released is to take
it back up into the pre-synaptic terminal and in fact there are mechanisms in certain
neurons molecules that are in the pre-synaptic membrane that act as auto receptors to take
their own neurotransmitter back up.
A very good example of this is serotonin.
Serotonin has transporter molecules in the pre-synaptic terminal that will actually take
serotonin back up into the pre-synaptic terminal will repackage it into synaptic vesicles
so it can be released again when it should be.
So that's very interesting.
Now another mechanism that has evolved is degradation within the cleft and the best
example of this is acetylcholine.
So now I want you to imagine other nerve terminals that are going to release acetylcholine.
In the cleft are enzymes that break acetylcholine into its component pieces and then takes those
molecules back up into the pre-synaptic component to be repackaged so they can be reused again
as acetylcholine.
So acetylcholine gets re-synthesized in the pre-synaptic terminal so that it can be released
again then broken down in the cleft and then the components taken back up re-synthesized
into acetylcholine so it can be released again.
And lastly we have removal by astrocytes and this is going to be very critical to understand
when we talk about stroke.
Glutamate is the main neurotransmitter which is inactivated by uptake mechanisms that exist
in astrocytes.
So I want you to imagine again here's our synapse right here between our pre and post-synaptic
cells and out here are these little tiny glial cells sitting around.
When glutamate is released one of the mechanisms for inactivating glutamate is that there are
mechanisms within glial cell membranes that actually take it up and we will learn in stroke
that the astrocytes simply can't keep up with how much glutamate is released during a stroke
and that's part of the reason why people have disability after stroke.
So we will talk more about that later.
Now you can see these are the mechanisms for inactivating neurotransmitter.
These are every bit as important as the regulated process in releasing neurotransmitter because
we could kill neurons if we didn't have a mechanism for stopping the action when it
needed to be stopped.
Also you notice something else.
For at least some of these mechanisms these are actually very efficient ways for the little
synaptic ending to sort of take care of itself.
Now I want you to imagine a neuron in my cortex that projects down to my spinal cord.
Well it can't synthesize neurotransmitter here and send that down the axon down here
otherwise there'd be this huge delay in being able to fire the next cell because you'd have
to wait for that to be transported.
So some of these mechanisms act to allow neurotransmitter at the neuronal ending to be taken back up
restored into vesicles so it can be released again.
So it's a local process that is also very, very efficient.
It stops the action of the neurotransmitter and it also provides a mechanism for making
sure there's always neurotransmitter down there.
So that's very important.
Now we've gone into some detail about neurotransmitters because they're the chemicals that are going
to provide for the signaling in the nervous system, electrochemical signaling in the nervous
system.
Here's another reason.
Individual neurotransmitters are going to play a really important role in some of the
things we're going to talk about later.
So I'm going to give you one little example.
We have a tiny little nuclear group which is in the midbrain and here's the midbrain
right here.
You can't see it but it's a tiny, tiny little nucleus.
This nucleus is called the ventral tegmental area.
It's so small that I can't even point it out to students in sections through the brain.
It has a projection to the forebrain structure called the nucleus accumbensepti and what's
important now isn't remembering those names but that that projection utilizes dopamine
as a neurotransmitter and in every single case where people are addicted to drugs or
addicted to behavioral things like gambling, it is this pathway which has been called into
play.
So whether it's a gambling addiction, nicotine addiction, alcoholism, heroin addiction, cocaine
addiction, it doesn't matter what it is.
This little tiny nucleus and its projection utilizing dopamine is the critical player
in whether or not something will be addicting.
So this is very important.
What I want you to think in terms that any drug or thing that you take in, any psychoactive
drug you take, any drug that changes you psychologically is going to operate by changing
the synthesis, the release, the inactivation or the binding of a neurotransmitter.
So every drug you take has its effect at particular synapses where particular neurotransmitters
are used but it will operate on this mechanism of chemical release and so that's one of
the reasons why I wanted to go into more detail on this.
Let me give you one example.
The antidepressant drug Prozac and by the way the drug itself is not antidepressant,
the drug just has a mechanism of action but it turns out that giving this drug causes
some people to be antidepressed so that's why we call it that.
Prozac is designed specifically to interfere with the reuptake of serotonin.
So after serotonin is released, the uptake mechanism for taking it back up is being blocked.
What that results in is that serotonin is left out in the synaptic cleft to continue
to stimulate those postsynaptic cells and it turns out that in some individuals that increases
feelings of well-being but the drug is designed to block that reuptake mechanism.
Now it turns out that cocaine blocks the exact same reuptake mechanism and therefore
cocaine is a very mild antidepressant.
It blocks the very same reuptake of serotonin but cocaine does something else.
Cocaine also affects this ventral tegmental nucleus accumbens projection because it also
acts at dopaminergic synapses.
So Prozac doesn't act at those synapses, it's not addicting.
Cocaine operates in the serotonergic systems in the same way Prozac does but it also operates
in the dopaminergic system involved in that one projection and cocaine is highly addictive,
more addictive than heroin.
And so this just shows you any drug you take whether it's over the counter, whether it's
illicit or not, all of the drugs that change you up here are operating at specific nuclei
specific pathways and specific neurotransmitters or multiple neurotransmitter systems.
And this is why they have the effect they do and it's also why we go into more detail
about these chemicals.
Lastly, it's extremely important for you to appreciate this and I really think at this
point in the class that you probably already do.
If you have brain damage anywhere, it doesn't matter what it's due to.
You remove those neurons from a very complicated circuit and that's going to throw off excitation
inhibition in other neurons that are involved in those circuits.
And so any brain damage, any signs and symptoms or change in the patient that you see aren't
just due to that nucleus being involved in a specific function, but the fact that there's
these complicated interconnections of cells, which means that you remove an area, you throw
off all the inputs, you throw off all the outputs.
And so what you see in the person as a result of brain injury is very, very complicated.
So what is the big picture about neurotransmitters and neuromodulators?
Well, if we wanted to conceptually think of something, and I think it's important for
us to stand back and get a big picture, if we stood back and got a big picture, we would
think of most of the pathways in the brain, the long-axon pathways utilize glutamate.
Some long-axon pathways utilize GABA as well, but GABA is primarily involved in interneurons.
So GABA and glutamate are the major neurotransmitters in the brain. This is going to be very important
when we talk about stroke. These other chemicals can be neurotransmitters, but we often think
of them as neuromodulators modulating what is going on in the glutaminergic pathways
or in these other pathways. So this is sort of standing back again, and you can see peptides,
you can see hormones, you can see acetylcholine, the catecholamines, the endolamines, all of
these different chemical structures modulating the pathways that use glutamate. Now, the function
of any area is very, very complicated, but what I want you to remember, it will always
be very strictly regulated. It is a regulated process. We don't understand everything about
how it is regulated, but the reason that we have normal movement, we have normal vision,
that we can talk and move and smile at the same time is because all of these synapses
are firing when they should, and there is inactivation of neurotransmitter when it needs
to occur and firing when it needs to occur. Thank you.
