Welcome back to our last lecture in this first segment of our course.
Up to this point, we have been learning about how the brain is organized.
So we looked at gross, cellular and molecular levels.
We also looked at how neurons communicate with each other.
In this last and final lecture in this segment, I want to use stroke as a clinical example
to reinforce what we've covered up to this point and also tell you some very important
things about this critical clinical disorder.
To understand stroke, we need to realize that the brain is very active metabolically.
It's estimated that although the brain accounts for only a very small portion of the total
body mass, about one or two percent, it receives twenty percent of the resting cardiac output.
The other thing that's important to understand is that the brain has no ability or at least
very, very limited ability to store either oxygen or glucose.
And lastly, neurons die within minutes if they are cut off or deprived of oxygen.
Thus, anything that's going to interfere with blood flow is very, very important because
it compromises brain function.
Neurons die and they aren't replaced.
And so it behooves us to take good care of our neurons and that means taking very good
care of the vessels that supply the oxygen and glucose to our brains.
So what is a stroke?
Well, a stroke is essentially a brain attack in the same sense that we speak of compromise
of coronary vessels as being a heart attack.
Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the United States and is the number one
cause of disability.
When we think about stroke and what we want to cover here in this lecture and understand
is why when you have a stroke, you have particular signs or symptoms.
So the first thing we want to do is define what we mean by signs and symptoms.
In neurology, signs are what are found on examination of the patient.
So for example, if your doctor shines a light in your eye, they may be looking to see if
your pupil will close down because of the light.
If it fails to close down, that's a sign.
If you go to the doctor complaining of a headache or saying that you've developed headaches,
those are symptoms.
So we have signs and symptoms and I'm just going to use it together.
Where the patient comes in with or what the doctor finds on examination.
So what we want to learn in this lecture is why is it that one person who has a stroke
has difficulty talking, whereas another person who has a stroke has difficulty say moving
their arm.
And given what you've learned in the course, you can probably anticipate what we're going
to talk about, but it's very important to do so.
You want to look first at the blood supply to the brain and understand a little bit about
that before we go into the clinical cases itself.
Stroke can occur in the spinal cord, but it's very rare.
So most of the strokes that occur occur up in the cerebrum or occur up in the brain.
The entire blood supply to the brain is basically from two major arterial systems and these
are called the internal carotid and the vertebral systems.
So the entire blood supply to the brain is basically through these two systems.
The internal carotids are going to give rise to what we call the anterior part of the circulation.
So the anterior part of the circulation will be the vessels that are going to supply oxygen
and glucose primarily to four brain structures or the structures of the front of the brain.
Now it will supply the cortex and also some deeper structures in the hemisphere, but usually
those they're rostrally located.
Now if we wanted to look at the internal carotid artery and how it supplies the cortex and
we want to focus in this lecture on the cortex because that allows us to review what's been
covered before and keep some of the complicating factors out.
If we look at the internal carotid artery it gives rise to two branches and those branches
are the anterior and the middle cerebral arteries.
So let's look at what is supplied.
Again I said it was primarily the anterior part of the brain so it's going to be cortex.
You see here that a large part of the lateral surface of the cortex is supplied by the middle
cerebral artery.
You also see in this lateral view, this is the front of the brain, this is the back,
that there's a ridge up here that is supplied by the anterior cerebral artery and that
will become important in a minute.
So basically most of the lateral surface of the cerebral cortex of the brain is going
to be supplied by the anterior and middle cerebral arteries which are themselves branches
of the internal carotid system.
If we look at the medial view of the brain, so now if we were looking at this brain model
it's like looking at the medial surface of the hemisphere, you see that the anterior
cerebral artery supplies most of this surface up here that's up in this general area on
the medial surface and the middle cerebral artery continues to supply the large part
of the temporal lobe which you can see here located in this area.
Now the two vertebral arteries are going to supply more what we call the posterior circulation.
So the two vertebral arteries are going to come up through the neck and they're going
to supply brainstem structures like the cerebellum which is posterior in the brain and then they're
both going to join and form one single basilar artery and at the anterior part of the basilar
artery it's going to divide into two posterior cerebral arteries and those posterior cerebral
arteries are also going to supply part of the cortex and some of the deep structures
of more forward in the brain.
So the vertebral arteries are going to join to form a basilar and that basilar is going
to supply the pons primarily so again the vertebrals are going to be involved in posterior
circulation and then they're going to form that single basilar over the pons and then
divide and some of the branches are going to supply to come up and supply this inferior
or ventral portion of the cerebral cortex.
If we look again at a medial view of the cortex we see that the posterior cerebral artery
supplies the back part of the cortex which is where the occipital lobe is located.
So we have two systems, an anterior system that arises from the carotids and a posterior
system that arises from the vertebrals.
This is actually a dissection that I did of the vessels as they come up to the base of
the brain and to understand where this is taken from the vertebrals and internal carotids
are going to come up to the brain like this up through the neck and then they're going
to anastomose which means to join the inferior surface of the brain and that would be located
right about here.
So if you thought about it, if you went up through the roof of your mouth that ventral
portion of the brain is where the carotids and the vertebral systems are going to join
together and they're going to form what is called the circle of willis.
The circle of willis being named for our father of neurology, Thomas Willis.
So they form an arterial circle that is connected.
So let's go through this a little bit.
Here are your two vertebral arteries that are going to come up and they're going to
join into this one basilar artery and this basilar artery lies over the pons area of
the brain.
Then in the anterior portion, remember it's located like this, so it lies in this plane.
What you're looking at lies in this plane.
In its anterior portion, the basilar artery is going to separate into two posterior cerebral
arteries.
So the posterior cerebral artery, the basilar and the vertebrals are part of this posterior
circulation to the brain.
If you think about it, it lies in this plane and these will be the posterior located of
these vessels or arteries.
Then you have up here in the anterior portion of the circle of willis, the internal carotid
artery and the internal carotid is going to give rise to the middle cerebral artery
and the anterior cerebral artery and this system forms that anterior part of the circulation
of the brain.
You also notice that there are little tiny joining vessels and that's what joins this
all into the circle of willis.
A stroke occurs when the blood supply to any part of the brain is compromised.
Now you can have a stroke that involves any part of the brain and like I said, it also
occurs in the spinal cord although it's fairly rare to have strokes in the spinal cord.
What we want to do in this lecture is to focus specifically on the cortex and that's because
we've spent most of our time discussing the cortex and it will be easiest to understand
and I will constantly remind you of that because obviously these same vessels have tiny branches
which are going to enter the brain and supply the deep structures.
These two systems, the internal carotids and the vertebrals, supply the entire brain with
blood, oxygen and glucose and so this is the entire system of the blood supply to the brain.
Now there are two different kinds of strokes.
One is called a hemorrhagic stroke and a hemorrhagic stroke occurs when a blood vessel
breaks and blood actually leaks out into the brain structure itself.
So that's a hemorrhagic stroke.
That causes whatever that vessel used to supply is now cut off from its blood supply.
It's just a bleed in the brain.
The second type of stroke is called an ischemic stroke and ischemic strokes account for the
greatest majority of strokes that occur in the brain, about 85%.
So most strokes are ischemic in nature and that refers to the fact that some artery has
been blocked in some way and for you to understand the significance of that, you also need to
know that vessels are a different width.
So a main branch like the internal carotid is larger than an end artery.
Ischemic strokes occur when there's some kind of blockage, generally occurs in end arteries
but can't occur anywhere and that blockage can be due to anything.
It can be a local process so if you think of the vessel as being like a garden hose,
if you have some kind of scarring that occurs on the inside of the vessel, you can have
plaque or blood platelets or any number of things that build up in that scarred area and
that can produce an ischemic stroke.
Now if it's bad enough, it might also cause a hemorrhagic stroke but for right now we'll
just separate the two.
You can also have blockage of a vessel because of something like bacteria, for example, from
the heart that gets thrown up into the blood supply to the brain.
So you can have a stroke, you can have a vessel occluded because you have bacteria blocking
that vessel and so that's the second type of stroke that occurs.
In general, when the blood supply to an area of the brain is cut off and it doesn't matter
whatever the reason, the neurons are compromised and thus the function of the area is compromised
or lost.
So again, what we want to do here for the following discussion is limit ourselves to
cortical branches.
So we're going to limit this discussion to talking about branches that supply the cortex,
that outer sheet or mantle of cells.
Again, vessels enter the brain substance to supply deep structures but that adds a complication
that we don't have time to go into here.
So we're going to talk about strokes of some particular areas and I want to see whether
you can anticipate exactly what function would be lost given what you have already learned
in this class and now given what you know about the blood supply to the brain.
So let's start with primary motor cortex.
Primary motor cortex is Brogman's area 4 and area 4 is located right here on the lateral
and medial surface of the hemisphere.
Area 4 is supplied by the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
So if we look here, area 4 lateral surface is here and you see that most of the lateral
surface of the hemisphere is supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
The other thing you need to know to understand why a person who has a stroke involving a
particular artery loses a specific function, particularly with regard to motor cortex,
is that this lateral surface in motor cortex represents basically the upper body.
So that means the lateral area of motor cortex on this side controls the movement of the
upper extremity on the other side.
So you remember that these motor neurons have axons that travel all the way down in the
brain, decasate in the lower medulla to enter the spinal cord and exit at particular levels
and that allows for a specific motor behavior.
The lateral surface of motor cortex represents the upper body innervation and this would
be supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
If we look at the medial portion of the hemisphere like this and look at the representation of
area 4 here, what we see is that the medial part of area 4 is supplied by the anterior
cerebral artery.
And lastly what we need to know about this is that that dorsal ridge which is supplied
and this medial surface is what will allow for the movement of the contralateral lower
extremity.
So this medial aspect of the cortex is supplied by a different artery, the anterior cerebral
artery.
So that allows us to understand why a person who has a stroke that involves the end arteries
of the anterior cerebral artery that specifically supplies area 4 in the cortex loses the ability
to make a movement of the contralateral lower limb that is specifically what they lose.
And the reason for that is because of what area has been involved and what artery supplies
that area.
So this is true for all of the brain.
Here we just gave an example of what happens with one specific area of the cortex.
Now this example shows you what happens if you just have the branches which are very
small, just the branches that supply one area.
What would happen if you had a stroke that involved the internal carotid?
A stroke of the internal carotid artery would produce a different set of signs and symptoms.
The internal carotid gives rise to both the anterior and the middle cerebral arteries.
That means any areas on the lateral surface of the hemisphere or the medial surface of
the hemisphere supplied by anterior and middle cerebral arteries could potentially be involved.
So this is a more massive stroke, much more dangerous stroke, much more massive.
And this is a right hemisphere but if we thought about a left hemisphere lesion or damage that
occurred from a stroke of the internal carotid, imagine what's being represented here.
We talked in the course how in the left hemisphere you have language areas located here.
You would have the entire body now on the contralateral side paralyzed because both
the anterior and the middle would be out.
And so the upper body innervation and the lower body would be gone on the contralateral
or opposite side.
You would also lose somatosensory cortex, you would lose all feeling on the contralateral
side of the body from the stroke.
So any of these areas that we talked about and the different functions of these areas,
if you had a stroke involving the internal carotid you could potentially lose those functions.
Now let's imagine what occurs if you have a stroke of the posterior cerebral artery.
So the posterior cerebral artery is part of that posterior circulation and we see here
that the posterior cerebral artery supplies structures down here in this part of the temporal
lobe laterally and also visual cortex.
So the entire occipital lobe is supplied by the posterior cerebral artery.
So now we can see what would happen.
You had a stroke that involved cortical branches of the posterior cerebral artery.
You would in fact, if we had a stroke that involved the posterior cerebral artery cortical
branches on the left, we would be blind in the contralateral or right half of our visual
field because the visual areas of the brain have been affected.
And so what you have in stroke is totally logical.
You need to know what area of the brain has been affected and what artery supplies that
area of the brain.
When a physician examines a patient who's had a stroke, they look at the signs and symptoms
and they know exactly what artery has been involved.
Now it gets more complicated when you have branches that go deep in the brain but for
cortical structures this is basically true.
Now we said that there were different kinds of strokes and different kinds of strokes
have different kinds of consequences for patients and so I thought we would talk a little bit
about that.
So let's imagine a hemorrhagic stroke for example.
In a hemorrhagic stroke, the vessel breaks.
Maybe there's such a buildup of plaque, whatever, the vessel breaks and blood leaks out.
Well this is most unfortunate because that blood then makes up what is called a space
occupying lesion in the brain.
Our brain is in a closed compartment and anything that takes up space is called a space occupying
lesion.
It shouldn't be there.
A brain tumor, a blood clot, a bleed, anything like that.
The reason why this is so serious and so dangerous is because our brain is in this closed compartment
and there's nowhere for the brain to go.
So what happens and again this should reinforce information that we covered before.
What is going to happen is the brain is going to move down.
So if you have a bleed up here, it takes up space and it squeezes the brain down.
Now you remember that we talked about the reticular formation, that it was a core group
of neurons that extend all the way from the medulla up into the telencephalon and these
neurons control very vital functions of the body.
Well the neurons that are located in the medulla specifically are involved with regulating
heartbeat and breathing and functions like that.
When you have a space occupying lesion up here, for example a bleed, it forces the brain
down and it forces the brain down through that foramen magnum or hole in the skull and
it compresses the medullary reticular formation and causes death.
So a hemorrhagic bleed is very, very dangerous.
Now ischemic stroke can also cause swelling in the brain and that takes up space as well.
But generally we're very lucky, generally this swelling which is referred to as edema.
So edema is just swelling that occurs due to accumulation of fluid.
Edema can generally be controlled in ischemic stroke by drugs that can be administered to
someone.
Also great strides have been made in helping individuals who have ischemic strokes actually
survive with very little disability if they're treated early.
And that is the critical point.
If you have an ischemic stroke the key to not being disabled or dying depending on what
area of the brain is involved, the key is being treated early.
So let's look at what happens there.
In ischemic stroke you have a different process that takes place.
In ischemic stroke you have the blood supply cut off to an area because a vessel has been
compromised either by the accumulation of plaque or by the buildup of some kind of bacteria
or it could even be blood platelets, any number of things.
So the vessel is compromised and therefore wherever that vessel is compromised that
area of the brain is now cut off from glucose and oxygen.
What happens in ischemic stroke however is that often people don't even realize they've
had strokes, we'll come back to that in a minute.
But even if they do they might delay going to the doctor and that unfortunately is something
that is very, very dangerous but also leads to increased problems.
So let me tell you what happens and this is where we can bring together some information
about neurotransmitters into this lecture about stroke.
So remember I said that the vast majority of axonal pathways in the central nervous
system use glutamate as a neurotransmitter.
I've also said on numerous occasions that glutamate is neurotoxic so it actually isn't
the glutamate itself but it's a process it sets off, kills neurons.
Well unfortunately in ischemic stroke there are a number of things that happen after the
stroke that put areas of the brain at great risk and it's actually very easy to understand
this.
So here's what happens, let's imagine this is the surface of the brain and we occlude
a particular vessel that supplies this tiny area so it's a little tiny end artery that
just gets filled with plaque or something and we cut off the blood supply.
Theoretically you would think that this is the only place where you might have any kind
of disability or whatever and you might not even notice it because it's a tiny area but
in fact what happens is that if that occlusion is not cleared and that area of the brain
continues to be cut off from its blood supply the axons which supply that area that use
glutamate as a neurotransmitter start dumping their glutamate into the brain substance itself.
So these axons become leaky because all of these mechanisms that keep different ions
across the membrane all of these things are energy dependent processes so the minute that
area of the brain is cut off from its blood supply from its glucose and its oxygen it
is going to compromise this mechanism and what's going to happen is the membrane is
just going to start releasing chemicals into the extracellular space and it releases glutamate.
Now unfortunately this glutamate then sets up a process that results in the death of
neurons around the area that was actually ischemic and we call this area surrounding this the
penumbra because penumbra means umbrella so it's like the umbrella area around the area
where the stroke actually occurred and the astrocytes desperately try to soak up that
glutamate because one of their jobs is making sure that neurotoxic substances are removed
from the brain so when there's a stroke astrocytes are recruited to the area they make an attempt
to soak up that glutamate which is there but they generally can't do it and so this glutamate
produces this penumbra region that actually kills more neurons than the ischemic site
itself did.
So that is why ischemic stroke can also be very serious and lead to people being debilitated
or unable to do something.
The initial signs and symptoms when a person first has an ischemic stroke might be very
small and very minor then if not treated this penumbra region will develop and the individual
then can lose a great deal of function.
Now lastly one of the reasons why people do not have ischemic stroke dealt with early
and there are drugs that help remove occlusions and vessels but they have to be administered
within three hours of the stroke.
They cannot be administered after that time because these drugs themselves carry the risk
of hemorrhagic stroke so they have to be administered as soon as you have an ischemic stroke and
one of the problems is that we often have occlusions of a vessel which clear by themselves.
So you could have a tiny little something occluded vessel and then it clears and then
the vessel is patent again and so everything is fine.
So let's imagine we have our individual and the person suddenly notices that everything
has gone out of focus.
So this could be an ischemic stroke of the blood supply to the eye but within two or
three minutes maybe the individual can focus again just fine.
So the person says oh well that wasn't anything I don't know what that meant or you have people
who will report things like they notice that there was some kind of funny tingling in their
fingers and it was like really weird because they hadn't been lying on their arm or anything
but there was this strange feeling but then after a few minutes or hours it went away
and so the individual doesn't seek medical treatment.
These are called transient ischemic attacks.
Transient events meaning that they clear and so the person doesn't seek treatment.
Why they're important is transient ischemic attacks signal that there's some kind of impending
thing that is probably likely to take place.
And some very large fraction of individuals who have ischemic attacks go on within two
or three years to have a major stroke involving a major artery.
So the take home message from this lecture and one which is important if you ever have
a sudden onset of any neurological sign and symptom meaning anything that anyone listening
this course could attribute to the brain or to your eye which is an outgrowth of the brain
seek medical treatment immediately.
It doesn't matter whether it got better and it clears or whatever seek medical treatment
immediately.
Thank you.
