Welcome back to our course on the brain.
Up to this point in the class, we've been talking about how the nervous system is basically organized and how all this 100 billion neurons of the brain communicate and interact with each other.
We are now going to begin the second segment of our course.
And with this lecture, we begin going into more detail about some of the specific systems that we have only mentioned briefly in the past.
We're going to begin with the sensory systems, and there's a reason we begin with the sensory systems.
The sensory systems are how we gain knowledge about a world external to ourselves, and the sensory systems are also involved in how we have knowledge about our own bodies.
So our sensory systems represent the information coming into our brains, and so it's very apt that we start at this point.
We're going to go into the most detail about the visual system, and we do this because we are primarily visual animals.
Human beings are very visual in how they take in information about the world, so more than any other sensory system, vision is going to dominate.
And in fact, this is true in primates. Of all the sensory systems, the visual system has undergone the most differentiation or specialization in primates,
and we will see over the course of the next two lectures how very important the system is.
When we are done with the visual system, we will briefly talk about the auditory and the somatosensory systems.
Somatosensory being how we get information about our bodies, we'll briefly mention those and we'll compare it with the visual system and in what ways they're similar and in what ways they're different.
But we're going to focus in this lecture and the next lecture specifically on the visual system.
So here in the first lecture, we want to talk about the eye and its role in this visual process.
Now, far from taking a picture of the external world and sending this picture to the brain, the eye actually transmits very little information.
It is actually our brain beginning with our visual cortex, the very posterior pull of our brain.
It is the cortex of the brain which is going to recreate an external world from very little information and then create mental perceives which we are going to experience subjectively as seeing.
And so we're going to start with the eye because this is the first structure in this chain of events which will ultimately lead to us being able to see.
So let's think about what the purpose of the eyeball is.
Basically, the eyeball is a structure that's designed to focus light rays onto the neural part of the retina.
So there's a sheet of neurons at the back of the eye which are part of the nervous system and this neural sheet is called the neural retina and it is this sheet of cells upon which light is focused.
So in this, you see one of my little dogs out here in space and the purpose of the eyeball is to focus these light rays onto the neural retina and the neural retina is a sheet of cells at the back of the eye.
Now, while light does hit these other areas of the eye, we're going to learn that there are mechanisms that allow these light rays to be specifically focused in organisms like ourselves onto a particular part of the retina which is called the macula or central retina and the very center of that which is called the fovea.
Now, because the retina is neural tissue, there will be neurons, one role of them in fact, which will have axons that actually leave the eyeball to go to the brain.
So the eye is the first structure where this process takes place.
Now, we'll be looking at this drawing a couple of times to remind you of these various structures and what's going on, but this drawing is also found in the booklet that accompanies this course and so if you want to look at that drawing as we talk, you'll be able to fall along.
So, let's first talk about the refractive structures of the eye.
We say that light is bent or refracted.
So when we want to focus light rays, when the light comes in through the cornea, which is the transparent outer layer of cells through which light has to be transmitted, it's bent by the cells in that structure.
The other structure which is very important is the lens and the lens lies behind the cornea.
It's an internal structure and it is also a refractive structure of the eye.
Now, let's think about what happens if you have anything that interferes with the focusing of the light through the cornea and the lens.
So, for example, there are a number of disorders that occur with aging.
For example, cataracts.
A cataract is a clouding of the lens which is due to biochemical changes in the lens structure itself.
So, as the cataract develops, then the person can't see things in particular areas because light rays literally cannot get through the lens.
Another disorder which commonly occurs with aging is Presbyopia and this is a loss of the flexibility of the lens.
So our lens is an incredible structure.
It's very, very flexible, particularly when you were young.
And one of the things that the lens does is it allows us to look at different distances.
So if I look at a distant object, my lens actually flattens and then if I look immediately at something close to my face, then the lens rounds up.
So it's a very flexible structure.
As we age, it loses its flexibility, just like our bodies lose flexibility.
So as we age, it loses its flexibility and the result of that is we look at a distance and maybe we can see fine.
We look close up, nothing's in focus.
So we start holding things farther and farther away so that we can see them.
So you could either think of Presbyopia as a disorder that's involved the lens, which it actually is, or you could think that as you age, your arms get shorter.
Okay? Something is wrong here.
You can't hold things far enough away and you have to start wearing reading glasses in order to see.
Now, light enters through the cornea, which is transparent at our cells, and then goes through the pupil and then is refracted by the lens.
And the pupil, when you look at someone's eyes, the pupil is the dark structure.
It's basically a hole. It's a variable aperture.
So the pupil is going to let more light in when you're under low light conditions and it's going to close down to protect the neural retina under bright light conditions.
And this is really important because, as you already know in this class, neurons are very sensitive.
And if neurons die, they aren't replaced.
And so if you had a bright enough light, it would literally kill the neurons in your eyes.
It's why you don't want to flash a laser pointer that you're using into the eyes of your audience because you could literally kill neurons in the neural retina.
They will not be replaced. The person will be blind wherever those neurons are lost.
And so the pupil acts as this variable aperture to allow light in under dim conditions and to close down when it wants to protect the retina.
Now, understanding just this little bit of anatomy is also going to help you understand something else.
When you look into the eyes of a person who has cataracts, the person's eyes appear to be kind of whitish.
And people think that's because the outer surface of the eye somehow has been turned white.
But that's not true.
Your cataract is a clouding of the lens which is an internal structure of the eye.
And what's happening when you are looking at the person is their pupil has opened up wide because of the clouding of the lens.
And so to try to let in more light, the pupil has opened up.
And when you look at them, you're actually seeing that opaque lens as you look into their eyes.
And that's why their eyes look light.
So when we do cataract surgery, we go internally and remove the lens and replace it with an artificial lens.
And so it's an internal structure that people are having replaced.
So let's look back at our little doggy picture here again.
So here we have our external part of the eye, the cornea.
Your pupil is located here so it opens or closes and is surrounded by structures that reflect different colors.
So people have brown eyes and blue eyes, but the pupil itself looks black.
And then behind it, we have the lens.
And again, the whole purpose of the eye is to focus light onto the back part of the eyeball, which is the neural retina.
And specifically again, we want to focus the light rays onto the central retina called the macula and the center of that called the phobia.
And in a minute we'll come to the reason why.
The other thing I want you to notice here is that the little doggy representation back here is upside down.
And that's because the lens here acts like any other type of lens and it reverses and inverts images.
So what seems upright here will be down here on the back of the retina the way it's projected.
It is your brain that writes the world.
So it is your brain that knows up from down and will write that image appropriately.
Now one of the other consequences of the fact that this is a neural structure back here, a sheet of neurons,
is that individuals can damage that part of the eye and this can occur for a variety of reasons.
So the neural retina is basically just a multi-layered sheet of neurons that are at the back of the eyeball.
It's important to realize that it's actually derived from the diencephalon in development.
So it actually is central nervous system tissue that is located on the external part of your body.
So your eyes you need to definitely protect.
Now let's imagine that in the globe itself, in the eyeball itself, you have some kind of process that occurs that prevents fluid from leaving.
So you constantly have fluid being made.
That's part of what gives the eyeball its structure.
If you have any blockage of little areas where that fluid then leaves, so fluid is just constantly being made,
then you increase the intraocular pressure and this produces a disorder called glaucoma.
Glaucoma is insidious because the person doesn't feel anything,
but the neurons are being killed at the back of the eye or the optic nerve where the axons of neurons in the eye are going to project to the brain.
Though that nerve is being compromised and so people go blind because of glaucoma,
an insidious disease that you don't feel anything but actually results in the loss of neurons.
So now we have light rays refracted or bent so they're going to be focused onto that particular region of the retina called the macula.
So let's talk about that a little bit more.
The macula is actually called the macula lutea and that means yellow spot.
The very central area of the retina where light rays are being focused actually contains a yellow pigment that absorbs blue or short wavelength light.
And so this is done because blue light or short wavelength light degrades visual images
and this is where the area of high visual acuity is at so this yellow pigment is there to cut out any short wavelength light.
Now the very center of the macula is called the phobia or the phobia centralis and this is the center of the macula
and it is the area responsible for the highest visual acuity.
We call that form vision so our ability to see individual forms and make sense out of them and the phobia is also responsible for color vision.
The optic disc and the optic nerve are going to be the axons of the only neurons which will leave the eye and these are called retinal ganglion cells
and where these axons leave the eye there are no cells that respond to light.
Just the axons leave the eye as the optic nerve.
This area of your retina is actually blind but do you notice that as you look out in the world and look around that you don't see any part of the visual field that's missing.
You don't see it missing because the brain simply fills in the missing space
and there have been a lot of hypotheses about what's going on but the conclusion has been reached that it's actually the brain filling in the optic disc
or area where retinal ganglion cells leave the axons or the axons leave the eye.
So let's look a little bit more in detail at that sheet of neurons that's at the back of the eye.
The central nervous system tissue, central nervous system tissue.
So the neural retina actually consists of five types of neurons and this is a very simple structure.
You have rods and cones which are the photoreceptors and photoreceptors will be the cells that will be able to absorb light.
So they are the receptor cells for the visual system and they start this process.
The photoreceptors are located at the very back of the retinal layer or sheet.
Then in between these rods and cones are photoreceptors and the neurons which actually leave the eye which are called retinal ganglion cells,
we have a number of interneurons and they are called bipolar horizontal or amicron cells.
So we have only five types of cells or neurons that are located in the neural retina.
Let's look at what the neural retina looks like.
Here is actually histological section through the retina and light comes into the eye this way and the photoreceptors are at the very back of the eye
and this single layer of cells here are the retinal ganglion cells which are the only cells whose axons leave the eye.
Now photoreceptors.
Photoreceptors are pretty incredible.
There are 120 million photoreceptors in the eye referred to as rods and these rods are a photoreceptor that is specialized for vision under low light conditions
and they are most numerous in the peripheral areas of the retina.
If you want to demonstrate that to yourself, they are exquisitely sensitive to light.
A rod can actually absorb a single photon of light.
If you want to demonstrate this sensitivity, if you look at a star at night outside, you look at it directly, it looks very dim.
If you look off to the side and you let the light stimulate your rods which are very numerous in the peripheral part of your retina,
so it's not what you're looking but you look off to the side, the star will suddenly become very bright.
So you can try that and you can demonstrate how very sensitive the rods are.
The other type of photoreceptor which is found in the retina are cones and there are 6 million cones and these are photoreceptors which are actually not very sensitive
but they are involved and responsible for high visual acuity.
So they're responsible for color and form vision and they are why we turn our heads when we want to see something.
So remember those light rays are being focused onto the macula or the fovea in human beings.
This is where the light rays are actually being focused when we turn and look at something.
The line of sight is onto that foveal region.
That means if I look straight ahead like this and something comes into my periphery, for example, that's moving, I turn and I look at it.
Note that when it's in the periphery out here, it's out of focus but when I turn and look at it, I'm causing the cones and my fovea to be stimulated
and it allows me to tell what the object is.
So we are what are called foveate animals which means we move our head and eyes to bring the line of sight to fall specifically onto our cones that are in the central part of the retina.
Now the absorption of light by the rods and cones causes changes in the photoreceptors that result in the stimulation of a second neuron in the chain.
So the second neuron in the chain are bipolar neurons and bipolar neurons are interneurons, integrative interneurons,
intercalated between photoreceptors and retinal ganglion cells.
And now I'll bet you can anticipate this.
Let's think about the difference between the connection between rods and cones.
Rods are numerous in the periphery, they operate under dim light conditions, they're exquisitely sensitive to light.
Well it turns out that huge numbers of rods will converge onto a single bipolar cell and that's another reason why the rod system is so sensitive
because it has this huge amount of integration.
A huge number of rods will feed into a single bipolar cell.
Now if we think about the fovea on the other hand, what is the purpose of the fovea?
The fovea is to bring things into focus, sharp focus, high visual acuity, operates only under highlight conditions.
So there in the fovea what you have is a one to one relationship between the photoreceptor and the bipolar cell.
So it's not very sensitive system but it's one that's exquisitely good for deciding differences on point to point representation on the retina.
So it will be the cone system that is involved in high visual acuity and will also learn color.
Now if there are two other neuron types called amicron and horizontal cells, these are also interneurons in the retina.
So they're integrative but let's look at what is actually going on in the retina in a schematic sense.
What you have in the retina is a vertical organization which is from your photoreceptors, your rods or cones,
to your bipolar cells, to your retinal ganglion cells which are the only cells that leave the eye to go to the brain.
This is called the vertical organization. Your horizontal and amicron cells are interneurons which help sharpen what's being transmitted in the vertical direction.
And this is going to be important in a minute for understanding how the retina is actually working.
So all of the processing which is taking place in the retina and particularly in the foveal region of the retina is designed to sharpen the image.
So these horizontal and amicron cells often inhibit laterally what's being transmitted vertically to make edges sharper,
to make contrast greater because it turns out that this is what the brain wants, it wants information about change.
So our retinal ganglion cells are the only neurons involved in the retina whose axons will leave the eye to project a brain structure.
One of the pathways that we have talked about, there's many different areas where synapses take place.
One of the most important is the projection of retinal ganglion cells to the lateral geniculate and the lateral geniculate will then project a visual cortex.
This is the front of the brain, this is the back of the brain. So retinal ganglion cells will leave the eye and synapse in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus
and then neurons in the thalamus will project a visual cortex and it is visual cortex which will start to reconstruct an external world
and create a subjective experience that we call seeing.
Now the next thing we need to think about when we think in terms of vision is that what the cells in the visual system transmit as far as information.
Well, cells in the visual system are spontaneously active which means the only way they can signal any kind of information is by either increasing their firing or decreasing their firing and that's all that they do.
And retinal ganglion cells transmit specific types of information to the brain via these retinal ganglion cells increasing or decreasing their firing across the retina.
Now different retinal ganglion cells however carry different types of information and it's not uniformly distributed across the retina.
So let's think about the retinal ganglion cells.
Retinal ganglion cells that represent the macular or foveal region of the retina are going to transmit information to the brain which is predominantly about change related to form which means contrast and edges.
So the retinal ganglion cells that project to the brain that represent this foveal and macular area are most interested in contrast and form.
They also transmit information about color.
The retinal ganglion cells that represent your peripheral retina aren't interested at all in color and can't focus on anything so they're not really interested in the details about form.
What the retinal ganglion cells in the peripheral part of the retina are interested in is movement.
And so the retinal ganglion cells that are connected to those rods and cones and bipolar and everything representing the peripheral retina are going to transmit to the brain information about movement.
And again, this is something that has evolved in evolution.
If you think about this, if you have a noise here or you have something visual that moves into your visual field very quickly, you turn and you look at it.
You've sensed it because the cells that are representing the peripheral retina are very sensitive to movement.
But you turn and look at what the object is because it is your fovea that cares about contrast and brings things into sharp focus and allows you to identify an object.
Saber-toothed tigers probably and all that.
We know that a lot of the information that goes into the eye is lost.
And this is one of the things that is really important to appreciate.
There's 120 million rods or photoreceptors rods.
There's six million cones, but there's only one million retinal ganglion cells.
And this says that a huge amount of information has already been lost before this signal ever was sent to the brain.
Huge amount of information is lost, but it doesn't matter because what the brain cares about is information about change.
And so it can take tiny pieces of information and lo and behold, recreate an entire external world that we have a subjective experience of seeing cameras, seeing people, seeing tables, seeing color, seeing everything.
And yet very little information has been sent to the brain.
People have estimated, mathematicians have estimated, how much information is lost.
Even given how much information has been lost, I want you to be impressed that people have estimated that retinal ganglion cells by increasing or decreasing their firing in response to changing stimulation across the retina actually transmit each second one billion bits or pieces of information to the brain.
And that's impressive.
Now, to give you an idea that in different animals, the retina is going to be specialized in different ways.
I just want to give one example because I think it's a very cool example.
Let's imagine that you're a bird of prey and you fly very high and you look on the ground to see little mice or some other thing that's moving on the ground.
Now, I want you to think about what's involved in first being able to detect the movement and then being able to focus on it because you're then going to dive and try to pick that little mouse up off the ground or whatever it is.
Well, it turns out that birds of prey have more than one phobia.
And so what happens as they fly is they don't turn their head like we do to bring things into focus.
As the mouse moves on the ground, it goes across the various phobias that are in the animal's eye.
And so when the animal goes to dive down to grab that mouse, again, the mouse is moving, but it's crossing the phobias of the retina and that bird brain is capable of being able to calculate exactly where the object is that they're trying to get.
Because if you missed, if you were on the fraction of a second, you're a dead bird, okay? You crashed into the earth.
And if you haven't thought about that before, imagine what that little bird brain has to do to integrate that information so that you're able to dive down like that and grab your prey and go back up and fly.
So that just shows you in the human visual system what we care about is form.
We identify objects in the visual world. This is part of how we gain an enormous amount of information.
We care about change. We care about contrast. And we care a lot about color.
But for another animal that's specialized to another niche, other things are important.
And if you were to look at the eye across the whole vertebrate kingdom, you would see specializations in this structure related to the niche that that animal occupied.
Thank you.
