That is kind of the life.
Welcome back.
In the last lecture, we discussed how and what information is transmitted from the
eye to the brain.
We learned, for example, that foveal regions of the retina, which are the areas that are
important for high visual acuity, send information to the brain about contrast and edges.
The foveal region also sends information to the brain about color.
And that's because we are high visual acuity animals, and these things are going to tell
us about objects in the world.
We also learned that the peripheral parts of the retina, however, are specialized in
different ways.
So the peripheral parts of the retina are going to send information to the brain about
motion of objects.
So remember, again, we are foveal animals.
If we look straight ahead where things are in focus and something comes from the side
of our visual field, we turn and look at it so we can bring it into focus.
So different areas of the retina are specialized to send to the brain this different information.
In this lecture, what we want to do is to focus on the projection of retinal ganglion
cells to the brain.
Now retinal ganglion cells are going to send axons to many different structures in the
brain.
Some of these are involved in visual reflexes, for example.
But we're not going to focus on that.
In this lecture, what we want to focus on are the projections of the retina to structures
that are going to eventually project to the cortex.
And the reason for this is because the cortex is the seat of the mind.
And so we're interested in the area of the brain that forms percepts that ultimately
result in our having a subjective experience of vision.
And that means we're interested in the projections to the cortex.
You don't see with your eye, you see with your brain.
So we want to trace these pathways.
Lastly, we're going to use color vision to help bring home this point that seeing is
a construction of the brain.
And I have a little demonstration for you in that part of our course.
So in the last lecture, we saw that information about form and color and motion is going to
be processed by parallel pathways.
So different classes of retinal ganglion cells are going to send this information to the
brain.
So we say those are multiple parallel pathways.
So they're like little sub pathways that are carrying only information about form or motion
or color.
And these parallel pathways are going to be projected to the brain.
Now we want to talk a little bit more about the details of this projection.
First let's look at the overall projection of the eye to the lateral geniculate.
So this perspective isn't quite right and in a few minutes you'll understand why, but
this just shows that in our eye we have axons which leave at the optic disc.
These are retinal ganglion cell axons which will form the optic nerve and tract and will
project back to the lateral geniculate nucleus.
And the lateral geniculate nucleus is just one nucleus in the thalamus.
Neurons in the lateral geniculate will then project their axons to visual cortex or area
17.
And again, area 17 is at the back of the brain at the very back pole of the brain.
So this is basically the overall projection that we're interested in because we're interested
in that pathway that eventually results in information about form, color and motion getting
to the cortex so that we can eventually have this subjective experience of vision.
Now if we look at this in more detail, we want to look at how the image is projected
to the brain because this is very well understood in vision.
So the term visual field, the term visual field is what the person sees.
And so whenever you hear a doctor talk about a visual field defect, it means that somewhere
in where the person sees something isn't being seen correctly.
So to understand the visual field and the projection to the brain, we have to know a
little bit about this in more detail.
So let me explain this diagram.
This is the whole field that you can see when you have both of your eyes open.
Now if you drew a line down the middle of the body, this is your nose, if you drew a
line down the middle of the body and the person was focusing straight ahead, it turns out
that part of the visual field could only be seen by the eye on that side.
So here's your eye and this part which is called monocular would only be seen by that
eye.
To demonstrate that, if I look straight ahead like this and I don't change my focus but
look straight ahead, if I bring my finger in from the side, there'll be a point at which
I can see that finger but only with this eye and the same as true of the other eye.
Now we have frontally placed eyes and that means that we have a binocular portion to
our visual field and this is what we see with both eyes open.
Now let's see what happens when we project an image into one part of the visual field
or another.
So an image which is projected up here into the left visual field is projected onto one
part of the retina of that eye which is called the nasal part because it's close to the nose
but the line of sight is actually to the temporal part in the other eye.
Note that it's in part of the binocular visual field so that light is going to be directed
onto the retinas of both eyes but it's in this particular way.
That means that an object presented in the left half of the visual field is projected
onto both eyes but different parts of both eyes.
Now the other thing you have to know to understand the projection to the brain is that the temporal
part of each retina and that's what this would be close to the temporal aspect or where
the side of the head would be, the retinal ganglion cells and the retina on this side
of the eye project directly back to the brain on the same side.
But retinal ganglion cells that are in the nasal part of the eye are going to cross.
Now let's stop just for a moment because we'll review this but you remember that motor cortex
neurons which are located up in the cortex send their axons all the way down and cross
in the medulla and then enter the spinal cord.
Well this is a different pathway.
This is a pathway that wants to go to the brain and it has its own way of crossing and
in the visual system it works such that parts of both eyes are projected to one side of
the brain so the temporal part of this retina will project straight back and the nasal part
of the other retina will cross.
What this results in is an image which is presented to the left visual field up here
is going to be processed by the right side of the brain and now you understand why if
you look straight ahead like this it's this side of the brain that process information
from that half of the world and an image presented here will be processed by this side of the
brain and it's because of these specific projections and what crosses and what doesn't cross.
There's no mystery to it, it's really very straightforward.
So we have parts of each eye that project to one side of the brain.
So anything in this part of the visual field processed here, anything in this part of the
visual field processed by the other side of the brain.
These axons when they come out of one eye obviously the same thing is happening on the
other side but when these axons come out of the eye they're called the optic nerve and
when they join with axons from the other eye then back here it's called the optic tract.
So all of these axons are on the way to the lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus.
Note that the lateral geniculate on the right will process information about objects presented
in the left half of the visual field.
So let's look at our lateral geniculate nucleus.
The lateral geniculate nucleus receives information again from parts of both eyes but information
from each eye is going to synapse in a different layer so the lateral geniculate anyone who
is familiar with this structure would recognize this as the lateral geniculate.
It is one nucleus in the thalamus and it has multiple layers and it turns out that each
eye will synapse in only one of those layers and it means that the brain is keeping information
from each eye separate.
Now in addition to this some of these layers are going to process information about color,
some of the layers are going to process information about motion, some are going to process other
types of information meaning again information streams are basically in parallel pathways
that keep the information separate.
Another thing that happens in all visual structures is that there is an orderly representation
of the projection.
So you can think of this as a retinotopic map in the visual system or I like to call
it a visiotopic map.
Let me explain what it is.
Now parts of each eye project to each side of the brain but basically that means that
each side of the brain is getting a whole map of one retina, okay parts from both eyes
but one retina or one half of the visual field and it turns out that that projection is point
to point.
Now it might be distorted in some way but it is point to point.
That means that each place on the lateral geniculate is receiving from retinal ganglion
cells in a specific place on the retina and that orderly representation means that there
is a map on the visual structures of every point in visual space.
So our brain knows exactly where in visual space something we are looking at is located
and so this is just one of the very fundamental things about sensory systems that information
is kept very specifically like this.
Now if we look at the lateral geniculate I said that the map could be distorted.
So here is our lateral geniculate, one nucleus in the thalamus.
Now I want you to look over here.
There is a point to point representation, one part from each retina that projected the
geniculate but what you will see is the map is distorted in that there is a great deal
more tissue in the lateral geniculate that is devoted to the foveal region or the central
region of vision than there is to the peripheral retina.
Moreover up here in this area more tissue is being devoted to an analysis of form and
color.
So the layers down in this part of the geniculate analyze motion, the layers up here are more
interested in color vision and form.
So when we say that a map is distorted it means that there is more neural tissue devoted
to something than you would think there would be.
So remember that the foveal region in the retina is tiny.
It's just that tiny little part of the center of the macula.
It's tiny in the retina but it has a huge amount of neural tissue devoted to it even
though there will still be a point to point representation.
Now when we look back at our retinal projection picture again now you know why the perspective
isn't quite true here.
It's parts of both retinas that will project to the lateral geniculate and what we want
to look at now is the projection of the lateral geniculate to area 17 because we need to get
information to the cortex.
In area 17 information from each of the eyes is still going to be kept separate.
Information about form, motion and color is still going to be kept separate.
So all of the information pathways are still going to be kept separate even though they
project to the same area.
Also there's going to be a retinotopic or visiotopic representation or map in area 17.
So if we look at our brain model area 17 is at the very back or pole and it turns out
that nearly a third of area 17 is devoted exclusively to the foveal or macular region
of the retina.
So again there's a point to point representation of visual space of one half of the visual
field on each lateral geniculate and each area 17.
But the map is distorted because we are foveal animals.
What we care about is high acuity vision and so more tissue in the brain is going to be
devoted to that area of the retina that's projecting that type of information.
So if you looked in another species, maybe an animal for example who didn't have a foveal
then they would have a different map.
So in humans this map is distorted because we are high visual acuity animals.
Now from area 17 and let me turn this model around like this, from area 17 you'll have
projections to higher order visual areas that are found in other lobes.
Some are in the occipital lobe, some in prideal lobe and some are down in the temporal lobe.
So we have these higher order sensory areas and in this case higher order visual areas
that are going to start decoding the information that's been sent and this will ultimately
result in us being able to see in a particular way.
Now this is also very orderly and very interesting.
There are two basic streams of information in visual cortex.
So we have information come into area 17 where different types of information are kept separate
and then what we're going to have is from area 17 we may have a projection just rostal
to that to 18 but basically you have two streams of information.
You have one stream that goes up into the prideal lobe and areas up here devoted to vision that
are going to help you understand where something is in space and you have a ventral stream
that's going to go to higher order visual areas down in the temporal lobe to tell you
what something is.
So where and what are going to be processed by different higher order visual association
areas.
Now to give you an example of what we mean by higher order, I want you to think about
the fact that there are neurons that specifically in higher order visual areas that care only
about the velocity of the movement of something and it means that there are individual neurons
that will fire or change their firing rate only when something is moving at a particular
velocity and other neurons won't fire to that velocity, they fire to yet another.
Each of the areas that's found in this higher order cortex are performing some kind of analysis
of something very specific about the information that's been transferred.
Down here in our ventral stream, down here, what something is, there are higher order
visual areas down here where the neurons will fire or not fire only if they're looking
at a face.
So that these neurons are specifically designed to analyze information that recognizes faces.
Moreover, there are areas that will recognize a face when you're looking directly at it
and there are areas that recognize faces in profile and this is why we can recognize people.
Faces are very important to us.
Faces are one of the most important ways that we identify individuals.
Now there may be 30 or more of these different cortical areas all in this higher order visual
association cortex that are telling us about where and what a vision.
So this is just really incredible.
Now let's look at one specific pathway very quickly.
Neurons in area 17 project area 18 and then those neurons are going to project to an area
which is just a little bit more rostral about at the junction between the occipital and temporal
lobes.
And this is to an area called V4 and that just means vision area number four.
Remember that was one of the ways that we define areas in the brain now is by looking
at numbers like that instead of Brogman's numbers in all cases and V4 is specifically
involved in color vision.
So this is one of the ways that we see color.
Now seeing as a construct of the brain, we see with our brains.
So I could give you many examples of proving this.
For example, we know that the brain fills in information that's missing from the optic
nerve projection.
So where the optic nerve is comes out of the eye, that area is essentially blind.
And so the brain just fills in the information.
The brain fills it in, it isn't there.
So seeing a whole visual field without that missing is a construct of the brain.
We could also use visual illusions and in fact visual illusions are a popular way that
is used to demonstrate that vision is a construct created by the brain.
It is not seen by the retina, it is a construct of the brain.
So this is a very famous and used visual illusion.
Now if you look at this in one way, if you look here, if you think of this as hair and
this is a very fancy hat and you look down here and you see this as the eyelash and this
is the face and down here the shoulder of a young beautiful woman.
If you look at this another way, you see this as hair, you see this as a huge nose and now
this is the chin of a very old ugly woman.
What is important about visual illusions and why they're used to show that seeing as a
construct of the brain is that the stimulation of the retina is exactly the same in both
cases.
But what you see, which is a construct of your brain, a creation by your brain, depends
on how your brain interprets what it's saying.
And so whether you see the beautiful young woman or whether you see the old woman is
a result of the creation of your brain.
What I would like to use to show you about seeing being a construct of the brain is to
use color vision and in particularly the perception of blue and to show you that all color vision
in fact is created by the brain.
So what's responsible for color vision basically in any type of color vision?
Well color vision requires at least two types of photoreceptors that respond to different
parts of the visual spectrum of light.
In human color vision there are three types of cones that basically absorb light in different
parts of the visual spectrum.
So on this you see, we call them by the colors, blue cones which basically mean that these
are a specific type of cone that is going to respond to short wavelength light.
We also have green cones and red cones, but one of the things I want you to notice and
this is very long wavelength light, I want you to notice that there's actually a lot
of overlap.
I've also shown the absorption of rods on here to show you that rods maximally absorb
light at a particular wavelength as well.
Now there are different kinds of cones and these specific different kinds of cones are
not distributed equally in the retina and this is one of the reasons why seeing blue
is so interesting.
So for blue, short wavelength light degrades images.
So you remember in the macular region of the retina, the maculoludia is called that because
it has a yellow pigment present specifically to absorb short wavelength light.
Why?
Because we're high visual acuity animals.
We don't want anything that degrades the visual image.
So short wavelength light degrades visual images so the retina has selected for a visual
pigment that actually absorbs any stray short wavelength light.
Also very interestingly, there are no blue cones in the phobia of the retina or in the
macular region.
Most of the macular region has no blue cones.
So how is it that you can look directly at me, you can look directly at me and see my
blouse is blue?
How can that happen?
Well, it happens because this is a construct created by your brain and how color vision
takes place is that the brain interprets the relative firing of the different kinds of
cones and then creates what we subjectively experience as a particular color.
So the brain is going to say when you look directly at me with your phobia that there
are no firing of blue cones.
And the relative firing of the other types of cones is such that the brain creates and
knows what's coming in, creates a subjective experience that we say is blue.
And in fact, this is how all color vision takes place.
All color vision is the consequence of the brain's interpretation of the relative firing
patterns of the different types of cones.
Now color is what we experience privately and subjectively.
And if you think about that, we'll talk about this again.
Imagine how you would describe the sensation of blue to a person who had never had vision.
How would you describe it?
It's a subjective and private experience.
So what is the purpose of color?
Well, I love to take photographs of sunrises and sunsets because I think they're especially
beautiful and the colors are especially beautiful.
And I try to capture that as well as I can on film.
But that's not why color evolved.
It doesn't really care whether we like looking at sunsets or not.
So what I'm going to show you is a black and white image.
Now form vision, high visual acuity, form vision is very powerful in human beings.
So it's possible that when you see this black and white image, you'll be able to recognize
what it is because that's what your brain's designed to do.
But maybe you won't be able to tell what it is.
So let's look at this black and white image, just look very briefly, OK?
Now if I tell you that this is a picture from my garden, it might help you because in fact
your brain's going to take that information and now it's going to look at the image differently.
Right?
OK.
So now it looks at the image differently.
Now let's imagine what is going to happen when we add color.
So let's look at what happens when we add color.
So here we have my lanternas, my yellow lanternas and this beautiful little butterfly with
his little orange spots on his tail and his blue and he's sitting on one of those lanternas.
Now once you've seen this, do you notice that you can't look at this the same way?
Now you can't help but interpret what the black and white image is.
I had tried to take a picture of one of my dappled oxens next to some leaves because
you can hardly see her apart from it but the picture didn't turn out so I had to go with
a butterfly.
But this really shows you something very critical about vision.
So what is color good for?
What color does is color enhances contrast.
And this is what the visual system cares about.
Remember when we talked back about the retina that what the retinal ganglion cells are sending
very little information to the brain but part of what they're sending to the brain is information
about edges and contrast.
It sends information to the brain about change.
So what the brain cares about is contrast.
And color enhances contrast enormously.
So it turns out that experiments have been done demonstrating that human beings can differentiate
approximately 500 levels of brightness.
So the brain that means the brain can differentiate 500 different levels of brightness.
But mathematicians have determined that if you looked at all the possible firings of retinal
ganglion cells that were connected to the various types of cones that we in fact can
distinguish 6 million hues of color.
Color greatly enhances contrast.
Now the last thing to be said about color vision is something that is really on the
cutting edge of neuroscience because it turns out that learning plays a role in our ability
to distinguish between different colors.
So for example in general women have better color vision than men do.
Now it's not necessarily so that it's only learning that has played a role in us.
Why you can teach people to distinguish between very fine differences in hue.
So they can be taught to do so.
So an individual might be involved in an experiment where they can't tell the difference between
two or three different colors of blue.
They can be taught to make those discriminations.
But it turns out that in some animals, and humans may turn out to be one of those animals,
the visual system and the processing information system for color is different of females than
it is males.
And so we have yet to determine in the human visual system whether or not that's true.
So when your husband tells you that he can't tell the difference between the two colors
of blue that you're wearing, probably not this, but in other colors of blue, it may actually
be true that he can't.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
