Hello, and welcome back again to our course on the brain.
In our last few lectures, we've been looking at the visual and the auditory systems.
These are the two main systems that allow us to receive information about an external
world.
We went into more detail about the visual system because it's just such a wonderful
model system for how the brain processes sensory information.
Again, these systems allow us to obtain information about a world outside of ourselves.
And so these are the two main sensory systems in human beings.
Our cortex will ultimately form percepts that allow us to have a subjective experience of
seeing and hearing.
Now in contrast to the auditory and visual systems, our somatosensory system is a specific
system which is going to convey information that the brain is going to use to form percepts
that are related to touch and other sensations which are within the distance of our body
and also information about our bodies themselves.
So we're going to have pathways that are going to transmit information in the somatosensory
system that are going to allow us to know about the internal and external state of our bodies.
And it is this somatosensory system that we want to turn to now.
Just like the auditory system, we aren't as interested in every detail about the system.
What we want to do is to be able to generally understand how the system works and also to
be able to contrast it and what we know and what we've learned about the visual and the
auditory systems.
Now the other way that we're going to sort of pare down the amount of information in
this lecture because this too is a very complicated system is that we're going to restrict our
discussion to the body below the neck.
So it turns out that sensory information from the face is even more complicated and so we're
just going to be talking basically about the body.
Again to review, the visual and auditory systems inform our brain about an external world at
a distance.
The somatosensory system provides information to our brain about our own bodies and also
about the world within touching distance.
And we'll see later that this will be very important because different parts of this
can be lost with different brain lesions.
Just as with vision and audition, we are also going to have different kinds of experiences
associated with this.
So basically our somatosensory system is going to give us information that our brain will
form percepts about that allow us to feel pain and temperature, touch and proprioception.
So proprioception is an especially interesting one that at least that I'm very interested
in.
Proprioception is about how we know where our limbs are at.
Now this is the kind of thing that we all take for granted.
Well I know where my limbs are at because they're there, but that's not true.
You know where your limbs are at because your brain interprets the input that comes in from
the limbs and it tells you where they are at.
And believe me, this can be lost in a patient where an individual with their eyes closed
will no longer know where their legs are at.
So this is very important.
So let's define proprioception.
So proprioception comes in two varieties.
You can have a static proprioception where you know where your limbs are at that even
when I don't look at my arm, my brain tells me where my arm is at even though the arm
is not moving.
And you also have a different type of proprioception which is called dynamic, which means that
now my brain knows where my arm is at at different points because it's interpreting the dynamic
information that's coming in from the joint.
So even something as simple as knowing where your limbs are in space is actually a construction
of the brain.
And combined with other information, for example, from the visual system, our brain is going
to form another kind of percept that is related to the system.
And that is, our brain is going to form a percept about personal space, immediate extra
personal space, and space at a distance.
And we're going to learn that the brain is going to process this very differently.
It's also the system that provides us with feedback about our body state.
And we all know what it means to not feel good or something.
This is part of the system that plays a role in this.
Now there are differences between the visual and auditory system and the somatosensory system.
But there are differences which turn out, at least for scientists, to be very significant.
For the first thing is very obvious.
In the auditory and the visual systems, we saw that the receptor cells were located in
one place.
So for example, for the visual system, the photoreceptors, which are the cells that are
specifically specialized to absorb light, were found in the retina, in the eye, in one place.
For the auditory system, the hair cells were found in the organ of cordy and the cochlea,
all in one place again.
Now for the somatosensory system, we're going to see that our receptors are located all
over our body and inside as well.
And so this is a much more complicated system because the receptors are not in one place.
We're going to learn that there are many receptor subtypes as well.
The other thing which is different, which we haven't really figured out why, is that
in the auditory and visual systems, neurons were spontaneously active so that the code
for signaling in those two systems was to either increase or to decrease firing rate.
Neurons in the somatosensory system are not spontaneously active.
They fire or they don't fire, so they use a slightly different code.
Nonetheless, the code is still that electrical signal between neurons, electrochemical transmission.
Now in the somatosensory system, we have different types of sensations.
Basically what we have are different qualities of sensation of the stimulation of our bodies.
So what are those different qualities due to?
Well, we have pain and temperature, touch, proprioception.
Those different qualities are due to different types of receptors being stimulated.
So we're going to find out that different kinds of receptors are localized in the body
that ultimately result with our subjective experience, which is different between pain
and touch, or between proprioception and temperature.
So those different qualities are actually going to involve different receptors.
So the pathways which carry the information from these different types of receptors are
going to be independent, more independent than we saw in the visual and auditory systems.
And finally, ultimately the reason why we feel one thing is pain and another thing is
touch is because our brain is going to interpret what's coming in via the different pathways
and receptors in a different way.
Let's take one example.
One example.
Our experience of pain basically results from the stimulation of only a few types of receptors,
one of which is called a free nerve ending that exists in the skin.
It's a very specific type of receptor.
It sends that information along a very specific pathway in the brain, and our brain interprets
that as pain.
Now pain and temperature are known as the no-susceptive senses.
And that means that these are the pathways which transmit information to the brain about
potentially damaging stimulation to the body.
So these are very old and very important systems.
Our sense of discriminative touch, on the other hand, and by that I mean fine touch.
So it's not just that you've been touched but that you understand the quality of the
touch.
So fine discriminative touch is a high acuity system.
And this is the system that's used for our brains to interpret so that we can appreciate
the size, shape, and texture of objects.
So for example, this fine system is what allows me to tell the difference in texture
between this podium and the skin on my face, which feels completely different to me, and
any other texture that we might touch.
Now this results from the stimulation of an entirely different receptor.
And these receptors are called Meissner's core pussels, and they're a very specific
type of receptor, and they're concentrated in the tips of the fingers, the soles of the
feet, and the external genitalia.
So these are part of a system that are exquisitely sensitive to touch.
And they're the system that allows us to make these fine discriminations.
They're also very popular with most of my students when they're asked to judge what
receptor they think is most important.
Other types of receptors underlie other submodalities, depending on their location in the body.
Now remember, let's imagine that we have a receptor that responds to two different things,
but the information is going to travel in different pathways.
Ergo, the areas of the brain that are going to interpret know what pathway it's come from,
so it doesn't make any difference.
So for example, there is one touch receptor called a Pacinian core pussel, and this is
exactly what it looks like.
It looks like an onion, and it has multiple layers, and what happens is when it's depressed,
it sets off an action potential in a process which would be located here in the structure
at another level.
It turns out that the same type of receptor can be used as a touch receptor or a proprioceptor
depending on where it's out in the body.
So for example, Pacinian core pussels in the skin respond to this pressure change in the
skin and my brain interprets that as touch, but Pacinian core pussels in my joint tell
my brain about proprioception because my brain interprets it that way.
And again, the brain doesn't care that the same receptor is being used for two very different
kinds of information because this information from the Pacinian core pussels in these two
systems will be carried in separate parallel pathways to the brain, and the cortex is the
place where it will interpret whether or not this came from a Pacinian core pussel in
the skin and its touch or whether it came from a proprioceptor in the joint.
So again, we see like we did with the other sensory systems.
Information is obtained by stimulation of receptors and information about different submodalities
is going to be kept separate and travel to the brain in separate parallel pathways.
So all of the individual information is never going to be lost.
And this is just like what we saw with the visual system where we saw that form, color
and motion were kept separate so that up here we could have different percepts.
So our subjective experience is different of those three qualities.
Now we're going to see that it's our brain that tells us whether something is painful
or pleasurable.
It will be the brain that does this.
Now these different pathways, these different pathways have also evolved obviously in the
brain and in different animals.
For example, it's very easy to understand that pain is a very old pathway in this somatosensory
system.
One of the most important things that any animal would need to know is if something
was nibbling at its foot or something was biting it, if there was damage to some part
of its body surface.
So this is a very old system and the information comes in from the part of the body.
Specific receptors are stimulated.
The information comes into the spinal cord obviously because information coming in from
the body will come into the spinal cord and in this old system a synapse will be made
there and then another neuron will project up to the brain to allow for a conscious appreciation
of pain.
Now discriminative touch notice is about this fine texture, this high acuity part of the
somatosensory system.
That's a phylogenetically newer pathway and it's carried by a separate pathway in the
brain that in fact the information comes in and travels in the spinal cord without synapsing
in the spinal cord.
So these are separate parallel pathways and they can be studied in a variety of animals
depending on the evolution of that animal's nervous system.
Now we're not concerned here with like the names of these various pathways and everything
or even where they travel in the brain.
What we want to appreciate is that information from these different systems is going in these
parallel pathways which allows us to have different experiences depending on how our
brain interprets the information coming in from those pathways.
So each of the pathways comes in and they will cross or not cross or whatever but ultimately
I want you to think about this, ultimately it is this side of the brain that will process
the information from this side of the body and this side of the brain that will process
information coming in from this side of the body or feel what comes in from this side
of the body.
So it means that ultimately, ultimately because things cross in different places, information
that comes on this side of the body needs to get to this side of the brain and that
should make sense to you.
And at this point in the class I'll bet you can guess where in the brain all of these
pathways are going to first project for us to have conscious appreciation.
Yes, they're going to project to the thalamus.
So the information that comes in via these independent pathways have their own synapses
along the way and different places they cross but ultimately they want to get to the cortex
so that we have a conscious appreciation of our bodies and so this information is going
to go to the thalamus.
In the thalamus, information is going to be, is going to synapse in specific nucleus just
like we saw with the other sensory systems.
So in vision, information went to the lateral geniculate.
In the auditory system, information went to the medial geniculate and now for the somatosensory
system all of these separate pathways will converge on a structure called the lateral,
the nucleus lateralis dorsalis, the ventral posterior nucleus which is a division of the
thalamus.
For below the body, it's the lateral division and this is where that somatosensory information
will project.
Now in the thalamus, I'll bet you can also realize or guess that all of the information
about these various subsystems is still being kept separate.
So it's not at the level of the thalamus that percepts are made so that information still
has to be kept separate.
Now given what we've talked about with the visual system, with the auditory system, can
you guess where VPL, where this nucleus is going to project?
Yes, is going to project to the primary somatosensory cortex.
So the primary somatosensory cortex, if you remember, here is Brogan's map and you have
a central sulcus of Rolando and primary somatosensory cortex which is Brogan's areas 3, 1 and 2
is immediately caudal to that central sulcus of Rolando and there is a projection here
on the lateral surface and 3, 1 and 2 can also be seen on the medial surface of the
brain.
Just like in the other systems, primary somatosensory cortex is going to then project to higher
order somatosensory areas that are nearby.
And it's these higher order somatosensory areas which are going to start forming the
percepts which we experience as pain and temperature and touch and proprioception.
And we saw exactly the same thing in the visual and auditory systems.
The projection is first to the primary area and then from there to the higher order sensory
areas that form the percepts.
Now just like there were retinotopic maps or viziotopic maps for the visual system and
tonotopic maps for the auditory system, what we have in the somatosensory system is a map
of the body.
So we're going to actually have a map of the body surface, a map is going to be an image,
a map of the body surface will exist in this primary somatosensory cortex.
Now this map is generally referred to as a homunculus and that means like a little man
image and this has a real history back when it was believed that there was a minute body
that could be seen in sperm and it comes from that historical tradition.
So I didn't like it as much so I had the drawing made so that my body is represented in somatosensory
cortex but nonetheless what you see this is the medial division of the cortex and this
is the lateral portion of somatosensory cortex and what you see is there's an orderly projection
of the body surface.
Here's my face, the upper limb and the lower limb.
You also notice that just like in the other systems there's distortion of the map.
So in the visual system what you saw is that what was most important was the phobia and
so we had a disproportionate amount of neural space devoted to processing that information.
The auditory system is sounds from speech and for human beings it's the area of the
face and surrounding the lips because we are very sensitive around the lips and also
tips of our fingers, palms of the hand.
And so these are the areas of highest acuity so to speak and so our map onto our primary
somatosensory cortex looks like this because that's the most neural tissue that is devoted
to just the processing of those areas because that's our high acuity system discriminative
touch.
Now we think a vision audition about is how we get information about a world that's external
to us.
Our somatosensory system is going to be important for giving us a different type of information
because it gives us information about our bodies.
I wanted to use just two brief examples to illustrate the importance of the somatosensory
system now because we always think a vision and audition is being so dominant in us and
it's true that for information at a distance these are the systems that we predominantly
use but nonetheless the somatosensory system is extremely important in human beings.
So the first example I'd like to give is for pain.
Pain is important for all mammals.
Pain again is a no-susceptic sense, it tells us about potentially damaging information.
Now pain is also different from any of the other sensory systems and submodalities.
Pain is our exception to the rule, you can't have a rule unless you have an exception.
This is true to the rule and that is for pain to be felt, you don't need a projection to
the cortex.
You can actually feel pain at the level of the thalamus.
Now let me tell you the consequence of that.
We don't understand this syndrome but this is very important.
Pain is handled differently, it's an old system, we can feel it at the level of the thalamus.
Pain is a disorder in which individuals have strokes that involve that ventral posterior
nucleus.
Now let's predict what you think you'd see.
All of the sub pathways project to that nucleus so indeed individuals lose all somatosensory
feeling on the contralateral one half of the body just like you'd expect.
So pain, temperature, touch, and proprioception are gone.
But now a syndrome happens that isn't seen for any of the other sensory systems.
When the ventral posterior nucleus is affected the person continues to not be able to feel
touch and proprioception but pain actually comes back.
So within a few weeks pain comes back but it's different.
Now anything that touches in any way the contralateral half of the body induces a horrible burning
pain and I've actually had patients brought to my class who had to wear specific diaphanous
clothes on one half of their body because even any kind of touch just set up this horrible
emotional reaction to the pain that they felt.
This is the only system in which you see something like that and this is because somehow pain
is dealt with different from all of the other sensory qualities of information.
Now for us to know exactly where painful information is taking place or where pain is taking place
on our body surface if we have a normal brain and normal projections we need the cortex for
some very fine discriminations but just to feel pain we don't in fact need the cortex
we only need our thalamus.
Again pain is different in another way unlike other submodalities we do have mechanisms
that prevent damage to our receptors but unlike other submodalities in the pain system we
actually have a way to stop the information from ever getting to the brain.
These are descending pathways which go from the cortex and other nuclei that are deeper
and go down to the spinal cord and actually gate the transmission of painful information.
This is probably the basis for the placebo effect when you think you've taken something
that's going to relieve pain even if you actually didn't but you feel a relief of pain somehow
your brain has set the system into place.
This is also the system that's probably responsible for the fact that a soldier can be horribly
injured yet carry their buddy for medical help before they feel any pain or realize
that they have been injured very badly.
Now pain is very important in human beings even at a subconscious level and we often
don't think about this but it's important to us even when there is no conscious appreciation.
So for example those of you sitting down and listening to this course as you're listening
to the course you're making very subtle small movements and you're doing that because at
points of pressure on your body where you might cut off the blood supply to some part
of the skin there's a subconscious appreciation in your brain of pain and it causes you to
make these little movements.
Bed sores form at points of pressure in individuals who aren't receiving this information.
So for example the elderly pain thresholds are changed they often get bed sores an individual
who has spinal cord injury and is not getting information coming up to tell them they don't
get the information they get bed sores and infection by bed sores is a major cause of
death in individuals who have spinal cord injury they have to constantly be moved but
the person's not getting any sensory input say a quadriplegic is getting no sensory input
at all from the body so they don't feel anything so they don't know they have an infection
they can't report to someone so they have to constantly be moved to prevent these bed
sores at these points of pressure.
And finally in humans pain has a different type of component to it which is very important
and that is it has an emotional component and we think when something is very painful
we have this emotional response to it part of it is to move for example if I were to
touch this I'm very hot to move my hand away very quickly but in fact in the brain with
the correct brain lesion you can dissociate the emotional aspect of pain from the ceiling
itself and we learned this from all those individuals who at the turn of the last century
had prefrontal lobotomies so a prefrontal lobotomy is the removal of a cortical lobe
in this case they remove the prefrontal cortex of the lobe or you can do a leukotomy which
is undercutting of the axons which go to the area so you remember back when we were talking
about Egypt how they used to go up through the nose and pull the brain out well you can
go up through the nose and do brain surgery and you can run a wire back and forth like
this and cut the frontal lobes off from the rest of the brain. This surgery was done in
a variety of different types of patients but one of the groups of patients were people
that had intractable pain so these were people that were in such terrible pain that medication
could no longer relieve it. When they did the prefrontal lobotomies or leukotomies it
seemed as though these people weren't in pain anymore and then lo and behold a physician
asked the right question. He asked the individual do you still feel the pain and the person
said I feel it just like I always did I just don't care anymore. The emotional component
of the painful experience had been dissociated from the feeling of the pain itself because
the emotional elaboration which is that response is a cortical function and the front part
of the cortex had been cut off from the rest of the brain. Now my last example is that
our somatosensory system is organized differently in different animals and it turns out that
one of the best studied of all these systems is going to be animals that actually use
their whiskers as somatosensory organs. So this is an image of a cat I had a number of
years ago named Poupette and cats use their whiskers as a somatosensory organ to help them
in the world and to gain information about the world. This has been best studied in rodents.
Rodents can run along a wall in the dark and get along perfectly fine without being able
to see very well. And so what we've discovered is that in their cortex a huge amount of the
cortex is devoted to an analysis of the deflection of each and every single whisker.
So in human beings what's most important is fine touch, discriminative touch and what's
most important for Poupette was the deflection of each of these whiskers. I would also like
to recommend that you read an article that I have listed at the end of the outlines and
this is Thomas Nagel's famous often quoted article on what is it like to be a bat. This
article talks about how different animals are going to have a different subjective experience
and there is no way that we can ever know what it means to be another animal because our
brains are organized differently. I highly recommend it. Thank you.
