Welcome back to our course on the brain.
In the last few lectures, we have been focusing on the sensory systems.
And these are the ascending systems of the brain.
So this is how we gain information about the external world.
We call them ascending systems because they actually come up in the brain or come from
the eye or from the ear or from our body.
So we call these the ascending systems.
In order for us to have a conscious appreciation of anything, we have to have the information
ultimately get to cortex.
Motor areas are going to be part of the descending system of the brain.
So motor behavior is going to be initiated in the cortex.
And now those systems are going to go down to affect behavior in the body.
So here we want to talk about how action occurs as the result of activation of particular
cortical areas.
And there will be different cortical areas that are going to be involved in the planning
and initiation of movement.
We call that the pyramidal system.
And there will be other parts of the brain called the extra-paramidal system that are
going to be intimately involved in making sure that motor behavior is normal.
Now when sensory information comes into the brain, it leads to internal processes.
And some of these internal processes result in thought.
And so that isn't necessarily movement.
What we want to focus on is when that incoming sensory information actually leads to a movement.
And here we're going to focus specifically on the movement of the body below the neck
again because the movement of the face is very, very complicated.
We smile.
Other animals don't smile like we do.
And so that makes the musculature and the control of it very, very complicated.
So we're going to focus here on the movement of parts of the body below the neck.
So the motor system is generally divided into a number of subsystems.
So we have our pyramidal system, and these are called the direct and indirect cortical
spinal systems.
We'll be talking about that in a minute.
The extra-paramidal motor system, which is composed of basal ganglia nuclei and other
nuclei that will be very important later when we have a discussion about clinical disorders.
And lastly, the cerebellum.
Now this division into these motor areas has some heuristic value, but it's very important
to appreciate that for the slightest movement, for any normal movement, no matter how small
that movement is, all of these systems have to work together.
And so they're really all complexly interrelated.
And so if you take out any part of the entire system, it changes the ability to make a normal
movement.
Now we've already discussed the pyramidal system, but I wanted to add a few more details
and to make sure that it's very well understood.
The pyramidal pathway is involved in the initiation of a motor movement.
So it's the cortex initiates movement.
And so this pyramidal pathway is the major pathway that is involved in that process.
It's called pyramidal because the neurons in area 4, if you remember, that give rise
to the cortical spinal pathway are shaped like little pyramids.
And so that's where it got its original name as pyramidal.
Now the pyramidal neurons are going to give rise to the cortico-spinal pathway.
And the cortical-spinal pathway, you've seen this picture many times, here's our little
pyramidal neurons up in motor cortex.
And here's the axon coming down, crossing in the medulla, entering the spinal cord,
and synapsing onto our anterior horn cells, which are actually in the spinal cord.
And the important thing here is that these neurons, the anterior horn cells, are the
only neurons that actually go out and innervate the muscle.
And we'll see later that there are different clinical signs and symptoms that occur if
you damage these neurons versus these neurons.
But where is motor movement actually planned?
Well it turns out if I were to turn the model here again, and this is the front of the brain,
this is the back, this is area four right here, the planning of motor movement occurs
in higher order motor areas that are part of the frontal lobe.
So they're just rostral to area four.
So a motor movement is planned based on a lot of things.
You can anticipate that these areas are going to get a lot of input from higher order sensory
areas and from multimodal areas.
Remember, you want to make a movement, you're getting all the sensory input.
If I walk backwards, I'm looking at my visual space, I'm getting information from my proprioceptors.
There's a lot of sensory information that would be involved in my brain deciding what
movement should I make next.
And so widespread areas project to these areas that plan a motor movement.
Now let's talk in a little bit more detail about how movement of a specific part of the
body takes place.
And again, here we restrict it to below the neck.
Just like there are other maps in the brain, there's a map of the body on to motor cortex.
And I don't think that's really surprising.
We actually use this as an example of the anterior cerebral artery stroke that involved
the leg.
So here I am again, here I am again, and you see that there's an orderly point to point
representation of the body on the motor cortex with the leg or the lower limb represented
medial A and on the lateral surface of the cortex, the face and the upper limb.
Now the motor cortex contains an orderly representation of the contralateral body surface.
And just like in sensory systems, there's a disproportionate representation of certain
parts of the body.
So as we look here in motor cortex, you see that there's a disproportionate representation
for the area of the mouth and also of the fingers.
And this relates to the very fine motor movement, which is necessary for speech and the very
fine motor movement that's necessary for dexterity of the fingers.
So you see, again, a disproportionate representation based on what's important.
So the map is similar, but not identical to the map you saw in somatosensory cortex.
Now think about this.
Motor cortex lies here, and then next to it, in front or behind the central sulcus of Rolando,
you have the sensory areas 3, 1 and 2, primary somatosensory cortex.
And it should make sense that these areas are complexly interconnected.
When I want to make a motor movement of a particular type like touching this part of
the podium, I'm also getting feedback from the sensory system about this movement.
Notice my joints are moving, I'm making movement, I'm touching this, I'm getting all kinds of
feedback to my sensory cortex.
That is interconnected with the motor cortex that then decides what the next movement is.
So motor cortex has to sort of get the sensory information before these neurons are going
to fire to know what next movement should be planned and executed or initiated.
So there's a lot of connections between this and a lot of important information is transmitted
in these individual pathways.
So each half of the motor cortex is going to control the movement of the contralateral
one half of the body.
The axons of motor cortex make up that cortical spinal tract, and that cortical spinal tract
is going to course down through the brainstem, down through this area of the brain, down
in the brainstem, and in the lower medulla those axes are going to cross and then enter
the spinal cord.
Now the axons from different areas of motor cortex that control the movement of different
parts of our body are going to exit into the spinal cord at different levels.
So they want to exit at the appropriate level, so it wouldn't make any sense to have your
body map, for example, for innervation of your upper limb.
The axons that come from the part of motor cortex that controls your upper limb, you
want those axons to exit at cervical levels of the spinal cord to allow your upper limbs
to move because they have to exit to synapse onto the anterior horn cells.
On the other hand, if you want to make movement of your legs, you want to make movement of
your legs, then the cortical spinal tract axons have to go all the way down to lumbar regions
of the spinal cord.
To the areas of motor cortex in the medial surface, here in the medial surface that control
the movement of the leg, those neurons send their axons all the way down to lumbar regions
of the spinal cord before they exit into the spinal cord itself.
So if we look at the anterior horn cells are the cells in the spinal cord, and remember
they are the only cells which send their axons to the muscle.
So if we looked at the spinal cord, here's what we see, this is actually a lumbar region
of the spinal cord.
So the lumbar region of the spinal cord is only going to have the axons, now first I
should orient you, this is just a section taken through the cord, this is dorsal which
would be back and this is ventral, and we're just looking down at it, so you see two halves
of the spinal cord, just like you have two halves of the hemispheres.
The cortical spinal tract actually runs right here, this is a bygurt stain section, so
these are the axons of the cortical spinal tract that are darker.
So the only axons at this level would be those that are for innervation of the lower
limb, because all of the other axons have already exited at higher levels.
So here in what we call the lumbosacral enlargement, which is the part of the spinal cord which
is going to have anterior horn cells right here that go out to the muscle, these axons
will now leave the pathway where they've been coursing in the spinal cord and they will
send axon terminals in here to synapse onto neurons in this area and those cells go out.
Now this is such an important point, it is so important to understand this, I want to
go back to this map image of the brain.
This means on our last slide, neurons whose cell bodies are located in this area of the
cortex and are involved in making the initiation of the movement of the contralateral lower
limb, those axons were coursed all the way down in the spinal cord in that pathway and
not exit until the lower levels of the lumbar spinal cord.
And so that's how the appropriate muscle is contracted because the motor cortex sends
the axons down to the spinal cord in that way and only the anterior horn cells project
out to the muscle.
This is referred to as the direct cortical spinal pathway and the reason for that is
obvious, here's your neurons in some area of motor cortex and these axons project directly
to the spinal cord so we call it the direct cortical spinal tract.
Now we also have indirect cortical spinal pathways, surely you didn't believe after
sitting through this course for a while that it would really be so simple that there's
only one pathway, so there's a lot more.
There are indirect cortical spinal pathways and indirect cortical spinal pathways, the
best way to understand this is to think of a pathway where the motor cortex projects
to some nucleus somewhere in the brain stem and then that nucleus projects to anterior
horn cells.
So it's called an indirect cortical spinal pathway, so motor cortex to the nucleus and
then that nucleus down to the spinal cord.
So what do these pathways do?
Well these pathways are involved in something else and if they don't work properly we couldn't
even make a motor movement.
These indirect pathways, if I had to make a generalization about their function, by the
way there's many of them, but their overall function is to maintain the appropriate level
of background tone, particularly in anti-gravity muscles of the body like your quads.
And so we walk upright, we couldn't do anything like step backward or dance or move our body
in any way if we didn't have the appropriate background tone in the muscle against which
movement is initiated.
So you have to have that background tone in order to make an appropriate movement and
that is what these indirect cortical spinal fibers do.
Now the other thing that's important to understand about the direct cortical spinal and the indirect
cortical spinal is that they both course together in the brain.
So these indirect cortical spinal and the direct course together and that's going to
be important when we come back to clinical issues because mostly these two pathways are
injured together.
You don't have one injured and then the others, they're injured together and that's what
results in the signs and symptoms we see in patients.
Now there's also an extra pyramidal motor system and this term came from the fact that
early neuroanonymous knew there was a pyramidal system, that's your cortical spinal system
and then they saw that there were also other nuclei in areas of the brain that helped control
movement so they decided they'd just call it extra pyramidal.
So the term just means outside of the pyramidal system.
It's kind of an old term because it's not really very accurate but that's okay.
Now this extra pyramidal system is made up of a huge number of individual nuclei that
play a role in motor programs.
So what do I mean by that?
I'll give one example.
There are hundreds of motor programs taking place at any given time.
In fact, when I turn and talk to you and I move my hands like this, this is almost like
a habitual movement with me.
It's part of a motor program that gets set off when I talk to people about the brain or
I try to describe something.
The better example for anyone to think about is that as we walk, we swing our arms at our
side, we don't think about it.
It's not an intentional movement that we think about, it's a motor program that gets set
in as you shift your center of gravity from one leg to the other as you move.
So motor programs are controlled by these extra pyramidal motor nuclei and there's a
lot of them and they're found in lots of areas of the brain.
So we're just going to look at a few of them.
There are many more but we're going to look at a few.
There are some of the nuclei located in the telencephalon, remember the most recently
evolved area of the brain.
These are called basal ganglia.
Now this is really confusing.
What on earth is a basal ganglia?
Well in the central nervous system we call collections of neurons, nuclei, but it turned
out that early neuroanatomists saw that there were collections of nuclei in animals that
controlled a lot of motor behavior and they thought they were primitive so they called
them ganglia because in the peripheral nervous system collections of neurons are called ganglia.
So this is an old terminology again that just hung on from the old days but they're called
basal ganglia.
Now another nucleus is found in the diencephalon beneath the thalamus and it's called the subthalamic
nucleus.
I'm going to show them to you in a minute and the last one which is going to be important
when we talk about Parkinson's disease is the substantia nigra and we're going to see
that it plays a critical role in Parkinson's disease.
So let's look at where some of these nuclei are located.
So this is a horizontal section to the brain so it's taken in this plane, it's taken across
like this.
So this is rostral in the brain, up here, this is the corpus callosum right here, this
is rostral and this is caudal, this is our cerebellum, so this is caudal.
Up here in rostral areas of the brain there are three major nuclei that are part of the
basal ganglia system, telencephalic.
You have your caudate and I want you to notice that it's right here, this is the ventricle
of the brain, so here's one of the ventricles, here's another one, the holes in the brain.
You have your caudate nucleus right here, pale staining nucleus, this is vigorous stain
so the nuclei show up light and then you have another structure here that's actually consists
of two nuclei, the putamen and the globus pallidus.
I'm not as interested in you remembering the names of these structures but just pointing
out a few of them so you see where they're located.
Now this little guy right here is the subthalamic nucleus, so the thalamus is right about at
this level and this is beneath it so this is really too low to see the thalamus but
here is your subthalamic nucleus and the last nucleus which is important in this extra
pyramidal motor system is going to be the substantia nigra and this is a section through
the midbrain, remember here's our midbrain and because it's rostral midbrain you also
see caudal diencephalon here so if you look at here, here was our lateral geniculate and
our medial geniculate in the thalamus but the rest of this is all midbrain and the substantia
nigra is a major structure in the midbrain and it's the structure that's going to be
very important again in Parkinson's disease.
Now if I show you on a real brain and remember these plastic embedded sections are real pieces
of human brain that have been embedded in plastic.
This is the front of the brain, this is the back of the brain so this again is a horizontal
section.
If we look here very closely this area right here in the fresh brain with no staining at
all shows up black and it shows up black and that structure is the substantia nigra and
that's why early neuroanatomists named it the black substance.
Now I said that this system was involved in subconscious motor programs and that's really
true but this really hardly does justice to a system that has many more nuclei than this
that are really complexly interconnected.
So we're trying to simplify things so that we can understand what's going on but be
assured that they are very, very, very complicated.
Now a major difference between the pyramidal system, cortical spinal and the extra pyramidal
system, major difference is that the extra pyramidal motor system has no projection to
the spinal cord.
All these complexly interconnected nuclei, only a few of which we've been talking about
have no projections to the spinal cord.
So how are they going to change movement or make movement happen?
Well it turns out they do this by very complicated feedback circuits, feed forward and feedback
circuits that are going to ultimately influence the direct cortical spinal or the indirect
cortical spinal pathways.
So they do it indirectly, not directly.
So it's very important to appreciate this.
One of their major projections of nuclei in this extra pyramidal motor system is going
to be to motor nuclei in the thalamus.
Now we've concentrated on sensory nuclei in the thalamus but they're also motor nuclei
in the thalamus.
So this system has complicated pathways that will go to the motor areas of the thalamus
and then go up to area 4 and then alter what the cortical spinal tract does, both the indirect
and the direct cortical spinal pathways.
So think about this as you're making any movement that you have these complicated feed forward
and feedback circuits that are involved, that involve nuclei that are then going to alter
the pathway that initiates a movement.
This is very, very complicated.
So how do nuclei of the extra pyramidal motor system know what movement the motor cortex
wants to initiate?
I'm going to reach over and I'm just going to touch area 4.
I'm going to go do that, I'm going to do that just like this.
Well how does my extra pyramidal motor system know that I want to do that?
And by the way, there are motor programs that are set in here too.
Notice as I make the movement that the gross movement comes first and then there's a fine
movement as I go to touch something.
These are like habitual ways of moving and we have to have these extra pyramidal nuclei
involved, otherwise you can't make a normal movement.
So how does my extra pyramidal motor system know what my motor cortex wants to do?
So here we have our motor cortex neuron and it's sending its axon down to the spinal cord.
That's what we mean by cortical spinal.
But now lookie here, at these nodes or breaks in the myelin sheet, this axon is going to
send axon collaterals to the basal ganglia nuclei.
So when this initiates a movement, this is a single neuron, remember there's thousands
of them.
This neuron is going to send an axon which is going to communicate with the basal ganglia
and tell the basal ganglia what movement it's going to initiate.
And you also see that other axons are going to eventually reach the cerebellum which is
the third part of the motor system.
Now I want you to think about this.
As these nuclei are projecting down like this, each firing of that axon is sending the information
to hundreds of areas of the brain, so that those areas of the brain are being informed
about what one motor movement is going to be initiated.
This is a very, very complicated thing that's happening and if you think about this, this
is the main way, we call a pathway, we call a pathway by the one axon which is the major
part of it.
So we call this corticospinal because that's the major pathway, but there are hundreds
of axon collaterals peeling off at every point, connecting other areas of the brain.
So other areas of the brain always know what the motor cortex is going to do and initiate.
This is in general how all the pathways in the brain are organized.
The retina may project to the lateral geniculate in the sensory system for vision, but on its
way to the geniculate it has hundreds of axon collaterals peeling off to tell other areas
of the brain what retinal ganglion cells have just been stimulated.
And so this adds a level of complexity that I really want you to appreciate.
So I want you to imagine at any given time, we've only covered two of the systems, at
any given time you make a movement, the simplest movement involves hundreds of pathways.
And we just simplify it by calling one pathway or two pathways, something like that.
But there's actually all these axon collaterals, so there's actually much more information
being transmitted.
Now let's review this.
Sensory information comes into the brain and these sensory areas are going to go to higher
order sensory areas, that information, then that information is going to be transmitted
to areas that are rostral to area four for the planning of a movement.
So if you're going to make a movement based on what you're seeing or that you decide you
want to make a movement, these rostral areas are going to plan it.
And then they're going to project their axons to area four.
And area four is going to initiate the movement.
And on the way down to the spinal cord at the nodes, breaks in that myelosheath, that
main axon is going to send the information about what it's doing or what it intends to
move to other nuclei so it knows what's going on.
You also have indirect cortical spinal pathways that are maintaining appropriate background
tone, particularly in anti-gravity muscles.
And that's because I wouldn't be able to reach out and touch this podium if I didn't
have a certain amount of muscle tone in the muscle itself.
And so these indirect pathways are going to control that.
And they course together in the brain.
If you lose these pathways, the direct and indirect cortical spinal pathways, then you're
unable to make a movement, you're paralyzed.
Then you have an extra pyramidal system, which is very important, because it's going to play
a role in these motor programs and lots of other things.
Now when you try to think about what it's doing, you remember two things.
When there's constantly going to be interconnections between these nuclei and they're not going
to project to the spinal cord, they're going to try to influence the direct and indirect
cortical spinal pathways.
And they're the only ones that actually will project to the spinal cord.
And so there's these complicated feedback loops that are important.
When we think about clinical disorders of these extra pyramidal systems or these extra
pyramidal nuclei, it gets very complicated because there's a lot of them and they're interconnected.
But let me just give you an idea of how devastating a disorder that can occur if you have one
nucleus removed from this complicated circuit.
That subthalamic nucleus I showed you, which is a small nucleus beneath the thalamus, if
you have a unilateral lesion of that nucleus on one side, and this most commonly occurs
from strokes, you end up with a disease which is a terrible disease called hemebalismus.
And this means that you have flinging ballistic movements of your limbs.
And these individuals end up dying because they constantly break their arms.
They can't walk down a hallway without their limbs flinging out involuntary motor movements
from a lesion in a single nucleus in this complicated circuit.
So everything about movement is thrown off because all of these things are complexly
interconnected.
The person can no longer control it.
Another disorder up in the telencephalic nuclei that codate imputamen, those nuclei that are
basal ganglia system.
There's a genetic disorder called Huntington's Chorea, and at one time in the United States
every single case of Huntington's Chorea could be traced to two brothers who came from England.
It's a genetic disorder, a dominantly transmitted disorder, and people don't normally show any
signs of symptoms until they're about 40 years old, which means they've generally already
had children.
And what happens in Huntington's Chorea is the codate imputamen lose a single type of
neuron.
Now we're down to the neuron level.
One single type of neuron is lost in the codate imputamen, and these individuals start
having abnormal writhing movements of their body which they cannot control.
They aren't able to sleep, they aren't able to do anything because of these movements,
and the disorder results ultimately in death because of this.
And so you see that you can remove a single type of neuron in one or more of these nuclei
and have devastating disorders.
So what we would like to do in the next lecture is to look at this third system, the cerebellum,
which is involved in the coordination of motor movement and see how it plays a role in allowing
us to make these fine motor movements that human beings are capable of.
Thank you.
