Hello, and welcome back again to our course on the brain.
Here we're going to begin the third segment of our course where we're going to discuss
a number of higher order cognitive functions like the subject for our lecture today, language.
Our goal in this lecture will be to review the evidence that very specific areas of the
brain are going to play a role in both spoken and written language.
Now language involves higher order sensory areas and higher order motor areas, and that
should make sense to you.
For example, auditory areas are involved in the ability to interpret spoken language
as meaningful, so this is going to be the function of a higher order sensory area.
Motor areas are going to be involved in the ability to produce the specific combination
of sounds that compose a given language, and which are meaningful to any native speaker.
So this means by definition that higher order sensory and motor areas are going to be involved.
We don't just make sound, and we don't just listen to noise.
Language involves communication between one person and another.
Now our species appears to be unique in our ability to communicate symbolically through
language.
Other animals may communicate in very subtle ways, but we're the only species that actually
communicate symbolically.
Language is believed to be instinctual in our species, an instinct.
And what are some of the reasons why neurobiologists and linguists believe this?
Well, skeletal specializations have been identified in our earliest hominid ancestors that allow
for speech.
This suggests that language arose at the dawn of our evolution.
Also, while an individual language of course is learned, the ability to recognize the individual
sounds which we call phonames in any language is present in humans at birth.
So any baby at birth can hear all of the sounds that are made in any language spoken on the
planet Earth.
But the reason you speak Japanese if you're born in Japan is because you're exposed to
a subset of sounds that make up the Japanese language.
If you speak English, you're subjected to those sounds.
So an individual language is learned, but human infants have the ability to hear, to
make the distinction between phonemic sounds in all languages.
Lastly, the left hemisphere shows specialization in the language areas we're going to talk
about before birth.
So we believe that all of these things indicate that language is instinctual in our species.
Now language is composed of a number of different elements.
One of the things I find fascinating is that there are approximately 6,000 distinct individual
languages spoken on the planet Earth.
What I find even more amazing is about 1,000 of these languages are spoken in New Guinea.
These are independent, separate languages.
These are all the languages spoken on Earth, 1,000 of them in New Guinea.
Now each language consists of different phonemic sounds or individual sounds.
And so English, for example, consists of about 50 distinct phonemes or phonemic sounds.
For example, ba and ka.
So these are not letters, they're sounds, ba and ka.
So you think about words like bat, cat, and notice that those initial consonant sounds
convey the difference between those two words.
And that's very important.
That one sound conveys the difference between two animals, very, very different.
Now do you remember when we discussed that in the auditory system that as you age we
lose the ability to hear higher frequency sounds?
Well that's unfortunate because what we fail to be able to hear as we get older are specifically
the consonant sounds.
And so that's why as we get older we have trouble understanding the words and songs
and music and when we listen to the television set because we're not hearing the phonemic
sounds that begin a word that give us the clues to what the word means.
So this is most unfortunate.
Now morphemes are the simplest arrangement of phonemes into a meaningful group.
So for example, a syllable is a morpheme.
And simple words in a language are different and distinguished from each other by phonemes
and morphemes.
And they convey different meanings.
And it's meaning that matters to us.
That's what language is about, is about conveying meaning.
Now words in turn make up sentences.
And sentences are nothing more than temporal strings of words that have meaning.
But the meaning in this case isn't just due to the individual words, but meaning is also
conveyed by grammar and syntax.
So for example, all languages, each individual language has a specific word order.
So they have a place in the sentence where the subject, the verb, and the object will
go.
In English that's how it is, it's subject, verb, and object.
The order of the words in an English sentence conveys meaning.
So for example, in English, the boy looked at the girl.
The girl looked at the boy, mean two different things.
And all the words are the same, just the order has been changed.
And each individual language has its own word order.
Language areas are found in the left cerebral hemisphere.
We've talked about this before, that the left hemisphere is dominant and the left hemisphere
is generally dominant whether you're right-handed or left-handed.
So we normally call it just the dominant hemisphere, but that is almost always the left hemisphere.
These language areas play a critical role in our ability to speak and to understand
language.
There were two physicians, Paul Broca and Carl Vernike, who were among the very first
to describe patients.
They had specific disorders of language.
And these types of disorders that refer to language are called aphasias.
And this definition you now see on the screen is very critical.
Anaphasia is an acquired disorder of language.
It means that the individual could speak and understand language perfectly fine and then
had a stroke or some other kind of damage and now has some kind of problem related to
language.
And this distinguishes it from something like dyslexia and other types of disorders.
So aphasia is specifically an acquired disorder of language.
And it needs to be contrasted with something else because it's easy to get these confused,
a very important distinction.
Aphasia is a disorder of language.
It is not about articulation.
So an individual might have difficulty articulating words because they had an injury to their
face, because they have trouble moving their tongue a particular way.
They might have some other kind of neurological problem that makes it difficult for them to
articulate words.
But that's not what we're talking about.
Aphasia is a disorder of the higher order function of language.
It means specifically being able to understand your native language and to be able to speak
it normally.
So it is a higher order function that is lost.
So let's begin with one of the aphasias that was named after Paul Broca.
Aphasia is a motor aphasia or called an expressive aphasia.
And it is due to damage specifically within areas 44 and 45 in the frontal lobe in the
inferior frontal gyrus.
If we looked back at a drawing of the brain, this is the left hemisphere, Broca's aphasia
results from damage right here to the area which bears his name, Broca's area, Brogman's
areas 44 and 45.
An individual who has Broca's aphasia is very hesitant about speaking.
It is language they can't speak.
It's not really a problem related to understanding.
It's not a problem in articulation.
They have trouble speaking language.
So they're very hesitant and certain parts of speech are missing.
And so if they want to go to the store or something, they might say, go store.
And it's very hard for them to communicate with language.
Something seems to be wrong in the motor aspect of being able to speak language.
And over time, individuals with these disorders that involves Broca's aphasia become mute.
So the individual basically stops speaking.
They no longer are able to communicate in spoken language.
Now let's contrast that with the other type of aphasia, which is named after the other
physician, Carl Vernike.
Vernike's aphasia is a sensory or a receptive aphasia.
And the disorder is due specifically to lesions that are found in damage to area 22 of the
temporal lobe.
So let's look at where that is at.
And here is Vernike's area, right here, Brogman's area 22.
Now one of the things I want you to notice, Broca's aphasia is a motor aphasia.
It's an expressive aphasia.
Notice it's in the frontal lobe, which is where all those motor areas are located, right?
So you can remember it that way.
What is down here?
What primary area is down here in the temporal lobe?
The auditory area.
And Vernike's aphasia is specifically aphasia, a receptive aphasia, in that an individual
now can't understand language.
So this individual can speak perfectly fine, but they no longer understand what other people
say to them.
It's a very interesting kind of thing.
Broca's patients can understand what's said to them, but they can't speak language.
The Vernike's patient talks nonstop, but nothing they say makes any sense.
It's almost as though when the words come out of their mouth, they can't understand
language, so what goes into their own ear doesn't make any sense either.
So for example, in a physician's office, if an individual had a stroke involving this
area, Vernike's area, you might ask the individual something like, do you know why you've been
brought into the hospital today?
And the individual might say, the sky is blue and the dog had a pink collar on.
And furthermore, there's a candy store down at the end of the, and they talk nonstop,
but it doesn't make any sense, and it has nothing to do with what you said to them.
You can imagine the difficulty in being a family member and the dynamics of the family
and how it changes with people who have these kinds of aphasias.
Now obviously, in normal individuals, we hear language spoken to us, and Vernike's area
is connected to Broca's area, and that should make sense to you.
Obviously if someone says, well, do you know why you're brought into the hospital?
If you make an appropriate response, it means you understood what was said to you.
So the areas are connected, and there's a different type of aphasia that occurs at that
connection between the two areas is lost.
So there are many different kinds of aphasias.
One of the things I would like you, as my students to notice here, is that do you remember
that most of the lateral aspect of the hemisphere was supplied by a single artery, and that's
the middle cerebral artery?
So it turns out that individuals who have strokes that involve major branches to this
lateral aspect of the cortex in the middle cerebral artery can have both Broca's and
Vernike's aphasia, which mean they can no longer speak language and they can no longer
understand language, and this can be utterly devastating for the person and their family.
Now we mentioned previously that one of the shattered sort of paradigms in neuroscience
was that language is exclusively a left or dominant hemisphere function.
So yes indeed, Broca's area and Vernike's area are indeed found in the left or dominant
hemisphere, but you know what we sort of wondered is what is Broca's area in the right hemisphere
doing or what is Vernike's area in the right hemisphere doing?
And what we have discovered is that even though the left hemisphere is dominant for language,
the right hemisphere in fact plays a very critical role in language.
What is the main function of language?
The main function is communication.
So what does the right hemisphere do?
Well the right hemisphere is predominantly involved in prosody.
Prosody is intonation and the sing-songy nature of a language, and each language has a sing-songy
nature to it.
When you hear someone speak French, you hear someone speak Italian, you hear someone speak
English.
There's different kinds of lilting intonation and rhythm to the languages that are spoken
by a normal speaking person of that language.
So prosody is very important.
It's also one of the ways we convey meaning.
Jeanette, sit down.
Jeanette, sit down.
We convey meaning by in a emotive way when we use different kinds of rhythm and influx
in our voice.
So it is also one of the ways that we communicate.
Now interestingly, lesions in the non-dominant hemisphere, non-dominant hemisphere that would
be broke as area in the dominant hemisphere speak in flat tones so the individual doesn't
have the sing-songy and doesn't inflect.
The person who has the comparable area that would be Bernicke's area but in the right
hemisphere doesn't understand the emotive communication that takes place when other
people speak to them.
So when someone else speaks to them with that emphasis or with some kind of inflection or
in a particular way, the person doesn't understand that emotive element.
So in fact, our right hemisphere, our non-dominant hemisphere plays a very critical role in communication
and that's what language is really about.
Now another paradigm that has been sort of shattered in modern neuroscience relates to
people who sign and this is kind of interesting.
I once offered a course to teach medical students how to sign to patients who are deaf
and people have a misconception and neurobiologists had a misconception for a long time and that
was it's been known for ages that the left hemisphere appears to be dominant for language
and for analytical ability.
So people who are physicists tend to be very left hemisphere dominant.
Also the right hemisphere was thought to be more involved in things like spatial properties
and so the hemispheres were seen in that particular way.
So the conclusion was reached that individuals who use sign language, which means they use
space in front of them and move their hands, that signing had to be a right hemisphere function.
Well it turns out that's not so.
Language is language and the brain doesn't care what medium you use to communicate or
to use language, it's a left hemisphere dominant function and in people who have never spoken
and he used sign language, used the same brokers in Verneke's area that individuals who speak
language.
So what happens in these individuals?
If a person who is a signer has the brokers area compromised then that individual is halting
in their signing just like the person who has brokers is halting.
If they have a receptive aphasia on the other hand, Verneke's area is involved then they
can no longer understand the signs that someone else is making to them.
So in our species the left hemisphere appears to be specifically designed to use language,
to do what's necessary to allow us to communicate.
Now up to this point we've been focusing primarily on spoken language, but we of course do have
another type of communication and that's written language.
Now unlike spoken language, written language is an invention, not an instinct, it's an
invention.
We have a number of different areas however that have been implicated in written language
and this is very important, but before we get to those areas I want to point something
out to you because I think this is very, very important.
Written languages rely on pictures to represent words or we have alphabets, that's what
we use now, but every neurologically normal person on the face of this planet learns how
to speak language, but not every person on the face of this planet will ever learn how
to read or write and in fact if you looked at our planet as a whole you would see their
far more individuals who do not read and write, but every single neurologically normal kid
will learn how to speak language.
Language is an instinct, spoken language is an instinct, or if their parents sign to them
whatever language they use that will be an instinct.
Written language is an invention, but there are also some other differences which I think
are very important.
What we've learned is that in spoken language the left hemisphere is actually designed to
abstract the set of sounds that are being spoken in that particular language.
So in spoken language while the baby's brain can understand the phonemic sounds found in
any language, the language they're exposed to the brain abstracts that particular set
of phonemic sounds, the 50 phonemic sounds of English for example.
Now individual sounds make up the language, so this is a part of the process of the brain
doing what it's supposed to.
The baby's brain also abstracts the rules of the language, so the word order for example.
So the baby's brain is designed to do this, vertical keys and broken areas are designed
to do what they do, and it's the abstracting of the rules that makes this an instinct.
By simply hearing the sounds, or by simply seeing your parents sign over your crib,
your brain is abstracting what these sounds mean, and more importantly for any course
in neuroscience, the brain is capable of mapping that sound to meaning, and that's what language
is about, and that's what the left hemisphere appears to be specifically designed to do.
Now let's think about written language though, that isn't what happens in written language,
you have to be taught to read and write.
There's no abstracting the general rules by your brain, you actually have to be taught
to read and write.
So what areas of the brain have we discovered play a role in the ability to read and write?
Well it turns out that there are two areas that are found in the parietal lobe in the
dominant hemisphere, right here, these are areas 39 and 40 in the parietal lobe, if you
have damage to these areas they result in an acquired illiteracy, so it means a person
who could formally read and write has a stroke that involves that area and suddenly they
can no longer read or write, notice again they're also supplied by the middle cerebral
artery, so massive middle cerebral artery strokes devastate the person's ability to
have language.
Now finally, language in humans is not just about communication, language actually helps
us organize sensory experience and this is something that's of great interest to neural
linguists who are very interested in these issues.
Most obviously we categorize objects in our world by words and once that meaning is mapped
to that word, you can't ever look at something and not see a table or not see a chair or
not see a woman or a cat, you can no longer do this, the word has been mapped to meaning
in your brain and short of neurological disease, you can't lose the ability, so this is part
of what the brain is designed to do, so for example, when a child is very little, almost
any small four-legged beast is a kitty or a doggie and then as the child acquires language
and the brain starts to map meaning to the words, now all of a sudden a doggie is a doggie
and a kitty is a kitty, just try describing what the real difference is that what your
brain is picking up, suddenly the child can pick up the difference between the two types
of animals and never again will they confuse a dog for a cat, never again of course unless
you have a brain lesion, there are actually people who have specific brain lesions who
lose the ability to differentiate between a dog and a cat, there are people who cannot
tell the difference between two different kinds of vegetables, they can't put the appropriate
word with the object, can't differentiate between different types of flowers, in addition
and this is sort of beyond the scope of this course, but people can lose very specific
parts of speech, so for example, when I was a student I saw an individual presented to
a class I was in who had lost the ability to speak, to read, or to write nouns, and I
only nouns, so instead of saying the sky is blue, he would say does blue, no break, nothing,
nouns were just gone and there are other parts of speech people can lose, there is nothing,
there is no ability you have that can't be lost with the right brain lesion and that's
the point basically of the whole course, but it's very important to point that out, you
can actually lose parts of speech, notice also that thought has a lot to do with words,
so if we're silent and we start thinking about something, notice in fact that it's words
that are coming to mind, think I want to go to the store and suddenly or I want to move
over to the brain model and suddenly I move over and I touch my brain model, so internal
thought has a lot to do with language, now the role of the brain obviously in both written
and spoken language is considerably more complex than what we have time to cover here, one
of the things we're learning is that there are habitual ways we learn how to speak, so
people say uh-huh, uh-huh and there are people who have different kinds of patterns or habits,
well it turns out it looks like the extra primal motor system takes over there and so
without even thinking these language areas don't even need to be called into play anymore
because the individual just responds habitually a certain way to something and remember those
motor programs and the extra primal motor system, so people who have lesions in the extra primal
motor system often lose habitual ways of speaking and interacting with other people by language
which is very, very interesting, now one of the last areas which is of great interest
to neurobiology and also to interest of people that are interested in neuro-linguistics will
be people who are bilinguals or people who speak more than one language, so how the brain
acquires the first, second, third languages whatever, the how you acquire these languages
seems to be dependent on age, so in normal individuals we acquire our first language
when we're babies obviously, this is when our brain is designed to do this and it's
working overtime to do so, now if very early in development you're exposed to other languages
and I actually have a marvelous example for you, there was a secretary in one of the departments
at Vanderbilt who was Danish, she had a little girl and she never spoke anything to the child
but Danish, her husband was French and he never spoke any words to the child except French
and everyone else in the world that she lived in spoke English to her, well initially when
she was very little, you know she's two years old and she's starting to babble, okay, she's
getting all the languages mixed up and she's got a word for this and she can't think of
another word for that but she talks nonstop, you know because she's two years old, well
then a miracle happened, somewhere about the age of four suddenly if she was speaking
to her mother she spoke only Danish, she was speaking to her father only French, speaking
to other people, the babysitter only English, suddenly her brain had separated these languages,
Broca's and Verneke's are capable of hearing the sounds in any language, capable of abstracting
the rules of any language and when you're young we really don't know how many languages
a person could potentially learn but what happens is that as we age something occurs
in the brain and this occurs after puberty and we'll talk a little bit about some changes
that take place in puberty but what happens is that as you age you lose the ability to
have these areas abstract the rules, now you have to study language, now you have to
bring your hippocampus and memory into play, now you have to read the word and notice what
you do when you learn a second language as an adult, you look at the word and they tell
you that hello is hola in Spanish and what do you think, oh hola means hello, no hola
means hola, to a child they don't translate it into some other language to understand
what it means, it just becomes mapped to meaning in their brain, so how we learn second languages
is different and also something happens around puberty, an interesting sideline that has
happened which is just really fascinating is there was an evolution of a new language
and by the way little children who are signers when they're about two they use their hands
and they just babble just like little kids who speak language, I mean it's fascinating
but before 1979 in Nicaragua there were children who were deaf who didn't understand spoken
language, they were deaf and these children I believe were orphans and they were all brought
together and there were about 500 of them from different areas of Nicaragua and these were
young children, these children initially could not communicate with each other and what happened
over time is they developed a full blown brand new sign language that had never been seen
on the planet earth and it had syntax, it had order, it had meaning, so language this
incredibly unique capability that we alone as humans have helps us communicate with others
organize our sensory experience, we can communicate to other people our feelings, we can try anyway
this is just an incredible capability that we have and short of brain damage you will
always be able to communicate in this fashion with other people so it's just an incredibly
wonderful capability that we have, thank you.
