Hello, and welcome back again.
Up to this point for the last few lectures, we've been talking about this huge mega system,
this limbic system, that's responsible for our engagement with the world, and the subsystems
that are part of this larger system are involved in learning, memory, emotion, executive function.
We ended the last lecture by saying that if you throw off any of the balance between all
these different nuclei, all these different pathways, if you throw it off either by damage
to a nucleus or by having something go awry in the connections between the nuclei or from
reticular formation that you have changes in mood, you have changes in personality.
So this time, what I would like to do is to use depression, which is a fairly common
clinical disorder, as an example of this.
Depression is, in fact, very common.
It can be very, very broadly categorized into two main groups, and depression is a very
complex disorder, but we're trying to simplify it here.
So the two very broad categories would be reactive depression, which is a normal response
of the brain to loss.
Now it doesn't mean that reactive depression isn't profound.
There really can be grief-stricken, and we are social animals.
We bond, and when we lose people, for example, that we love, who we love, then you could
have a profound reactive depression.
In addition, human beings are somewhat unusual in that we also have strong bonds with ideas
and things, and sometimes the loss of trust, for example, can devastate people.
Reactive depression can be very profound, so I'm not denigrating it, but it's a normal
response of the brain to loss.
Clinical depression is something very different.
Clinical depression, which is referred to now as unipolar depression, is a medical condition.
It's a neurological disorder resulting from an imbalance of neurotransmitters in the limbic
system.
So similar mechanisms may underlie both.
The internal subjective state, which occurs, can be similar in both, but one is a normal
response to loss, and one is a clinical disorder.
So in reactive depression, you see something very clear.
In reactive depression, the person may have a very strong emotional response to the loss,
but over time, the individual will go through stages, very similar to the stages that were
described in Dying Individuals by Kubler-Ross.
People will go through stages, and they will slowly come out of this reactive depression.
And in fact, studies have shown that as people come out of this depression, the reactive depression,
they start to reinvest in life.
They start to laugh again.
Life starts to have meaning again.
Something else that's been discovered is that the person has a general return to their
general temperament.
So temperament is a very real part of how each of us has our limbic system wired.
Some event occurs, it can throw things off for a while, but actually we generally recover,
and we recover who we are.
Clinical depression is very, very different.
Again, it's a neurological condition, and there is no identifiable stimulus.
It isn't caused as a reaction to something.
It's not the way the brain's normally wired to respond.
It's a clinical condition.
Now it can be triggered, and in fact, reactive depression can sometimes trigger clinical
depression.
So an individual who actually has a tendency towards clinical or unipolar depression can
have something happen in their life that then will result in a full-blown, being able to
see a full-blown clinical or unipolar depression.
It's also extremely important to stress that clinical depression is not just feeling sad.
It isn't just that the person kind of feels a little melancholy.
It's a profound despair and hopelessness, and it is often characterized by self-loathing.
It's a mood disorder.
People have suicidal ideation.
Individuals talk about how life is worthless.
It's a profound blackness that descends on an individual.
One of my very favorite writers is William Styron, and he wrote Darkness Visible, a tiny
little book.
It's just a gem, and he talks about his own spiral into unipolar clinical depression.
I just want to read just a few words from this little gem of a book.
He describes depression, a sense that my thought processes were being engulfed by a toxic and
unnameable tide that obliterated any enjoyable response to the living world.
This is a writer trying to describe for us what this is about.
He went through periods where he was so depressed that he contemplated suicide, and this is
very typical of people of unipolar depression.
He had something else which is common, and that is that he had a variation in when these
depressive episodes would descend on him, and his came in the afternoons, and he came
to appreciate that in the afternoon he was going to start spiraling downward into this
despair.
He talks about the difference was now, in his understanding, was in the sure understanding
that tomorrow, when the pain descended once more, or the tomorrow after that, certainly
on some not too distant tomorrow, I would be forced to judge that life was not worth
living, and thereby answer, for myself at least, the fundamental question of all philosophy.
He battled with suicidal ideation the entire time until he was hospitalized and actually
treated, and one of the most moving and poignant things he had to say said, death, as I have
said, was now a daily presence blowing over me in cold gusts of wind.
And so, this just gives you an idea.
Clinical depression is not just feeling sad, it's an anguish, it's akin to physical pain,
and it's a despair, it's an abyss.
And we see clinical depression associated with other illnesses as well, psychiatrically.
For example, manic depression.
Manic depression is now called bipolar, but I like manic depression because it describes
what the state is like.
It's basically cycles of debilitating depression that alternate with periods of absolute exhilaration.
And so the person just cycles from one to the other, and absolutely a debilitating disorder.
Now here for this lecture, I want to just use the term depression in a very general
sense, because we really can't talk about the subcategories.
We now believe that depression is a very complex disorder, probably caused from a wide variety
of etiologies, but here we just want to keep our discussion very straightforward.
And we want to have an understanding that it's very likely that most types of depression
have very common elements involved that are going to relate to the limbic system structures
that I'm going to talk about.
So what neurotransmitters have been implicated?
The neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that are primarily implicated in depression
are going to include the biogenic amines, which we also call the monoamines.
So the monoamines, as you remember, are the catecholamines, dopamine and norepinephrine,
and also the endolamine, serotonin or 5HT.
And we'll see that depression is largely going to be a disorder that involves norepinephrine
and serotonin, but it actually involves all of the monoamines.
These neurotransmitters modulate our emotional response to the world.
So they modulate how we feel, modulate our mood.
And so these are the neurotransmitters that are specifically involved.
We know this in part because increasing the levels of the monoamines increases feelings
of well-being.
Now this is within a certain limit, of course.
But in general, in anyone, even a person who doesn't have any kind of depression or disorder,
if you increase the levels of monoamines, you feel good.
That's one of the reasons why people eat chocolate.
It's one of the reasons why people engage in social interaction.
It's one of the reasons why people do a lot of things.
It increases the monoamines and thereby makes you feel good.
And so these molecules are used normally in limbic system structures.
Now the so-called antidepressants, and I use the term so-called antidepressants.
I'll call them antidepressant drugs, but I want to qualify it first.
We say so-called because drugs aren't antidepressants.
Drugs have a certain mechanism of action, and it just so happens that certain class
of drugs that have a certain mechanism of action antidepress people.
So we call them antidepressants.
But it's sort of like referring to cones that absorb short wavelength light as blue
cones.
They're not blue cones.
They absorb short wavelength light.
So here the drug isn't an antidepressant.
The drug has a mechanism of action, but that mechanism of action may result in an antidepressed
subjective state for the individual that the drug is given to.
Now antidepressant drugs facilitate synaptic transmission in monoaminergic pathways.
And so here we have, if you increase the level of monoamines, you increase feelings of well-being.
The drugs, the so-called antidepressant drugs, facilitate synaptic transmission in these
monoaminergic pathways.
That finding led to a particular hypothesis, and that hypothesis is called the biogenic
amine theory of depression.
And it simply states that depression, and we're talking here depression in general,
the new polar depression, results from a functional deficiency of monoamines within
specific pathways or nuclei or structures within the limbic system.
So this is the biogenic amine theory of depression.
You'll see this written about in many books, anywhere where depression is discussed.
Now before we talk about the different classes of drugs that are used to treat depression
and what they do, why don't we look back at the synapse and just think of a few of
the ways that a drug could facilitate transmission.
So remember, the antidepressants work by facilitating transmission at synapses that use particular
neurotransmitters or neuromodulators.
So let's just think in general how a drug might do that.
Well for example, a drug might somehow bind here and facilitate the release of the neurotransmitter,
which is found in these little vesicles presynaptically.
So the drug might be able to bind in such a way that caused more synaptic vesicles to
bind with the presynaptic membrane.
Another way you could facilitate transmission in a system would be to block reuptake.
So you remember that we have our action potential come down, causes calcium influx, the synaptic
vesicles to bind, and the neurotransmitter to be released.
The minute it's released, there are mechanisms then that want to stop that action because
we don't want seizures, we don't want non-specific action.
So what we have is we have reuptake.
That's one of the mechanisms anyway.
So we have reuptake, so the molecules which are released, some interact with the receptor,
some are taken back up.
If we wanted to facilitate this kind of transmission at this synapse, we could block reuptake.
So maybe we could take a drug that would specifically bind with a little transporter, just a molecule
in the membrane here, bind with that transporter and keep that molecule from being taken back
up.
Leave it all out there in the cleft to continue to stimulate those postsynaptic receptors.
So that would facilitate transmission.
Another thing you could do is remember that one of the ways neurotransmitters can be degraded
is that either in the cleft or somewhere else in the pathway, you could have enzymes
that break down the neurotransmitter, thereby halting its action.
Well, we could design a drug that would prevent that breakdown from taking place, and that
would keep molecules out there.
That would facilitate the transmission because it would keep the molecules still doing their
thing postsynaptically.
And in fact, this is how the drugs that are designed to anti-depress and those that have
been found that have that action actually work by one of those mechanisms.
So let's look at some of these antidepressant drugs.
They basically come in three very broad categories.
The first category called the tricyclic antidepressant, and that only has to do with the structure
of the molecule.
That's not important, but they're called tricyclics.
Mipramine, dezipramine are in this class of antidepressants.
The tricyclics are still used, and they were used up into the modern time when designer
antidepressants like Prozac were introduced, but some individuals still do take the tricyclic
antidepressants.
The other category are the monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
So we'll talk about those in a minute, but it's another broad class of molecules that
have the effect of antidepressing someone.
And last of all, the designer antidepressants that are so very popular now.
So let's start with each one of these classes and talk about it a little bit.
Tricyclic antidepressants are very efficacious for the treatment of unipolar depression in
some individuals.
And I always have to qualify that.
Basically the tricyclics inhibit the reuptake of all the monoamines.
So they inhibit reuptake.
That's their mechanism of action.
And when they inhibit reuptake, that allows more of the molecule to be out there in the
synapse.
And that effect, note, when you increase levels of monoamines, you increase feelings
well-being.
So when individuals who have something wrong with the amount of neurotransmitter that's
released or whatever, this will facilitate and the person subjectively experiences an
antidepressant effect.
One of the problems with the tricyclics is that they can have what's called a paradoxical
effect.
This can be very serious.
Let's imagine that two of you as my students come and say that you're depressed.
Well, maybe it means the same thing, maybe it doesn't.
Maybe what's wrong in one individual is different from what's wrong in another individual.
If you're prescribed a tricyclic antidepressant, one individual, it may antidepress them so
they may feel better.
The other individual may go the other direction.
That's why we say that it can have a paradoxical effect.
So an individual who reports that they're depressed can take one of the tricyclics like
imipramine and become almost suicidally depressed.
And so you can actually increase suicide in individuals that you're treating for depression
by using these drugs.
Now we don't understand why some people have this effect or the drug has this effect on
certain individuals, but I'll get to later in this lecture talk a little bit about what
we think is going on.
So tricyclics cannot be used to treat reactive depression.
Tricyclics are notoriously ineffective at treating people who've had terrible losses in their
lives and are very depressed and seek some kind of help for that.
Now the next class of drugs that we want to talk about are the MAOI inhibitors.
These are monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
Monoamine oxidase is simply an enzyme that breaks down the monoamines.
So if you give an inhibitor for that, then you prevent the monoamine from being broken
down.
And if you prevent it from being broken down, then more of the monoamines out there at the
synapse and it's elevating the mood.
Now unfortunately, in addition to the antidepressant activity that MAOIs have, they also alter
the metabolism of a dietary amino acid called tyramine.
And it turns out that if an individual eats foods that are very high in tyramine, like
cheese for example, processed cheese in particular, while taking MAO inhibitors, what happens
is that the individual has an increased risk of having a hypertensive crisis and a hemorrhagic
stroke.
And so there's a whole list of what we call proscribed foods that they should not eat while
they're taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
Notice sometimes on the back of boxes, the warning labels will say things like, do not
take this drug if you are currently taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor.
Most people don't even know what a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is and they certainly wouldn't
know that the drug they're taking was one.
The reason is because that medication may increase blood pressure and if the person
is also taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, it can reach levels at which people have hemorrhagic
strokes in the brain.
Now it should be fairly obvious why drug companies were willing to spend enormous amounts of
effort in R&D to design a drug that worked as an antidepressant that didn't have a paradoxical
effect and didn't have some of the negative side effects that the antidepressants that
were available have.
And so lo and behold, this is where the designer antidepressants come in.
They're called designer antidepressants because companies actually set out to specifically
design a drug that would act at specific monoaminergic synapses in the limbic system, thereby altering
or increasing the level of that specific monoamine, but also didn't have these negative side effects
or paradoxical effects.
And so the designer antidepressants are the ones primarily now that are used and are on
the market.
Now the of course most famous antidepressant which is a designer antidepressant is Prozac.
And Prozac was first released in 1987.
It took 30 years for biochemists to develop this drug.
It acts at primarily at serotonergic synapses and it blocks the reuptake of serotonin.
So for this reason Prozac and other drugs within the same class are called serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, the SSRIs.
So this is one big class of designer antidepressants.
They targeted serotonin because it was understood fairly early that most of the antidepressant
effect that these other types of drugs were having were working either on the serotonergic
system or on the system that used norepinephrine.
So these have sort of been the targets but the SSRIs are extremely effective in many
people at elevating mood and antidepressing the individuals.
So what nuclei use 5HT?
Well you probably don't remember this but we talked about it.
There are those little raffae nuclei, little tiny scattered groups of neurons in the reticular
formation that have widespread and massive projections to limbic system structures.
These are the neurons in the brain that utilize 5HT.
And so when there's something wrong, when serotonin isn't high enough in those projections
then people report that they feel depressed and it's been linked to specific genetic regulation
of this pathway that individuals report being depressed and the designer drugs work very
very well with them.
Now the response of individuals on Prozac is actually not 100% antidepressive.
Prozac for many people is transformational which means the individual has been terribly
depressed and just the spiral of despair and you give them Prozac and they feel really
good afterwards.
There's another class of individuals who report to their physician that they're depressed
and you give them Prozac and it doesn't do anything, you increase the dose, it still
doesn't do anything so you stop.
Prozac is an acting as an antidepressant in those individuals and it tells us that depression
is really a very complicated disorder.
It's not just a serotonergic pathway that isn't working right so we just need to replace
serotonin.
In different individuals the subjective state may be caused by an interaction of other systems
as well and is a complex disorder but in many people Prozac works well.
In a very very few individuals Prozac increases suicidal ideation so whenever anyone is placed
on any antidepressant they're always monitored to make sure that it's not having a negative
effect in that way.
Now all drugs have negative side effects though.
There isn't anything that's a drug that you put in your mouth that doesn't have a negative
side effect.
It doesn't matter whether it's aspirin.
So what are the side effects of Prozac?
Well in some individuals Prozac causes severe anxiety so the person was depressed now they
take Prozac and now they start suffering from like an anxiety which is just free floating.
They can't put their finger on what's causing them to feel anxious but they feel very anxious.
Prozac can also markedly decrease libido in both men and women and can negatively affect
sexual performance particularly in men.
Now if an individual is depressed and now they take a drug that antidepresses them that
makes them more likely to want to engage with other people or engage on a social or a sexual
or personal level.
Well now the person may be taking a drug that's going to interfere with their ability to interact
normally in those realms.
William Styron talked about a doctor telling him that the drugs he was given would influence
his sexual performance and he said he literally laughed at it.
He was so depressed he was desperately trying to save his life.
He really wasn't worried about sexual performance at that time but when people are antidepressed
it's natural that they would seek out interaction with others and so it is an important thing
to consider.
Panic is actually used to treat other disorders.
It's used to treat reactive depression and it works very well with it.
If you have a terrible loss in your life and you're really struggling with depression
and it's reactive you know exactly what's caused it and you're in a lot of pain.
Prozac can antidepress you if you need that help for that.
It's used for obsessive compulsive disorder which we'll talk a little bit more about later.
It's used in panic disorders, it's used in eating disorders, it's used in substance
abuse disorders.
So again the drug itself isn't an antidepressant.
The drug is working on a particular pathway and particular neurotransmitters and it can
be used to modify those pathways in a number of disorders in which those pathways are involved.
In some individuals, even though one of the side effects of prozac is anxiety, in some
individuals it actually helps people be less anxious.
So in certain individuals it can be given to people who are anxious and it actually helps
them.
It's used to try to control violence particularly in young men so it has an effect of decreasing
violent behavior.
It's also marketed under the name seraphim for the treatment of premenstrual dysphoric
disorder in females and so increasing serotonin levels helps women who suffer from this disorder.
Now because it's been on the market for a long time, we have a profile of the kind of
people that prozac really helps.
These tend to be people who have chronic depression, individuals who have obsessive compulsive
traits and individuals who show marked reactions to loss.
This is where the antidepressants like prozac work the best.
Now there are other antidepressants as well.
Some are not SSRIs, some are.
These drugs generally are prescribed a drug and the level of the drug is increased until
you have an antidepressant effect.
If you fail to have an antidepressant effect, another drug will be tried.
And if that doesn't work, there's a procedure for what are followed until you start to have
some kind of antidepressant effect.
Many drugs are available but I think the one thing that we've learned from depression
and learned from the treatment of it is that depression is a very complex disorder.
And when one individual reports to a physician or reports to anyone, I feel depressed.
They're attempting to describe an internal subjective state to another human being.
And this is not easy.
But what I mean by what I feel when I say that and what you mean when you say that can
be very different.
And the fact that these drugs are used to treat a wide variety of disorders and also
that the drugs have different effects in different people, sometimes antidepressing
them, sometimes not, also suggests that many different pathways in the limbic system can
be involved in any given individual.
So every individual needs to be treated as such when they're treated for this disorder.
Great deal of research is oriented towards understanding depression because it's very
common in our society.
Some of the newest findings are that individuals who are suicidally depressed and actually
commit suicide actually have lesions in certain areas, structural lesions in areas of their
limbic system that individuals who are severely depressed but do not commit suicide do not
have.
So we are really trying to understand what sends people into the spiral and might even
send them into an episode from which they do not ever return.
Thank you.
