If we had to characterize some special qualities about human beings, we might include in that
list our tremendous ability to learn, to be influenced by experience, and certainly
that's true, and we're going to focus on that exact aspect of human existence in one
of our lectures in this course.
But another quality that characterizes humans is our enormous range of emotional response.
So our emotions help engage us in the world, and our emotions are like color is for vision.
Remember I said that we could differentiate up to 6 million hues of color?
Well, our emotional life is like this vibrantly rich palette of internal subjective experience.
We have this incredible range of emotions that we're capable of feeling, and it's our
limbic system that allows that to occur.
In our last lecture we looked at depression, where you might think of it as very black,
the blackness of despair and hopelessness.
But in addition to the depths of depression, we're also capable of the most intense joy
and an exuberance of life, and so much so that great thinkers like Sigmund Freud thought
that there was actually a life instinct or a pleasure instinct in human beings.
We had this ability to feel such joy in our lives.
And so we're very complex organisms.
Our limbic system is very complex, and it allows for this broad range of emotional interaction
with the world.
In this lecture, I want to talk with you about a subsystem of this mega limbic system.
And this subsystem is the system that's responsible for creating that internal positive or euphoric
feeling we have when we engage in pleasurable activities.
So whether that's reading a book, whether it's viewing a sunrise, whatever it is, maybe
taking a course, doing something that we enjoy, this is the system that is tapped into.
This system is also involved in very pleasurable feelings that are associated with the body,
even something as simple as thirst.
If you're very, very thirsty, remember how that water tastes when you take that first
swallow?
It just tastes marvelous.
And you just have this sense of joy that comes from that.
So there are a lot of different kinds of joy that we experience in our lives, and that's
one of the points of this lecture.
We have this broad palette again of emotions just like color, and what we want to talk
about now are the ones that are on the high end of that experience, the ones that we experience
is joy of life.
Now what neurotransmitters would be involved in this subsystem and our limbic system, this
subsystem that lets us appreciate the joy of life?
Well, it's the monoamines again.
So increasing the levels of monoamines increases feelings of well-being.
And that's part of what we're talking about.
If there's a continuum and we're talking about these feelings up on this end, then obviously
the monoamines are going to be involved in it, increased feelings of well-being.
We saw in the last lecture that at least in some individuals who report being depressed,
giving drugs which increase the level of monoamines or facilitate monoaminergic transmission
actually help people be less depressed.
These anti-depressant drugs, however, actually primarily target serotonin and norepinephrine.
We'll come back to why that's important.
But we know from just everyday observation and think about our own lives.
We seek out activities that bring us pleasure or some kind of reward.
And so what we want to talk about is the very subsystem in the limbic system that allows
that to happen and contributes to this sense of well-being.
These and other observations of just about normal life and about how anti-depressants
can help individuals who are depressed led us to believe that there, this internal subjective
sense of euphoria even, of a joy of life, had to have a biological substrate.
And we know that the cortex is involved ultimately and had to be because we have this internal
subjective sense of joy, of tapping into this joy of life.
And so we knew that that was so.
And this subsystem of the limbic system in general is referred to as the endogenous reward
system.
Endogenous meaning that it's a system that naturally occurs in the body and in this
case the brain that specifically is meant to be involved in helping the individual seek
out pleasurable activity, to engage outside of oneself, to again engage in the world.
And this is what our limbic system is about.
So this is a specific system that allows us to tap into the joy of life and is of great
interest to neuroscientists.
This system can be conceptualized as both neuroanatomical and biochemical.
And by now in the class you've already figured that that's true for any kind of function
that relates to the brain.
So in an anatomical sense, it's going to consist of a sort of subset of nuclei and pathways
in the limbic system.
And on a biochemical level it's going to involve particular neurotransmitters or neuromodulators.
So let's begin with identifying the nuclei of the limbic system that are specifically
involved in being part of this endogenous reward system.
Now a number of nuclei are involved, we're going to revisit some of this, but let's just
talk about where they're at and the major players in this endogenous reward system.
The first is the ventral tegmental area.
The ventral tegmental area is this tiny, tiny little group of neurons that are in the midbrain.
So if you remember, the midbrain is midway between the forebrain, which is rostral, and
the hindbrain, which is caudal.
So the midbrain is just a little strip of tissue in between the other two main divisions
of the brain.
And so the midbrain has little groups of nuclei, little tiny groups of nuclei, and the ventral
tegmental area is one of them.
You also remember that the midbrain is also called the mesencephalon.
So midbrain and mesencephalon mean the same thing.
This tiny little group of neurons that are in the mesencephalon, the VTA or ventral tegmental
area, are going to give rise to two major projections out.
One will be to limbic system structure.
So that's called the mesolimbic projection, and another one of the projections is going
to be to the cortex, which is called the mesocortical projection.
Here's our ventral tegmental area here, and it's going to have a major projection to a
mesolimbic system structure called the nucleus accumbens.
And it will also have a major projection to the cortex, and these are called mesocortical.
So this is mesolimbic, and the projection here is mesocortical.
And if you read any books that talk about the endogenous reward system, they will talk
about these two major types of projections.
So the ventral tegmental area, this tiny little area in the midbrain, which we will see later
utilizes dopamine as a neurotransmitter, basically has two major projections, to a limbic system
nucleus and to the cortex, specific areas of the cortex.
So the other anatomical sites that are important in this system will be the targets of the
ventral tegmental area.
So the first one is the nucleus accumbensepti, and the nucleus accumbensepti is the target
structure of that mesolimbic projection.
So it goes to the structure.
Now this is a drawing, or this is actually a vigorous section, showing where the nucleus
accumbens is located.
It's located right here in the brain.
This is a section in this plane through the brain.
These are the holes in the brain, our famous ventricles up here, and this structure was
called by early neuroanatomists, a septum.
So this nucleus, which looks like it's a continuation of that, was called the nucleus
accumbensepti.
The septum really separates the two parts of the ventricles and the two hemispheres.
But this nucleus is so large in human beings that you can actually see it on the vigorous
sections of the brain, so it's actually very large.
Note that the ventral tegmental area, which projects to it, is tiny.
But the target of this mesolimbic projection is a very large nucleus.
Now the nucleus accumbensepti is very important.
It turns out that every single case of drug addiction or any other type of addiction involves
that nucleus.
So nicotine addiction, cocaine addiction, when people become addicted to alcohol, and
we're also, newer studies show that gambling addiction, sexual addiction, pornography addiction,
other types of addiction involve this nucleus.
And this nucleus is critically involved in the system of reward.
And so it will be one of the nuclei that's involved in the seeking behavior of the person
going after that thing, which is bringing them pleasure.
And so it's critically involved in this behavior.
The last area, which is anatomical subdivision of this endogenous reward system, are to cortical
areas.
And the cortical areas that are involved are going to be predominantly this orbital frontal
area of the cortex again.
We'll come back to the significance of that, but remember this was the area of the brain
that Phineas Gage had that rod go through.
This was the primary area of the brain that was involved in him.
And we'll come back to the fact that this is one of the main areas that that ventral
tegmental area projects or uses that dopaminergic projection.
This would be the mesocortical projection.
So just to review a little bit, we have three main nuclei or areas.
The ventral tegmental area, which is located in the midbrain, which is also called the
mesencephalon.
These ventral tegmental neurons give rise to the mesolumbic, which is to the nucleus
that comes in septi, and the mesocortical, which is to prefrontal cortex.
Now let me add a little bit of information to this.
This projection of the cortex is not just random to the cortex.
It's to the orbital frontal cortex, but particularly in the left hemisphere.
This is a system involved in reward.
And you may not remember this, but back when we talked about stroke, I said that strokes
of the left hemisphere often lead to depression, and we weren't really sure why that happens.
Well, it turns out that stimulation of the left free frontal areas increases feelings
of well-being because the left prefrontal area in this orbital region is involved in
this endogenous reward system.
So it goes back to the idea that our hemispheres have many things that are just really involving
one hemisphere a little bit different than the other hemisphere, that there's a hemisphere
lateralization to some functions.
Now this is how the system is defined anatomically.
What about biochemically?
Well biochemically, the reward system, its major player neurotransmitter is going to
be dopamine.
So dopamine is one of the catecholamines, and it's also one of the monoamines.
So dopamine is the major player here.
It's involved in that ventral tegmental projection to both the nucleus accumbens and the cortical
projection, so that's a very, very essential one.
So this projection from the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens and also the
mesocortical to the orbital frontal cortex uses dopamine as a neurotransmitter.
And I'll bet that you can guess without remembering what was up on the screen what the other two
major chemical players are in the reward system.
Think about it, reward, feel good, yes, well it's going to be the opioids and the opioids
and the oxytocin.
And so these also overlap with the doberminergic projections.
And this is going to be very important when we come back to examining what happens in
individuals who take certain kinds of drugs or affect their brain in one way or another
that these systems will also be involved.
So it seems like a very simple system.
There are only a few nuclei and pathways that appear to be involved in this endogenous reward
system that allow us to tap into the joy of life, which seems like a big thing, and it's
also fairly simple on a biochemical level, but a very, very important one in human beings.
So what's the experimental or clinical evidence that led to a conclusion that these nuclei
and transmitters were involved in some kind of endogenous reward system?
And before I go on to that, there's our little lovebirds again and the oxytocin flowing.
So what is the evidence that activation of this system causes an internal subjective
sense of joy or an internal subjective sense of elation or feeling good or feeling a joy
of life?
What's the evidence for that?
Well, let's begin with the evidence from animal research.
This has a special significance for me.
There were areas when I first began in neuroscience.
Some of these areas had already been identified that could be stimulated in animals and could
produce feelings of intense pleasure, and I'll tell you how we made that conclusion
that that was true, but this is how I was taught to do brain surgery in animals.
I was taught to implant electrodes into their brain in these pleasure areas, and these animals
were then trained to press a bar in order to get electricity through these electrodes
to stimulate these areas of the brain.
And we could tell if I'd actually learned how to do the brain surgery because the animals
would then bar press to get that jolt of electricity.
If I was often my placement of the electrodes, the animals would not press the bar to get
the jolt of activation of the system.
So this has its own significance for me.
These are tiny areas in the rat brain, and so you have to learn very specifically about
how to target areas of the brain.
Now the thing that's critical here is that an animal who has electrodes in this area
of the brain, in the area around that what in humans is called the nucleus of common
septi, these animals will bar press and they will not eat, drink, and they will even refuse
sex to be able to have access to the bar to press the bar for self stimulation.
The animals will bar press to exhaustion, and there are films of animals totally exhausted
lying on their side with their little paws up on the bar just hitting it one more time,
completely exhausted, and the animals will starve to death if they are not forced to
eat and drink.
So this is how we interpret that there's something very positively rewarding about what's happening
when you stimulate these areas of the brain.
These areas of the brain are stimulated under natural conditions that involve eating and
drinking and sex, and also unnatural conditions like electrodes implanted in the brain.
And so they're activated in both cases.
Also if you lesion these areas in an animal, then the animal will not bar press to stimulation.
So you can block that stimulation effect by doing particular things in animals.
We believe that these areas of the brain are involved in the reinforcing aspects of pleasure.
So when things are pleasurable to us, we seek them out again, and part of it is because
we're motivated to do so because we have this underlying subsystem which is in fact designed
to do that.
The seeking behaviors involved, these are all things that allow us to go out, engage
in the world in such a way that it brings pleasure to us.
Now in animals, you also have certain drugs can hijack the system, it happens in humans
as well.
Drugs like cocaine artificially stimulate these very same pathways.
And so you have animals that will press a bar to get a hit of cocaine.
And just like the example of where they had electrodes implanted in the nucleus of comencepti,
these animals will refuse sex, food and water in order to get their hit of cocaine.
We actually have a mouse model where the animal is addicted to cocaine from the very first
hit.
And these animals are used to study drug addiction.
They're a genetically modified animal, and from the very first time that they get a hit
of cocaine, the animal is addicted.
And these are the areas of the brain that are involved.
Now in animals, we can't know what their internal subjective state is.
I mean, you know, they may be yelling, we, I don't know.
I mean, we don't know what their internal subjective state is.
What we do know is that individuals who are drug addicts, for example, individuals who
work cocaine addicts, talk about how they get this whole body euphoria, which is so
intense it's like nothing in normal experience.
They have this intense feeling of elation that occurs from taking the drug.
And so the very same areas of their brains light up.
And that tells us, in fact, that very similar mechanisms are being used in the two cases.
So whatever, you know, in human beings, we have an elaboration because we have many
other areas of cortex, but basically the same pathways are involved.
Another interesting finding in humans, however, and I think this is very interesting.
In humans imaging studies, where you can look at the activity of these areas of the brain
and under what conditions they light up, these areas are activated when we anticipate pleasure.
So in human beings, one of the reinforcing aspects and one of the motivating seeking aspects
of pleasure is the anticipation of it.
Now even more interesting, I think, is that the greatest activation of the areas in human
beings, the greatest activation occurs when anticipation is paired with a certain degree
of uncertainty.
So we're motivated to seek pleasure under conditions where, well, it might happen, it
might not happen.
But we're highly motivated because we get this intense jolt when it does occur.
But these are areas of the brain that are designed to basically anticipate pleasure
and to motivate us towards behaviors that may allow that to occur.
This is being studied very intensely in gamblers who have this uncertainty as to whether or
not they will win when they gamble.
And these areas of the brain are just light up like Christmas trees in them.
And so this is a very active area of research.
Now more importantly, in human beings we know that damage to this endogenous reward system
can actually abolish a person's ability to experience joy in life.
And we know that not just from Phineas Gage, we know that from other individuals, our clinical
examples, where individuals have damage to this area of the brain or they've damaged
it themselves through the use of certain kinds of drugs and they are no longer able to tap
into the normal joy of life.
And so this is an area that is of active interest to neuroscientists also because of the clinical
aspects of it.
So let's stand back a little bit from what we've been talking about in the last few lectures.
We have this huge system, this mega system, learning, memory, emotion, executive functions,
this huge mega system.
And within it we have subsystems.
And this reward system is one of those subsystems that allows us to engage in the world and
to engage in activities that promote pleasure for us.
A lot of neuroscientists have wondered about what the evolutionary pressures were for this.
But if you think about it, even seeking out a mate involves you have to do something, you
have to seek it out.
And we're very complex beings and so we're attracted to certain people, we are motivated
to do things.
So this is the system where we're motivated to seek out pleasure and this also contributes
to a joy of life.
Now dopamine is the major neurotransmitter here.
Dopamine was one of the monoamines.
Now you just heard in the last lecture that antidepressants are given to help people
who are depressed and it increases the level of the monoamines.
But I said a number of times that most of those drugs act on serotonin and norepinephrine.
Why is it that dopamine isn't a target?
Why is it that we don't give drugs to increase the level of dopamine to help people be antidepressed?
Just think about that for a minute.
All the monoamines are involved.
Increase levels, you increase feelings of well-being.
So why is it, I didn't talk about designer drugs that are designed specifically to go
after dopamine so that someone who's depressed can suddenly experience the joy of life?
Well the reason is because we learned very early on that increasing levels of dopamine
produces mania.
So it produces this almost artificial elation or high which can hardly be described just
like depression is a depth of an abyss which can hardly be described.
Individuals who have manic-depressive disorder again or what we refer to as bipolar disorder
talk about states of intense elation.
Essentially, the person is high during a manic phase.
Just like being stimulated by a drug like cocaine.
During this phase of intense high, that's exactly what they're experiencing.
There's even neuroscientists and psychiatrists who go as far as saying that individuals
who are bipolar become addicted to that high.
And this is one group of patients that are very difficult to manage because they're very
non-compliant with their meds.
And all of the medications that have been designed for bipolar disorder, for this manic-depression
cycling of way up and way down, all of the drugs that are designed to treat this devastating
disorder level people out to here.
And people who experience this disorder don't want to be leveled out.
They want to experience those highs because they say it's higher than anything you can
possibly imagine.
So they don't want to be leveled out.
They want to experience the mania.
They don't want to experience the depression.
They want to experience the mania, so they are very non-compliant.
Now, having said that, it's true that just in the course of normal behavior, our normal
lives, we are capable of having intense joy of life.
When we fall in love, there's your perfect example.
You fall in love and you're just high on it.
And these are the same areas which are stimulated.
But we now know that these are the areas that are stimulated when a person just does things
that they enjoy.
A person who enjoys learning all their life has these areas stimulated when they take
courses or they read good books.
I like to take photographs of sunrises and sunsets.
I have a deck off of one of the rooms of my house and I have a swing on that deck that
faces to where the sun sets on the river, which is in front of my house.
And I could sit up there and I see the sunset and all the colors.
And I'm just filled with this sense of connection to the universe.
That joy, that elation is a stimulation of the system.
And it doesn't, there's no denigration made here.
Just because there's a biochemical basis or an anatomical basis doesn't make love less
important to us.
And it doesn't make seeing a beautiful sunrise over the Andes and Machu Picchu any less of
a life enhancing experience.
So I have a quote by an individual, David Hume, a philosopher, lively passions commonly
attend a lively imagination.
This is a system that allows us to imagine or to anticipate pleasure.
So it's the system that kicks in that motivates us for seeking the things that bring joy.
And this is also the system, notice the oxytocin, notice these other chemicals that are involved.
It's also the system that motivates us towards having social interaction with other human
beings.
And for most people, making new friends, enjoying the people we love, this is something that
brings intense pleasure to our lives and certainly something which is very important.
I want to say in the context of this lecture and for the lecture before, I want to recommend
a number of books that I think are just wonderful.
If you have someone in your family who suffers from depression, William Styren's book, Darkness
Visible, is a wonderful way to try to gain an insight into what that experience is like
for them.
It can be very hard for people to understand what the depressed individual is experiencing
or going through.
Another person who has written some of the best books are just amazing.
I highly recommend, and you notice in this class, I haven't done this very often, I highly
recommend anything by Kay Jamison.
She's a psychiatrist who suffers from bipolar disorder and it is because of her incredible
insight into her own disorder and her ability to communicate to us what mania is like that
gives us insight into why people with bipolar are non-compliant with their meds.
She has also written a book and this was about just a couple of years ago.
She wrote a book on exuberance and I think this is marvelous.
We've spent our research dollars studying depression, that's for a good reason because
people take their own lives, people's lives are unhappy, but Kay points out in her book
a very important point.
We also need to understand scientifically we need to understand what causes some people
to have a joy of life.
We need to understand exuberance.
We need to know how these people are resilient, what it is about their brains that allow them
to be resilient to the normal tragedies that occur to every one of us.
How these people are capable of tapping into the joy of life no matter what.
And so we need equally to care about depression but also about exuberance.
Thank you.
