Or is it just one", she wrote.
In the previous lectures, we've been talking about the endogenous reward system, a subdivision
of this larger limbic system that's involved in reward.
I want to point out to you that in 2005 Discover Magazine listed the identification of this
endogenous reward system as one of the most important scientific discoveries in the last
25 years.
This is the system that allows us to tap into the joy of life and allows us to engage in
the world.
And because drug addiction is a major problem in our society, the identification of this
endogenous reward system has really contributed a great deal to our understanding of this.
So in the present lecture, I would like to highlight our current understanding about
how this endogenous reward system can actually be hijacked when you take a drug from the
external world, which we say is exogenous, when you take a drug like cocaine into your
body.
Before we start, however, I think it's important for me to make a sort of position statement.
Neuroscientists in general, why we may be socially conscious, don't really care whether
a drug is legal or illegal or whether it's prescription or over the counter.
We're not as interested in issues like that.
What we care about is what the mechanism of action of the drug is, which means how that
drug acts in the brain, at what sites does it act, and also what areas of the brain are
involved.
So we're not as interested on some level.
I could have chosen, for this talk, for example, I could have chosen any number of drugs that
you can buy over the counter in the store that are going to affect the endogenous reward
system.
Many prescription drugs have sort of psychoactive effects, and I could have chosen those for
this discussion.
I chose cocaine and marijuana because a comparison of these two gives us an idea about how mechanism
of action works and also how drugs differ and how their subjective internal state that
the person has related to the drug differs as to how the drug, the mechanism of action,
and also where in the brain it works.
Now it probably doesn't come as any surprise to you that any drug that has a sort of psychiatric
effect or a psychoactive effect or any influence on your subjective feelings operates on this
endogenous reward system.
It operates on the limbic system.
So such drugs that operate in this system can be physiologically or psychologically
and psychologically addicting.
So what this means is that the person seeks out the drug, and we separate physiological
addictions sometimes from psychological addiction, but we actually think very similar mechanisms
are involved.
There may be genetic factors that are involved in whether a person becomes physiologically
addicted to a particular drug, although some drugs are clearly more addicting than others,
or there's a higher probability that a person would become addicted.
So for example, cocaine is a very highly addicting drug.
I've mentioned before we have animal models in which animals are addicted to cocaine from
the very first hit, and so it's a powerfully addicting drug.
Other times individuals can become dependent on the drug use because it alters them in
a way that they find pleasing or whatever, but they're not actually physiologically addicted.
The genetic factors that play a role, there's some interesting things coming out in there.
It turns out that females may have more of an inherited factor related to whether they'll
become drug addicted.
So this is important because of course women can be pregnant and the use of drugs during
pregnancy is a very big issue.
Here we're going to use again cocaine and marijuana to illustrate some general ideas
about how the system is affected and what we think these drugs are doing.
So let's start our discussion with cocaine.
Cocaine is what is referred to as a psychostimulant.
It's very highly physiologically addicting.
It's a blocker at both serotonergic synapses and dopamine for reuptake, but at the serotonergic
synapses it has a very mild effect, but it has a very potent effect on the dopaminergic
system.
In addition, the major targets for cocaine being that it's a major blocker for dopamine
reuptake is going to be this endogenous reward system and it's going to be the cortical projections
to the prefrontal cortex.
Now this is one of the reasons why a drug like Prozac is not addicting, but cocaine
is both Prozac and cocaine act as blockers at serotonergic synapses.
But in addition, our cocaine acts at these synapses that are dopaminergic in these projections
to accumbens and to the prefrontal cortex, whereas Prozac does not.
So so far to date, all drugs and behaviors that are addictive appear to involve the nucleus
accumbenscepti.
So that dopaminergic projection from the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens appears
to be one of the central players in determining whether or not a drug is physiologically
addicting.
Now while this projection from the ventral tegmental area goes, as you remember, both
to the nucleus accumbens and to cortical areas, short circuiting of these cortical projections,
this orbital frontal connection, is believed to play a role in the behaviors which become
associated with very powerful addictions and in the kinds of very negative behaviors
that people demonstrate when they're seeking out a drug.
So let's look at how cocaine is thought to have its major effect at dopaminergic synapses.
Basically what cocaine does is block the reuptake of dopamine.
So as you remember, action potentials are sent down and sets off a cascade of events,
influx of calcium, and the fusion of the vesicle at the presynaptic terminal, which
releases neurotransmitter into the cleft.
Then you want to stop that action so that you have an event which has a clear beginning
and ending.
And one of the mechanisms for that is reuptake of unused neurotransmitter back into the presynaptic
terminal.
With this block of the reuptake of dopamine, it means that a huge amount of dopamine is
left out in the synapse to stimulate these postsynaptic receptors.
And cocaine is a very potent blocker of dopamine reuptake.
So in this projection from the ventral tegmental area, this endogenous reward system, from
the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens and also to cortical areas, dopamine
is being dumped out in huge amounts.
Now when the neurotransmitter balance in these structures is disrupted by cocaine, there
are effects that occur because the synapse isn't going to like this.
The synapse isn't working the way it ought to.
And again, you're throwing off this balance of excitation and inhibition in a whole circuit
because you're influencing one major pathway or two major pathways in the system.
There's an initial intense stimulation of the dopaminergic receptor.
And because of the projections that we have in this endogenous reward system, you have
an initial feeling of intensification.
So there's a very positive reward initially when taking the drug.
But the projection goes to the nucleus accumbensepti and also to the cortex.
So you have this internal subjective sense of euphoria.
So the cortical areas give you this internal subjective sense of euphoria that occurs because
of all the dopamine that's out there initially stimulating those postsynaptic receptors.
Unfortunately, the brain doesn't like this.
This isn't how it's meant to work.
This isn't how this endogenous reward system is meant to work.
So that this intense stimulation of the receptors is followed by a very massive and rapid compensatory
adaptation at these particular synapses.
And behaviorally, this takes the form of drug withdrawal and craving.
So now these synapses have been altered in a particular way, and we'll see that there
may even be long-term changes that take place at such synapses.
So initially you have this response where there's a lot of dopamine present in this
cleft, and you get this subjective feeling of elation.
You have these projections to accumbens and projections to prefrontal areas of the cortex.
That's followed by an intense dysphoria.
A dysphoria is a subjective state described as a crash, where the person has depression,
lethargy, irritability.
There are a lot of sort of behavioral things associated with that.
They feel really badly, it would be the way to put it.
And so what happens is after stimulation and having this elation, it's followed by this
dysphoric feeling, and it's going to promote a craving and a seeking out of the drug to
get that intense elation back.
And what happens is you have a very rapidly, because it's a highly addictive drug, a rapidly
escalating pattern of compulsive use.
And so individuals who become cocaine addicts become totally focused on getting their cocaine.
And this sets up this pattern that is very, very difficult to break.
In addition, those postsynaptic receptors don't really like being stimulated like that,
or that's not what they normally should be doing.
And what happens is that over time they adjust their sensitivity, so now the cocaine addict
has to take more cocaine to get the same effect.
Because the brain has its own way of compensating for this massive dose of something that's
caused this endogenous reward system to give this intense feeling of euphoria.
We have in neuroscience identified some long-term changes in individuals who are cocaine users.
This may be somewhat individually defined.
We know, for example, there are people who are users of cocaine who end up withdrawing
from the drug and end up having perfectly normal lives.
Unfortunately, there's a larger percentage of people who do not.
And so we've learned something by having animal models where we look and see in a number
of animals you see long-term changes in the brain.
Those long-term changes are of a particular type.
You see a change in some animals, a permanent change in the responsiveness of postsynaptic
dopaminergic receptors.
So it means the receptors that bind dopamine in the accumbens and the orbital frontal cortex
permanently change their responsiveness to dopamine.
So that means even if you don't take cocaine anymore, then the natural release of dopamine,
when you're reading a book or viewing a sunset, doesn't have the same effect as it had before.
The other thing we know is that if you remember from our discussion on the endogenous reward
system, these nuclei in this system have a very high concentration of these opioid
receptors that are involved in the modulation, we believe, of emotional pain.
Well, it turns out that in laboratory animals you can demonstrate, and in humans, changes
that reflect this, that there's a down regulation in the synthesis of opioid receptors in these
nuclei in the endogenous reward system after long-term use of cocaine.
Now let's think about what would happen over time in such an individual.
Over time, because this endogenous reward system has modulated its responsiveness to
dopamine, what you see often is an emotional blunting in the person.
So the person appears to not be able to engage in the world in a normal way, in a positive
way, because this system has been affected.
This also, no doubt, contributes to recidivism in cocaine addicts, and this should make
sense to us.
If the system compensates by down regulation of responsiveness to dopamine, then the normal
things in life that would make us feel a joy or a connection aren't the same anymore.
So again, this is an emotional blunting.
So recidivism is very high in cocaine addicts, and we believe that one of the reasons for
that is because they seek again to feel good.
I remember when I was studying to be a grief counselor that all of us were required to
take a course about addictions, because having a person withdraw from a drug is in fact asking
them to give up something.
And so people experience loss and grief over giving up a drug that has given them such
a rewarding pleasure.
And I remember one individual who came to our class said something I will never forget,
because I love music, and I love how music makes me feel connected emotionally.
This individual said that before they were a cocaine addict, they used to love to listen
to music.
That music just sent them to a place.
That was wonderful.
And then they were a cocaine user for about ten years, and when we saw them, they had
been withdrawn from cocaine for like five years.
And the individual told our class that every day was a struggle not to go back to taking
cocaine because, for example, when he listened to music now, he didn't do anything.
He didn't have any positive effect on him, and he remembered that he used to have this
feeling of elation when he listened to music.
So he said that every day was a struggle to not go back and take cocaine to stimulate
the system to feel good.
And that really struck me as being something that we all need to think about when we're
trying to help people with drugs, that their system may have been altered from it.
Now most research has focused on the nucleus accumbens projection because of its association
with addiction.
Every highly-addicting drug affects the nucleus accumbens projection.
This we know.
We haven't found any to date that don't.
But it's also important to think about that other dopaminergic projection from the ventral
tegmental area, and that's to this prefrontal area, specifically to this orbital frontal
area.
And you remember when we were talking about the endogenous reward system, we talked a
little bit about what this area does, and also when we talked about finiascage.
It's involved in impulse control.
It's involved in the inculcation of cultural mores for the individual.
And this area has to be intact for a person to use morals to guide their behavior.
And last of all, that it's involved in the appreciation of the consequences of one's
own actions.
And so we believe that the hijacking of this dopaminergic system in the endogenous reward
system and those projections, these mesocortical projections, are involved and play a role
in the often egregious behavior that you see in individuals who are addicted to drugs like
cocaine.
So you have people behaving in behaviors that clearly don't indicate that they're using
their moral compass to make decisions.
I remember medical students asking me about a case that was in the Nashville newspaper
a few years ago about a woman who was a cocaine addict who had given her 12-year-old daughter
to a drug dealer in exchange for a single hit of cocaine.
And this hit the front pages of the news.
And the students wondered, this woman must be this horrible person.
Well, this system hijacks the area that allows you to use moral behavior to guide decision
making.
And this, too, is something we have to take into consideration when we're helping people.
Now, we don't have, obviously, something exactly the same in animals, but we actually
have something similar in that.
If you train that animal to press a bar to get cocaine and the animal is addicted, the
animal will choose that, will choose the cocaine over food, water, or sex.
And less force fed, and less fed in some way, will starve to death, will choose the
cocaine over food.
And so this tells us that even in this animal that the mechanism that should allow the animal
to care about its survival more than anything else, get hijacked when these drugs are taken.
Now let's turn our attention to a drug that has a different mechanism of action.
And while working on some areas of the brain that are the same, there are also areas that
are different.
And that's marijuana.
And if you look at this picture, the teaching company placed up here behind me for these
lectures, this looks like an individual who's sort of been smoking something, and you see
that areas of his brain are lit up.
It's not necessarily accurate, but it does depict that when you smoke marijuana that,
in fact, you have areas of your brain that are affected.
Now marijuana in moderate doses has effects similar to alcohol.
At higher doses, it can cause euphoria and heightened sensation.
For example, people report that taste is heightened when they smoke marijuana.
Contrary to popular belief, about two-thirds of users do show some kind of drug dependence.
And if they stop smoking marijuana, they do show anxiety and irritability.
So they do show withdrawal signs and symptoms.
Drug dependence to marijuana can, in fact, be induced in animals.
And so we can study this in the laboratory.
In this case, however, the mechanism of action of what's happening is entirely different.
In the case of cocaine, you block reuptake at dopaminergic synapses.
That's not how marijuana has its effect.
What marijuana does is marijuana binds to a specific receptor that's found in particular
areas of the brain.
So it's going to bind to a particular receptor in the brain.
Cannabis will bind to this receptor.
We'll come back to it, another significance of that.
It binds these receptors and alters the synapse, but alters it in a different way.
The areas of the brain that are affected are going to be very similar to the areas that
were involved in cocaine addiction.
But the effect of binding the receptor versus blocking dopamine uptake are going to be very
different.
Also, there's some other areas, like the hippocampus amygdala that are also involved
in marijuana, because this is where those receptors are that bind the substance.
So that's going to have an influence on the behavioral characteristics that people demonstrate
or the change in the reaction that people have to cocaine.
You have a disinhibition, for example, of the prefrontal area in individuals who smoke
marijuana.
And you have many of these different areas, again, hippocampus, dental tigmental area,
the euphoria and everything is going to be because of this endogenous reward system.
You have stimulation of the amygdala and these other areas as well.
You note that some of these are similar to cocaine, but others are different.
The projections to prefrontal cortex are interesting because we believe that the binding of the
receptor at those sites, which is a different mechanism of action from the cocaine, also
results in a different behavioral change that takes place in an individual.
Long-term chronic use of marijuana can cause what's called a motivational syndrome and
it's believed to be due to those cortical projections.
A motivational syndrome is where an individual sort of loses the interest in engaging in
activities like learning, going to school, holding a job, doing one thing or another
like that.
That's a normal part of how we engage in the world.
A motivational, the person loses a motivation to engage and often really only wants to lay
back and maybe drink alcohol and smoke marijuana with their buddies.
That's the only thing they seem to be very motivated to do.
This a motivational syndrome is seen in long-term abusers and in certain individuals that tend
to have some kind of temperament of certain types that lead them to this a motivational
syndrome.
Most of the research to date, however, has focused on the binding of the cannabis receptor
in the hippocampus and there is a reason for that.
That's because individuals who are long-term users of marijuana often show problems in
memory.
So memory being a hippocampal function, this has been a major focus of research.
Now, we've been looking here at cocaine and marijuana, but any drugs that have a euphoric
effect are going to stimulate that endogenous reward system.
We can see that what other effects that the drug might have, have to do with what other
areas might be affected, also depends on the mechanism of action, how much that endogenous
reward system is stimulated, how it's stimulated, the mechanism of action, and the side of action.
These are the two things that matter most.
Again, all highly addicting drugs significantly alter dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens.
And so marijuana is not addicting like cocaine is because the change that happens in the binding
of the receptor does not result in the same degree of dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens.
We believe that this is the underlying reason.
Now there are many drugs that are going to affect the system, obviously, many of the
social drugs.
This discussion also allows us to talk about something else, which I think is a more general
principle that I'd like you to leave with today.
And that is that whenever we have a receptor somewhere, like I talked about how there were
receptors in particular areas of the brain that would bind cannabis or marijuana, whenever
you find that that occurs, it doesn't mean that the brain has cannabis receptors.
What the brain has is a receptor that has a natural ligand, we say, or a natural ligand
that binds to that receptor normally.
So for example, the receptor that binds cannabis binds something that's normally occurring
in the body called arachidonic acid.
And we don't know what arachidonic acid does.
We're still investigating that.
But the fact that cannabis binds at these sites means that it's just structurally similar
to the natural ligand, which exists in the body or in the brain.
And so this is a more general principle that when you take a drug from the outside and it
has an effect, if that effect is brought about by the binding to a receptor, neuroscientists
have learned that that means that there's something normally occurring in the brain
that's probably structurally similar that binds to that receptor.
And so that's one of the reasons we study it.
So that is just a general principle that I think is important.
Now modern neuroscience is also beginning to shed light on another issue.
And that has been somewhat controversial.
But that's whether or not there are behavioral addictions.
So are there such things as people who engage in compulsive sex because they're addicted
to it, or individuals who are compulsive gamblers because they're actually addicted
to it?
Well, it turns out that functional MRI and PET scans, which are just fancy methods for
looking at neuronal activity in the brain noninvasively or fairly noninvasively, show
in fact that the same areas the brain light up is light up in drug addiction.
So you see, for example, in compulsive gamblers, the nucleus accumbens lights up like a Christmas
tree in individuals who appear to be for all behavioral characteristics addicted to gambling.
And we believe that there are many types of behavioral addictions that people can acquire.
Now what makes one person be able to gamble and never become addicted, and another person
become addicted, is of course one of the main questions we care about with drugs as well.
There are people who don't become addicted to alcohol.
There are other people who take a drink and that's it, they're gone.
And so we have a lot to learn about the individual differences and potential genetic factors that
play a role in whether someone would be addicted or not.
One of the things that the behavioral studies have indicated, however, is that if you look
at the behavior of people who say are addicted to pornography, addicted to sex, addicted
to gambling, any kind of behavioral addiction, not only does the nucleus accumbens light
up, but when the individual is not engaged in the activity, what you see is that there's
a compulsive nature to seeking it out, there's a willingness to take incredible risks, their
entire relationships are involved, their ability to hold down a job, they take risks involved
just like drug addicts do, and we believe it's because this orbital frontal cortex again
is involved and so the person, the system is oriented towards getting the fix.
And so it short circuits, hijacks areas of the brain that would allow us to use the limbic
system and this endogenous reward system to make good decisions about what we do in our
lives.
Now one of the things that neuroscientists are particularly interested in and one that's
important for our society, we need to understand more about how drugs like cocaine and other
drugs that are taken by pregnant women influence the original development of this endogenous
reward system in fetuses.
So you remember the brain is growing very rapidly and all these neurons are being generated
and the basic patterns of things are being set down before we're born.
So we're very interested in what happens to receptor development, whether or not these
individuals who are born to addicted mothers show a down regulation of the system before
they ever even have experience in the world.
And so this is an active area of research because of the consequences since children
are the future for our society.
And so this is an active area of research in neuroscience.
The other reason neuroscientists are particularly interested in this area and why the endogenous
reward system in its definition was one of the greatest discoveries in the last 25 years
is that we've also learned that this prefrontal area of the brain undergoes reorganization
of puberty under the influence of hormones.
And so who you are in a very critical sense is established at that time and this is from
the beginning of puberty through early 20s.
Well it turns out in our society this is the main time that individuals experiment with
drugs and so we're very interested in how taking these drugs at this critical period
in development might influence the experience of pleasure, how one connects to the world,
how one engages with the world from that point on in your life.
And so this is a very, very active area of research as well.
So again, while neuroscientists care mostly about what a substance does at a cellular
level and we're interested in what areas are affected, we're also interested in how this
knowledge that's generated can be used in a positive way to help people live good lives.
Thank you.
