Welcome back. Well, finally, in this lecture, we're going to talk about learning and memory.
So we've been talking about the limbic system being this big umbrella system that's involved
in learning, memory, emotion, and executive function. So finally, we're going to talk
about learning and memory. Whenever I talk about memory to a class, however, I always
struggle about how to put into words how important memory is in our lives. It just plays a role
that is so important in being a human being. We're the only species that has, for example,
an ethics of memory. We actually associate an ethics with being able to remember things.
Then I read something that was such a beautiful description of memory and so poignant. And
I'd really like to share this with you. I've read this many, many times, but it's never
failed to just remind me of how important memory is in our lives before we talk about
the neurobiology. This is a quote taken from Elie Wiesel, his memoirs, All Rivers Run to
the Sea. This is early in his life before he started writing about his memories. He had
been a teenager in a concentration camp, and he writes, Of course, I could write my memories
of the camp, which I bore within me like a poison. Though I never spoke to anyone about
this, it weighed upon me. I thought about it with apprehension day and night, the duty
to testify, to offer depositions for history, to serve memory. What would man be without
his capacity to remember? Memory is a passion no less powerful or pervasive than love. What
does it mean to remember? It is to live in more than one world, to prevent the past from
fading and to call upon the future to illuminate it. It is to revive fragments of existence,
to rescue lost beings, to cast harsh light on faces and events, to drive back the sands
that cover the surface of things, to combat oblivion and to reject death. All this I knew,
and because I knew it, I told myself I should write, but I had to be patient. Some day in
years to come, I would celebrate memory, but not yet. Just a beautiful description of how
important memory is for human life. Here, we're going to focus on the neurobiology, but as
I do that, and I talk about changes that synapses and everything, think about the role that
memory plays in your own life, in your own positive experience of life.
In our chapter or our lecture on development, we stress that axons and different systems
made connections to other areas of the brain. We learned that neurons were generated and
then those neurons took up their place and they extended axons. Well, this made it sound
as though this was a predetermined sort of thing that happened. In some ways, it's true
that our brain does have some hard wiring, so to speak. The hard wiring refers to an
orchestration predominantly of long axon pathways that make different structures be connected
to one another as they should be. We do have hard wiring in our brain, although we'll come
back to just how hard-wired these connections are. But if we had to give an example, you
remember your eye out here that the retinal ganglion cells project to a specific nucleus
in the thalamus, the lateral geniculate, and then those neurons project areas 17. The neurons
in the eye don't project all over. They project to a specific nucleus and that specific nucleus
connects to another. So in some sense, this is a genetically pre-programmed sort of projections
that are hard-wired or genetically orchestrated. But just as some systems are hard-wired, it's
equally clear that in humans, much of what happens for us that's important for our behavior
and our response to the world is learned. So we could say that it's dependent on experience.
So what is going on there? Well, we could have guessed if we'd known what the limbic
system did, we could have guessed that it's going to involve some changes in the limbic
system. The limbic system is the system that engages us with the world. So it's going to
be the system that's most easily modified by the experience that we have in the world.
So the question is, what is it that experience modifies? What is it that's being modified?
In what ways are our brains soft-wired, meaning that they're malleable to changes that experience
influences something that's going on in the brain? Well, we know that we don't generate
a lot of new neurons, so it means that something has to be going on in those all-important
connections between areas. So that's what we're going to focus on here. We know a great
deal about learning and memory, and neurobiologists often use that term, learning and memory,
like it's one word. And the reason we do that is because, obviously, learning requires some
kind of memory component, or you wouldn't have said that you learned something. But
most of the research is directed specifically at memory because, in fact, you can have some
types of memory without learning. So I'm going to use the term memory, but it means sort
of, you'll see, it's easy to follow, that it involves learning and memory, and this
is the system that's responsible for that. So what we normally do when we look at memory
and learning and memory, memory can be divided into a number of different categories, and
these have different functional and temporal features. So first of all, functionally, memory
is generally grossly divided into two broad categories. The first is what we call explicit
or declarative memory. So explicit memory involves the memory for words, for example,
that's called semantic memory, and also the memory of events. So this is called episodic
memory. So this is just one type of memory that's involved. There's another type of
memory called implicit or non-declarative memory, and this involves a lot about nonverbal
memory skills, like motor skills. So for example, skills of being able to brush your teeth,
that it's just something that once the pattern gets set into play, you don't even remember
when you learned it or how you learned it. So it's called implicit memory. Temporally,
is commonly divided into three categories, but I want to tell you it's very difficult
sometimes to really define that the parameters very carefully, but we just do this so that
we can study events. There's something called a working memory, and working memory is like
an immediate memory. So if you tell me a phone number that I need to know and I need to remember
it for 30 seconds or so so I can make the phone call, then this is a very short type
of memory that doesn't involve any learning. If you ask me three days later, probably three
minutes later, what the number is, I can't tell you. So this is called working memory.
There's a short term memory, and short term memory is necessary for learning to take place.
So short term memory is sort of a memory, and again, the temporal parameters are difficult
to specify, but meaning short term that they don't necessarily last a lifetime, but many
short term memories become long term memories, and this is the area that we as yet don't
really know a lot about, but the last type of memory in a temporal sense is long term
memory. So long term memories can in fact last a lifetime, but I want to emphasize something
here. They may last a lifetime, but it doesn't mean that they're not modified by experiences
that come after they were made. So memory is a dynamic thing, and so it can undergo
change with experience. So in terms of brain structures, what do we think is going on in
memory? Well, there are a lot of areas that are involved. These are associated obviously
in the limbic system. This is the system that's involved in this. Higher order areas of prefrontal
cortex, hippocampus, the extra primal motor system, we'll see what that's involved in.
That's outside of the limbic system, but we'll see it's involved with a very specific type
of memory. Amygdala, something we, a structure we haven't talked a lot about, but one that's
involved in fear, learn fear and processing of emotions, and we all know that positive
emotions help us remember things and learn things. And negative emotions, if they're
too strong, can prevent learning from happening. So it really shouldn't be a surprise that
a structure that's involved in emotional processing is involved in the circuit in the limbic
system and also areas of the prefrontal cortex. So let's just talk about a few of these and
how they play a role in memory. The prefrontal cortex, and this is predominantly areas in
this area of the prefrontal cortex, appear to be involved in working memory. So these
are the areas that appear to be activated when we have a very short time that we want
to have the memory involve some kind of action. So again, it's like remembering a phone number
long enough to be able to dial it on a phone. And so this is short-term working memory and
this is predominantly brought about by areas in the prefrontal cortex. We don't know a
lot about it, we're learning about it, but we know the main area that's involved. The
next area, of course, which I've been saying off and on throughout this course, is the
hippocampus, our little seahorse. It's that old three-layered cortex that's involved
in learning and memory. And it's going to play a critical role. And it should make sense
that an old cortical area would be involved in something like short-term memory because
this must be one of the first cortical systems that develop to help an animal be adaptive.
If an animal can't learn from experience, then it can't change its behavior under some
other circumstance. And so it makes sense that this old cortical area plays a role. Now
in humans, there appears to be a lateralization or specialization of function, and I find
this just absolutely fascinating. It turns out that the left hippocampus, so the left
hippocampus, is primarily involved with memories that involve language. And we know that the
left hemisphere seems to be dominant for language. Well, the left hippocampus seems
to be really good at remembering words. And the right hippocampus is better at spatial
memory, so our ability to find our way through the maze of life. So the spatial memory is
more a right hippocampal function. Other studies have shown, and from clinical cases
where sadly individuals had had only one hippocampus be involved in some disorder. We've also
learned that the left hippocampus, remember I said it was also involved in episodic memory?
Memory of events that occur throughout your life? Well, it turns out that the left hippocampus
appears to be critically involved in the formation of what is referred to as an autobiography.
So what the brain does is construct a story from bits and pieces of events that have happened
to you in your life, and it creates a story that internally we see as the story of our
lives that define who we are. What's interesting about that is if you actually check a number
of things that have happened to individuals, they're not necessarily accurate, but they're
very consistent with how the person views themself. And so what you have is a creative
process that's involved in the creation of your own story of who you are. And we know
that there are diseases, for example Alzheimer's disease, that remove the autobiography from
the person. And so we're learning a great deal about that.
Now this extra primal motor system, the extra primal motor system, remember extra primal
it's involved in habitual movement? Well it makes sense, it's involved in that non declarative
type of motor behavior. Like you learn how to brush your teeth and then you don't really
have to think about it anymore. So it's a type of learning and I hope that it makes sense
to you that the extra primal motor system would be called into play here because you
have these habitual movements that are involved in motor learning. Again this is amygdala,
we've already talked about this. Emotional learning and processing, so it plays a role
in our ability to learn and remember because it plays a role in emotions. Association areas
of the neocortex. Remember all these areas that were really association areas, so they
were either multimodal or they were higher order association areas, well we think that
long term memory involves some kind of change actually in protein synthesis in neurons and
widespread areas of the cortex. And it's one of the reasons why actually long term memory,
short of massive brain damage, people don't lose their long term memories generally. Now
we'll see in Alzheimer's disease they do, but I'll tell you why at that time when we
talk about that lecture. But in general you don't lose long term memories, whereas the
hippocampus is primarily involved in short term memory. The hippocampus is a small area
and if it's damaged you see very dramatic changes in the individual. So what have neuroscientists
learned about what's going on in the brain when we learn something or we remember something?
Well if it's the connections that are involved then it means that the changes have to occur
at synapses. And we call these changes synaptic plasticity which implies that the synapse
is not a static structure, it's a dynamic structure and synaptic plasticity is a dynamic
property of synapses that allow them to be modified and underlie learning and memory.
One of the other things we've discovered which is just fascinating is that many of the processes
that are involved in learning and memory in humans are conserved throughout the animal
kingdom and so this lowly creature, the sea slug, has many things operating that allow
him to learn and the basic mechanisms that allow learning in this animal are the same
mechanisms that take place in our brains. And we've sort of modified them or built
on the simpler mechanisms but this is something that's conserved across animal species.
Let's think about some ways that synapses can be modified. So let's look at our synapse.
Now we've already talked about some of these so I'm just going to briefly review this but
I want you to be amazed at how many different ways that synapses can be modified, how they're
really dynamic. So for example, we mentioned that the post-synaptic receptor could be influenced
by a non-specific release of neurotransmitter that might occur out here. Anything in fact
out here that changes the responsiveness of these receptors will change the membrane potential
perhaps any number of mechanisms that we talked about. And so if this membrane potential
is changed somehow that means when the normal action potential comes down here it will be
altered. What are some other ways? Well, we've learned a lot about this. Remember
that that post-synaptic potential, what is generated in the post-synaptic dendrite can
be either increased or decreased. Remember it's graded and decremental. So the graded
part means it's dependent on the amount of neurotransmitter release. So you could have
neurotransmitter release go up or down. This is an example of what happens if you facilitate
neurotransmitter release. So here's our little rat and he has electrode in his brain. We
stimulate this synapse and we get a particular post-synaptic response and it's that big.
So it turns out if certain kinds of stimulation are given in between here and then you go
away and you come back and you stimulate this pre-synaptic guide just like you did up here
turns out that the neuron the synapse remembers and now it facilitates the release of neurotransmitter
and your post-synaptic potential is enlarged. That means if you synapse up here and now
your post-synaptic response is greater you have more of an effect at the axon hillock
that you did than you did before. So your synapses are more efficacious. And so this
is one of the main ways in fact and this is most highly studied in the hippocampus. So
we believe that it's a major way in the hippocampus that learning takes place. And there are
a lot of ways of modifying this but this is the basic mechanism which is involved. Now
another way let's think about another way we could modify synapses and all of this is
going on in our brain right now in this class. So let's think about another way. Well let's
go back and look at these little things called spines. We didn't focus much on spines. They're
these little tiny guys here. These little protuberances of the pre-synaptic or post-synaptic
dendritic membrane. So this is where input comes into a cell, these little dendrites.
And the spines are little protuberances of the dendritic surface. So it's going to increase
the dendritic surface. That's a main function. But those little spines also isolate synapses.
Now this turns out to be very, very important because it turns out spines are dynamic structures
and spines can actually change their shape very rapidly. So there are three kinds of main
shapes to spines in the nervous system. One is long and this is normally the kind of spine
that occurs earlier in development. And then in adults you see primarily stubby spines
that are shaped like this or spines that are called mushroom spines. It turns out that
the presence of a significant neck here decreases the effectiveness of that synapse. And it
turns out that they can go from one shape to another very rapidly. And so a synapse
onto this kind of spine is more efficacious than a synapse onto this spine. And under
certain conditions we are still learning about these spines can rapidly change shape.
So when we look at a picture of a synapse like this, here's our main dendritic shaft.
Here's the pre-synaptic component with the vesicles in it. This is the post-synaptic
spine. When we take a picture like this, it makes the spine look like a static structure.
But I want you to imagine that this little guy right here, which is a stubby spine, can
change shape under the influence of experience. And all of these things, changing how efficacious
a synapse is, whatever is going on, spine shapes, everything, are these dynamic processes
that are going on every minute in your brain, every second in your brain. So those little
guys are dynamic. Wow. Are you getting the idea that there's a whole lot of ways you
can change things without generating new synapses or generating new neurons? Well, but it turns
out in fact that we can, in fact, generate new synapses. So in addition to all these
changes that take place at a synapse which is already formed, we can also form new synapses.
So let's have a look at that. New synapses are formed throughout life, it turns out.
This is something modern neuroscience has uncovered. So here we have our generic neuron, this is
where synapses are made onto a dendritic tree, and then an action potential is fired here
at the axon hillock and down here. Well, under the influence of what happens to this cell,
these end terminals, in fact, are capable of making new synapses. Now, what's interesting
about this is there's two different ways. Here I have the lateral geniculate, and you'll
remember that input from retinal ganglion cells comes in and could synapse on another
long axon cell which goes out to area 17. But I also talked to you about little interneurons,
and it turns out that we think this is where most of new synapses get made, although long
axon pathways can form new synapses as well. There's two different ways to do this. This
would be where information from the eye, for example, occurs in any pathway, actually makes
it synapse on a tiny little neuron whose axon synapses in the nucleus, and then it synapses
on a long axon cell that goes out to 17. So this little guy can form new synapses as well.
So you could have a long axon pathway form new synapses, or you could have little interneurons
form new synapses. So there are multiple ways of even making new synapses in any pathway,
whether it's long axon or it's a short axon system. So let's look at a couple of cases
in which new synapses can be made. Well, interestingly enough, new synapses can be made after injury,
and it's probably one of the reasons why minor brain damage doesn't really change us a lot,
which is a good thing. So this may be a way to help us if we have some kind of minor damage
to the brain. This is one of the ways we study new synapse formation in the laboratory.
So let me explain this diagram. This is normal input to some structure. So you have an axon
that forms the synapse here onto a little tiny stubby spine. You have a second axonal
input here to another synapse. And so you have two different synapses. Now let's imagine
that these axons become damaged. So these axons are damaged. They're going to die and
be taken away. They're going to be removed from the system. Well, it turns out this guy
who's never been injured, who's perfectly normal, when this postsynaptic area is now
devoid of this input, that axon is capable of forming a sprout and forming a synapse
onto that site. So new synapses are actually formed. And again, this is one of the main
ways that we study synaptic plasticity and study new synapse formation in the laboratory.
We can make this happen in the lab. Another way that you have new synapses formed is
as a result of experience. And these were some just beautiful experiments that were
done from beginning in like about the late sixties through the present time in neuroscience.
It turns out that under certain circumstances, when animals learn new things, you can actually
go in and count the number of synapses in their brain. You can count the number of synapses
fairly adequately and you can show that you have action potentials normally. You subject
some animals to a learning experience and other animals not to a learning experience.
And it turns out that axons can form these growth cones or sprouts and actually induce
new synapse formation. So in this case, there hasn't been any kind of damage or anything.
There's actually been some kind of experience intercalated between time A and time B. The
most incredible demonstrations of this was made by a scientist named Bill Greenow many
years ago in which animals in laboratories are generally kept in small individual cages.
And they don't have any social interaction and they live their lives like a rat lives
their life in a very small cage. What he did was just elegant. He took some rats and he
made what he called an enriched environment. And he had little toys in sort of a play area.
There were a number of animals so they were socially interacting with each other, had
little wheels where the animals could exercise and these little wheels. And the animals were
handled by individuals in the lab. Well, it turned out when they examined the brains
of these animals, those animals that had been raised in enriched environments had significantly
more synapses in a number of structures than animals that were raised in single cages.
And this has been confirmed over and over again that experience modifies the number
of synapses in areas like the hippocampus so that when we learn things we make new synapses.
So we can alter synapses in many ways but we can also make new synapses. So I just think
that is incredible. Now changes in human beings. What have we discovered
in human beings? Well we believe all the same fundamental things go on in humans. We can
change how efficacious a synapse is by changing the amount of neurotransmitter that is released.
We can change how responsive a receptor is. We already know that because that is part
of what cocaine does. Cocaine receptors for dopamine are altered by taking cocaine. So
we know that even in the human system that very similar mechanisms are involved. Well
we know something else. We know that new synapses can be made. And we know that even in these
long axon pathways it takes place. So for example, an individual who learns to play
the violin, when you look at how their somatosensory cortex is organized, you remember, part
of what somatosensory input is about is about proprioceptive input from the limbs and from
structures of the body. When you look at the map of their body in somatosensory cortex
they have an even greater representation of each individual finger of their hand than
people who do not play the violin. And this has been shown in pianists and other individuals
as well. And so actual experience of life of learning something can change what the map
even looks like of how the body is represented in the brain. And we're learning that this
happens throughout the brain. And lastly, some absolutely fabulous experiments have
been done. There's an observation that individuals who have been born blind from birth appear
to have like better hearing or better feeling or something. And neuroscientists who know
what to make of that and everything, well it turns out that you can show in animals
and we believe the same thing happens in humans, we can show this functionally. That those
pathways that would normally be involved in the visual system, so from retina to geniculate
to area 17, we've been able to show that in individuals who are blind from birth, auditory
areas develop here in 17 that would have been visual had they not been deprived of
visual input. And so what they have are greater numbers of areas that process information
in the auditory system and the somatosensory system so that indeed they may be more sensitive
to sound or the way they're processing sound and processing touch is very different than
an individual who has had sensory input through the visual system. So the brain is clearly
very plastic and it's plastic throughout our lives. It doesn't matter how old you are,
you can still learn by one or more of these mechanisms. Thank you.
