you
Hello, and welcome back to our course on the brain.
In all of our previous lectures, we've been considering awake perceptual and cognitive
behaviors.
For example, seeing, hearing, and what pathways or structures might underlie perception in
the human brain.
We've also looked at motor behavior, how we act in the world, and even looked at emotional
behavior, and saw how important emotions are in helping to guide us in making rational
decisions.
Note, however, that in all of our discussions, we have avoided addressing what it means to
be awake and what it means to be conscious.
In the next lecture, we're going to examine the current ideas and the problems that are
faced by philosophers, neuroscientists, anyone who's interested in understanding the conscious
state.
In the present lecture, however, we're going to touch just a little bit on what neuroscience
is contributing to our understanding of an altered state of consciousness that we all
experience every day, and that's sleeping and dreaming.
It turned out that this was a lot more difficult than it first looked.
So for example, there are complex interactions between many areas of the brain that are all
the way from spinal cord up into the forebrain.
It wasn't so simple that there's one nucleus that gets turned on, and that's why we're
awake, and then it gets inhibited and we go to sleep.
We wish it had been that easy.
Unfortunately, it is very difficult, but the one thing which is very important, and I want
you to take away from this lecture, we aren't going to focus a lot on detailed anatomy.
We're going to talk about generalities, but I want you to know that both wakefulness and
sleep are actively induced and maintained by particular areas of the brain.
So let's just think a little bit in some really general terms about the brain right now and
brain areas that play a critical role, and we aren't going to focus so much on the details.
Two major areas play a role in wakefulness, sleeping, and dreaming.
One is the reticular formation, and you remember the reticular formation consists of 110 different
nuclei that exist all the way from the lower parts of the brain up into the forebrain.
Well, there's specific nuclei within the reticular formation, not all of them, but specific nuclei
in the reticular formation that play a role in our ability to be awake or to sleep or
play a role in dreaming.
So the reticular formation is one of those brain areas which we know plays a critical
role in these processes.
Now these neural groups in the reticular formation are themselves controlled by the hypothalamus.
So you remember that the hypothalamus was below our thalamus, so it's located right about
here, and our hypothalamus maintains a sort of homeostasis.
And so if you think about it, between the waking and the sleeping state and everything,
this is a sort of homeostatic mechanisms are involved in the control of this.
Also it's true that the light, dark cycle regulation of sleep and wakefulness is also
controlled by the hypothalamus.
So for example, there's one nucleus here in the hypothalamus which is called the supracias
matic, which means it's above a structure called the chiasm.
It's just where optic fibers cross in the brain.
It receives a direct projection from the eye.
So the supracias matic nucleus, it makes sense, it gets a direct projection from the retina.
It's involved in circadian rhythms, and the word circadian is from the Latin, meaning
around a day.
So we have our day, night cycle synced with a light, dark cycle.
And so this is one of the nuclei in the hypothalamus that's involved in this, and it knows when
it's light outside because it gets input from the retina, so it gets input from the eyeball.
And this is also when we talk about sleeping and dreaming and these sorts of things, where
Descartes' famous pineal comes in.
It turns out that the pineal actually produces melatonin, which is one of the hormones that's
involved in sleep-wake cycles.
And so it actually isn't the seat of the rational mind or the soul, but it does play an important
role in our lives.
All of these nuclei in the reticular formation, in the hypothalamus, and other areas of the
brain are involved as well, are involved in very, very complex circuits that are going
to control waffulness, sleep, and dreaming, and the switching between those various states.
So again, we're back.
What is the most important thing I want you to take away from this lecture is that both
waffulness and sleep are actively induced and maintained by the brain.
I don't think any of you are surprised at that at this point in knowing that whatever
happens is going to be regulated by the brain.
Now before we discuss any of the sort of general mechanisms that are involved in dreaming
or sleeping, we need to discuss how we study these things experimentally.
It turns out that there are changes in brain activity that can actually be measured.
So they place electrodes on the skull, and you can actually measure like sort of a population
response of neurons beneath that.
And this is the electroencephalogram.
So what it measures are global changes in electrical activity in the brain.
So now we're not looking at specific areas that light up when you're making a decision
or something.
We're looking at a very big and global process.
So let's look at this and see what it looks like under different conditions of waffulness
and sleeping.
So what does it look like in the awake state?
Well if you look here on this diagram, you see this is awake with eyes open.
The EEG or the recording from these electrodes shows a low voltage, desynchronized fast activity.
So if you look at the electrical activity of the brain in general, this is what it looks
like.
Now sleep actually occurs in stages.
So it doesn't happen all at once, it occurs in stages.
And those stages are actually associated with changes in the EEG.
So during about the first hour or so of sleep, there's a progressive slowing and synchronization
of this EEG activity.
And for this reason, it is called slow wave sleep.
And in fact, slow wave sleep actually progresses through four stages.
And just to make this so it's not so busy, I've shown stage one and stage four.
And what you can see here is that by stage four, you have EEG activity which is slow,
highly synchronized, and high voltage.
So if you look here at stage four sleep, how different that looks from the awake EEG.
And this is how we investigate this in the laboratory.
Now during slow wave sleep, this very synchronized, very high voltage synchronized activity, we
actually have a decrease in heart rate, in our blood pressure, in our respiration.
And that means that there's a parasympathetic dominance.
So parasympathetic, this is part of the autonomic nervous system controlled by the hypothalamus
that's involved in rest and relaxation.
And so during the slow wave sleep, this is the system that is working, which is maximal
during this time.
If you awaken an individual during slow wave sleep, generally they do not recall any kind
of dream.
And so this is another way that slow wave sleep will be different from other stages of sleep.
In over about a 30 minute period, at the end of stage four, slow wave sleep, what happens
and this is about 90 minutes into the evening, or your first cycle of this anyway, there's
an episode of what is referred to as rapid eye movement sleep.
And rapid eye movement sleep, shown here again on our EEG pattern, this is a deeper level
of sleep.
Now what's interesting, look at this, look at REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, and
look at the normal EEG.
And what you see is that rapid eye movement sleep is very similar in its EEG pattern to
the awake state.
And for that reason, it's called paradoxical sleep.
It's actually the deepest level of sleep you can be in.
The arousal threshold is higher, it's harder to awaken people from it.
It's the deepest level of sleep, and yet the EEG looks like you're awake.
So it's called paradoxical sleep.
During rapid eye movement sleep, you have increased oxygen consumption, increased heart
rate, increased blood pressure, and increased respiration.
So this is where you have what's called a sympathetic dominance.
So it's your fight or flight.
So it's the part of the autonomic nervous system that wants to prepare you to fight.
So here your EEG activity looks like you're awake, you're in this kind of state, and actually
the consumption of oxygen by the brain is greater during REM sleep than it is during
either intense physical or mental exercise.
So the brain is very, very active.
Now over the course of the night, there may be five to seven of these cycles of both slow
wave sleep, REM sleep, and then back to slow wave sleep and REM sleep again.
So you have five to seven cycles a night, and there's sort of a progression as the night
goes on.
The slow wave sleep becomes less deep, and the REM episodes increase in length.
So there's a change during the night of these cycles, but you normally have five to seven
of such cycles a night.
Also over a lifetime, the amount of time slept and in various stages of sleep changes.
So for example, when we're babies, we sleep about 18 hours a day, and unfortunately for
our parents, the only time we're awake is when they're trying to sleep.
But we sleep about 18 hours a day, and as we age, we progressively spend less total number
of hours of sleep, or these are averages we're talking about.
There are also changes in REM sleep as we age.
One carefully, in humans, REM sleep begins in utero.
So fetuses actually have REM episodes, and in young infants, it comprises about 50%
of their total sleep time.
Then it diminishes to about 20% during puberty, and from that point on is relatively stable
until advanced age when it goes down again.
So there are changes in the amount of sleep and the way we sleep, and in particular stages
like REM, both developmentally and in other ways as we age.
At about this point in our course, you really have to stop and imagine all of this going
on in your brain.
We can walk and talk and think and listen to things, we can smile, we can interact,
we can do all kinds of things, and all these processes are being controlled in our brain.
The fact I'm awake right now is because there are nuclei in my reticular formation that
are causing me to be awake and causing me to be conscious, and without that, I wouldn't
even be able to be here in front of you.
And so at this point, we understand all of this is going on without our having to do
anything.
So this is just, I think, really fantastic.
So how does the brain control all these very stages now, and what do we know about it?
Well, the complexity of these circuits, I had to make sort of a decision about this,
the complexity of these circuits that involve both waking, sleeping, and switching between
the states is incredibly complex.
It's astounding actually.
I counted no less than 10 separate nuclei and 6 separate neurotransmitters that are involved
in a single stage of sleep.
And you can only imagine, those are only the ones that we know about.
These are only the ones we've discovered.
So rather than covering all of them, I sort of made an executive decision, and that is
that I don't want to go into details about any one of them or whatever.
I want to basically summarize for you what we believe is going on, because I think that's
more important than whether you hear a lot of the details of the anatomy.
So I try to draw a picture here for you that sort of summarizes overall what we've learned
about sleeping and dreaming and the regulation of these states.
There appear to be two general systems that are regulating these states.
One system here, which is shown in red, involves nuclei that are primarily at the pond's midbrain
junction.
And there's a second system, which is involved, a number of nuclei are involved here, in the
ponds and the medulla and other areas that project up to the cortex.
Both of these systems, in fact, either project directly to the cortex or project to the thalamus,
which then projects to the cortex.
So think of just two major systems.
This second system, which is down here, the one shown in black, primarily utilizes monomens
as neurotransmitters.
And we're going to come back to that little fact.
It's not something you would remember unless I pointed it out.
So what you did is think of two general systems that are involved.
And each of these may be multiple nuclei that are involved in multiple neurotransmitters.
Now just think in terms of these two systems.
During wakefulness, so while we're awake right now, both of these systems are active.
Both are stimulating the cortex and or the thalamus in the cortex, so they're both active.
During slow wave sleep, they both show a decrease in responsiveness.
So there's a decrease in activity in both of the systems during slow wave sleep.
And we also call slow wave sleep non-rem sleep.
During REM sleep, the red system is extremely active, and the black system is completely
turned off.
So we have two general systems that can be differentiated.
What they do during wakefulness, non-rem sleep or slow wave sleep, and REM sleep.
So think of it more in those terms.
I think that that would be much better for you to remember than the details of any one
of the systems.
So what about dreaming?
Dreaming is really interesting.
But we know even less about what mechanisms in the brain control dreaming.
We do know that it's controlled predominantly by reticular formation.
We do know this from lesions and individuals who had various types of brain damage and
everything.
We also know that all neurologically normal individuals do in fact dream every night and
dream multiple times.
Not everyone recalls their dreams, but everyone does dream.
People can have REM rebound or dream rebound if they're deprived of sleep.
So most dreaming we believe takes place during REM episodes.
And we'll come back to that because it isn't true that all dreaming takes place during
that time.
So actually contrary to popular belief, and that is that all episodes that involve dreaming
take place during REM.
We also know that there is dreaming associated with slow wave sleep or non-REM sleep.
But it turns out in slow wave sleep or REM sleep, recall is different and the content
of the dream is different.
So that's very interesting.
So let's look at dream content first.
During slow wave sleep, if you're awakened during a time when you're dreaming, there's
no story.
There's no story to what you remember.
Very poorly recalled, like a single event.
But if you're awakened during REM sleep, you can tell complex stories.
So your REM episodes have some kind of storyline associated with them.
It can be very complex.
There's very vivid imagery that takes place during REM episodes or during REM sleep.
And REM dreams are often recalled.
So in addition to increased dream recall that you have during REM over the course of a night,
there's also an increased intensity to the REM episodes or the dreaming that occurs in
REM.
And your most intense dreams take place in the early morning hours.
We don't know what controls this because we're just learning about what's going on in the
brain, but it is very interesting.
Also bad dreams can occur during REM.
And I'm calling them bad dreams, meaning that they're complicated stories that have a negative
sort of connotation.
So we call them bad dreams.
And these also take place during REM.
The dreams again that take place during non-REM sleep or what we call slow wave sleep are
poorly recalled.
And the dream content is generally less visual and less emotional.
Now we said this before, bad dreams can occur during REM sleep, but actually true nightmares
are seen only during slow wave sleep.
And again, this is something else that individuals who work in this area are very, very interested
in.
When you have nightmares, these occur during slow wave sleep.
So let's talk a little bit about that.
Such dreams that occurred during non-REM sleep or the slow wave sleep are true nightmares.
And they have respiratory oppression.
The individual has difficulty breathing.
And the person can be almost completely paralyzed during these episodes.
So these are true nightmares.
In children, the non-REM nightmares are called Pavar nocturnus, which means night terrors.
These episodes might last only one minute, and there may be no recall of it when the
child awakens.
The child may awaken by simply screaming in terror.
But when asked what the problem is, they can't recall anything.
Because remember, during slow wave sleep, there's very little visual imagery or anything
that could be recalled.
In adults who have nightmares during slow wave sleep, it's called incubus.
And that means demon or evil spirit.
So it was thought that these demons descended on these individuals who had these periods,
who had these terrible nightmares.
There can usually be no memory of the dream.
If there is any recall of these episodes, which are generally short, there's no story
involved.
It's just a single horrifying event.
And there are actually individuals who have damage to their brain and end up having Pavar
nocturnus or incubus as adults.
And this can be terrible for the persons even desire to want to sleep, because they don't
want to go to sleep.
They can't recall a story, but they don't want to go to sleep, which says that the brain
is retaining some kind of memory of this horrifying nightmare, which has taken place.
And all of us have this sort of dream weaver that's weaving our dreams for us anyway.
And we'll come back to a little bit about, in neurologically normal individuals, how
important dreams really are.
Sleep disorders, as everyone knows, are fairly common in our culture.
And they can involve something like insomnia, where a person can't go to sleep at night.
They can involve other problems like not being able to stay asleep once you've gone to sleep.
That can be terrible.
People wake up at, you know, one o'clock in the morning and can't go back to sleep.
Or individuals suffer from what we call somnolence, which is asleep in us during the day.
So they're sleepy all day long, and they just can't ever seem to be fully awake and tend
to drink a lot of coffee.
One of the best studied of the sleep disorders is narcolepsy.
And narcolepsy is a genetic disorder, a sleep disorder, which consists of episodes where
an individual will suddenly become very sleepy or fall asleep during the day.
So the individual can't help it.
They can't inhibit it.
They'll be carrying on a conversation, and they'll suddenly just go to sleep.
So they have these attacks during the day.
Individuals with this disorder typically have difficulty sleeping at night.
So that led us to think that there was probably some problem in whatever nuclei in the brain
controlled the switching from the one state to the other.
And in true, there have been found problems in this switching mechanism.
The first attack when people have narcolepsy doesn't generally occur until puberty to the
mid-twenties.
So the individual may not have any of these attacks until that time.
Now this is interesting because notice that this is a time when the regulation of REM
also changes.
This is when it goes from about 50% of total sleep down to 20%.
So these individuals also have something wrong with the nuclei or connections that control
REM episodes.
And in fact, what you see in individuals with narcolepsy, when they go to sleep suddenly
in the middle of the day, they go directly to REM.
So they don't go through all those other stages of sleep.
They suddenly go into a REM episode.
And in fact, there are individuals with this disorder who have REM episodes while they're
awake.
And they have difficulty because they have like hallucinatory events that are taking
place while they're awake because they're having this dream state occur while they're
actually awake and not asleep.
So individuals with this disorder also often have another disorder which is co-morbid with
it, which means they often occur together.
And that is a disorder called cataplexae.
And cataplexae is where there's a sudden loss of muscle tone in the individual that's brought
about by emotion.
So the individual, you tell them a joke and they start laughing, and suddenly they lose
all their muscle tone.
And they may collapse or they may only be slack, jawed, for example, something like that.
But they will lose muscle tone either in the whole body or in part of their body.
And these two disorders often exist in the same person and happen together.
Now these cataplexic episodes can occur when a person is about to have an episode where
they fall asleep.
So it can be when they go into one of those episodes, when they come out of it.
It doesn't take much to realize that this is a debilitating disorder.
So you have an individual who, it's very dangerous for one thing because this person
suddenly falls asleep, can't control it.
I knew someone when I was in college who had this disorder.
You could fall, you could hit your head, you could have a bleed in the brain, you could
die.
So it's a very dangerous disorder.
Not to mention if you also have cataplexae, it can interfere greatly with social interaction.
Both of, both narcolepsy and cataplexae can.
You're talking to an individual and you're in the middle of a conversation, suddenly
this person goes to sleep or suddenly this person's jaw falls open because they lose
muscle tone.
This changes the way this person is able to interact with other human beings in their
environment.
And so while it isn't a disorder that will kill you, it certainly is one that does interfere
with your ability to live a normal life.
One gene locus has been identified and this gene is believed to be one that controls the
switching mechanisms between the awake state to the sleep state to REM sleep.
And so it is the switching mechanism in particular that is odd.
Now narcolepsy can't be cured, but it can be treated.
And I thought you might find at this point in the course, it's kind of interesting how
it's treated.
A tax where the person suddenly falls asleep, well it makes sense, it's treated with stimulants.
You treat it with prescription level stimulants to try to keep the person awake and it operates
on these areas of the brain and that's why stimulants work.
The difficulty with REM sleep that they have, that they have these REM episodes while they
are awake or when they have a narcoleptic attack, they go directly to REM, that's treated
with tricyclic antidepressants or MAO inhibitors.
Remember when we talked about not calling a drug an antidepressant or something, what
mattered was its mechanism of action.
Well it turns out that that one system which is basically turned off during REM in normal
individuals is the system that uses monoamines.
So in order to, the individual with narcolepsy of course doesn't have that system working
correctly.
So what you want to do is increase the monoamines so they have fewer REM episodes and so they
give them tricyclics that increase their level of monoamines.
But they're the same drugs that would be given to a person who had depression.
And so again it's the mechanism of action that matters in any drug you take or anyone
prescribes for you which is the most important thing.
Now sleep research is very important, it's a very active area of research.
We spend about a third of our lives asleep.
And this in itself says that something important has to be going on and yet we don't have any
idea why we need to sleep or why we need to dream.
We really don't have any idea.
So dreaming in particular is something that captivates our imagination.
You know there are cultures who've always thought that it gives you foreign knowledge
of the future, that it can portend things, that this is very important, give us insight
into our desires and our secret wishes.
Freud gave us a peek into the subconscious of what was going on in our minds and certainly
maybe all of this is true on some level.
But we think that obviously there's a reason.
REM episodes start in utero.
We know that that's true.
We know something else.
Only animals with neocortex have REM episodes.
So these episodes were the storyline and the visual imagery and everything, all of this
occurs only in animals that have a neocortex.
And so there's something going on, there's something that's important.
The only real line of evidence that is beginning to maybe give us a little insight into what
sleep and dreaming are about is that it turns out that REM is necessary or thought to be
involved in helping in the consolidation of memory.
So while the hippocampus may take information in involved in learning and memory, it looks
like if you prevent REM episodes from happening, you prevent the consolidation into long-term
memory.
And so there's something about what's happening during those episodes that the brain needs
to somehow transfer the information, that short-term buffer in the hippocampus, to more
long-term storage or change in proteins.
The other thing we think is very, very interesting is that for most of us, we may every once
while have a dream in which we realize we're dreaming, but actually we can very readily
tell the difference between dreaming and awake state.
In fact, but we have to be awake to be able to do that.
So when we wake up in the morning after getting the fog cleared out, we clearly can tell the
difference between a dream state and a waking state.
Well, cognitive neuroscientists are interested in this because they want to know what processes
are going on during the awake state that allows that self-reflection that tells us the one
was real and the other is not.
And so cognitive neuroscientists are very interested in wakefulness, sleeping and dreaming.
So in the next lecture, what we're going to look at is the enigma of the conscious state.
And this is something that truly captivates philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists.
Thank you.
