Hello. I'm Tom Rawlings, president of The Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
The Great Courses on Tape cover a broad array of university-level disciplines. The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you could finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are entitled The Soul and the City, Art, Literature and Urban Living. The speaker is Professor Arnold Weinstein of Brown University.
Dr. Weinstein received his bachelor's degree from Princeton University. He received his MA and PhD from Harvard University in comparative literature and was a Fulbright scholar from 1966 to 1967.
He has taught at Brown University since 1968 where he is now the Henry Merritt-Riston Professor and Professor of Comparative Literature. He is the author of several books and over 40 articles.
Lecture 1, The City as Container, The Artist as Map Maker
The city life almost sounds like a paradox today because I think the question that a lot of people have in their minds is, are cities livable at all?
When I brought with me a quote that I read this morning in the Washington Post,
DC reels from night of violence. District police spent yesterday morning counting the dead, the near dead and the injured.
And by late afternoon the grim census from the overnight violence in southeast Washington said that three had been killed and at least nine wounded.
And even as police regrouped there were two more slayings yesterday.
As a DC man was gunned down in northeast Washington and a 66 year old woman was found fatally stabbed in her northwest Washington apartment.
The overnight rampage spanned seven hours late Thursday and early yesterday and in that time the wounded drove themselves to hospitals, were airlifted to a trauma unit or died on operating tables.
In one case police said a man fought off two people who were trying to force their way into his house, shot them with a weapon, he managed to rest away, then was shot dead in return.
City life, so that's the city as a war zone.
And I think that that image of the city which is, I think, comes home to us in the papers frequently, comes home to us in the way we live.
That image is a very grim foreboding image and I think it's important, it's one of the reasons that I'm doing this course, to widen our optic about what city life has meant.
And perhaps even today in these grim times what it does at least portend.
This is what this course is not. It is not a compendium of facts and data on particular cities.
It's not a guidebook, a Michelin red or green guide to particular cities, museums, restaurants.
Those are useful documents. It's not what's going to happen in the course.
And it's not really even a comprehensive historical look at the cities that I'll be talking about in passing, which will be London and Paris and some on St. Petersburg, as it was then called, and a bit on New York.
What the course is, is a speculative account of city life, of the way that individual life changes.
It's conditioned, threatened, heightened, impoverished and also enriched by the fact of living in cities.
And to tell that story I want to look at the arts.
By arts I mean predominantly literature, that is to say fiction, poetry, drama, but also painting, also film, and we'll see in one of the lectures even architecture.
And the story that I want to tell is largely a story of the development of the modern city from the mid-18th century to today.
But in some cases I'm going to range as far back as Periclean Athens, and in some cases we will consider possible future scenarios.
Now why would you push the arts as a guide or record to city life?
In 1983 the Reagan administration gave New York City $300,000 to improve the image of its neighborhoods.
And among other things this entailed pasting vinyls, vinyl decals, happy vinyl decals of flowers, the neighborhood pets and things like that,
over the smashed-in windows of abandoned buildings so that developers who were speeding by on the Crosswalks Expressway would perceive a dressed-up city, a happy city, a city that looked smart.
And it's against that view of art, that view of art as thrills, as cover-up, it's against that view of art as really window dressing, which is what it literally is in that anecdote,
that I'm presenting art as a guide to the city.
I'm going to suggest that artworks are in fact a very privileged entry into the city, into understanding city lives, and by extension into understanding our own lives.
This is a somewhat anomalous position.
That urban studies as a field is a field that really privileges the social sciences and it privileges empirical data, facts, statistics, it works on issues such as demography, population count obviously,
size of buildings, quantifiable data for the most part.
And when urban historians take into account art, it's usually, it is a kind of corollary, like it backs up or confirms or adds to what we have come to by more scientific means.
Art is thought often to be suspiciously soft, impressionistic, distorted, the private angle.
I want to argue it just the other way.
I want to suggest that the arts render for us the feel of the city, the experience of city life, a story that is even libidinal rather than factual, that has little to do with quantifiable data or charts or figures,
but instead depicts our subjective life, our responses, not how much we earned, what we bought, what we ate, what we spent, but issues instead like what we feared, what we felt, what we desired, what we dreamed.
And if you ask those questions, then you have to ask yourself, what kind of data do we have for those things?
Where do we get answers?
Where is the record for those experiences?
And of course my answer is that art is the record for those experiences.
And so art is going to be very prominent in this presentation.
And I, the term I use for speculative, this is a speculative approach.
And I hope that you will respond to it that way, that you will have, no one is an expert about the experience of city life.
All of us in some sense are experts about it perhaps, if we live in cities and we know something about them.
So I hope that we can have some give and take about these matters.
Your take on a number of the issues that I'm going to present may well be different from mine.
Now, if art is in general thought to be a bit soft and suspicious, perhaps mushy for the urban scientists,
you can well imagine that the art form that would be mushyest of all, most private, would be poetry.
Poetry in the social sciences is usually very often thought to be a rather forbidding the esoteric form.
And the students who come to Brown to take my courses, usually you have to almost corral them, force them to read poems.
So I'm going to make us read a poem. I'm going to read a poem to you and take a look at it as a kind of test case
for what it is art can tell us, show us, help us to discover about the city.
And it's an old poem. It's a poem written by William Blake in 1793 and the title of it is London.
I'm going to read it through and then I'm going to talk to you about it for a few minutes.
I also think it's a great poem. I like it.
I wander through each chartered street near where the chartered Thames does flow and mark in every face I meet marks of weakness, marks of woe.
In every cry of every man, in every infant's cry of fear, in every voice, in every band, the mind forged manacles I hear.
How the chimney sweepers cry, every blackening church appalls, and the hapless soldier's sigh runs in blood down palace walls.
But most through midnight streets I hear how the youthful harlots curse, blast the newborn infant's tear, and blights with plagues the marriage hearse.
I don't think anybody has ever called marriage a hearse quite before Blake did, although I suspect a lot of people have since.
Now, this poem to me is emblematic of how poetry in its compressed way gives us a rich and dense picture of how we live in an environment.
I wander through each chartered street. I wander is the very fundamental act, seems to me, of city life.
Not I drive, but I wander. It's the human body on its own feet encountering the city.
And we're going to see that as a repeated posture in a great deal of the works that I'm going to talk about.
It is the mode of urban movement on the feet in the streets.
Through each chartered street near where the chartered Thames does, and you can't miss in this very brief poem,
the amount of times this poet repeats the same words to emphasize them, the chartered street and the chartered Thames.
Well, we all know you can charter streets.
Charter has its own old echoes and meanings.
Charters are in fact documents, agreements between rulers and the ruled.
Going back to the earliest charter we know of, at least in English history, the Magna Carta.
And this poem is about the relationship between the ruled and the ruler.
Now, you can charter streets, but can you charter the Thames?
The Thames flows. It's this kind of natural flowing source, and the poet says it too is chartered.
And I think he there gets at some of the basic conflicts of this poem.
And you'll see that that chartered Thames, in fact, is going to reappear.
Marked in every face I meet, marks of wheat against marks of woe.
It's a very, I think, striking formulation about the city as a place of misery.
And note the kind of totalitarian vision here.
Everyone looks the same way. Every face I meet marks of weakness, marks of woe.
Mark, of course, is repeated three times. Mark in every face I meet.
And he clearly means to remark, to see, to acknowledge.
I think that we could also look at that verb to mark in every face I meet
and think of it really in modern terms as marking the way we mark when we make graffiti.
That maybe the poet looks at these people and he marks their faces.
This poem is about how we see. We think of seeing often as a kind of passive operation that the world is out there
and we've got holes in our face and the world comes in to our brain and we call that sight.
And what I think is being suggested here is that vision is aggressive.
It's active. It's starting. It's marking.
And I think by the time one finishes this poem, you really have the question,
do I see the same world that he does? If I walk down the streets of London,
would I possibly take in the same scene that he does?
Would people look the same way? Would the city look the same way?
And in a sense that the answer is yes, then the poem hasn't meant much to you.
If the answer is no, like what kind of strange vision is this,
then in fact the poem leads us into a totally different perspective.
The second stanza is even more totalizing.
In every cry of every man, in every infant's cry of fear,
in every voice, in every band, the mind forged manacles I hear.
And again, you have to wonder, could it really be so much the same?
I think the expression the mind forged manacles is one of the great formulations of modern time.
Mind forged manacles. Manacles everybody understands.
Manacles are what the forces of authority do to people.
But Blake is talking about here is not so much oppression but repression
that the police force that really does the most damage to us
is the one that's inside of us, that we have internalized.
Mind forged manacles. We do the job ourselves.
And I think that there is, Freud of course would have totally agreed with this.
Blake, who's writing over a hundred years before Freud,
prefigures a great deal of Freud's view of repression
and the way in which we police our own instincts, our own libidinal urges
in order to meet the conditions of civilization.
The poem begins to open up in its third and fourth stanzas
how the chimney sweepers cry every blackening church of polls
and the hapless soldier sigh runs in blood down palace walls.
And this is where we begin to see the city and to hear its noises.
The chimney sweepers cry every blackening church of polls.
Blake wrote a number of poems about chimney sweepers.
And in the London of his day, these were young boys,
frequently between five and eight years old.
You had to be very small to get up into the London chimneys then.
And they were thrust into these chimneys.
One of his most lovely poems is called the chimney sweeper.
He writes a version of it in the Songs of Innocence
and a version of it in the Songs of Experience.
And these chimneys themselves were so narrow
and, of course, they were so rough on the child, the chimney sweeper,
that the children frequently went into these chimneys naked
because skin, you didn't have to buy a replacement for that.
They had terrible kinds of calluses and many of them died in these chimneys.
And in one of his poems on chimney sweepers, he speaks of that chimney as a casket, as a coffin.
And I think he's not even being very figurative. It literally was that.
Well, notice here that the chimney sweepers cry,
and presumably it's a cry that's uttered inside of a chimney.
No one walking down the street in London is going to hear it.
This poem hears it. It's a visionary poem.
You see things that you can't see, and he hears things that most of us don't hear.
And what does this cry do? It appalls every blackening church.
Now, the chimney sweeper is inside the chimney cleaning the chimney.
And what Blake is doing here, and he's doing it most overtly in these lines,
is he is drawing for us the connection between the individual and the institution.
That there is a connection being spelled out here, painted in front of our eyes,
between this child, who is a kind of urban worker at a very young age,
and the institutions of London culture, notably the church.
And that this child's cry reverses his work.
It doesn't cleanse anything. It blackens. It indicts. The church is blackening.
And the second line, the second part of the stanza, is even more overt.
And the hapless soldier's sigh runs in blood down callous walls.
The soldier that Blake is referring to is doubtless not a soldier who is in London.
It's a soldier doing the work of empire, a soldier who is losing his life abroad,
in service of the king.
That sigh, now that he uses the word sigh, it's the last thing that you could pick up in here.
That's what this figure hears.
He hears that sigh, and then in a kind of extraordinary transformation,
the hapless soldier's sigh runs in blood down callous walls.
And there is the Thames. It can't be charted.
It's the river that continues to flow.
This time it's become a river of blood, and it is a script.
It runs in blood down walls for everybody to see.
That is the connection between the victimization of the soldier during the work of empire
and this urban language that he can see at this time.
It's not the institution of the church. It's the institution of the palace.
And it's down those walls that that sigh is transformed into blood that pours.
It says if you cannot charter that, you cannot regulate that.
It will come out. It will be on show.
It will be readable at least for the heightened vision,
the heightened perceptions of this poet.
And then by extension, you can tell, I'm trying to make my argument for art.
This kind of document the social sciences would essentially rule out is what does this tell us.
And I suggest that what Blake is trying to tell us is how urban culture works,
what position we have in it, what the relations are between individuals and institutions.
And then that rather harrowing, really gruesome last stanza,
but most through midnight streets I hear.
And every time I read this poem, it stuns me to get that line.
I never think that we're at midnight, but I think this poem starts in a kind of casual way.
I wander through each chartered street.
It sounds like a little promenade, and it gets very grisly by the end.
You realize that it's midnight. It's a very different kind of setting.
And what does he hear?
I hear how the youthful harlot's curse blasts the newborn infant's tear
and blights with plagues the marriage curse.
Extraordinarily convinced, threatening, nightmarish kinds of lines.
Presumably he's talking about the prostitutes who line the streets of London at night.
And we understand the 18th century language that the word plague means for a writer at that time, syphilis, venereal disease.
And so the youthful harlot's curse blasts the newborn infant's tear and blights with plagues the marriage curse.
It's a very bold formulation that says that the prostitutes pass on the venereal disease.
The men give it to their wives.
The wives bear children who themselves are diseased.
Blast the newborn infant's tear and blights with plagues the marriage curse.
There are a number of important city figures that are being used here.
Ever since the Bible, the corrupt city is Babylon, and it's whore, the whore of Babylon.
And I think that's what Blake has in mind when he talks about the youthful harlot.
And we see again that there is a kind of powerful vision of individuals and institutions,
but also of an exchange system, a marketplace system, which is one of the titles of a future lecture I'm going to give,
about the city as a marketplace of buying and selling.
That's what happens to the chimney sweep, to the soldier, and to the prostitute.
They are used, they are commodified, they are turned into items on the marketplace.
And what Blake is talking about is there is a language of victimization that we should attend to,
that we can hear if we are properly attuned to it, that we can see if our eyes are properly sharpened.
Blast the newborn infant's tear and blights with plagues the marriage curse.
When one thinks about this poem, it seems to me it's possible to say that he's not only talking about prostitutes,
that this is a time where in fact women had very little choice in marriage.
They were fundamentally sold themselves, sold to the highest bidder, sold by their fathers frequently.
And I think he's making a statement, if you know enough about Blake, he's one of these great liberation kinds of writers,
he's making a statement about marriage, that marriage itself transforms women into prostitutes.
I mean, if it's an unconsented marriage, if it's a forced marriage, if it's simply a marriage of property,
and the young girl is more or less sold into it, then it is in fact comparable to prostitution.
Now plague, plague we're going to see is an almost stock item in city thinking, and I'll be talking about it a lot as I go.
Plague is the epidemic disease that strikes everyone, the epidemic disease that is really ecological disease.
And Blake ends his poem with really a portrait of a totally diseased city, a city that seems to be infected entirely with disease,
either venereal disease or perhaps a larger kind of disease we could talk about.
And I think that this is a very daunting picture of a city that is really experiencing apocalypse.
That is what it means when blights with plagues, the marriage hears the said, that is to say there will not be a future.
That the city, its people are diseased in their organs of generation, sexually diseased,
the newborn infants tear, the babies are born dying, there will be no future.
It's about as graphic a picture really of apocalypse as we can imagine.
And Blake clearly has in mind a different kind of city, a city that he would have called the New Jerusalem,
and she is contrasting with the corrupt marketplace buying and selling city of London.
What I really want to stress is that this is a poem that makes visible to us what we cannot see with our own eyes.
We can't see the connection between individuals and institutions.
We can see individuals and we know about institutions, but the linkage, the connection, the causal relationships,
the forces that in fact inform, govern and perhaps destroy our lives are not visible.
We just, the retina doesn't take it in.
That's what it means to write visionary poetry, is to put that on show.
This is a poem about forms of enslavement, forms of exploitation, about buying and selling,
and by the time you finish it, and it starts as I said in the most casual, seductive way,
I wander through each chartered street, by the time you finish it, an entire culture really, it seems to me,
is on trial and being invited and being shown in its operations, its charters, its contractual operations
and what that betokens for individual people.
Now that to me is an example, and you may be seeing it here as persuaded of it as I am,
an example of how artistic material sheds light for us on the kinds of relationships that we have,
the kinds of interactions that we have with our culture.
Now, in this course, there are going to be a number of fundamental themes,
and I could just about say that there's something like an arts poetic, like a poetic art.
The vital factors, the vital concerns seem to reappear over and over in city text,
and I think that they reappear in city text because they are factors of city life.
They won't surprise you, but what I want to do in this course is to think about it,
to unpack them, to reflect on them, to see the ways in which they might be considered.
The first one that I would indicate is anonymity.
It's a kind of fundamental fact of city dwelling.
Not that one is anonymous in one's own family or one's own house or with one's own friends,
but these would be the city. These would be the larger metropolis.
One is destined to be nameless, faceless, anonymous.
Now, I'd like to suggest that there are two takes, two readings at least, of this kind of anonymity.
We all know the negative one, solid alienation, impersonality, and you extend the list.
It sounds like these are the modern conditions that we all know about, and I don't want to belittle that.
That is going to be a very, very substantial element in city art, and I think it's an element in city life.
But what I'd like to suggest is that you also could view it from the other side about what are the virtues of anonymity.
What is it betoken or promised for human beings that people don't know them?
This is the clear distinction between village culture and city culture.
The village is the place or the small town that you may have come from where everybody knows you inside out.
They know who your parents were, they know who your grandparents were.
You are at least thought to be a legible person.
It's by contrast, I think, by the way, that's one of the reasons people leave small towns and that they go to cities to live.
And so you can see what I'm getting at.
The anonymity of city life can in fact also be a condition of its freedom, a condition of one's own mobility.
It can be an invitation to self-making, self-invention, not you as the product of your parents,
you as the person who always lived at that particular house,
but you as someone who is really a mobile proposition,
you as someone who is inventing him or herself, creating a life for him or herself,
and not always being tagged or checked by the environment or by the others.
So this gets me close to the notion of maneuvering room that people have in cities
that they do not have in other kinds of cultural environments.
The second issue that is a sort of a recurring feature of both city art and city life,
and I think it's a really great plot of city literature, is encounter.
Encounter with the other or with others.
And here too, I think, two kinds of readings are possible.
Certainly, we all know the negative reading.
Encounter in the city is your encounter with violence, murder, mugging, rape, death.
Those are all varieties, dark varieties of encounter.
What happens when you wander through city streets?
What can happen?
They're obviously in line with that article from the Washington Post that I started the lecture with.
But certainly there too, there is another side to it.
And it's the side that we would do well to consider more deeply, which is, again, it's self-evident.
It's the positive side of encounter, which is learning from others, meeting others,
encounter that would lead to friendship.
People do make friends in the city.
They meet people that they didn't know before they got there.
And let's take it further.
Romance, heaven knows it's one of the most cliched plots of Hollywood films,
is that people come to the city and they bump into other folks who they end up falling in love with,
and you can just trace that one further.
And as a further extension of that, something that becomes a bit more structural, in my mind at least,
and it's family.
Not the family, the blood family that you have, that you come from, that you didn't choose,
that's predetermined, but a different kind of family.
A chosen family.
A kind of spiritual kinship, not a blood one.
And that that's possible in city life.
Well, we're going to see that this happens in a number of wonderful city techs.
It's kind of a predominant theme in the novels of Dickens and of Balzac,
of how people make their families.
And there, too, they're chosen arrangements, chosen human connections.
All of these, I think, are the positive side of encounter.
And these, too, are reasons why people come to the city, why they want to live there.
A theme that was very visible, foregrounded in the Blake poem, is exchange.
Exchange as perhaps the basic activity of cities.
Ways of defining the city, first and foremost, from its origins right onto today, as a marketplace.
And there we think of the exchange of goods and services.
We can think of exchange in a more intellectual and cultural way,
an influx of ideas, an outflow of ideas and of cultures.
And there, too, of course, there is a much darker, more threatening view of exchange.
And I think that's what Blake was putting his finger on.
And that's exchange as a kind of really almost totalitarian commodity system,
where the people are not exchanging goods and services, but people have become the goods themselves.
Prostitution would be, as I said, one version of that,
that the human being could be reduced to being a commodity, the human being for sale.
Or, in a somewhat less melodramatic formulation, what about just life itself as reduced to consumerism?
That is to say, thinking of the urban environment as exclusively exchange,
ruling out any other kinds of interests or issues.
And that, too, is possible. One could call it the Bloomingdale syndrome or something like that.
Another important theme for the city is entry into culture.
And this goes back to the beginning, I think, of our notations on city life.
And I would refer you back to the Bible.
That the founder of cities in the Old Testament is Cain.
Cain is the man who found cities.
He is a marked man. You remember the presence of marked people in the Blake poem.
He's a man marked by God. He is exiled from the garden.
Well, not quite from the garden, but certainly from the human family.
He is a fractured side as well. And he is the man who found cities.
These are not accidental features about the myths that go around cities.
Certainly a myth that you're all familiar with is the Romulus Remus story about the founding of Rome.
That, too, is a story of fractured side, of violence that is, in a haunting way, inseparable from the founding of cities.
And then if we think about what happens in cities, the kind of prediction of the hostilities and violence that continue to threaten
cities. And I said entry into culture in the sense that, to put it in shorthand, when we leave the garden, we enter culture.
That cities are, in fact, the cultural form that people live in as opposed to living in caves, living in the woods,
or any of the kind of nostalgic ideals that people have had about the desirable life.
Another great theme is orientation as the challenge of city life and of city art.
Finding one's way, that's obvious in a literal sense. How do I get from here to the grocery store, to the bank?
But it doesn't take a whole lot of imagination to realize that finding your way is a larger proposition.
It's a kind of orientation that could be existential, it could be spiritual.
And we'll see that city techs are frequently dealing with those matters about the ways in which you could be lost.
Going back to the Bible again, the first city that is mentioned is the city of Babel.
It's a city of confusion, of noise, of languages that divide people.
That's how it's talked about in the book of Genesis.
And I think for many people walking today, for the first time in New York City, it's Babel.
It is noises, it's languages, dialects that one doesn't understand.
A lot of these old mythic traditional versions, I think, are absolutely with us today.
And the last point that I would make is history. And I won't do much with that yet, but I will in my lectures to come.
History has in some ways the deep ground of city life and of city art.
The buildings of the past, the reasons why we travel to various cities.
Why we would go to Paris or to Rome, Venice, it's partly to re-experience the past.
The past is what lives in those buildings are the past.
Where is the 18th century, the 17th century?
In some sense, it still lives for us in the buildings that remain.
So those are the kind of features of city art and of city life that recur over and over in the text that we're going to look at.
And common to all of them is a kind of cardinal urban truth, which is that city life complicates and at its best enriches private life.
But then something so simple that it hardly meets saying, and yet we're going to see that that is the great threat
and also the great promise, the great possible reward of living in Metropolis.
Now, I started with that really awful piece in the post, and I'll return to that for a minute, not that segment,
but the reminder that the cities today are thought of as unlivable.
And we all know the list of things that are wrong with them, blight, decay, poverty, violence, drugs, disease,
places of racial and ethnic unrest, arteries of the city are clogged.
We know about what a nightmare it is to commute.
And when we think of the city stories that come to us today,
Bensonhurst, the flight of the Central Park jogger, the drama of the Utah family by the subway,
it's possible to think if those are the facts of city life, how can you stand here and talk to us about art?
I mean, art can really look a little bit obscene against that backdrop of actuality, murderous actuality.
And the first thing I would say is that those stories in their own ways are not new.
The Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet is a story about warring families within a city,
and you mentioned her, so relatable in my mind, to West Side Story, which is in itself a remake of Romeo and Juliet,
or a fellow, another, I think, very urban play of Shakespeare.
It's about a black man who is the defender of a white, Christian city,
and comes to understand during the play just how complex, how complicated, how illusory perhaps that role is,
the amount of paranoia that can go into that, or what Iago does at the end of that play of niking people in the dark.
Those are urban scenes that are still with us, but they are not new.
Aristotle, long ago, gave us a very positive reading of the city.
He defined it this way, men come together in the city to live, they remain there in order to live the good life.
The etymology of the city connotes words like civic, citizen, civilization,
and the city has always had common cause with cultural and social achievement.
Lewis Mumford, who I think is one of the very great urban art cultural historians, has written this about the city.
The chief function of the city is to convert power into form, energy into culture,
dead matter into the living symbols of art, biological reproduction into social creativity.
Notice that consistent stress on transformation, not the city as a place,
but the city as work that is being performed, cultural work.
The last thing that I want to mention in this lecture is part of what I gave as a subtitle for this first lecture,
which is the artist as map maker, mapping.
The map is the first thing that many of us get when we go to a strange city, and we know what maps tell us.
They give us a disposition of streets, they tell us about the neighborhoods,
or the arrondissement, the boroughs, or whatever, how the city is divided spatially.
It's important to have maps because when we step out of the door onto the street, buildings are unnamed,
and we can't see very far, and we don't know experientially the things that map tell us.
That's why we have the maps. They domesticate space out there.
They allow us a certain kind of orientation.
But the point I want to make is to flip side of that, that one of the most fundamental features of the city
is that it dwarfs us spatially and visually, that it reminds us of what a small spot we occupy in it.
And it's in that sense that the city is an enormous spatial container.
Now maps are conventional.
They tell us where parks are, and churches perhaps, and railroad tracks,
but they're not likely to point out what restaurant you like best to eat in.
A map will rarely tell you which neighborhood is beautiful and which one is hideous.
It will not tell you about civic unrest and where you're not supposed to go.
And maps change.
We know that the Rand-McNally folks are having a lot of trouble making maps now about Eastern Europe.
The places are changing, the boundaries are changing, the names are changing.
And if you look at old maps of the Renaissance, you realize there's a lot of guesswork that goes in maps as well.
People didn't really quite know where certain places ended and where they started, how far the sea went, etc.
And what I'm trying to do is to take that notion of map and suggest to you that there's something flexible and loose about maps,
something even a bit subjective, that the map is our way of mapping the environment.
It's our way of graphing and laying out the environment.
And in that light that I want to suggest to you that it's an apt metaphor for city art.
If you can think of novels and poems and paintings as maps, as ways of laying out the city.
And what I think you have to realize is that unlike maps, I don't know, I mean even if you like your map,
you're not likely to identify with it or to get invested with it emotionally or psychologically.
But art allows you to do that.
There's a different kind of discourse that when we read poems or plays or novels, we first personalize them in some ways.
We have a vicarious experience so that it's an entry into, in a very privileged way that art may be thought of as avenues that can lead us into cities.
Perhaps leaders into cities that no longer exist if you read a novel about London in the 18th century.
London's not there in the 18th century, but the novel gives you a taste of that.
Or it may lead you into places that in fact you would not go into in reality.
But you would definitely enter in an artwork, in a painting or in a poem.
What I'm saying is these are the benefits of art.
They enable us a kind of extended experience, a kind of vicarious experience that we in fact would not choose often in reality.
Now, maps we think of as measuring space, obviously.
What I want to suggest is that the city art also is a map in a radically different way, that it's a map of time.
And in that sense, I think we underestimate it.
Time is of course what we cannot see.
Our eyes are not equipped to see that.
But I want to suggest that the city itself, as well as city art, encloses us in a kind of temporal, historical continuum.
Makes us more aware of its own reach historically and temporally.
And you will see in a number of the texts that we're going to, that I'll be talking about, that there is a very fascinating parallel with individual time,
which is frequently thought of as memory, one's own past, the things that are not present here and now, and the temporal or historical reaches of the city.
So that city art, both temporally and spatially, makes us more aware of our placidness, of the space and the time we occupy.
Of the here and the now, as in some sense being part of a there and a then.
The city artist then comes across as both a surveyor and a chronicler.
And my bottom line is, we need figures like that.
That I think we live particularly in cities, all too often, at the surface, and for the moment.
And that art like this helps us to perceive the reaches and the dimensions of our environment.
And if we're lucky then, of ourselves. Thank you.
