Butcher 2 Lost in Space
I'd like to talk more about space.
And the title that I'd like to give this is Lost in Space,
which sounds a little bit hoken like a sci-fi title.
But as I said, I think space is really the kind of fundamental medium of the city,
and it's what we first encounter.
And Lost in it, as indicated, is one of the themes of city art frequently.
And I want to think about it from the other end as well.
What do we do with an enormous amount of space
that it's an incessant challenge related to organization?
I called it map-making, but we could use other words like design,
social order as well, pattern.
And I think you can't do research in matters like this.
I think that the imposition of design, of seeing something and giving it a shape,
is one of the most elemental human instincts that there is.
When you trump it up, you can call it art, or you can trump it up municipally.
You can call it city planning or architecture.
But the impetus itself, I think, is lodged inside of every human being
to give shape, to give pattern, to give form.
It's pleasing to the human mind.
There's a kind of something, I think, really almost hedonistic
about the perception or the making of pattern and of form.
And I want to have us think about those kinds of appetites.
It's not just a rational operation. There's an appetite.
There's something appetitive in it about our want, our desire to do things like this.
And you'll see, I'm going to give you one or two texts where this desire to impose form on space
gets into a lot of trouble, creates other kinds of problems.
The city itself frequently appears as a kind of prime arena for experiments in design,
and also, as we all know, for failures as well as successes along those lines.
Now, I'm going to backtrack, and I'm going to talk to you about a myth
that you probably are familiar with, although it's rarely considered an urban myth.
And it's the myth of thesis in the labyrinth that goes like this.
The king Minos wants to be king of Crete.
And for this, he asks the god Poseidon, or whom we also know as Neptune, for a special sign.
And what Poseidon does is he sends a white bull from the sea.
This seems to do the job. This is enough for Minos to be proclaimed king.
However, the understanding with the white bull that comes from the sea
is that Minos is then to sacrifice it to Poseidon.
Well, this bull is so beautiful, so breathtaking, that Minos cannot bring himself to sacrifice the bull.
So Poseidon then decides to punish Minos, and the way he does it
is he has Minos' wife, Poseidon, fall in love with the bull.
Now, this presents problems of its own.
And Poseidon turns to Daedalus.
Daedalus is the resident craftsman, architect, and I think genius in the area,
and asks Daedalus to make a disguise for her, and he does.
And so disguised as a cow, she can then have intercourse with the bull.
The result of that is the Minotaur, the Minotaur that is half bull and half human.
Minos is not very happy with this turn of events.
He then commissions Daedalus to build a maze to house the monster in.
And each year, youths and maidens are sacrificed to the monster.
And each year, young heroes, trying their metal, present themselves in order to enter the maze,
find the Minotaur, slant, and exit.
And of course it never happens, until Theseus comes.
More or less at the beginning of his career.
When Theseus comes, Theseus is very smart.
Theseus, first of all, woos the daughter of Minos, Ariadne.
And Ariadne promises to give him a thread,
a little bit like the Hansen and Gretelstone,
to give him a thread so that when he makes his way into the maze, into the labyrinth,
and assuming that he can slay the monster, he can then follow the thread to find his way out.
Theseus is really a more energetic womanizer, even, than Ariadne knows.
Because he also courts her younger sister, Sadra.
So, Theseus goes into the maze, slays the Minotaur, follows the thread out, takes Ariadne with him,
abandons Ariadne on the island of Nexus to keep with his her younger sister, Sadra.
All does not end well for Theseus, however.
He is then punished by Poseidon, and also Acridite,
by the subsequent incestuous longings of Sadra for his own son, Hippolytus.
And that ends up with the death of Hippolytus, caused by a monster from the sea.
Now, Thisus punishes Bedelus by imprisoning him, but Bedelus, in a version that you all are familiar with,
fashions wings for himself and for his son Icarus, attaches them to his body with wax,
and flies out of the island to prison.
And we all know that Icarus flies too close to the sun, the wax melts, and he falls.
It's a great story.
It's a fable about power, about sexual power.
It's hard to miss the longings between a woman and a bull is telling us something about erotic power.
It's about the power of becoming king, what you would do to become king, how you remain king.
And it's also about human cunning and human resourcefulness, about the building of an environment,
about finding one's way in it, and finding one's way out of it.
And that's why I think it's an urban parallel.
And at the heart of the labyrinth, we find the monster, the minotaur.
And I'd like to suggest that that is also very resonant, that at the heart of the labyrinth,
there is violence, there's monstrosity, and that the maze is built to control or to contain a kind of erotic secret.
Now, it's not hard to see in this a kind of structural educational pattern.
And we'll see it in city text.
To enter the labyrinth, to make your way in, and to face up to the secret that is contained at the heart of it.
It's an exploratory plot in its own way.
It could even be thought of as a kind of paradigm of rites of passage.
After all, that's how the young heroes presented themselves in the first place.
To prove their manhood by entering the labyrinth and trying to kill the minotaur.
Vicious comes out of this as a hero who successfully finds his way.
And mind you, he's given to us really two very different kinds of traits.
One is the prowess to destroy the minotaur.
But the other, the city has the wit and the cunning to woo the women, find his way out with the Fred.
This has nothing to do with muscles.
This has to do with a certain kind of fruitness.
And I think that in some ways, this adventure of Aethesias takes, for example, Homeric figures like Achilles and Odysseus.
Achilles, who represents great pride and great strength.
And Odysseus, who is resourceful in cunning.
And it fuses them together in this story.
Both kinds of strengths are being talked about here.
Ariadne's thread is a perfect and recurring metaphor for orientation in the built environment.
For finding one's way.
It's a mythic version of a key to the city.
And you will note the emphasis in the story on walking, really.
Walking through the maze.
And I'm going to talk more about walking.
I already mentioned that the way Blake's poem works that way.
I'll come back to it.
Most of all, there's the splendid figure of Daedalus, the maze maker of antiquity.
Daedalus the artisan builds a labyrinth.
It is, for him, a marvel of rational design, of world construction.
The same man is an expert on disguises.
He alters Pacify into a cow and himself into a bird.
And I think there, too, he shows a kind of foot spa, a kind of fundamental human energy
to conquer the environment, to impose his own will over it.
A kind of imperial appetite to extend his own reach.
Certainly that's what flying means, to extend his own reach.
I think McLuhan could have done something with him.
To build models.
But this environment, this maze that he constructs as a kind of product of his own intelligence and rationality,
how does it function for the creature in it?
And we cannot fail to see that the maze functions as a prison for the creature in it.
It contains the Minotaur, but it is also built with the idea in mind that people trying their pluck against the Minotaur
would never be able to find their way out in the first place.
So it's a marvel of order for the builder, but it's a pure prison for the trapped figure who lives or walks inside it.
And with this story, I think we have a whole slew of elements that go into city art.
We see the role of human cunning and the kind of drama that consists of finding your way.
We see how one person's design can be another person's nightmare.
We see that building structures constitutes an exercise in power, particularly if they're structures that other people live in.
If you can hear me, I'm getting very close to the idea of a city planner here, a person who designs cities.
We see the prestige of design, but also the darker ramifications of design,
the conflict between the clarity of the blueprint and the murk of experience of living.
And I think even that the myth suggests in a kind of muffled way that transgression pacifies lust for the bull,
Ariadne's betrayal of her father, Theseus's betrayal of Ariadne, Federer's betrayal of Theseus,
the transgression and transformation into bird and to cow are perhaps at home in city stories.
That the city might be a kind of environment where these kinds of metamorphoses,
these kinds of overstepping boundaries take place is what makes city art interesting.
And we'll see in references that will come to figures like Hogarth, Defoe, Dickens and others, the play of these elements.
Now, Deadless for me embodies the myth of the builder, the man who orders nature according to his own will.
And he obviously is a parallel figure to the artist, the man who creates structures that endure
and structures that others inhabit. And I don't think that's an unfair definition of art, that you would do inhabit it.
Psychologically, you don't actually set up shop in it.
But in fact, we enter a work of art, whether it's even if it's a painting or a poem.
This kind of figure is obviously not limited to myth, and there comes a moment in the development of cities
when this will to power and this creation of a grand design is given free reign
and actually is allowed, enabled to construct entire environments.
This could not have happened in classical antiquity, and it's a nice line.
It's Mumford cites this, but I'll cite it too.
It comes from Aristophanes, back in classical Greece.
And Aristophanes makes fun of a city planner who has these kinds of grandiose, formal, geometric designs.
And I'll quote you, this is Meton the planner in one of Aristophanes' comedies.
With the straight ruler, he says, I set to work to inscribe a square within this circle.
In its center will be the marketplace into which all straight streets will lead,
converging to this center like a star, which sends forth its rays like a straight line from all sides.
This is laughable in ancient Greece.
This is not laughable in the Renaissance.
These kinds of conceptions have in fact become possible, particularly with the imperial Baroque princes
who had great power and wanted, in fact, to build cities from scratch as a kind of homage or indication of their power.
And it's been suggested that even our modern expressways, with their, our versions of the Grand Avenues
or our Cloverly leaps that look like versions of the round point of these Baroque cities,
that the imperial city in its design, the idea of a grand geometric design is with us as much today as it ever has been.
And obviously, if you think back to the labyrinth of what it's like walking through that rational form,
then I'd ask you to think to the last time you walked, for example, in Paris at the Place de l'Étoile.
If you have, I think you're to be commended that you've got to cross it.
Or if even you were in a car trying to negotiate it.
Or not just the Place de l'Étoile, but the Place de la Concorde.
And a lot of the enormous monumental urban patterns that go into this kind of Baroque design.
What is frequently lacking there is any kind of human scale.
And I'd like to take a few minutes to consider some cities that were built according to this imperial notion of design.
Of imposing a grand order on the natural setting and making a city.
And the city that I would start with is precisely St. Petersburg, which as you know has undergone a number of names.
It was called Leningrad, it was called Petrograd, and now it's back to Petersburg.
And it is really one of the emblematic cities of grand design, of grand planning.
It's as if Daedalus became king, became Minos, and had the power to carry out his design on a massive scale.
Usually you cannot say that a city is created.
Created is an inappropriate word for it.
But with Petersburg you could say that.
In 1703 Peter I starts to drain the swamps of the Neva River.
Or drain the swamps where the Neva disgorges into a large lake there, the Lake Ladoga, into the Gulf of Finland.
And he is going to build from scratch a new capital for Russia, for his kingdom.
And he thinks of it pointedly as a window to the west, and if you know where Leningrad or Petersburg is located.
It is at the westernmost edge of Russia, the Soviet Union.
And by doing this, of course, he is going to scrap Moscow as the old traditional, much more ethnic capital.
A non-western city with its own religious traditions.
He's going to reject that. He's doing this in the Enlightenment in the 18th century.
He's going to reject that in order to put this sort of European modern front on his country.
And so, to build Petersburg, he imports western architects.
They come from England, and France, and Holland, and Italy.
No Russians are going to do this job.
And the plan that they submit is entirely a geometric rectilineal plan, which is familiar in Europe since the Renaissance.
But unheard of in Russia, where all of the cities still have their medieval character with the small narrow winding streets.
Here is something unheard of, and there are actually poems written at the time where they talk about measurement and geometry as sort of startling notions in city planning.
Now, Peter is an absolute ruler, and therefore he is capable of building on a scale that is unmatchable in any western country at this time.
Within a decade, he has 35,000 people living in Petersburg.
And by two decades, this is nothing but a swamp where he starts.
By two decades, he has 100,000 people there.
He commanded every stone mason in the Russian Empire to work on the city.
And he forbade stone building anywhere else.
You couldn't build things in stone outside of Petersburg.
And he ordered noblemen to relocate to Petersburg, or else he threatened them with the loss of their titles.
And of course, he had a huge labor force.
He had an unending source of surfs of people who could be simply commanded to work on this project.
And they had a lot of work cut out for them.
They had to drain the swamps.
They had to dredge the river.
They had to construct the canals, the dams, the embankments.
They had to make the pilings, and then to make the buildings.
Most of the parallels that people use when they try to describe the magnitude of what he's doing at this point,
go back to the pharaohs, building their pyramids, or to Oriental desks,
which is almost unthinkable the scale in which this is happening.
Within three years, 150,000 workers have either been wrecked or died in the process.
But of course, that's just dispensable labor, as far as he's concerned.
So he builds this city from scratch.
He creates over this murky swamp, and apparently it's still a miasmic climate there,
because swamps just don't go away.
He creates this glittering 18th century city of enlightenment, of enlightenment culture,
and intellectuals, artists, and philosophers from all over Europe receive royal patronage.
And that's of course during the century that the great palaces and squares and facades were built.
The contrast between this European city and the rest of Russia is a very fertile theme in Russian literature.
People talk about it all the time, that writers from Pushkin, to Gogol, to Dostoevsky, to Bailey, to Mandelstam
were all writing about Petersburg, and the Petersburg-Moscow rivalry is a kind of classic sort of commonplace in Russian thinking.
And frequently they write about, particularly Pushkin, in a very famous piece, writes about the statue of Peter that was built in 1782
that can come alive, get off of its pedestal, and stalk the streets and punish people who are somehow not faithful to Peter's vision.
And Pushkin also writes about the Netskip Prospekt, which is the Grand Central Avenue in Petersburg.
And he invents more or less, and it's an invention that's going to be very successful in Western literature, the street romance
about who you saw on the Netskip Prospekt, where all of the fancy people show up and do their walks, etc.,
or where strange encounters might take place. This is a feature of modernist literature as well.
If you've read Joyce's Lissie's, it's a street novel in that way.
There are a lot of neo-Italian films that only take place walking major streets, etc.
And I think it goes all the way back to the Sojourn in the Labyrinth.
Now Dostoevsky in Notes from Underground locates the story in Petersburg and pointedly refers to Petersburg,
I quote him, as the most abstract and premeditated city in the world.
And this is a loaded definition because Notes from Underground is Dostoevsky's effort to challenge
that kind of overweening, rational view of human life.
It's a very polemical story, and it's a very painful story.
And it's an anti-hero, one of the first anti-heroes in modern literature.
And in the sense it's Hamlet being told two centuries later about the plight of an intellectual who was paralyzed.
But it is also a really sort of plucky critique of the completely rational city,
the completely structured city where human chances left out, and above all where the spirit has no play.
Given Dostoevsky's religious convictions, etc., he wanted to argue that there's a kind of human freedom
which is free from this kind of rationality.
And in particular one of the lines it takes in that story is that humans will not always act out of self-interest,
which is what the rational programmers of the time believe.
He wants to show that occasionally humans will act against this self-interest because that too is a form of freedom
or as the metaphor he uses in the story of road-making.
It's a wonderful urban metaphor of making roads.
He says that people construct roads not necessarily to get to point A or point B,
but for the process itself that the making of the road is an exercise in freedom and inactivity.
The most extravagant text about the grand design city that I know of is Andrei Bailey's novel called Petersburg.
And that's where we see the full writerly possibilities of the city that is a window to the west.
Now Bailey's story takes place during the events of 1905 in Petersburg.
And so he is writing a story about a divided Russia torn up in political format, a revolution on the way.
And he locates it as well within the story of a divided family outfitted with a kind of edible plot also.
And it's a novel that is absolutely structured according to binary oppositions and contrasts.
And one of them is between the gleaming Baroque facades of imperial power that are a kind of testament to human prowess,
to rational design, to the strength of the autocratic ruler, to the government's power, the administration.
That is opposed in at least two ways.
It's opposed from within by the disgruntled workers, by the feverish agitators, by the coming revolution.
And it's opposed from without by a kind of Russian xenophobia about a recent loss in war to Japan,
about a kind of yellow peril that's the language that it takes in the novel.
And what Bailey's trying to do is to show that this gleaming facade of unity, this western gridiron plan of the city,
is unsuccessfully covering up all kinds of ferment and chaos and disorder.
One of Bailey's greatest characters is this senator, Apollon Apollonovich Ablucov.
No idea if my pronunciation is right.
And he's a kind of personified version of the rational gridiron form.
And I want to read you a passage or two from this book so you can hear what an artist would do with this.
How a writer would take the idea of the rational design and convert it into character,
take it into absurdity, and it bleeds when it's plenty absurd.
Apollon Apollonovich Ablucov was gently rocking on the satin seat cushions, as is in his coach.
He was cut off from the scum of the streets by four perpendicular walls.
Proportionality and symmetry soothed the senator's nerves,
which had been irritated both by the irregularity of his domestic life and by the futile rotation of our wheel of state.
Most of all, he loved the rectilinear prospect.
The prospect reminded him of the flow of time between two points of life.
This is my favorite.
Time for hours on end, he would lapse into an unthinking contemplation of pyramid triangles,
parallel pebs, tubes, and trapezoids.
While dwelling in the center of the black perfect satin-lined cube,
that's the little coach that takes him,
Apollon Apollonovich reveled at length in the quadrangular walls.
He was born for solitary confinement.
Only his love for the plain geometry of the state had invested him in the polyhedrality of a responsible position.
This man is obviously set up for a fall, okay?
I mean, he comes right out of a geometry handbook.
That's the way he sees life, that's the way he sees political power.
The order of the city has literally been transformed into the posture of this man's life.
This is the way Bailey describes the agitation, the masses that are gathering together,
that are going to change the course of history by this revolution.
This is how he describes these people on the Nazi prospect.
There, the body of each individual that streams onto the pavement becomes the organ of a general body,
an individual grain of caviar, and the sidewalks of the Nazi are the surface of an open-faced sandwich.
Individual thought was sucked into the celebration of the myriapod, it's a wonderful term,
the myriapod being that moved along the Nazi.
Not one person, but a myriapod, this kind of multiple articulated thing that is moving down this street.
And wordlessly, they stared at the myriad legs and the sediment crawled.
It crawled by and shuffled on flowing feet.
The sticky sediment was composed of individual segments, and each individual segment was of course so.
There were no people on the next day, but there was a crawling, howling myriapod there.
The damp space poured together as if this swamp, this sort of fertile swamp,
has spawned its own strange creatures, for which it is, of course, the workers, the political agitators.
But you can see barely trying to find a language that's totally at odds with that rectilineal fantasia of the senator.
Find a language for this political torment.
The damp space poured together a myriad distinction of voices into a myriad distinction of words.
All the words jumbled and again whirled into a sentence, and the sentence seemed meaningless,
and hung above the Nevsky a black haze of fantasmata.
The crawling myriapod is horrible.
It has been moving along the Nevsky for centuries.
And he goes on.
That's the kind of vital, charged, conflicted language and metaphoric thinking of Bailey's novel of grand design.
So you all know what the American counterpart to Petersburg means. We're in it.
But Washington is the American adventure in grand design.
It was planned at a comparable time in the late 18th century.
But there was no Peter in sight.
There was no desperate with unlimited funds and power to carry out the design.
Major Lausanne's design was a baroque design, and it started with the principal buildings and the squares.
And it was planned as a series of interwoven traffic spider webs with its generous main avenues.
The main avenues of the city, when they were built, were planned to be 160 feet wide,
which was much, much wider than anything existing in America at that time.
And he planned axial approaches, monumental scale, enveloping greenery.
But as I said, he didn't have the means to implement the design.
He was just a hired architect.
And the design was not carried out fully.
There's a wonderful quotation from Dickens, who traveled to America in the mid-19th century and walked up and down Washington.
And I quote what he said.
He called it a city of spaciousness in 1842, a city of spacious avenues that begin in nothing and lead nowhere,
streets a mile long that only want houses, roads, and inhabitants,
public buildings that need only a public to be complete,
and ornaments of great thoroughfares that need only great thoroughfares to ornament.
The huge avenues, of course, have now been filled.
We have the motor traffic that can take care of that.
But Mumford in his book on the city and history suggests that it's not accidental that this monumental scale Washington has never appealed to people as a living environment.
And I think he very persuasively points to Georgetown.
Georgetown is a totally different concept of urban design as a place of small, modest, domestic buildings, narrow streets,
built on a human scale, and, of course, it becomes one of the postures and one of the most desirable places to settle in this area.
It has a charm, a residential charm, that the grand design city cannot have.
I'm going to leap from Peter and Laplace Washington to the, I think, most important 20th century figure of grand design, and that's Le Corbusier.
He typifies, in some ways, the autocratic city planner, even though he never got a chance to plan cities,
but he wanted to, desperately, for decades, made plans constantly.
Submitted them, they were always turned down.
The plan he submitted in 1922, now remember this, 1922, was what he, he termed it a contemporary city for three million people.
That was his title.
And he submitted plans for one of the world fairs.
Here's what he proposed in 1922.
The creation of a complete environment.
He was going to build 24 glass and steel skyscrapers, each one 60 stories high, in the midst of great parkland where 500,000 to 800,000 people could work.
And there would be two great super highways that would intersect the city.
There would be no more corridor streets around these great buildings.
Instead, he wants to let in sunlight and air, and he wants, therefore, to build up, which is where the space is.
And then in 1925, he proposed the Grand Boisan.
If you know anything about Paris, then you can see the Ile de la Cité and the Seine there, and you can also see these absolutely staggeringly large skyscrapers that have no scale relationship whatsoever
to the existing city that has taken, you know, thousands, really, of years to become what it was.
Let's take a look at the other slide, which is another view of the Grand Boisan.
And you see something again of where the scale has gone, these enormous skyscrapers.
You can see the huge, various avenues that are there, and you've got this sense of the puniness of the individuals against this kind of gargantuan, but high-tech conception.
Now, what he proposed was in 1925 to build a version of this, and he wanted to destroy two square miles in the center of Paris to have this built.
And the right bank, where all the Paris business district is located, and he proposed this to the automobile magnates, and he was very perplexed that they didn't accept his plan to do this.
When he went to New York in 1935, it was his first experience of other skyscrapers.
He'd been designing them forever, but he'd never seen one.
And like most foreigners and most anybody who comes to New York for the first time, he would fold on it, odd by it.
I think he formulated an interesting critique of it.
He said, first of all, that the New York skyscrapers, and look at this, aren't big enough, all right?
They're not remotely big enough.
Again, this is in 1935, he was there.
He didn't see some of this about now.
But he says they weren't big enough, and he said, above all, they were not integrated into any kind of city planning.
They should have been located in Park Space.
He wanted, for example, to build highways that were elevated where people could drive at 100 miles an hour.
This is in the 1920s.
Drive at 100 miles an hour from skyscraper to skyscraper, but people could walk on the grounds in the parks.
And he also, in 1935, faulted New York, the building in New York.
He went around the city, apparently, in a rush tour, telling all these architects who had built the New York skyscrapers how wrong they had been, and how they'd won it.
And he felt that, already then, there was a rush to the suburbs, which is one of the theme songs of American city experience,
a rush to the suburbs, which he thought was dreadful, that, first of all, they were going to ruin the countryside.
Secondly, he could see, even then, over 50 years ago, the coming nightmare of commuting,
the people would waste precious hours getting from the city to the suburbs,
and he thought, why couldn't we build a city community to keep the density we want,
but to also have openness, air, light, accommodate traffic?
Well, it never happened.
None of his plans, as I said, were ever actualized.
We do have, in this country, cities and buildings that have been inspired by this type of design.
Many of them, I think, are largely thought to be failures.
Co-op city in the Bronx, it has been suggested at Tyson's Corner in Washington, Charles River Park in Boston,
social experiments in high-density living, huge-scale building that may have very little relationship to the setting around it.
Le Corbusier points, to me, at least, to the figure of Robert Moses,
who shaped a good deal of New York's cityscape, building those expressways right through the Bronx,
taking down buildings right and left.
I'm going to read you how a writer deals with the hubris and the possible madness of city planning, imposing a design.
The writer I'm citing is a modern Italian writer who recently died at Lo Calvino,
and it's a story of a town called, or a city called, Perentia.
It goes like this.
The city of Perentia is to be built, so they start with the astronomers who are going to establish the date when they'll begin
and the emplacement according to the stars.
They're going to build this one right.
According to the passage of the sun, the axis of the heavens.
The temples and the neighborhood of the city will be positioned in accordance with the houses of the zodiac.
And the gates even in the city walls are going to be cut in such a way that they will frame the eclipses of the moon for a thousand years.
They're not taking any chances with this city.
It will reflect the harmony of the universe.
They built it.
They built it exactly that way.
A generation passes.
People come to the city to visit it.
And what they find there are cripples, dwarves, hunchbacks, obese men, bearded women.
And then Calvino adds that that wasn't even the worst of it.
That was just what you could see, that you could hear animal-like sounds coming from cellars,
and it was said that families were hiding children with three heads and six legs.
He then says, the astronomers had a problem with that.
They couldn't figure out whether they had misunderstood the order of the heavens,
gotten it wrong, or much more disturbingly whether the city of monsters was an inflection of the order of the gods.
It's like the best-laid plans of my some men.
It's a kind of meditation on the scale of geometry, the wonderful rational propriety and harmony of forms that are on plans and in books,
and the result when those are actualized as a living human environment.
Calvino's story is largely a reflection about the gap between divine order and human order,
but it's also, I think, a kind of sober meditation about human design as a kind of plan for cities.
The Corbusier model has been roundly critiqued in the last two or three decades of the century,
and there's a wonderful book by a city thinker, Jane Jacobs.
It's a book that's called The Death and Life of Great American Cities, which sort of systematically takes the Corbusier to task,
and some of the titles of her Table of Contents tell you what her emphasis is on.
She talks, she has three chapters on the use of sidewalks.
She has a chapter entitled The Need for Small Blocks, another one, The Need for Aged Building,
and someone has said it's not an accident that she's a woman who wrote this book.
There's an interesting sort of chauvinistic reading here.
What the critic said is that because she's a woman, she's had a kind of 24-hour-a-day experience of her environment.
She has walked through those neighborhoods. She has piloted children's characters through those neighborhoods.
She has done the shopping for the family. She's established social networks with the people who live in the city,
and it's all of this that leads her to say that that's not what cities are about.
It's not grand design. It's the quality of human interaction on a small-scale, grainy basis face-to-face in the city.
And this critic goes on to add, only chronically unemployed men ever have that experience of their environment.
Worth pausing on that one.
Well, what I have tried to talk about in this lecture is some of the challenges,
some of the problems that arise in trying to domesticate space, in trying to plan out cities.
And I guess it's worth underscoring what planning really means.
The planner may well be one of the modern mythic figures.
I mean, if thesis came back today and someone wrote a contemporary myth,
it would probably be based on the figure of a planner.
Planning has a great deal of what Aristotle would have called hubris in it.
Planning suggests that we can make a design that will hold for human use over time.
And that's, of course, why we have so many disasters.
The most extravagant one is the St. Louis experiment, I don't know if you know of it,
of a city called Pouet Ego that was built along the same lines of co-op city in the Bronx.
And it was so terrible that the only thing they could do was to dynamite it.
They simply blew it up as the best solution for solving the problem.
So I think that this issue of shaping the environment is one that is with us in city tax.
And I hope that you can see that the way that these thinkers go about it with their point,
or their boardroom designs and their blueprints has to do with the quality of our own experience.
They shape the environments that we live in.
That's why that myth of thesis and the minotaur is such a fine move.
I'll take an extra minute and close this with a little parable.
Another parable.
This one is from a writer whom you all know, Franz Kafka.
It goes like this.
I'm presenting this as a modern version of thesis.
It was very early in the morning.
The streets clean and empty.
I was walking to the station.
As I compared the tower clock with my watch, I saw that it was already much later than I had believed.
I had to hurry up.
The fright of this discovery made me unsure of my way.
I did not yet know my way around very well in this city.
Luckily, a policeman was nearby.
I ran up to him and asked him breathlessly the way.
He smiled and said,
For me, you want to know the way?
Yes, I said.
Since I cannot find it myself.
Give it up.
Give it up.
He said.
And turned away with a sudden lurch, like people who want to be alone with their laughter.
It's not a happy story.
It certainly spells out that getting lost is more than just getting from here to the station.
To the grocery store.
It doesn't take...
At first, it sounds just like a realistic account of a man going somewhere.
Pretty soon, we know that the way that has been lost is more than that.
It's not an accident that it looks up at the clock tower and it looks at his watch.
Obviously, a kind of symbolism of authoritative time, God's time, personal time.
And they're not in accord with each other.
And from then on, the panic sets in.
It is a portrait of alienation.
It's a portrait written by a man who was a German speaking Jew in Prague.
You can almost not count the number of alienations that are in that phrase.
A German speaking Jew in Prague.
And he uses the city as a kind of urban script to speak that alienation.
Thank you.
