Let me begin by reminding you once again of the last text that I mentioned at the end
of the last lecture, which is Polansky's film Chinatown, which I was using as a kind
of filmic version of Urban Apocalypse, and particularly I was trying to regard it as
an adipole film, as a film that really, in kind of astonishing ways, replays Sophocles
text that plague, in this case, is drought that affects the city, that the detective
adipus who has to sort of work his way back and find his own origins to find out what's
wrong with the city is replayed by the Nicholson character, Gettys, and he has to uncover the
same kind of transgressive story.
He too uncovers the story of incest.
I think that Polansky is a very literary filmmaker, and I think he knows what he's doing.
The point I really would make that I couldn't make at the end of the other lecture is, why
is it entitled Chinatown?
If you've seen the film, if you haven't seen it, you have to see it, it's great.
But if you have, you remember that the film closes in Chinatown, that only then do we
actually go to Chinatown.
And Chinatown is where Gettys had worked earlier, and it's where he'd first gotten
into trouble, and the persistent definition of Chinatown that is given in that film, that
it's a place where you don't know anyone, you don't know who is who, you don't know
what is what, it's where you could make trouble mistakes.
And that's why I think the film is where the brilliant, at the end, where all of a sudden
you surface at Chinatown, and that's where all of the mayhem takes place.
That's where the Fredonaway character is, in fact, shot for the wrong person.
That's where the Chinatown metaphysics get played out once again.
And I think that Polansky is trying to suggest to us in that film that at the very end we
end up there, where we actually see the parade of the ethnic traditions and the people speaking
Chinese, and we know we're in a new place, but he's trying to tell us that we have been
there all along.
But that's really, in some moral and epistemological sense, where this whole film has been unfurling
and it has all of the sort of features, it seems to me, of the edible story and the story
of recovery as being pre-eminently city stories.
Now the title of this lecture is Transmission and Storage, and in some ways this is the
kind of philosophical center, really, of this course, what I'm going to get at in this lecture.
Although I'm going to end up spending a lot of time talking about a poem that I like as
much as I do of Lake London, and I hope that you'll like it too.
But let me start with a simple quote by Ralph Waldo Emerson, which is, the city lives by
remembering, you can see how that's related to what I've been talking about.
The city lives by remembering, and in some obvious sense, this is impossible, cities
are inanimate, how could they remember themselves?
Up until now what I've been talking about is individual memory, individual narrative,
individual storytelling as potentially redemptive actions, but the city itself as something
that remembers.
And in that light, I think we begin to move to a more frontal picture of the city itself
as a kind of creation in time, and then perhaps as some kind of source of possible attitudes
and behaviors on our part, that the city is a container of history, even American cities,
which of course don't have the age of European cities or of cities of the Far East, but nonetheless,
even American cities have their own layers, have in fact developed over time.
And to live in a city is to have contact with times beyond one's own, beyond one's own particular
trajectory or duration.
It is also to have contact with ideas and cultures and living thoughts beyond those
that any of us is capable of producing by ourselves, or capable of learning from our
own small circle, our own family.
And I'm referring here in particular to the work of Lewis Mumford, who has been the most
eloquent experiment, I think, of this theory of the city as a kind of structure that is
there to promote translation, storage, and transmission, that the city throughout history
has served the key sort of role, function of keeping the products of human exchange
and cultural activity, of retaining the intensity and luminousness of particular moments, particular
accomplishments, retaining them for those who come after.
Now, I've referred to the old buildings of cities as themselves, obvious mementos, living
mementos of a past that might otherwise be dead.
But we're talking about a lot more than just architecture here, or even buildings as such.
The city could be thought of as an enormous storage place, as a storage place really of
all human records.
It records, it records in its buildings, it records in its vaults, in its archives, in
its monuments, in its tablets, in its books.
All of these are in fact ways of keeping books, ways of keeping records, ways of retaining
things that have happened in the past.
Think of the university, the university, most of which the great universities are frequently
located in cities, the university is itself a storage place, this has been true ever since
the Middle Ages when they started.
A storage place for ideas, for living ideas, for generations, subsequent generations to
come through, to tap into, and to pass on.
Think of this program at the Smithsonian in its own way, that it's a way in which activity
takes place in a city, people come to it, ideas from other places come through it, it operates
as a kind of crossroad, as a kind of crossroads, the things are gathered, hugged, and people
partake of it.
So what I want to suggest is that the city should be thought of as a kind of cultural
circuitry, flowing current, we think of it usually as something static, buildings that
we can see that don't, unless it's an earthquake, don't appear to be moving, and I'm now trying
to push a notion of something fluid on the move, or else something that is stored so
that it could be on the move, a kind of enormous, kind of enormous urban genetic pool, if you
let me put it that way, an urban collective holdings that make it possible for the individual
who either lives there or comes there to partake of history, to become heir to history, to
partake of the past, and to put it perhaps in loaded terms to come into a kind of inheritance,
a kind of estate, and then pass it on. There's a kind of livings which really operates an
expansion of the individual career. It allows individuals to reach backwards and sidewards,
and to take in more than they could in their own small life trajectory. Now I've talked
about the city, obviously, as a place that performs these activities, but the real performer
has to be the living human being. He or she is the figure who retranslates the buildings,
the vaults, the archives, the monuments, the tablets, and the books into vital information,
into flow, into current, and then passes it on to others, to those who come later in time.
Montford adds when he describes all of this, that this human chain of being, this living
human transmission of cultural memory is infinitely more complex than the electronic machines
that we currently use for the job, and I'm going to return to that because that's one
of the central issues about the status and development and future of cities, is what
sense should they make in our electronic age. But right now I want to work more directly
with this issue of transmission and storage as a city phenomenon, not electronically,
but as a phenomenon of city archives, city monuments, city streets, and city history.
Now you remember the evocation of the successive roams in Freud's passages that I cited for
you, and his wistful desire to be able to represent them in one place all at once, and
I claim that art as well as language and memory is possibly able to do this, and I'd like
to try to actualize or to substantiate that claim in this lecture. I'm going to start
with a city that is not Rome, it's Paris, and I'm going to locate it for you as a kind
of backdrop for this poem that I want to read. It's Paris and it's 1857, and I'm going to
give you sort of a thumbnail sketch of some of the things that are happening in Paris,
and in particular in terms of the development of the city and the governance of the city.
In 1857, France is governed by Napoleon's nephew, Louis Napoleon, and he has had himself
proclaimed emperor, so it's Bessigon l'Ampire, and his reign of power began after the bloody
but failed revolution of 1848, which was a crushing blow not only for the forces of
democracy but for the burgeoning proletariat, and it's a time where most liberal thinkers
in Paris experienced a kind of absolutely determining experience, a terrible blow to
their hopes and their idealism, and I put it that way because the figure who interests
me here is the poet Baudelaire, this is the moment when his own idealistic hopes essentially
died. He had been really a very fervent believer in the possible hopes of a new political order
that were essentially crushed in 1848. He fought on the barricades for a while, I don't know
how actively he fought but he was there, and it's at that moment that kind of after the
collapse of those hopes and the subsequent regime of Napoleon III that we see the cynicism
and bitterness of Baudelaire. Now what does Napoleon III do when he begins his regime,
his second empire in France? Well he has one really monumental ambition, he has several,
but the one that interests me is that he wants to transform Paris into a grand imperial city.
He doesn't particularly have in mind Petersburg, which in the light of these lectures you might
think he would, but he has in mind particularly Rome, and the Rome of Caesar Augustus, that
he feels that Augustus turned Rome into a city of marble, and he wants to do something
comparable for Paris. He wants to leave an enormous suite of imposing palaces, government
buildings that would express this new imperial political order that he wants to install. He
wants also to commemorate the victories of his uncle Napoleon, and to alter the city this
way, to make it into a rather grand structure of imposing formidable buildings that in some
sense breathe power, government power, military power. He of course needs a great city planner
and a great architect, and it's in that position that we find a man who really I think has played
a great role in the history of city planning, and that's with Baron Postman, who is commissioned
by Napoleon Foix to redesign Paris, or at least to implement these new plans.
Postman is a sense of the man who has given Paris the look that it has today. Many of the
grand boulevards were created by Postman. He believed in these enormous vistas that would be
possible. He also had a number of very up to date modern views about hygiene and sanitation
and sewage, and so he made Paris certainly into a healthier city. But he also is the man
who created the kind of unbroken façade of the Paris buildings that we see in these boulevards,
the sort of five story gray façade. Paris you may have noticed is the most colorless great
city of its kind. If you compare it to Rome or to other huge metropolises, Paris is almost
unfailingly this sort of gray, and then when they clean it up it turns a little bit wider,
but it's just the color of stone. There's something very formal and very severe about the
architecture of Paris. He also created in these great boulevards, he went through a number
of the older areas of the city. The city had had a much more of a medieval look to it before
Postman got started with his program. Now I want to talk a little bit about that, about the changes
that resulted from Postman's designs and Postman's program. And the Latin Quarter would be a perfect
instance of it. The Latin Quarter, even the Boulevard Saint-Michel was created by Postman.
The Latin Quarter was really just a series of absolutely narrow, winding, dark little streets.
It looked like the medieval Paris, and Postman simply went through those streets, simply tore
them apart to create these boulevards. And the Boulevard Saint-Michel still is on a fairly,
I think, modest scale. He also created the great boulevards that go around the Étoiles,
that's where the bouvard Postman is, one is named after him. And part of his reasoning was to have
large thoroughfares that would permit the movement of military troops, as well as anything else,
because he didn't want a repeat of 1848. He wanted it to be possible to block insurrectionary
movements, to block popular protest, to make sure that this was going to be a safe, orderly,
secure, and perhaps repressive urban environment, which is what his boss essentially wanted.
And a lot of things began to change. When you start building enormous highways or thoroughfares that go
right through existing Arondissement or areas in Paris, then you do something to the fabric,
not just the spatial layout. You do something to the social fabric of those areas. And what begins
to happen in the reign of Napoléon trois and Postman is that Paris changes from a city of relatively
independent, relatively integral neighborhoods, each with its own sort of informal kind of self-government,
each with its own particular rather different character. Paris was known as a kind of checkered city.
Each of these Arondissement has its own flavor, and it follows that the people who lived in each of these
cactiers or areas had a sense of involvement, a sense of loyalty, a sense of belonging, a sense of
contribution, participation in the local life of that area. That's what starts to change. Paris starts
to become a grand metropolis. What Postman does is he locates all of the great administrative
buildings on the right bank and the Ile de la Cité, many of them. The bourgeoisie stays on the right bank,
and the workers are either thrown out into the left bank or to the outskirts of the city. But the
major shift flows from what I indicated just a moment ago. As these Arondissement or these particular
neighborhood areas are essentially altered, that is to say, opened up and made of a larger city, they
lose their specificity, they lose their integrity, and the people in them tend to shift in their
relation to the city. And the French terms that some of the critics have used are wonderful. They
stop being citoyen, which is citizen, and they become habitant, which is inhabitant. That is a major
shift from citizen to inhabitant. A citizen implies a kind of activist role in the community, where one's
and community is the term I want to use, where one has a personal stake in things, where one is
oneself involved demonstrably in the actions of it. Whereas habitant, inhabitant, all it is is a special
designation. You're simply there, and it has implications of passivity, even implications of
spectatorship. And it's a major shift. It's really a shift that I think is still with us today. It
already, I think, foreshadows the city of today, which is a city that has a kind of centralized
government in the middle, and citizens in the loose of sense, who live there, but have no personal
stake in the operation of the city. And it's to say it creates an entire population of passive, disengaged
people who feel powerless, who become spectators, and who have no real sense of loyalty or no conviction
that they could change things anymore in the city. And I think that that's our life today. Most of us feel
that city problems are almost unattackable, that they are being handled in any event by other people,
and that we are either the spectators or the victims of cities, but rarely the co-players ourselves.
One final detail about Paris in 1857. One of Haussmann's newest projects is the building of a place
called the Place du Carousel, or the Nouveau, or Nouvelle Place du Carousel. And it's near the Trilerie,
and it's modeled on Augustine Rome. And it involves, again, grand buildings, the extensions of the Louvre,
the little octetrion, which is in line with the large room center. And in order to make a new Place du
Carousel, he had to, of course, destroy the old one. Now, the Vieux Carousel was a grungy area. It was the
headquarters of dizzying artists in the early part of the century. It had bouquets, you know, the booksellers
in Paris. It had bouquets, you saw animals walking around in these squares. It had some criminals
and some prostitutes, but it also had entertainers and it had tradesmen of all sorts. And it was also a scene
of some of the bloodiest fighting during 1848. Now, that's the background I want to give you. And against that,
I want to read you a poem by Baudelaire, which I think is the greatest 19th-century French poem. It's a little bit longer
than London, so bear with it. And it's called the Swan, the Seigne. That's what that is in France. And it's a very
resonant title in French. If you know any French, you know that Seigne, C-Y-G-N-E means swan, but Seigne, S-I-G-N-E
means sign. They sound the same. And it's dedicated to Victor Hugo, the author of Les Miserables, and one of the
great French writers of the 19th century. And it goes like this. The first word of it is Andromache, Andromache
of the Trojan War, the wife of Hector. Andromache, I think of you. The little stream, a yellowing mirror that one time
beheld the huge salinity of your widow's grief that other simoyee, your tears, have swelled. He's referring to
Andromache, who created a kind of simulacrum of Troy when she was in exile. Built a little Troy for herself after she had
been pulled away from Troy. The little stream, etc., suddenly flooded the memory's dark soil as I was crossing the new
Place du Carousel. The old Paris is gone. The face of a town is more changeable than the heart of mortal man. I see what
seem the ghosts of these royal barracks, the rough-hewn capitals, the columns waiting to crack, weeds in the big rocks
green with standing water. And at the window, a jumble of bric-a-brac, they're still building the new Place du Carousel, the sort of grand,
officials setting. He remembers what was there. One time, a menagerie was on display there. And there I saw one morning at the
hour of cold and clarity when labor rises and brooms make little cyclones of soot in the air, a swan that had a
scape out of his cage. And there, webfooted on the dry sidewalk, dragged his white plumes over the cobblestones, lifting his beak at the
gutter as if to talk, and bathing his wings in the sifting city dust. His heart, full of some cool, remembered lake, said,
Water, when will you reign? Where is your thunder? I can see him now, straining his twitching neck, skyward again and again, like the man in
obid, he's referring to bedalus, who strains his neck, skyward trying to escape from his prison, toward an ironic heaven as blank as slate, and trapped in a ruinous myth, he lifts his head as if God were the object of his hate.
Paris changes, but nothing of my melancholy gives way. Foundations, scaffoldings, tackle and blocks, and the old suburbs drift off into allegory while my frailest memories take on the weight of rocks.
And so, at the Nouveau, which is where he's remembering this, where the Plastique Carousel is, at the Nouveau, one image weighs me down. I think of my great swan, the imbecile strain of his head, noble and foolish as all the exiled, eaten by
ceaseless needs, and once again a view, Andromache, from a great husband's arms fallen to the whip and mounted lust of Pyrrhus, and smumped in a heap beside an empty tomb, poor widow of Hector and bride of Hellenus, because Hector was killed and then she was married off to Hellenus and then to Pyrrhus.
And think of the consumptive negris, stamping in mud, immaciate, and trying to see the vanished coconuts of hidden Africa behind the thickening granite of the mist, quite a shift. I think of Andromache, and I think of the consumptive black woman walking the streets of Paris, looking through the mist, trying to see the Africa that she's come from.
Of whoever has lost whatever cannot be found again, ever, ever, of those who lapped up the tears and nursed at the teats of that motherly she-wolf sorrow, of orphans drying like flowers and empty jars, so in that forest where my mind is exiled, one memory sounds like brass in the ancient war, I think of sailors washed up on uncharted islands, of prisoners,
and more, so many more. It's a much harder poem to follow than London. It is not a narrative poem in the sense that it doesn't have a single development in it, and it's just usually all over the map. It starts with Andromache, talks about the swan, talks about Paris with the old carousel, the new carousel, and then moves into other figures like the black woman and then the shipwrecked sailors.
It's an astounding piece to be written in the middle of the 19th century. It's dedicated to Victor Hugo. In 1855, Victor Hugo left Paris during the regime of Napoleon III. He left Paris as a gesture of political defiance. He was not going to live in this country under this emperor.
It's a self-exile. Exile is a theme song in this poem. He's a self-exile. He's living in the Channel Islands at this time.
And what the poem gets at is the same kind of parallel that I've been trying to suggest between the past of the city and the individual past, but also it's getting at the character of urban life in the sense of it being a place where one lives at the surface,
and has no connection with one's past. If you look at the list of exiled figures in the poem, it's almost uncountable. Victor Hugo, to whom it's dedicated, Andromache, who was one of the great exiled figures of antiquity,
but also Daedalus, who's referred to the man of Ovid, and Ovid himself, who spent the last part of his life in exile, and then the figures within the poem, the swan, who has been exiled, carries in its heart this cool sombo lac natale, as what the French says, its beautiful native or natal lake.
But only in its heart that lake is there, that water. Instead, it walks the dry city streets in the dust and the pavement for all that it encounters.
And then other figures of exile, the black woman who's been brought in to Paris for labor of some sort, and who thinks back to her own homeland, Africa, which you can't see through the Parisian fog and mist.
It's a kind of astounding community of exiles. But to even call it a community is to underscore the irony of the poem, because each one of these figures has precisely been cut off from community.
Each one of these figures is living an arrested curve, that is to say, has no viable connection with his or her past, in the case of the swan, its past.
That's what he wants to talk about in conjunction with the city that is changing, with the specter of urban renewal, because that is when it begins with Hossmann, of taking the city and altering it.
And behind, underneath, or as Ford would have said, superimposed under, in some sense, the new plaster carousel, he remembers the old plaster carousel.
That's his whole memory. He remembers that swan, and then he remembers the old city. And I think we can say he remembers the fighting of 1848, as well, that took place in that carousel.
And there are interpretations of this poem who actually assign roles to Andromache and the swan, all in terms of the events of Cabernac and other players in the events of 1848.
Exile comes across in this poem as the very condition of city dwelling. And I think that's what's most modern about the poem, or one of the most modern things about it.
The city is a place where people live at the surface where they do not have a connection to their own rootedness, their own past. That's the least the city that he draws here.
Now, how does one establish a return to the places that you've been, in a sense, expulsed from?
The first line of this poem is Andromache, I think of you, Andromache, je pense à vous.
And what is so lovely about this poem is that thought, I don't know if you've noticed, but a number of times, think is in this poem.
And as it closes, I think about the shipwreck cellars, I think of so many, I think about the black woman who walks the streets, I think of my swan.
Thinking is the root to the past. It is the only root. Thinking is the access to things that are gone.
Thinking is precisely our capacity to move in places beyond where we are.
Memory and thought are the restoration of broken circuits, and they are the ways in which broken narrative is healed.
It's a return to home via memory, in some sense. It's the only way to recover a certain kind of plenitude.
Thought becomes a kind of access route that cannot be barricaded, if we put it in terms of Osman's Paris.
And yet, the poem is hard to follow because it seems so dispersed in some way.
After all, it starts with Andromache, it jumps to somebody else. The poem has none of the kind of clear sequence that we expect in most narrative statements, and that ordinary prose now is a dispersive prose.
And what I want to suggest to you is that thinking, which is the great return via memory to the places that we have lost, to the people that we were.
I mean, it's our own prior selves that we can recapture through thought. They're not anywhere else.
What this poem also seems to hint at is that thinking is also a model of self-loss.
Thinking is also a condition of exile. That is to say, thinking goes out as much as in.
This is a poem where a figure constantly sort of spatters outward, disseminates thought outward.
I think of, I think of, I think of, I think of, I think of.
That thinking is the condition of people who are lost within themselves.
It's like the neural network in which we ourselves live out our lostness, have no sense of placidness or home or certainty.
It's a de-centered poem. It's the word that's much used in modern criticism, de-centered.
That thinking is a kind of spawning. It's a kind of, I mean, listen to your head one day.
It's an endless activity that makes noise, sends us out rather than in, as well.
And at this poem, the way it ends, those last lines, are really sort of, get across the fact that there is not any kind of finality here.
I think of sailors washed up on uncharted islands, of prisoners that conquered and more, so many more.
You sense that it ends sort of almost in mid-air, like he could continue to add the list, add on to it, further and further and further.
So this poem, I think, connotes our own de-centeredness, our own lostness, our own exile status.
And it says some very rich things about the capacity of thoughts and memory to restore these things,
but also as kinds of avenues that lead us outward as well as inward.
This is not quite Freud's successive roms, and yet it is in its own way several parishes that are linked together.
Although you can only see one, he remembers the other.
The human being becomes the active agent who keeps the cities in place, who sees through one back to the other,
and it's a meditation about loss and renewal.
It's triggered precisely by the building of a new Paris, of a new Place du Carousel,
and the entire social-political order that is represented by host mimes changes.
It's a poem of great nostalgia, I think, but it's very modern as well.
Now, how would this scenario be played out in modern terms?
I mean, this is Paris in 1857.
I'm going to cite to you pieces of a contemporary poem by James Merrill about New York,
and it's called An Urban Convalescence, and from my point of view, it's a precise remake of Baudelaire.
The same things just translated into an American idiom and translated into contemporary terms.
It's about a man living in New York who is sick, who is convalescing,
and it starts with him hearing the big machines that are tearing up a part of his block.
And the line goes, and I'd like to cite,
as usual in New York, everything is torn down before you have had time to care for it.
Head bowed at the shrine of noise, let me try to recall what building stood here.
Was there a building at all?
I have lived on the same street for a decade.
And with this, there's a very poignant effort that begins an effort at reconstruction,
and it moves slowly and beautifully, fragment by fragment, from the forgotten building
that he tries to piece together to remember what its facade looked like,
and then with this lovely shift we move into his own past,
that we move from the forgotten building to a forgotten experience in Paris
about a woman that he had loved that he can't quite remember.
All he can remember is flowers that he had given her, flowers she was holding in her hand.
He can remember her fingernails, he can remember the flowers, the water sort of dripping off of them.
He can't quite place her face, it's a frightening poem about kind of loss,
a general reflection on loss, a wear and tear and vandalism that is not by any means limited to cities.
It's a psychic phenomenon, it's what happens in our own minds,
it's how we are despoiled of our own lives, that's what the poem is about.
That's the urban sickness, it's not just an urban sickness, it's a human sickness,
but that's what this poem is getting at, and it closes with a yearning for some kind of containing shape,
some way of retaining our pastness while still living.
The words that Merrill uses are, the dull need to make some kind of house out of the life lived out of the love spent.
The desire to make some kind of a plenary structure, a kind of psychic architecture,
a kind of building project that would house our lives.
And again, I think it's inseparable from a meditation about the buildings coming down in the city.
And we can think of this in melancholic terms, but there's something beautiful about it as well.
Cities remind us of our mortality, they remind us of our dimensions,
and they incite us, they challenge us to these acts of retrieval and recovery.
And with that in mind, I want to refer to a third text that's really a very fascinating text.
It's not a poem, it's a film by the French filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard,
and it's a film he made in the sixties called Als d'avir, Als d'avir.
And it's a film, it also has a second French title called Une étrange aventure de Limit caution.
I don't know if you know who Limit caution is.
Limit caution is a grade B cult figure in France.
And he's always played by the same person, Eddie Constantine,
who's made a great career in France playing a kind of degraded Bogart figure.
Eddie Constantine just mesmerizes the French.
He's an American who speaks fairly poor French.
He's got pockmark skin, there's nothing very, he certainly doesn't look like Jack Nicholson in Chinatown.
And he makes this sort of film noir series in the French films.
And he is the hero, or the detective hero of this film, and his mission is to save Als d'avir.
Als d'avir is the city of the future.
Godard filmed the whole thing in Paris, it's Paris at night.
It's simply the modern structures of Paris.
The ruler of Als d'avir is a giant computer that is called Als d'avir 60.
That's why it's called Als d'avir.
And this film focuses over and over on that computer.
You've got a wonderful contest.
You've got Limit caution, who is a comic book figure.
Limit caution, when he starts the film, says,
Where are my buddies Dick Tracy and Flash Gordon?
I mean, it's a totally campy film.
And then we have all of these wonderful shots of the giant computer which speaks.
And Godard was brilliant.
The man who speaks those lines, I learned this later during research on this film,
is a man who has actually had cancer of the throat.
And so it's a mechanical voice, more or less, that's doing the speaking even,
which is perfect for what he's trying to do.
The machine speaks, and we see these endless circuits, these coils.
We really see the circuitry, the memory banks, and Als d'avir 60 is a benevolent mechanical dictator.
It runs the city with all of the logical dictates that you would expect from a giant computer.
There's nothing malicious in it at all.
Everything is run by reason.
It's as if, notes from underground, where Dostoevsky calls St. Petersburg,
the most rational city in the world, were being rethought in sci-fi terms,
except I'm not sure how much in the future this one is.
And it controls everything, Als d'avir 60.
According to the processes of logic and order.
One of the things that it says over and over is that no one has ever lived in the past.
And it is all about rational organization.
It stores everything.
It contains everything in those banks that we see.
We've got our eyes on it all the time.
And so I don't think it's exaggerating to say that the machine has gotten rich and fat.
You can't have a fat machine, but we see it as sort of thriving, powerful, governing.
And the coronary is that the humans who inhabit Als d'avir have become thin and poor.
And this is how Godard shows that.
They are losing their emotions.
All of the people in the film are popping pills constantly.
They're all sedated, always saying thank you or you're welcome before anything is even said to them.
That they're almost like automatons themselves.
And even worse than that is they're losing their language.
Words, every day they have a few less words they know how to use.
And they're wonderful terms that are lost.
That they used to have the word amour, which means of course love in France.
Now all that God is volupte, which means sex or voluptuousness.
They have lost poetic terms like rouge gorge, or lumière d'automne, the light of autumn.
They've lost the term tendresse, which of course means tenderness.
So that we see them shrinking, shrinking in human ways.
They're not getting thinner than in terms of what their eyes see.
We see their life getting worse, reduced, thinner, as this machine controls the city.
Now Linney Caution goes through this film with a brownie camera taking pictures of everything.
He's storing also. You've got two models of storing.
You've got this computer that has the memory banks that runs the city.
You've got the people who are losing things, who are leaking, getting thinner.
And you've got this rather brute figure, he beats up people.
I mean he's not a very attractive hero at all, certainly in today's terms.
But he photographs everything.
And every time the sin opens his mouth, he cites older texts.
The literary criticism today we call that intertextuality.
So he doesn't say that. He doesn't say, I'm going to cite some Shakespeare.
He instead speaks Shakespeare to her.
He speaks Pascal, he speaks Elioir, he speaks Borges, he speaks Baudelaire.
This is, in other words, as he speaks, out comes the living culture of the past.
Mind you, people have argued that that's where we all speak.
We don't invent our language.
That we are simply an assemblage of things that we have heard.
We are constantly quoting, without knowing we're quoting, things that we've been told,
things that we have read, things that we've seen, things that we have heard.
That's what the mind is.
I'm not going to call it a sewage system.
But it in itself is a kind of bank that contains all of this cultural data that we like to say
that's our own thoughts, these are our own ideas, where it's very hard to be original.
It's not because we're too cowardly to be original.
It's not really philosophically possible that things have preceded us.
We have absorbed the cultural network that was there way before we were born.
So that's the way Lenny Cushing comes across.
He opens up his mouth and out comes the past.
And what he does in this film, as he explains to this mysterious beautiful woman, Natasha,
that she is not, her name is Natasha Fun Brown, and he explains to her that she is not from Alphaville,
that she does have a past, even though the computer says no one has ever lived in the past.
And in doing that, he is able to bring her out of the city.
And that's how the film closes.
By the way, it's a beautiful film.
It's a black and white film, and it's a kind of black and white choreography of the kinds of things
that Le Corbusier and Maisier would have loved.
It's all about the city as a place of glittering lights, of lovely, elegant signs,
of the actual traffic signals themselves as having a kind of geometric elegance and harmony to them.
He pulls her out of the city at the end.
Now, that little story that I've just narrated to you about that film
is a perfect way, I think, to bring this kind of speculation or meditation to a close.
Emerson said, which is how I began, the city lives are remembering.
And what Godard shows us is that the opposite is true.
The city dies by forgetting.
The city dies by forgetting.
This film stages in the most beautiful ways the choice between electronic storage and retrieval,
electronic transmission versus human storage and retrieval and transmission,
which is human memory, human love, human connection.
That's what it's all about.
It's really a kind of modern fable, a kind of allegory about the ways in which the past, the history,
and the depth of both the human experience and of the human environment can be saved.
Thank you.
