Lecture 8 A Moveable Feast
The title that I've chosen for this last lecture is a term that I think you'll all recognize,
a moveable feast.
It's a term that Hemingway used that he gave to a collection of sketches of his life in Paris in the 20s.
And what he meant by the term was that if, and I'm virtually exciting him,
if you were lucky enough to live in Paris when you were young,
he said, it stayed with you forever and wherever you lived afterwards,
because Paris, he claimed, was a moveable feast.
And he points to a very vital dimension of city life.
Its status is memory and ground for one's own subsequent life,
and I'll come back to that wherever that subsequent life takes place.
But for now I'd like to explore a dimension of Hemingway's title that I don't think he could have intended,
but which is very much with us today,
that the city now itself is moveable, moveable feast,
in different ways from what Hemingway meant.
Now the city cannot pack its bags, get on the train, and leave.
But the life in the city, the life that it was essentially designed to enable the marketplace,
the site of business and industry, the exchange of goods and services,
even shopping, this life, these industries are now moveable in ways that are unprecedented in history.
So for a good bit of this century, for the last 20, 30 years,
there has been talk of the city as an obsolete structure,
a structure that no longer serves any necessary purpose.
This involves issues such as do you need to be to live where you work,
or where you shop, think of conference calls, think of the advent of the computer,
think of the ways in which the electronic revolution has changed our sense of having to be present physically at a particular place.
I'm always reminded of when I try to call Amtrak to know if the train that is going from Washington to Boston
is going to arrive in Providence on time and frequently end up with someone who's sitting in front of a screen
in Tilton, Georgia or something and who says the train is going to be 15 minutes late.
And I say, well, it's snowing here, is that likely to make it worse?
And they say it's not snowing here, it's sunny outside.
The sense, in other words, of all kinds of operations frequently associated with 800 numbers,
having no physical proximity frequently to the reasons why we use those numbers,
to the actual location of the businesses themselves.
This is an important issue, it seems to me, because one could take a view that it's a life and death issue
for the city, or to use Marxian terms, could the city itself wither away, as he thought the capitalist state would?
Are the portraits and testimonies of urban life that we've been looking at up until now,
relegated to the past or to the museum, or they just antiquate, what will they signify tomorrow?
It has been argued that the city, particularly the American city, has developed in three phases.
You don't have to accept this thesis, but it's an interesting one.
The first phase is out of the commercial city.
And the commercial city, what is meant by this, is essentially the city that's a trading post for the metropolis abroad.
So this is the city of colonial America, where the wealth was siphoned off to London.
Then follows the industrial city, the city essentially of the 19th and early 20th century,
a site where heavy industry and production is located, happening in the city.
And of course, you can imagine that the third phase is the corporate city, the high-tech environment,
that processes exclusively or predominantly information.
Now, the reason these three phases are interesting is because you can append a lot of other things to them, and people have done that.
For example, some have argued in literary terms that each of these phases, the 18th century city that is a corporate city,
the commercial city, the 19th industrial city and the 20th century corporate city,
they've related them to movements in writing from realism to modernism to postmodernism.
But perhaps a more, I think, salient comparison would be in technology,
the shift from the steam engine to the electric and combustion motors of the late 19th century
to the electronic and nuclear power of the post-World War II era.
And to go even further and risk further metaphors, people have described this transition products to money to credit,
or if you really want to go the full route, from being to having to appearing.
That's taking it beyond the pale, perhaps.
But people have argued that all of those are possible translations of this development of the city.
One of the most influential thinkers about the corporate city and its electronic base,
the flow of information, the distribution of information, is of course Marshall McLuhan,
who some 30 years ago told us about the real meaning of our media.
He's altogether, I think, too much known as the man who wrote the media message.
And what has been obscured, I think, are, at least to my mind, the richer analysis he actually gives of particular media.
His basic notion is that all media must be understood as an extension of the central nervous system.
This is really, I think, a brilliant insight.
An extension of our own neurological reach in time and space.
And in that light, money, newspaper, radio, telephone, and TV, just to name a few,
can be understood as transportation systems, as extensions of our reach.
Now, you can look at history this way, which is what McLuhan does.
He sees that the Roman use of the road and of the paper routes is what essentially destroyed the tribal, oral, village culture of those whom the Romans conquered.
And there's been recent work, even, about Cortez and the Aztecs, Montezuma, along the same lines.
There's been a sort of semiotic reading of the settlement of the New World, saying that it's effectively what it was,
an encounter of Western European modes of origin, exchange of information,
an encounter with that with a totally different kind of culture, and that it was that organizational system that was triumphant.
It's not only whether people have seen horses or not, there's more than that to it.
It's the way in which one organized social forms, military forms.
Of course, McLuhan is interested in information itself.
And he claims, and this leads me to the argument we're working with now,
that the electronic age, which is instantaneous and global, you all know the phrase, the global village,
has absolutely no truck with the traditional pattern of the city, which is a center margin arrangement,
the city and then the suburbs and the semi-al, or even cities that have colonial trading products.
That's also a center margin.
That instead, we're in an electronic system that weeks havoc with the city that we've taken for granted for 2,000 years.
When information moves with the speed of electricity, with the same speed that it actually has in the signals of the central nervous system,
then all of the older forms of transportation and acceleration, such as road and rail, car, train, and even plane, become theoretically obsolete.
And from this point of view, the city form, metropolitan space, which comes from a walled community, a central marketplace,
the site at a crossroads or a river or a port, all of this loses its rationale.
It comes largely irrelevant in a world linked by electronic networks.
McLuhan feels that our entire space-time paradigm, which I have insistently claimed is the right paradigm for understanding city art,
as a mapping of space, a mapping of time, and I've argued that it's a way of understanding city life,
an extension of our own whereabouts in space and time, all of that goes out in electronic age that is instantaneous.
And everywhere. And making everything here and now.
That's why I commented on Jean-Luc Godard's film, Elsevier, because I think it's a very probing and prophetic kind of image of what could happen in a completely computerized world.
But we do live in that world of the here and now, that global village.
You turn on, when I listen to the New York radio, wins, you give us 22 minutes, we'll give you the world.
And of course, anytime we turn on our screens, we might watch the local news,
but for the most part, we're inundated with images of a world far beyond our city, beyond our borders.
We all were virtually participants, visually at least, in the Gulf War.
Things were unimaginable in military history.
I mean, that in itself will mark a great difference, I think, in the way in which, not just reporting,
but the way in which military strategy is even planned.
Now, it's also arguable, and has been argued, that the city has exhausted its original function in other ways, too.
For example, sociologists have claimed that the history of all social units is closely allied to their capacity to maintain themselves by armed force.
And if you think back through history, from the ancient Near East to Western antiquity and through the Middle Ages,
the ultimate military units were cities, maintaining themselves by fortifications, armies, and navies.
Today, and in Western Europe, ever since the rise of nationalism, states, we know, have taken over that function.
From a military point of view, the city is negligible.
Having said that, one thinks back to Chicago in 1968, or to the recent events with the LA Police Department,
and the tele-taped affair of Rodney King, and we know that the police in cities are very potent factors,
but certainly not in a worldwide political scheme at all.
People have even argued that when you're trying to do a military assessment of the cities as obsolete,
you should think all the way even to the specter of atomic war, and that the city is not only not a player,
but that it could ultimately be the final death trap of modern society.
People trapped in cities that are themselves the targets because of cities.
And, of course, there are obviously political parallels to this, too.
The city is no longer a far-tative political unit.
It's true, it has its mayor, but we all know that in this society, at least,
there's a complex interrelationship between city, state, and federal.
So, there's no reason to belabor the obvious.
What I'm saying is there are a lot of different grids and perspectives that would prove to you
that in important ways, the city no longer has the kind of authority or necessity that it once had.
So then the question that I want to raise, and it's a rhetorical question,
because I wouldn't be electorate if I didn't think there was an obvious answer to it,
is what is the significance of the city if it is no longer the dominant social or market structure,
or political structure that it was?
And the answer, and it's probably a naive answer, and it may have something to do with my own lack of enlightenment,
the answer for me is living, that the quality of life is a larger proposition
than whether business has become international or can be conducted by the facts the computer or the conference call.
We do not live in places simply because they are militarily all-powerful.
And what is most lacking in the electronic scenario is any sense or any value given to human presence.
To the fundamental body-to-body, face-to-face constitutes human interaction.
We may feel that today, in today's city, those encounters have become so potentially dangerous
that they no longer count as urban benefit.
After all, the TV monitor is not going to mug you.
But how many of us nonetheless would choose to live, not to work, but to live electronically?
I mean, if we could choose it.
My wife keeps saying that they're going to eventually have a fax machine that not only sends your messages,
but sends you yourself, warts and all, over the wires.
And even though that's not likely to come, the talk that one hears about virtual reality,
about coming technological possibilities, not of sending us over the wires,
but of sending it, the environment, to us by hookup electronically, that could be a challenge to this thesis.
I personally, since I've not experienced that, I find it hard to believe that even that could simulate face-to-face and body-to-body.
Even if it could simulate the kind of sensory input that we might get,
it is still a private, solicistic arrangement, it seems to me.
It's a machine feeding stuff into us.
It's not face-to-face and body-to-body.
So I think that despite all of these unheard of frequencies and velocities that cargo today's information,
there are some very simple facts of life that are not changeable.
One is that we live in bodies, not only in cities, in bodies that obey the law of gravity,
that require nurturance, that take up space, that have a very limited duration, that have their own rhythms,
and that must be brought into contact with other bodies, both socially and in some larger species sense, if there is to be a continuance.
That's one.
Two, we are equipped for encounter.
Our bodies, our language, our eyes, our ears, our mouths, even our noses, process and enable engagement with the world.
There is something very deeply social here.
It's also multi-stimulant, multi-media.
It is, in my opinion, unattainable with a TV monitor or a phone,
and I can't imagine that it's all replicable with virtual reality.
The plenitude of encounter is body-to-body, the language of the body, the stimulation of person-to-person,
the aura of physical presence, which is extraordinarily rich.
We all know that, that there's so many clues, there's so many factors that govern and enhance and tell us about human interaction,
that we cannot get on the phone, that we cannot get in other kinds of connections, but that are there when we're talking to people.
It doesn't mean that they're always articulated.
Most of them are not.
Most of them we wouldn't want to say.
But there is a kind of richness in that exchange that I don't think comes across in the electronic versions of it.
So I do not feel that we can live as disembodied images and messages.
We are physical, sentient entities that take up space, and I would say that the urban corollary that follows is that the city is the most intelligent and promising
spatio-cultural arrangement that humans have yet devised because it allows them to add to their lives, to transform their environment into individual enrichment,
and ultimately to valorize their trajectory in time and in space.
And Mumford said that the city should be thought of as a conduit through time of human achievement, a living chain of being,
stores and transmits the news of human life, by-dent of the human players who come together and partake of what is there, and then pass it on.
There's nothing civic-minded about this.
It's not a question of attitudes or good citizenship.
It is a matter of cultural continuum, of growth, of the fundamental symbiosis between self and society.
So these would be the kinds of conclusions that I would make and about the relevance of art in this perspective.
As we've seen in the work of figures like Blake, Dickens, Melville, and Rilke, and others, art can make visible to us patterns that we cannot see with our eyes.
We started with Blake's London, where he illuminates the relations between individual and institution, which most of us would agree,
yes, those are the governing relations in many people's lives.
If not the governing, they're at least there.
They play a role, and yet they cannot be taken in physically.
Or, one thinks of the Rilke material about people who cannot keep the city from rushing in.
We can't see this, but the writers can show it to us amongst painting of the hollowed-out spectral people.
Art shows us things that we know in some sense to be true, but that we are not equipped with our organs to perceive.
And so the artist frequently does us the great service of making that perceivable, making it visible.
It's true by many facts of life.
Pollution is a term that we know about, and we see the smoke out there, and we learn through autopsies and things that people's lungs are black.
We can't see it getting in.
It's not the smoke out there, it's the cigarette smoke, it's everything else.
We can't see the cancers inside us.
We can't see the things that happen inside us.
But frequently art gives us an entry into that perception.
That light, as I said, it makes things visible.
Sometimes, even at its darkest, it gives us a version of events like the Necropolis, the City of the Dead,
and Dara's film, where the Alpha, VOD, computer rules the city.
It gives us a version of events that we reject, and that's all the better.
That's what's tonic about the art.
One could almost interpret art as showing us a possible future that we cannot afford to experience.
That's why it is good.
That's why the most daunting pictures, the ones that are the most disturbing are perhaps the ones we need the most.
We need the most to imagine alternatives.
Because we have such poor, I think, imaginations out of us.
At its most negative sometimes, at its most nightmarish, and it's, well, it's quite possible.
I have perhaps overdone the negative in this course.
I think the artwork is true to human feeling.
I think it expresses the kinds of anxieties, fears that we have, but never find their way into statistics.
Art, I think, are lacking in the historical record, lacking in empirical data.
Art, this is how I started this course, art is a privileged record of our experiential lives, of our subjective experiences.
We need to valorize that more.
We don't have to say that life is only that.
Of course it is not.
I'm going to read you a passage of what I think is a very, very dark picture of city life by a modernist writer,
a post-modernist writer, you'd have to say, is a French novelist, Alain Hobb-Grayer.
It's part of a book called Project for a Revolution in New York, written in the 70s.
And you will hear it's written in an extremely modernist fashion.
He shifts constantly between real and imaginary.
You can no longer distinguish in his writing what is actually happening from what is desired, what is feared, what is felt.
Mind you, if life were like that, we would all be in bad shape.
We depend on making, that's what our human grammar is all about.
Being able to distinguish between the inside picture and the outside picture.
Being able to distinguish between our private optic and the way we can all agree that that curtain back there is blue, the color of this roster, etc.
There would be some local slight differences, but fundamentally there is an agreed upon outside view of the world.
Well, in this writer, as you're going to hear, those distinctions are not possible to maintain, and so this is the way this text goes.
It's a figure, Laura, who puts her hand on a knob.
She puts her hand on a ceramic knob, but suddenly freezes.
There is blood, a trickle of thick, fresh, bright red blood flowing under the white door, coming from inside the room.
Making a sudden decision, I'm skipping a little bit, the young woman completes her interrupted gesture and opens the door wide with a single gesture,
a violent push which makes the entire room vibrate as it flies open for a long time.
Her white hand remains suspended in midair in the open doorway, the next sentence.
Inside the car, nothing has changed and you have moved.
Ben Said's eyes are still on the floor while W continues his regular mechanical toying with the brass latch of the door.
You begin to realize you're in a subway, which breaks the silence with its too loud and too slow beat of some inordinate metronome.
For reasons which, and you've shifted again, for reasons which have not yet been explained to the passengers, a breakdown of the current sabotage.
Now, we are getting a list here of city nightmares.
A breakdown of the current, sabotage, a light signal jammed by tab, a young girl's body lines the tracks.
The train is immobilized in a tunnel between two stations for a period of time it would be difficult to determine.
Laura, we return to her, who is still on the platform connecting the two cars, listens, ears cocked for some decisive occurrence.
Crackling of flames, bursts of machine gun fire, alarm sirens, clamors of the revolution, or else the muffled roar appearing out of the distance and growing ever louder.
Notice this is happening, she's not just imagining it, all of a sudden the language is making this happen too.
She's listening for it and then it's just beginning to happen.
Growing ever louder until it turns into a very close den of the next train traveling at full speed since the track is free according to the jammed signals
and which bears down on the obstacle invisible until the last moment because of the curve of the tunnel and which will therefore in a few seconds collide with the paralyzed train
in an enormous explosion of machines, shattering to bits, cars, telescopes together, women screaming, window panes pulverized, steel twisted, benches torn out and thrown in all directions.
But on the road bed beside her, vague although very close, with almost within reach of her hand, no doubt the attentive girl perceives only a faint wheezing sound, a short and scarcely perceptible breath.
A dim oblong hunched shape is creeping along the rail which gleams faintly in the darkness.
The thing soon reaches the brighter and more open space between the two cars and Lara, frozen in horror, recognizes a rather large gray rat which, having stopped to stare at her with its tiny eyes,
raises in her direction a paler snout with sharp teeth at the sides, apparently trying to detect a tiny swift, slightly hissing sniffs.
The odor of the raw flesh it is selecting in advance, waiting for the imminent catastrophe whose premonitory emanations it has already picked up.
In order to tear herself away from the fascination which risks making her step over the railing if the halt continues, the young woman clings to the ceramic knob which is where we're starting.
This is nothing but going back and forth, this is a horrorscape, a scenario, it seems to me, almost an agenda, a list of urban terror.
And I defy anyone not to have a faster heartbeat when the train, the subway stops in the tunnel or when all of a sudden it stops and we don't know why.
These are the kinds of scenarios that are just waiting to be activated.
Activated in our psyches, activated in our minds, and that's what is so appropriate about Rob Grier's technique, that he doesn't require it to have happened.
It's happening psychically anyway as far as he's concerned.
And he wants to devise a writing strategy that would thrust that at you, make you realize that it's hard to prevent the eruption of these kinds of fears and terrors, that this is part of the city's repertory like it or not.
And as I say, even that in my opinion is a worthy contribution.
That it at least gets on the record things that are otherwise unrecorded and shows us that our factual data is important.
We've got to know how many times this really happens versus how many times we merely fear it.
But it's also good to know how many times we merely fear it.
The other relevance, justification for art about city life here in a much more positive direction is the kind of imaginative high that is recorded in work like that of Walt Whitman and also Baudelaire.
The making of a family, the discovery of responsibility and interconnectedness in Dickens and in Balzac, the awesome recognition that we do live together in relation.
City art is particularly made to tell that story.
Family making becomes a human work of art, establishing a form against the random city state.
The last thing I would say about the relevance of art in this argument is that city art is an art of great appetite.
It incessantly draws the map on which we live, shows us that the coordinates in time and space are larger than we might think and helps us thereby to a richer, fuller picture of our own placidness.
It makes us larger, larger entities.
But I'll close or begin to close this lecture by taking appetite even more literally and returning to Hemingway's title, A Movable Feast.
The city is a feast. It nourishes people.
At its most basic, non-metaphoric, I'm talking about the restaurants of the city.
Those places of ethnic cuisine where we can encounter and absorb not only food but traditions of others, vital, disparate and sometimes strident and warring traditions that go together to make up the city.
More figuratively, I am referring to the multiple cultures that are housed in the city.
The languages, the festivals, the parades, the fairs, the circuses, the museums, the exhibits, the shows, the concerts that all of us are privy to in the city.
And anyone who has ever been to a parade or a concert or even a museum knows that the living experience of it has a kind of plenitude, immediacy, dimensionality and excitement that no transcription of it can have.
And as for eating a meal, sharing a drink, seeing the flow of people, if you haven't done it in the real world, physical world, it's not happening.
So the city is a sumptuous container of nutrients, sounds, sights and experiences.
It has a variety and a richness that beggar and challenge our individual repertoires, that add immeasurably to the data of private life.
As Samuel Johnson said in the 18th century, a man tired of London is tired of life.
So, a movable feast. And we, we is we, the city dwellers, who move.
We are on the move. It is we who walk the streets, who enter and exit the buildings, who see, sometimes smell, sometimes touch the people who receive unto ourselves the stimuli that are out there.
And that's why, to my way of thinking, the contemporary urban spectacle of joggers and even walkers with Walkman plugged into their ears, with eyes glazed, studiously locked into their private inner sanctum is, I think, a sad sight.
It's, in my opinion, and you probably won't share this, I'll not too, object lesson in city life.
The portable phones that are so much with us today, those movable networks at once linking us and blinding us, testify as well to our absence from the scene.
Our disappearance as active perceivers. In Sweden, they call these phones yuppie teddies because of the fond way that people cradle them and the kinds of people who frequently have them in their BMWs, cradle them next to their cheeks as they drive their cars.
I call these how not to object lessons because they effectively block out our immediate environment. They replace our immediate, real, urban, physical setting with a long distance one.
That blocking out, as we've seen over and over, is of course what we are apt to do, what we are required to do all the time. It's what I call homeostasis. It's a way in which we stay alive.
But, art always works the other way. One of the first lines in Rilke's novel is when his protagonist says, ich lerne sehen. I am learning to see.
And it is what art, urban art always teaches us. It's one of the great lessons of art. The city is real. All of the obsolescent theories in the world will not make it go away.
It does not turn over and die, even when it is beset by violence or by corruption.
One of the most succinct statements of urban order comes from Shakespeare's Othello, which as you may remember and as I've alluded to, opens with Iago trying to start a city riot.
Yelling into Brabantio's house that the Moore and his daughter are making the beast with two backs and all kinds of obscene letters to the animality and carnality that is taking place.
Brabantio's response is telling. He says, this is Venice. My house is not a grange.
Centuries of civilization and human form go into that phrase. It measures the transition from nature to culture.
And Iago cannot start a riot in Venice. It is true he succeeds in Cyprus, which is an outpost. But in Venice, it cannot happen.
And in Venice, one of the lovely scenes of that play is the hearing in the Senate. It's a marvelous scene.
That's when Othello speaks his cause, pleads his case, and it's a scene of circles, of concentric circles.
At the core of it, we have the Duke, and we have Othello and Brabantio, each stating their case.
And around them, robed in their fine furs, we have the Venetian senators, and around them we have the audience watching the play.
And these are all forms of civilization. They're structures that do not simply collapse.
And I think that it's entirely important that we remember that.
The city is not Papier-Michet. The wolf who comes to the door will not blow it down.
Moreover, like Hemingway's parents, it goes with us as a part of our own sentiment.
If we have lived in cities, it's fair to say that they live in us. They condition our seeing.
They are a part of the furnishings of our mind.
I'd like to refer once final time to Calvino's text, Invisible Cities, which is a series of conversations between Marco Polo and Kublai Khan.
It's a very wonderful imaginative text.
And at one moment in it, the Khan points to a city of barges, ridged canals, palaces with marble doorsteps, boats driven by long oars,
market squares, balconies, domes, and campaniles, and asks Polo if he has ever seen a city like this.
Marco Polo says no, and he continues to describe to the Khan, right on through the night,
all of the fantastic cities he has seen in his travels.
Finally, the Khan says to him that there is one city he never mentions, Venice.
And the response of Marco Polo is worth attending to.
He says, what else do you believe I have been talking to you about?
And the Khan wonders why he never mentions that every time he describes a city, he is talking about Venice, which is, of course, where he came from.
The great traveler, the great man who goes to the Orient, Venice is there as the prototype created by time and space,
by the conditions of his birth, and it cannot leave, it cannot be traded away.
It conditions, it doesn't entirely control, but it conditions all of the seeing and naming and telling that takes place afterwards.
It's in that sense that cities live in us as well as we living in them.
I like that passage as well because this text is so much about the free play of the imagination,
the capacity to invent virtually anything.
And in that response that Venice, what else do you think I have been talking to you about?
It's a recognition that all of us are born at a particular time, at a particular place, and that that's not movable. That's there.
Those are our conditions. Now, the imagination allows us a certain kind of mobility,
but this gives a kind of richness, a kind of groove, kind of focus, perhaps even a kind of loyalty, definition to all of the adventures that subsequently take place.
So the city is real, and art, finally, is real.
It is not a way of decaling the Bronx. It is not a question of making rhymes for pretty canvases.
I have urged art on you as a privileged entry into the city, not because it is beautiful, although it is beautiful,
but because it widens and deepens our human estate. It enlivens and it enriches our purchase in life.
And by its very modus operandi, the way it works, it brings us out of ourselves and introduces us into landscapes, city-states, not of our own making.
This is good for the soul. This is the kind of workout that human life requires.
But this is what city art and city life have always done, to challenge the private due, to attend to the larger setting than I close now, to add scope to human life. Thank you.
I'm Tom Rollins, president of The Teaching Company. We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
Or visit us on the Internet at www.teachco.com. That's teacherco.com. Thank you very much for listening.
