Most experiences are limited to a set of objects and processes determined by the structure of these Homo sapiensbodies. However, our modes of inquiry and technological adjuncts have permitted us to extend perception into other scales, such that we must now define scale itself to orient ourselves to these new levels of observation.

Scale is not the level of observation, but a tool for establishing a reference point for domains of experience and interaction. Scale enters in the relation between two very different modes of experience. It shows how an entity not apparent in our perceptual field—for example, a carbon atom—fits within one’s normal experience. Without scale, “atoms” would be hypothetical and abstract, as they were until atomic theory tied “atoms” to objects discernible at a particular scale deduced through scientific practice. When we embed the objects and processes of other scales into our concepts and language, scale becomes implicit or forgotten as the condition for speaking in this way even as we develop more complex descriptions about these objects. Do I notice, when I speak of “cells,” that there is some implicit relationship between my body and these “cells”?
These transformations need to be examined so that we can trace out this elaborate structure of observation. We need a theory of scale, a means of looking at this way of looking.

A Scalar View
Look:
Looking at this body, I can think of these sensations as cellular signals and can muse on my emotions as neurotransmitter exchanges. I consider my microbiome and supplement my diet with probiotics while also carefully eradicating unwanted microbes in routine sanitizing. Fears arise about errant molecules delivered through plastics and pesticides. Other lively molecules called viruses hijack our globalized systems, uprooting and destroying lives and disrupting the world economy. For an ever-shrinking fee, I can have my DNA analyzed and face the odd relation between these spiraled molecules and some ambiguous data about this body’s dispositions. I see images of cells, drawings of molecules, diagrams of atoms like infinitesimal solar systems, and know that somehow these computers are made from incredibly small etchings. I contemplate nanomachines and artificially produced microorganisms that might come to embody unknown intelligence; they show up in movies at least and seem more believable as technological devices embed themselves more deeply in my life.

Looking into the world, I can conceive of my very weight as the gravitational pull of the collective presence of a massive Earth that I routinely see pictured. I can look with unease at this superfluous packaging on my food that arrived from across the planet and contemplate the island of plastic gathering in the Pacific. I can pick up one of these electronic devices and immediately connect to locales around this planet or dive into a wealth of information that includes endless bits of people’s lives spread out in an ever-increasing network. I can attempt to examine the political or economic climate—only to face uncertainty about who is acting, where, or to what ends (conspiracy theories proliferate). The simple numbers and narratives fed as signs of these global accumulations hardly serve to indicate what I know is the intricate dance of multinational corporations and globally spread governmental bodies carrying out extensive operations connecting together not just the unimaginably large 7.8 billion people on this planet but the immense ecological structure that supports that population. Advertisements remind me that somewhere people are starving and species are going extinct. The vastness of space only compounds the bewilderment; these stars and solar systems compounded into galaxies and groups of galaxies—how does this immense observable universe fit here in my world, this universe that I observe?
Bewilderment and Posthuman Experiences
We are intimately familiar with scalar objects and descriptions, but once we begin to inquire into them we find them absolutely bewildering. This bewilderment is an inherent attribute of scale becauseit moves us beyond our human-centered ways of dividing and seeing reality. But scale performs this decentering by connecting human perception and concepts with that which exceeds them. I don’t see cells as cells, the Earth as the Earth, atoms as atoms, or galaxies as galaxies. Only intervening modes of representation, navigated by a scalar notation, permit me to experience and understand the world in this way. Bewilderment arises as we attempt to reinterpret what we are experiencing in terms that exceed immediate experience. Yet, scale demands that already within your everyday experiencesare other scales of being. Looking at this hand, you are already seeing cells, atoms, ecological relations, bits of stardust.

Thus, even though we all are familiar with scale, knowing of a variety of scalar objects, invoking scalar relations, and finding ourselves entangled in scalar productions, we must nonetheless learn to scale. Scale requires that we rethink our ways of describing and thinking about the cosmos according to new and counterintuitive rules. It is not enough to just speak of cells. It is not even enough to work as a scientist in a lab, with elaborate apparatuses, with cells. Until you have reoriented your whole conception of your body according to this conception of cells, you have not comprehended what scale is and what it implies. But scale does not stop there; it also demands that we comprehend the strangeness of the quantum, the vastness of a million galaxies, and the diffused intimacy of the ecological. And all of this, it says, is already implicit in your experience of gravity, in your relation to the sun, in the air you breathe.

Scale as a Fundamental Philosophical Question
This book traces out the conceptual, perceptual, and discursive aspects of scale writ large, including how we find ourselves with scale as a notion, the conditions under which it operates, and the difficulties it presents for human knowledge built largely on nonscalar experience. It tries, first and foremost, to highlight scale as a certain way of thinking and speaking, and to train the reader in this way of thinking. I hope to demonstrate that the longer you dwell with scale, the more fundamental it appears.

There are three foundational philosophical concepts that scale indelibly alters. First, scale deals with the delineation of objects, transforming one field of objects into others depending on the scale of inquiry. Scale suggests that any object appears different—or does not even exist at all—if you change the scale of perception. As two ecologists note, “If you move far enough across scales, the dominant processes change. It is not just that things get bigger or smaller, but the phenomena themselves change.”3In a framework of scale, objects are no longer clearly separate, apparent, and self-contained entities “in themselves,” since changes in scale reveal that the same thing also exists differently. All objects, therefore, must be defined via their scale of interaction and perception. In short, scale changes everything because it changes what every thing means.

Second, because scale deals with perspective, it is intertwined with notions of the subject, experience, consciousness, and interpretation. In applying scale to the body you call “mine” you find yourself looped into a disorienting question: whose body is it? The atoms’? The cells’? The planets’? The galaxies’? While this may seem absurd, this conundrum is already necessitated by scale and is, I argue, the most fundamental challenge presented by scale. We can only pretend that objects and relations exist “in themselves” and apart from these scalar delineations if we leave our conception of ourselves intact. Doing so makes scale inevitably abstract; it permits us to treat scalar objects as just any other objects and scalar relations as just more relations. But scale ties those relations back to our usual experience, saying that what I am is already atoms, cells, planets, galaxies. But then who is scaling?
Finally, scale reworks our notions of process, relation, and organization. Scale presents not only new objects but a tangle of new relations in two senses: first, scale reveals relationships that were previously not apparent simply because they were not discernible; and in turn, scale provides new possibilities for comprehending these aggregates and relations. Schemes of control and force—whether called “top-down,” “bottom-up,” the “great chain of being,” or hierarchy of things—contain presumptions about scale that are revised when we carefully examine this apparatus.

The center of this book (Part II) directly addresses these reconfigurations, with a chapter devoted to each. But because scale entails a particular, counterintuitive way of thinking, we must first experiment with this way of thinking and attempt to make this term “scale” clear. Thus, Part I provides a series of thought experiments that define the parameters of scale as I am using it here and train the reader in thinking in terms of scale.

