The Philosophical Status of Scale
Before we begin these experiments, I want to highlight a few ways that scale has been positioned in theoretical conversations. In discussions of the “ontological status of scale,” scholars tend to be critical of the concept partially because it is unclear what scale is.4Even in accounts favorable to scale, scale is said to be an “arbitrary mental device which allows us to make sense of our existence.”5Or perhaps, “merely a way for humans to perceive and comprehend the world.”6Or, as one geographer put it, “there is no such thing as scale.”7Stripped of their diminutive qualities, these statements are partially correct: scale is a conceptual device that allows us to make sense of our existence, but not one which is entirely arbitrary. Scale provides a way for humans to perceive and comprehend the world, but one that is essential and not necessarily tied to humans. Finally, scale does not exist, in the sense that “scale” itself is not an entity but a reference for the structure of phenomena. The diminutive qualities of each of these statements relegates scale in relation to the social, the epistemological, and the ontological, respectively. But scale is not quite any of these.

To say that scale is ontological would imply that scale exists already as a kind of entity or fact of the world. To say that scale is epistemological would imply that it is a way of learning about or accessing the world. To say that scale is a social structure would imply that scale is one among many conceptual frameworks that society has built for mapping the world. And yet, scale relies both on the “being” of phenomena and a reference to the one who is measuring as a means of coming to know being. If we take the whole scaling process into account, considering whether scale is an epistemological, ontological, or social construct has less meaning. Rather, scale functions at a level above ontology and epistemology: scale is a means of orienting yourself both to experience and to the being of things. It is a metaphenomenal structure that makes use of a consistent measure to compare and calibrate ourselves to phenomena. Scale does not arise solely from beings (the ontological) or our mode of accessing beings (epistemology), but rather is a way of systematically organizing and comparing phenomena as they appear. Scale is an addendum and a reflecting back on what is discovered phenomenologically, first through attending to the presentation of the world and then systematically extending this presentation using a defined measure. In turn, the consistency of this defined measure then accounts for the way we are dividing reality, which means that scale cannot be solely a social construct.

Once discovered, scale becomes a necessary conceptual adjunct to any mode of inquiry—whether we want to speak of objects (ontology), our learning about objects (epistemology), or our way of organizing, speaking about, and distributing reality (sociality)—since the objects in question are only understood through the reorientation mapped by scale.Studying a cell only becomes possible once we extend our perceptual apparatus to sufficient resolution to identify cells, but it only becomes coherent when scale orients us to this perception. Regardless of the ontology of the cell (whether it actually exists), its epistemological status (how we find out about it), or the social aspects that go into its discovery (the training required to use a microscope), scale is required to understand what we mean by “cell.”
Scale provides us with a reference point to take note of how any phenomenon compares to any other. Doing so permits us to systematically attend to how what is is revised and structured as beings dissolve, shift, combine, layer, and relate to each other differently depending on the scale of examination. Scale does not mediate our access to the world; it permits us to make sense of mediated, extended, and projected experience. This status makes the scalar relation unlike any other kind of relation we find ourselves in. When we say that the Earth is made of rocks and the rocks are made of atoms, we are suggesting that the very being of each phenomenon is made up of, contained by, and holds reference to the others.

Two Kinds of Transformation
With this outline, we can see how Levin’s invocation of observation cannot be read within conceptions of objects, subjects, reality, interpretation, relations, and so on derived from this-scale experience. Rather, scale transforms the very possibilities of these terms. Scale requires that we move beyond the strict matters of organism and observation, matter and idea, language and knowledge. In short, scale forces us into what posthumanist theorists have recently emphasized as the deconstruction of the binaries of humanism, such as mind/matter, subject/object, and nature/human (see chapter 8). However, scale does not simply tell us to move beyond these binaries; it is a tool for moving us beyond them.

Demonstrably, Levin has done something quite interesting: in speaking of the “scale of observation,” what has the scientist performed? On what scale is this observation taking place? Can any organism staying within its biological capacities of observation change scales sufficiently to observe that its observation relies on a scale of observation? In speaking of scale, Levin has transformed not only objects but his own level of observation.

In this way, scale navigates two vectors of transformation: it is at the intersection of a transformation of the world and a transformation of ourselves. Remaining at one scale, these observers and objects seem to solidify in a formation. But scale itself is the possibility of permitting these subjects and objects to transform again. In moving persistently across these transformations, scale further transforms the possible subjects and objects we might attribute to these words “world” and “ourselves.” In many ways, this book is nothing more than an exegesis of the last four sentences.

Scale itself is properly transformative in turn, both changing and mapping our understanding of what we experience. Scale is inevitably rhetorical in the sense that it is about and requires a transformation or reconfiguration of our understanding of reality. As the study of persuasion, rhetoric focuses us on both the descriptive power of scale for objects and the transformative power of scale for those attending to these descriptions. Different rhetorical strategies are needed for us to follow out this transformation and permit scale to properly transform and reorient ourselves.

Finding a Theory of Scale Itself
Because we are so entangled in scale it is unsurprising that many Homo sapiensare already working through significant elements of scale, albeit obliquely or manifesting in other guises—subordinating scale to other issues, failing to follow through on the scalar concerns, or focusing on the scalar productions rather than the bewildering apparatus that makes them possible. Much recent work in critical theory and philosophy already relies on, or works with, scale. However, because they lack a clear theory of scale, studies that get the closest to describing scale often fall short of accounting for its most difficult implications.

One major problem is that it is difficult to study all scales at once. Just as Levin is primarily interested in scale for ecology, those studying science within the humanities often study a scale domain rather than scale itself. Much of the most significant work in science studies over the last few decades has focused on delineating and demonstrating the foreign nature of various scales. For example, Karen Barad’s Meeting the Universe Halfwayargues for revisions of agency and interpretation based on findings from the quantum scale. Work on nanotechnology demonstrates the strangeness of the nanoscale for conceptions of vision, control, and materiality.8The work of Natasha Myers, Stephan Helmreich, Myra Hird, and others treats in different ways the implications of the cellular and microbial scales.9Scholars of systems science and cybernetics, such as N. Katherine Hayles, Bruce Clarke, Cary Wolfe, Elizabeth Wilson, and Richard Doyle, have highlighted the entangled nature of systems thinking, particularly on the level of the planet.10Studies of space rhetoric and environmentalism, such as the work of Ursula Heise, Timothy Morton, and Lisa Messeri, have worked with the strange attempt to scale the seemingly abstract nature of place and outer space.11All of this work reveals an astonishing array of transformations in thought, culture, and language within these scalar shifts. All of these scholars inevitably confront their object of study as scalar, but these moments are, with some exceptions, subordinated to the primary scale of interest. Such work provides the basis for the following theory of scale, but one task here is to show how scale itself is a common thread in these discursive transformations.

Since I began this project, there has been a rapid increase of interest in scale in the humanities, particularly in the study of literature and culture.12However, such work tends to import theories of scale from the various disciplines (particularly geography) and handle several notions of scale together, while not making clear a theory of scale itself.13We thus want to develop more clearly a theory of scale itself that works across these diverse disciplines and objects. By “scale itself” I mean the apparatus of scale apart from any of the objects and processes that already make use of scale. I will show that there is a common notion of scale that needs to be accounted for by thinking not just aboutany one discipline or sets of objects but by thinking acrossthem.

In scientific theory, many others aside from Levin have also directly engaged with scale and orders of magnitude, particularly in systems theory and hierarchy theory.14But these are illustrative of the constraints in approach that tend to come with scientific expertise—a tendency to focus on method that is limited or filtered through one’s discipline (and the scales that one focuses on) and that remains largely confined to scientific practice and discourse. Thus, many of Levin’s questions about scale are methodological (e.g., how does scale affect scientific practice?) and are read through ecology. Hierarchy theorists attempted to generalize their scalar concepts, but more work is needed to defend and clarify the nature of these scales, how we arrive at them, and what they imply.15Often attempts to do so, such as The View from the Center of the Universeby astronomer Joel R. Primack and science communicator Nancy Ellen Abrams, conceptualize what they are doing as primarily an act of science communication rather than a more significant, philosophical inquiry into how scale has made possible a different mode of understanding, thinking, and speaking about reality. In turn, Geoffrey West’s Scale,a distillation of his scientific work written for a popular audience, extols scale as central to his work but does not contain a careful theory of scale, resulting in some significant omissions and confusions that we’ll encounter later in this book. Finally, the field of geography has an extensive conversation on scale but, as we will discuss in chapter 9, remains largely confined to scales relevant to the human.
