
The task here is to think as generally as possible about as many of these disciplinary descriptions as possible and to extend these considerations out of the specialized concerns of science and into the more general questions about reality, knowledge, language, culture, and so on. To this end, a note about my own training, since it affects what follows, is in order. In many ways I have managed to avoid being disciplined. My training has been primarily in rhetoric, science studies, and critical theory of the sort that one might acquire in many English departments in the United States. This training has managed to keep me insulated somewhat from the usual disciplinarity, with my focus in rhetoric allowing me to skirt even the disciplinary limitations typical of literary studies. I treat rhetoric in a more philosophical sense as the study of the effects, constraints, and possibilities of communication. This notion of rhetoric provides a basis for this project. My approach has been to consider each of these sites as first and foremost an articulation attempting to make sense of the same thing: scale. These different ways of articulating scale have different effects on what it is and how we conceive it, but out of those discourses one can distill common elements. Once these common elements were highlighted, I was able to separate out the common issues and explore how these issues arise from or unfold out of scale. Thus, earlier drafts of this book took a form more typical of cultural studies. Each chapter began with a cultural depiction of scale and then treated this moment as representative of a key scalar trope out of which one could distill aspects of scale. This method resulted in extensive analysis of texts but spread the theory of scale throughout the text. This final version distills out the results of this abductive process by placing the conclusions at the beginning in a more systematic and theoretical manner in Part I. The results appear more deductive than intended. Thus, while this book makes many general conclusions, I consider it primarily an experiment in articulation for encountering the conditions of scale and the effects of scale on experience. Some reflections on this method (and its relationship to science studies and rhetoric) can be found in chapter 10.

The delineating of scale itself required that I consider a wide variety of disciplines, interests, and discourses. Perhaps such an approach should be called nondisciplinary, since the following work only considers disciplines insofar as they might serve as apparatuses for focusing certain methods, emphases, and articulations. I have often ignored disciplinary boundaries entirely. However, I have not left out ties and references to specialized conversations—even though they strain my personal expertise—since to do so would cut the project off from the many conversations equally important to the question of scale. I see such ties not so much as interventions but as a kind of ping (in the networking sense) to those whose specialized knowledge might more adequately respond. In doing so I always had to make a choice: dive more deeply and thoroughly into a specialized conversation, or stay focused on scale. The focus on scale itself is the guiding factor throughout the work. Where possible, to maintain rigor and clarity, I fall back onto the practice I am trained in most: careful analysis of a particular text regardless of its discipline and genre. Undoubtedly this results in many loose ends, omissions, and potential misunderstandings (although I have attempted to minimize the latter, particularly in relation to scientific facts and practice), but such is inevitable with a project of this magnitude.

Given my training, many of the interventions provided will be couched in conversations in critical theory and science studies, but my hope is that readers from many fields and forms of expertise will find the content here useful, assuming they are willing to forgive the ways that the approach differs from their modes of thinking or doing scholarship. To this end, Part I is written in the most axiomatic form, consisting of six thought experiments out of which various principles, parameters, and conundrums of scale are defined. The first three thought experiments, which I call “experiential origins of scale,” culminate in a definition of scale (3.44—I will use this notation to cross-reference Part I with the remainder of the book), at which point the reader might want to move on to Part II. The final three chapters in Part I experiment further with scalar thinking, now assuming the apparatus of scale. By the end of Part I the reader will be adequately exposed to and trained in the conception of scale that is the core of this project.

Part II is equally philosophical, but now permits cultural depictions and critical engagements to enter as central to the arguments. This section examines more directly how scale reconfigures objects, subjects, and relations, but not exclusively as a philosophical problem. That is, I discuss basic philosophical problems not simply as abstract concepts but as a struggle to grasp and articulate a scalar configuration of reality. The arguments here will retrace and extend some of what was stated more axiomatically in Part I for the sake of something like prolepsis (the rhetorical term for accounting in advance for objections): how do we resist or struggle with what scale implies about subjects, objects, and relations?
In Part III, I consider directly the relationship between scale and communication, rhetoric, and representation. Since scale exceeds human experience, scalar descriptions must somehow depict or present that which is not immediately before us. What, then, does science describe? How do we interpret or approach scalar depictions? How do we make sense of scale’s transformation of ourselves such that it actually changes our way of being and living in the world?
It is my hope that this book will facilitate a more extensive and direct conversation about scale that more adequately crosses disciplines, while providing a relatively comprehensive, but by no means exhaustive, outline of what it involves. The primary goal here is to bring attention to the most bizarre aspects of scale while also training the reader in what scalar thinking and speaking might entail. To that end, the reader can get a general sense of the book in much less time by reading the first three chapters, then the first two or three sections of each chapter of Parts II and III, which set up the chapter’s problem and an overview of the way a theory of scale alters that problem.

Mysticism and Scale
A final note before we proceed. Perhaps the most controversial portion of this project is going to be its emphasis on a set of philosophical positions, practices, and discourses that may be labeled mysticism, the contemplative, or the nondual. It is necessary to situate this emphasis, since it is easily misunderstood.

There is a significant omission in our usual way of considering scale. The disorientation provided by scale and the fact that it relates to a transformation of ourselves means that it launches us necessarily into territory that is less comfortably scientific. This point of bewilderment is where those invested in scientific discourse tend to retreat back to the concrete productions of scientific study. We consider the cellular diagram rather than that my body is made up of cells; we return to studying images of stars and avoid contemplating our relationship to these vast distances; we reinscribe quantum fields as particles rather than consider the interpretive implications of quantum uncertainty. Again and again, the products of scale tempt us to retreat in this way, in part, because to do otherwise just seems too mystical.Thus, even Primack and Abrams, in one of their most interesting moments of scalar experimentation, throw out the phrase “It is not mystical; it is practical.”16But what if scale ismystical? The problem is that we don’t understand why it’s mystical or what this means because most invocations of that term do not carefully trace out the relationship between scale and the history, practices, and rhetoric of mysticism.

I argue that mysticism describes a particular experience, particular practices designed around that experience, and a particular configuration toward reality that arises from and works out a scalar perspective.When scientists take the time to dwell on the larger implications and effects of scale, they find themselves entering the discursive realm of mysticism. In turn, those who have mystical experiences often find that the scalar descriptions of science provide a language that fits their experience. What if, to fully orient ourselves to scale, we have to set aside this repeated dismissal of mysticism? I will show how scale brings some surprising clarity to what mystics have always been going on about and, in turn, that mysticism helps clarify essential difficulties presented by scale.

To this end, mysticism can be defined in scalar terms as that branch of inquiry that aims to induce and integrate encounters with nonhuman scales, particularly the cosmic scale.17Mysticism arises in the experience of an existence larger than oneself, in the experience of experience exceeding itself. This glimpse of a vaster totality beyond human bounds reorients the “individual” outside of the typical scale of the human being. This person must then try to make sense of, describe, and develop this new orientation. Doing so often leads to the articulation of a scalar terminology; we’ll encounter throughout this work the fact that most scalar articulations arise first within descriptions of contemplative experience.

The terms mysticism, contemplative,and nondualall bear a relationship to these scalar aspects. (We could add many other terms that will be caught up in the discussion, although we will not have space to address the nuances for each: holism, idealism, monism, organicism, transcendentalism, perennialism,and many more.) Mysticismdescribes a relationship to articulation: conceptual articulation is insufficient for the transformation experienced and described. Such articulations are “mysterious” because they are outside of the typical human lifeworld. Contemplativepoints to practices for cultivating this transformative experience. In turn, nondualdescribes a philosophical position, usually through a translation of the Sanskrit advaita(more on this in chapter 7). The scholar of religion Arthur Versluis gathers all three aspects together when he defines mysticism as “the contemplative ascent of the individual from duality to subject-object transcendence.  .  .  . [The] transcendent is one, unitary, existing outside all time, abiding in eternity, unbounded, and immeasurable. Mysticism is a word for coming to recognize transcendent reality for oneself.”18
The theory of scale presented here stumbles upon this same articulation, while clarifying this definition. The purpose of this project was not initially to comment on mysticism, but once the relationship between scale and mysticism became apparent it became essential to follow out these connections. It is crucial that the reader understand that these connections emerge outside of any dogmatic or religious context and are in many (but not all) senses secular. The approach here is again rhetorical: what are the functions of these terms, tropes, discourses, and practices of mysticism for describing and integrating in the scalar transformation? Ultimately, mysticism helps clarify the rhetorical elements of scale by accounting for how scale transforms the one who scales. For this argument to be made, we have to rethink mysticism in relation to what we have found out about scale and take it seriously as a discourse alongside science, philosophy, and social theory. However, because, I would argue, mysticism is what is missing from our current conceptions of scale,what follows will often counterpose nondual, contemplative conclusions to what can be drawn from many other discursive modes in order to highlight the difficulty and the task that scale has thrown us into.

The conclusions presented here are ways of seeing and taking into account the difficulty that our increasingly scaled understanding of reality presents for our persistently human-bound concepts. As an essential aspect of the structures of observations possible for these Homo sapiens,a theory of scale will leach into all aspects of how we encounter the world.

