But, of course, it already has. The theory presented here is thus a means of examining and dwelling with this implicit theory of scale, untangling the contradictions born from the residue of nonscalar views, and thereby reorienting ourselves to the strangeness that is our modern technological world, a world that insistently and persistently reveals ourselves beyond ourselves and demands that we comprehend this dissolution.Part IAlgorithms for a Theory of Scale
Scale is not the exclusive purview of science or the technologies that produce any scalar observations. Rather, these modes of inquiry and extensions of observation (e.g., in microscopes, telescopes, and the many more complicated apparatuses) examine basic aspects of experience that already generate the basis for scalar observations or necessitate the introduction of scale for the understanding and comparing of empirical observations.

On this premise, the following algorithms are fractal unfoldings of principles and definitions that are derived first through three thought experiments that I call “experiential origins of scale.” By this I mean basic phenomena that arise in experience that create the need for scale and the basis for producing it. These experiential origins are not produced by first creating an apparatus (as is the case with the creation of a map) or by attempts to understand pre-given objects, but rather through changes in one’s approach to observation. These observations are then augmented and extended using technologies that permit us to comprehend this extension beyond typical human experience. This approach positions scale as an attempt to understand basic questions about experience and observation.

I then add three additional “thought experiments inscale” that assume the notion of scale laid out in the experiential origins. These thought experiments are more properly experiments in thinking in terms of scale, and they are meant to train the reader in scalar thinking. Along the way I propose some more speculative reconfigurings of some scientific assumptions and approaches. Thus, while the experiential origins are meant to follow a purposefully naive approach to inquiry and observation, the experiments in scale are meant to pave the way toward a more sophisticated and far-reaching extension of the power of scalar thinking.

To show the continuity and application of these points, throughout this work I will refer back to the points made here using the paragraph numbers.1Distance and ResolutionThe First Experiential Origin of Scale
1.1—Let us start with a common observation. In front of me is an object: a tree. If I move away from the tree, the tree gets smaller. If I were to keep moving away from the tree while still keeping it in view—going to the top of a mountain, perhaps—I would find that the tree loses more and more detail until it merges into another object: the tree becomes part of a new entity called forest. The phrase “you can’t see the forest for the trees” becomes more meaningful as a statement about how the entity “forest” is a larger phenomenon that is not perceptible from the same position that one sees “trees.” The basic experience is that, in the view of trees, one does not discern this larger object, forest. This truism points to how this observation is not in any way new. Yet, if considered in its simplicity, it can unfold into a series of more significant observations about observation that generates the need for scale.

1.2—Clearly there is something fundamental about the brain’s processing of a visual field that produces this shift. However, if we were to proceed through the science of optics, searching for aspects of the processing of visual signals that produces these shifts in appearance, we would only find a mechanism for producing this change.1But tracing such a mechanism does not change the fact that this visual shift occurs or explain its implications, but rather tempts us to dismiss it as an artifact of vision rather than a general phenomenon about all observation. (What follows applies to all perceptions, which must contain similar mechanisms for separating out thresholds of perceptibility according to the scale of relevance. Vision, however, makes the shift in scale easy to see [as the metaphor implies] and track with sufficient precision.) We must pause on this simple observation: the change in the relative position of observer and observed leads to an alteration in what is able to be distinguished as an object.

1.3—The view from the mountain already suggests a fundamental characteristic of this shift: that individual entities dissolve into different entities when we change the scale of our view. What on one scale appears separate, on a larger scale appears to be one. This is not just a set of entities considered together—a set of trees. Rather, we find a whole new entity—the forest. If we could imagine forgetting that trees exist and only consider these phenomena via the perception of forests, we might consider the nature of “forests” quite differently.

1.4—If we pause here on the mountain, we find it hard to forget, however, that these forests are made of trees. There are at least four reasons for this. First, we look around us and see trees close by and relate them to the forest in the distance. We depend on what is near to provide a perceptual premise to understand more distant perceptions. This amounts to a reassertion of the scale of proximity as a mode of interpreting distant objects on familiar terms.

1.5—Second, our memory and language encode these transformations of perspective in a way that often obscures the shift. For example, “grass” already implies an aggregate in the same way that “forest” implies an aggregate of trees (and other objects). Walt Whitman’s famous “leaves of grass” is already a play on this kind of scalar encoding. Thus, in “A Song of Myself” he moves from an opening scalar identification (“I CELEBRATE myself, and sing myself / And what I assume you shall assume, / For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you”) to the image of grass (“I loafe and invite my soul, / I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass”). The awkwardness of singling out a “spear of grass” complements the opening scalar observation by highlighting the ease with which we speak and categorize certain things in aggregate and certain things in part.

1.6—Third, the object “forest” retains an intimate connection with the object “trees,” such that, in viewing the forest, we don’t think that we’ve lost sight of trees. Rather, we can retain the sense that in seeing the forest we are seeing many trees together, because the shift is not so great that the object “tree” is rendered completely unfamiliar. Indeed, if a tree is standing by itself, it might be perceived as a tree even from the mountain.

1.7—Finally, the consistency of the change in observation makes the shift seem trivial. The change in the appearance of objects is easily dismissed as a result of distance when we observe that moving away from an object creates this transformation in appearance.

1.8—If we remain at the mountain, our notion of scale will simply be the relation between these relatively familiar objects: the trees here and the forest in the distance. We arrive at what I am isolating here as a scalar perspectivewhen we move even farther away from the objects at hand. If we continue to move away—perhaps now via a camera on a spaceship—we will find that even the forest disappears as a distinct entity to be discerned. The key is that, as you move farther away from an object, the familiar objects are entirely transformed, such that, if we were to experience wholly at this new perspective, the familiar objects (both tree and forest) would not be distinguishable at all. At the scale of the planet, as forests give way to colors on a landscape, trees are no longer observable in any way that could clearly be tied to the current observation except via a scalar shift (in this case, literally coming back to Earth).

The significance of this point is clearer if we, somewhat prematurely, go to smaller scales. The discovery of cells, microbes, atoms, and subatomic particles required the delineation of wholly new objects made available for observation at these different scales.
