
1.9—To mark this complete transformation of objects, we must introduce the notion of “threshold.” A threshold is a discontinuity in what is observed, a change in the kind and quality of information that can be perceived as one alters the scale of observation. The need for scale arises when you observe this threshold shift whereby the whole experiential field transforms into new objects and need to make sense of what has happened. (We will arrive at these thresholds again in a different manner in 3.27 and continue to refine the notion of threshold throughout these experiments.)
1.10—Notably, this need for scale arises beforemeasurement (the starting point for the second experiential origin); it is not measurement alone that produces scale, and scale is not itself simply a measuring process. Rather, scale arises first from an observational shift in the objects able to be perceived. Thus, scale relates first to observational thresholds rather than physical thresholds, since the first describes changes in what might be discerned while the second describes changes in the scale of an object (an object getting larger or smaller), which presumes that object in advance. While we might characterize this threshold as a phase transition in perception, we can reserve the term “phase transitions” for a later point (see 6.19).

1.11—Considering this observational shift in terms of distance highlights the continuity of the perceptual shift from one scale to another across any scalar threshold. Scale requires this continuity, since this permits us to trace the change in observation across this threshold. We will arrive at other reasons and implications for this continuity later (2.6, 6.6).

1.12—The continuity in the observing apparatus is met equally by the discontinuity in what is observed. This point cannot be emphasized too much: scale entails a consistent and accountable alteration of observation that produces radical changes in what appears in any observation.

1.13—Prior to the 1960s, continuing our experiment in distance via literal movement of the eye was not possible. This points to the essential relation between technology and scale: scale requires technological adjuncts, because scale is only produced when we move beyond the perceptual limits of the human body. Thus, we can rewrite the previous three points: the significance of scale emerges when the lifeworld of objects available to the Homo sapiensperceptual apparatus encounters a perception that exceeds these limits.

1.14—Even in going to space, you haven’t physically switched scales. That is, the body of the Homo sapienshas not become as large as the Earth as if one has eaten the appropriate cake in Alice in Wonderland.Thus, you still have the same problems we noted above (1.4–7) at the top of the mountain: you can look around and see objects at the meter scale. However, once we have crossed a scalar threshold, one must ask: what is the relation between these two perspectives? Then one arrives at scale in the disorientation between two radically different perspectives. This is essential: in scaling, we are dealing with two very different experiences and putting them in relation. Scale is not either of these experiences alone but is an experience about two experiences (see 2.5).

1.15—Here, scale results from converting this observational movement into the concept of resolution. Resolution is the amount of detail one can discern within an observation. In relation to scale, resolution can be defined as the range of objects that are able to be taken as information for differentiation at a given observational range.2At different resolutions, different objects are discerned, so that one sees not merely small parts of a material but whole new objects. Shifts in resolution and shifts in scale go hand in hand: scale tracks the range of observation, while resolution points to the amount of detail able to be seen at that range.

Converting distance to resolution is truer to how scale moves beyond the human body (1.13). It also makes it possible to scale to the smaller, since simply moving physically closer to an object will not produce a revision of the world of objects unless accompanied by a change in resolution.

1.16—Scale domainscan be defined as the ranges between thresholds of observation, where the field of objects revises into an entirely new set of objects. Within a scale domain, objects remain relatively recognizable, as the tree does even from the mountain. Thus, a forest remains within the same scale domain as the tree. It is only when we move farther, and the forest becomes a landscape, that we find ourselves shifting scale domains. In the remainder of this project, the phrase “change scales” indicates a shift across a scalar threshold into a new scale domain.

1.17—To change resolution is to change scales even if you don’t move. Thus, if we were to remain in orbit and change our perceptual apparatus so that we resolve a singular tree, then we would be changing scales (scaling our perception via change in resolution). This meets the objection that better vision would allow one to view two scales at once or that certain parameters of the apparatus (e.g., the eyesight of a hawk who is able to see a mouse from the sky) cross thresholds of intelligibility.

1.18—The relationship between scale and resolution helps us understand the great innovation of the microscope. The microscope brings out an essential question of a threshold: do we conceptualize these objects in the terms of normal scale experience? We have arrived at a scalar perspective when we no longer consider the things in the microscope as simply really small objects within the same scale domain (cells as small compartments in the skin) but rather as a whole new set of objects (cells as units of their own).

1.19—In this scalar view, we can define objects as those differences that are able to make a difference at a particular range of observation.3By “differences” here we mean the grounds for separating objects available within a particular resolution. The tie between differentiation and resolution means that, to some extent, differentiation depends on the level of observation (i.e., scale). We should thus distinguish differentiation from division, since division implies an action taken on a pre-given object rather than a shift in observation. While any given scale provides grounds for differentiation, one must first select the resolution at which differentiation is to be produced.

1.20—Taking resolution (1.15) and the consistency of observation (1.11) together, we can state that scale produces multiple ways of looking at the same “thing” such that it will appear as different objects depending on the scale of observation.
