
1.21—The major premise implied by this shift in resolution is that any given differentiation might be rendered otherwise. Returning to 1.3, we can state the conclusion more generally: what appears differentiated on one scale is differentiated differently on another scale. That is, both differentiations and objects depend on the scale of observation. This implies that objects and differentiations are tentative or secondary delineations that depend first on the selection of the range of observation. At the same time, this does not mean that the observer creates the differences available for differentiation at any scale, but only that one must first designate the scale of relevance.

1.22—The unity of seemingly separated objects becomes available as a shift in perspective, not a bringing together of previously ontologically separated entities. As one moves to a larger scale, objects become a single unit as disparate things come together into a new object able to be discerned at that scale.

1.23—These units, however, are in turn inevitably parts of larger units. Scale to the largest possible scale imaginable. We can say that the “thing” that is being scaled is itself already “what is,” or the Cosmos. By definition, one could not observe this “thing,” since one is inside it and part of it. However, only such a unit that includes all units could be considered a “Whole.” As a resolution, this Whole would be observationally One, since no second object could be distinguished apart from it.4
1.24—Multiplicity is the discovery of differences that one might resolve within a previously unified object.

1.25—Unity does not annihilate multiplicity but includes it within it as a function of a change in resolution (see also 3.39).

1.26—Scaling smaller reveals multiplicity (more units within a unit), while scaling larger reveals unity (a unit that encompasses given units). However, this logic breaks down at the scalar extremes: there is no reason to assume that reality must continue to produce discernible modes of differentiation at smaller and smaller resolutions. Likewise, the scale of the Whole does not produce a unity in the sense of an object able to be seen together. Thus, both ends of the scale are equivalent to substance in Spinoza’s sense, a term already indicating that which underlies, that is, that out of which differentiations might be discovered to discern objects, and equivalent to the Bhagavad Gita’s concept of kūṭastham,the unchanging, or “that which stands at the top or the highest position.”5
1.27—The condition of possibility for redifferentiating this same “object” (whether the Whole or any object within that Whole) is that one might divide the world differently. This necessitates a kind of momentary and conceptual zeroing out of the mode of differentiating objects so that one might resolve them differently (see also 2.9). Thus, scale points to the inessentiality of objects and the unity of reality in three different senses via the Whole, the substance, and the negation of (which equals the openness of) differentiation.6
1.28—Only if we remain on one scale can we assume that an object discernible at that scale is contained and separate in itself. To adequately capture the paradoxical nature of this persistent habit, we can name this the partial-whole problem.The partial-whole problem includes all forms of distinctiveness taken as absolute or grounds for the distinction of objects as separate in and of themselves—in short, as “entities.” This includes any kind of haecceity (Don Scotus), monads (Leibniz), holons (Koestler), assemblages (Deleuze and Guattari), autopoietic systems (Maturana and Varela), and individuations (Simondon) that might be distinguished insofar as they are considered distinct in and of themselves.7
1.29—Because scale crosses us into thresholds beyond our human bodies, we need to be on guard for the ways we apply nonscalar experience to this scalar experience. Nonscalar experience leads us to persist in assuming the pre-given nature of the separation between objects able to be discerned at any given scale. It also tempts us to remain on one scale rather than being open to other possible scales.

1.30—The privileging of any given scale we can call scalism.8The first scalism is always going to be a privileging of this scale (around one meter), since it is the scale at which Homo sapienslive. This meter-scale reality is the nonscalar experience out of which our whole lifeworld, sense of reality, language, and culture is built. However, we can see how other scalisms are easily put into practice, for example, in strong reductionism’s assumption that a smaller scale holds more explanatory power than a larger one or the reverse assumption that larger scales inherently control smaller scales.

1.31—This experiment permits us to distinguish what we are here calling “scale” from scaling in the sense of making objects bigger or smaller. I will call this Gulliver’s scaling.Gulliver’s scaling presupposes objects, keeps them intact, and considers making them larger or smaller. Thus, in Gulliver’s Travelswe find very small and very large versions of essentially the same lifeworld of human beings. We find similar operations in Alice in Wonderland,Godzilla, King Kong, and similar scalar distortions (more on the nature of these in 2.19). However, this notion of scaling also operates in biology in the idea that organisms have limits to size and scalar proportions in growth (see 3.30).9Scaling operations, in the business sense of making an operation function in a wider range of effect, are also a form of Gulliver’s scaling.10
1.32—We can also separate out cartographic scaling. Cartographic scaling is about representation, while scale here has to do with specifying shifts in observation. As we will discuss later (2.15; chapter 11), these two are related, but to treat this larger apparatus of scale as the same as cartographic scaling is to obscure this essential relation between the transformation of observation and the transformation of reality.

1.33—I am separating out both Gulliver’s scaling and cartographic scaling from what I am defining here as “scale itself.” I’d argue that the notion of scale I provide here is more fundamental (and thus deserves the title “scale itself”) because it extends beyond these changes in objects and underlies these representations. Scale has its own rules, conditions, and possibilities that are derived apart from any Gulliver’s scaling and representations.2Measurement and PerspectiveThe Second Experiential Origin of Scale
2.1—Our trip up the mountain in chapter 1 suggests another experiential origin of scale. Given that this change of perspective generates two very different fields of objects, a need arises to compare and relate these two perspectives together. From the perspective of the mountain, how do I find a reference point for understanding the objects that are now in view? The answer: a measure. But how does this measure work, and why is it needed?
2.2—As we noted in our move up the mountain, my usual sense of size is formed by the physical proximity of the body to the structure called “house” (for the sake of quotidian variety, we’ll switch from observing trees to houses). If I stand in front of the house, it can take up most, or even all, of the visual field. And yet, in moving away from it, that house takes up less and less of my view. From the top of the mountain, it is hardly noticeable. Our first experiential origin kept us moving further and permitted this horizon of difference whereby “house” could be distinguished to disappear. What if, instead, we take a more rational—literally, ratio-based—approach to this experience and provide a reference for the phenomenon’s transformation?
2.3—Thus, we return back to the house and decide to insert a reference to help determine this thing we call “size.” The selection of this reference is almost arbitrary—we could choose my hand, a car, a random stick, whatever—except that it will be more convenient if we can take it with us, hold it up to things, and, most importantly, see the object in our immediate experience. Thus, using the whole building as the measure would not be particularly useful, nor would choosing a speck of dust. Truly scalar objects are likewise useless—you can’t use galaxies or cells as your base measure in this experiment. Likewise, the reference itself cannot change in length as we use it—so it needs to be a relatively stable object. Importantly, once the reference is chosen, it is no longer arbitrary.Now it has become a measure. For the sake of familiarity, let’s use a meterstick.

