2.4—If we want to measure the length of the house, we hold the meterstick up to the house and count the number of times it goes across the house. If we want, however, to then measure the house as it appears from the mountain, we have a problem. We can hold the meterstick up in front of the eye and find that it is useless for measuring the house. Since we can’t put it up against the tactile boundaries of the house while this far away, this measure is completely reliant on how close the meterstick is to our eye. Suddenly the measure itself seems oddly variable despite being chosen for its consistency: if I bring the meterstick close to my eye, it appears that the whole landscape measures one meter and the house perhaps a centimeter, but if I pull it away from my eye, suddenly the house will measure several centimeters. Of course this is absurd, because it is not how we produce a measurement. What has happened? The distance from the house has produced a change in the way the house has appeared. We can thus approach the reference another way, measuring not the object as it appears for us, but the eye’s distance from it.

2.5—Measuring the eye’s distance from the object will produce a reference point for a ratio between the way the object appears and the size of that object depending on the distance from the object.1This is, in fact, a somewhat simple mathematical maneuver that is essential to the work of astronomy.2What we have done in this operation is move back and forth between the two positions as a function of distance in order to determine the comparative size as it will appear in a visual field. Here it becomes clearer that scale is created only by the relationship between these two very different perspectives (1.14).

2.6—What has changed in the scaling operation? Not the meterstick, the perceptual apparatus, nor the object. Rather, the positionof the eye has changed. In other words, the perspectival shiftcreates the change (see 1.11).

2.7—What, then, is the measure measuring? As a function of distance, it is measuring the position of the viewing apparatus relative to the object (the eye to the house). But as a function of ratio, we are measuring the relationship between one view (from the mountain) and another view (from in front of the house). In scale, one is not measuring objects, but perspectives.

2.8—Furthermore, one of these experiences or perspectives will always be inaccessible or atypical in some way. From the mountain, the house is “over there,” and the view of it is different from the usual way of interacting with it. If we went back down to the house, the experience of viewing it from the mountain would now be “over there.” In each case, the “here” remains the same, based on the immediate domain of proximal objects, which is compared to the atypical perspective. In fact, the measure was chosen precisely for its ability to refer to this normalized, proximal experience while serving as a reference point for the distant object. The measure provides a consistency based on typical, local experience to make sense of atypical or inaccessible experiences.

2.9—The presence of the objects measured can lead us to forget that we are also measuring perspectives. But the role of perspective is further obscured by that fact that in measuring we attempt as much as possible to treat the positionof the perspective as a zero point. In “putting the meter against the house” we attempt to zero out perspective by removing any intervening angle or perspectival alteration between the measure and the object. At a distance, we cannot zero out in this way. Instead, to measure properly, you have to take the distance of the eye into account, treating the eye as the place from which the measuring starts but which itself is not added to the measurement. Oddly, this zeroing out isto take into account the perspective.3
2.10—With a measuring standard in place and a sense of proportion, we can produce scale from the measure itself. Since the measure already contains a reference to your usual experience, it can function to relate any degree of perception (even nonvisual) to our usual experience by applying the proportion to the measure itself rather than to the visual difference.

2.11—Here, it becomes clear that scale is not a percept but a concept: scale uses a measure to provide a conceptual relation between two perceptions. Scale is a marker about perception, providing a reference for accounting for variations within perception. But, as a concept, it can also be extended far beyond this proximal experience that we used to produce the relation. In doing so, the concept has not lost its relation to perception but rather encodes this relation—including a standard of consistency and a tie to empirical shifts in observation.

2.12—The measure can now be used to account for observations beyond our experience by increasing the number of measures or cutting up the measure. This compounding and cutting up is the projection of a relation to normal experience that permits us to retain the essential scalar ratio. Doing so produces scale as we are familiar with in science: it permits us not only to consider the house but the house on the scale of the nanometer.

2.13—What has changed in this cutting of the measure? With the size of the nanometer, we have changed the size range of our perspective while retaining a reference to normal perspective. The reference “nanometer” becomes a signifier of the scale of observation.

2.14—These Homo sapiensbodies will never really perceive the nanometer scale in the same way they perceive the house. Yet the reference “meter” preserves the relationship between that scale of observation and the scale of experience, at which a meter is clearly discernible. From this perspective, the great innovation of the metric system is that it retains this reference to normal experience clearly in view by simply compounding a measure selected from the scale of normal experience. Such measures embed the appropriate degree of consistency (2.6, 1.11) into the scalar shift.

2.15—In this extension or dissection of the measure, this second perspective—the “over there”—has now become embedded so that, insofar as we try to take it on as an actual perspective, it becomes mediated and represented. When we find ourselves with representations of objects on a scale exceeding the human lifeworld, the whole process becomes further disconnected from perspective. Now, looking at the map or the picture, we are tempted to state scale as a relation between two objects (the image and the thing being represented)—and this is incorrect.Rather, when we are looking at the object that contains a scalar image, we are not experiencing that image as an object but rather as a perspective. These perspectives have been navigated by the scalar relation and embedded within the representation.

2.16—In representation, scale retains the measure as the statement of a relationship to normal experience. The ratio on the map or image says not just “this object is xtimes smaller than the landscape” but “the view you are having of this object bears xrelationship to your usual experience of the landscape.” It is the latter observation that permits us to use a map to maneuver through a landscape. However, this is again why we must distinguish cartographic scaling (1.32) from scale here: representations inevitably have other alterations, filters, or distortions that are a product of the representation rather than the shift in observational scale.

