2.17—We can now understand how scale uses a measure to orient us to technologically produced representations. Scale says: “This picture you are viewing of Jupiter would be the equivalent of 139,822,000 of these meters you are familiar with” (Figure 1). I cannot perceive that number of meters stacked next to each other except via this scalar compression. Projecting out the measure taken from our usual perceptual field makes the incomprehensible comprehensible, but in a limited way by using our reference to compare this phenomenon (Jupiter) in relation to our usual phenomena around us. In sum, the scalar notation is a sign that allows the perceiver to perceive her own perception (here, the picture of Jupiter) as it is projected out beyond its usual perceptual constraints but, through the scalar consistency of the measure, rendered in ratio to the phenomenon around them. Without a scalar reference, someone who had never seen Jupiter would have no reason to think it was an object much larger than our whole planet (this could, in fact, be a beautiful little marble or a sphere suspended in a liquid).

2.18—If scale is the relation between one “over there” and another “over here” (2.8)—or the equivalent in the more projected forms of observation—then where is the perspective that is scale? Properly speaking, a scalar perspective is in both places at once: it is a situated dislocation.4The microscope or telescope does not avoid this problem, but rather more properly takes that “over there” and transforms it, that is, scales it, so that we do not even need to come down from the mountain to see the house as we would standing in front of it. In viewing the house with a telescope or, in a further abstraction, just viewing the image of a cell or a planet, we may seem to have made these two perspectives into one. But the making-one of the perspectives is only rendered scalar if within it is buried the reference to two.

Figure 1: This is how to see 139,822,000 meters. Such images not only present an object but represent two perspectives, as long as the scalar relation is in place. Image by NASA, JPL, and University of Arizona.

2.19—Consider, in contrast, an example of Gulliver’s scaling (1.31): the distortions in scale that can occur in film. Prior to computer-generated special effects, filmmakers used the relationship between vision and distance in order to distort the scale of objects.5For example, to produce the sense of enlargement, two shots taken at different distances can be overlaid onto each other to produce the sense that something is far larger than it is. Likewise, one might use a proportionally smaller model, as in King Kong. In the former case, two different perspectives are presented as one, which voids scale by overlaying these perspectives without an intervening scalar measure. In the second case, the scale model is presented as ifit is a normal-scale perception such that the distortion is not taken into account. In both cases, measurement and ratio are impossible. In fact, the “effect” occurs by obscuring them. If we treat the image in the microscope or telescope as functioning in the same way, we miss the fundamental difference in perspective that creates the phenomenon of scale (we will return to this problem in chapter 11).

2.20—Scale holds oneself to a measure.This is not to say that the measure is being imposed onto oneself in some arbitrary way. Rather, the consistency of that measure gives one a consistent reference point for tracking the transformation of objects as a function of a transformation in perspective. This “transformation of perspective” is not a transformation of something external to the whole operation out of which the phenomenal world appears. Therefore, the measure is one necessary means of holding oneself consistent for changes in any observation.

2.21—Scaling in the microscope or telescope can be seen as systematic, consistent, and measurable distortions of the apparatus. Likewise, alternative modes of “seeing”—for example, in the atomic-force microscope, protein crystallography, neutrino detection, and so forth—are coherent perspectives as long as they are put in relation to some measure derived from normal experience.

2.22—But in transforming this perspective, the question remains: what has been transformed? What is this entity who is perceiving such that it is capable of such a radical transformation? Our first inclination is to say “the apparatus.” But, crucially, even the microscope or telescope does not change.Rather, the device is added to perspective so that the eye sees differently. Perhaps we could say that the compound apparatus eye-microscope has changed, but even so, the consistency that renders it all measurable—and therefore accountable as a scaled perception rather than a distortion—requires that all of these factors be taken into account (e.g., accounting for the magnification power being used) in a way that also includes the object, the properties of light, the effects of gravitation, and so on. In less visual or direct modes of observation (e.g., protein crystallography, colliders, neutrino detectors) the problem is only more marked. What and where is that “thing” that sees (or detects or pieces together differences) if all of these are part of the seeing?
2.23—The final step is thus to turn the same apparatus on oneself, not just in the measuring of perception but in the taking into account the one who can maintain and compare these perceptions across these shifts such that one can have, at once, two very different perspectives. The real difficulty will always be, in the situated dislocation (2.18), where is the one who has this “perspective”? Who is scaling? In scaling is there any object, for example, the eye, that can be said to possess the perspective? But, as we have seen, the eye that scales is always already in at least two places at once (2.8), must be taken into account (measured) (2.7), and must be treated as the zero point from which the measuring begins (2.9). But, since scale produces an experience, this question of pinpointing the perspective makes more sense by referring not to each of these individual points of perspective but by reference to the experience of that dual location (1.14, 2.5), and the transformation between them. This dual location is the first way that scale dislocates the subject—subject taken here in the formal sense of the one for whom an object appears.

2.24—This dual location introduces a tension between the production of perspective and identification of the “subject” who has that experience. If we now start from a scalar perspective and ask “who scales?” we can see a further dislocation of the notion of subject, subject now in the sense of identification with an “I” who experiences. Our usual sense of identification might be rewritten as a scalar error: within the normal scale of experience, an object has been selected to be the subject—that to which experience is ascribed. But if we switch scales, acknowledge the tentativeness of objects (1.21), and acknowledge that scale places that perspective in two places at once (2.8), then we cannot likewise ascribe experience to a particular, clearly distinguished object definable in and of itself on one of these particular scales. In other words, we need to extend the partial-whole problem (1.28) to the sense of identification. We can call this the ego-structure problemand treat it as a subform of the partial-whole problem.

2.25—Just as we suggested in 1.27 that scale required a momentary zeroing out of differentiation, we must likewise suspend absolute identification with the scale of experience in order to properly grasp a scalar perspective. In other words, “I” cannot identify with one or the other of the perceptions bridged by a scalar reference if the experience is going to be truly scalar.

2.26—The transformation here is thus also a transformation of what one holds to, the experience held to be normal, and the assumption that one will be inevitably emplaced within any apparatus taken as an object on a given scale. Most importantly, scale transforms our sense of our “selves” as the Homo sapiensbody only definable at the scale of experience. In this sense, the ego-structure problem preempts or perhaps holds in place the partial-whole problem, since the egoic identification provides the grounds for scalism (1.30). It is one thing to attempt to zero out the divisions of the world and another to zero out one’s whole complex identification and structure of values built around this-scale experience.

2.27—If one no longer looks for any particular object on any given scale to identify as the subject, then the apparatus or “one who scales” is thus, in a literal sense, the Cosmos itself. That is, if one cannot delimit within the Whole any object to havethe experience, then the experience is, properly speaking, open to these possibilities and comparisons only because there is not a coherent, separate, divided subject experiencing these things from the outside. Instead, the Whole itself is that out of which, in which, and for which such divisions are made, preserved, compared, and extended.

2.28—The particularity of any experience could then be defined as a specific configuration of the Cosmos delimited within itself in a particular way. If so, properly speaking, within any view on any scale is already contained the whole of what is, filtered according to the particular parameters of that experience. However, for reasons that will become apparent later (5.11), a majority of the universe is too minuscule or too extensive to be registered directly within an experience in a way that produces the thresholds being registered with scale.

