2.29—We have, then, projected our “selves” beyond the confines of the “I” and rediscovered a sense in which, properly speaking, this “I” is the Whole experiencing itself in the sense articulated in the Hermetic microcosm/macrocosm or Vedanta’s Atman/Brahman. The primary function of these articulations is to transform perspective held to be “mine” for the sake of scrubbing ourselves of the scalism developed out of the habits of this-scale experience and values.

2.30—One might, via another apparatus within the Whole, trace out the significant structures, delimitations, and filters that produce any given scalar experience, using the thresholds provided by scale (1.16, 5.11) to identify a series of relations that produce one observational configuration. Thus, the perception of a protein molecule can be traced, as the anthropologist of science Natasha Myers has done, in a cross-scalar configuration of proteins, crystallographic techniques, polymerase chain reactions, microscopes, modeling, animated gestures, laboratory setups, funding streams, artistic renderings, personal motivations, dance competitions, and so on.6It is in this sense that scholars in science studies have emphasized the networks and apparatuses of science. However, this is a secondary tracing that already presumes another apparatus tracing the process of knowledge-making. We will take this point up in chapters 7, 8, and 10, since even these notions of networks or apparatuses do not fully account either for the scalar nature of this tracing or for the way that they dislocate identification even as they situate an experience.3Scope and AccumulationThe Third Experiential Origin of Scale
3.1—A final experiential origin of scale can be found in quite a different approach: in terms of the accumulation of knowledge. While we could begin with science, the social lives of humans present us with a starting point that begins from the simple inquiry into one’s surroundings.

3.2—Looking around her and attempting to get better at this thing called “surviving,” the Homo sapiensbegins to inquire into the organization of her surroundings. She discovers or is told about some relations: this plant helps with this, these animals are good for that, these people are related to you in that way, and these all bear such and such relationship to ensuring that you get fed, don’t get killed, and are able to reproduce. Inquiring into and remembering this map of relations is useful, even necessary for navigating the landscape of this Homo sapiens’s experience. Within this relatively immediate field of relations, most things are within reach and limited to what can be handled without much assistance.

3.3—In reality, the scope of consideration for Homo sapiensquickly extends into a larger organization of interaction and knowledge, which we can call the tribe, the estate, the city, or the like. Why? Beyond a single Homo sapiens’s range of experience, there is a frequency of interaction and an accumulation of data about relations that necessitates a move beyond any Homo sapiens’s limited experiential field and cognitive capacity. This creates a point of reference for a larger scope of consideration, relations, and organization beyond our immediate surroundings.

3.4—This higher point encodes a field of relations as a range of inclusion. The category—for example, the city—in itself is not an entity of consideration. Rather, the people, interactions, buildings, transactions, conditions, and so forth that are considered together as “city” are the topic of study. The term “city” indicates the interactions within a particular range, as the scope of the interactions to be considered together. To speak of the city is to speak of all of these interactions, and yet the city itself is not any one of those interactions. In this grouping, we find ourselves speaking of the city—its well-being, its structure, its status, its growth, and so forth.

3.5—At this point, the boundaries of the city need not be clearly defined. But the physical location of a city, as well as the limited scope that can be sensibly and usefully grouped within it, means that at some point the city itself becomes more clearly delimited. We can imagine this occurring in relation with another city. In this encounter, the definition and delimitation of the range of relations belonging to that city has to be clarified for the sake of a new set of relations that is now made possible: the relationship between one city and another city.

3.6—We have not quite arrived at scale, but now we encounter a form of logical typing. The theory of logical types was initially proposed by Bertrand Russell as a solution to a problem in set theory of the sort we are dealing with here. Set theory attempts to define the basis of mathematics using sets of (abstract or mathematical) objects. Logical typing becomes necessary when, as is inevitable, you begin to deal with sets of sets. A logical problem arises, known as Russell’s Paradox. By way of example: a barber is a man in a city who shaves all those, and only those, men in the city who do not shave themselves. Who shaves the barber? If the barber shaves himself, then he doesn’t shave himself. If he doesn’t shave himself, then he does. The problem here is that we have two different levels of categorization or sets: the city, a collection of individuals; and the barber, one of those individuals. Because the city contains the individuals, the rule produces a contradiction, since it considers the barber together in one portion (as a city) and the barber apart (as an individual) in another. In response, Russell proposes the theory of logical types, in which you distinguish types according to the level at which you are considering. One arrives at a new level when you make a set of sets, for example, the city is a set of individuals. To fail to acknowledge these distinctions in logical types creates conceptual and interpretive problems, since you fail to acknowledge that what you are referring to is the same entity grouped in two different ways.

3.7—In encountering another city, a logical typing occurs: we become aware of the city as a distinct domain of relations to be discussed and put in contact with other entities that also exist on this higher logical type. But, even as we do so, we risk obscuring the fact that, at this higher logical type, the “city” is already formed and produced out of an aggregation of relations. Indeed, it is usually not so much the “city” that is making this recognition—at least not when considering theHomo sapienswithin it—but a part of the city taking reference to this larger domain of relations.

3.8—The nuances of this logical typing are further confounded when, as more and more cities find themselves tightly woven in relations, we find ourselves defining nations as an additional logical type above cities. In turn, nations find themselves in relation with each other, and we start to speak of global relations. Each logical typing provides another name to describe a scope of relations. Each expansion of range does not erase the previous set of relations, but instead groups them according to levels at which we consider these relations together. But we must nonetheless attend to the level at which these relations are categorized and designated. To study the interactions within a city involves a different set of interactions that does not necessarily apply in the same way to the interactions between cities, and likewise in nations.

3.9—In this scheme, we have not found scale so much as layers of how humans might group together their relations. A logical typing does not immediately imply scale, particularly since one could create such sets even within the same scale domain according to any delimiting criterion. We find ourselves with the example of the city because of its tie to the basic Homo sapiensexperience and social life, which provides a basis for the delimitation of logical types. When we apply this same structure not to social organization but to knowledge and inquiry more generally, then we arrive at a more interesting and thorough scheme that brings us to an account of scale.

3.10—Above, we noted that the limits of knowledge are one element prompting us to move to speaking of the city. Just as physical limitations prevent one Homo sapiensfrom building an entire city on her own, inquiry into the nature of reality, broadly conceived, will always fail to be exhaustive. One Homo sapiensalone cannot study every interaction and knowledge available even in her vicinity. A limit is inevitably encountered within thought, language, and perception: as one adds more and more to any inquiry, one inevitably reaches a limiting threshold at which there are simply too many objects to consider.

3.11—So what do we usually do? We get someone else to help or rely on the work of others. In doing so, however, the individual comprehension must encode the inquiry and accumulation provided by this cooperation. In scientific work, for example, you cannot repeat every experiment that your further experimentation requires. Others have done this, and others have checked those scholars, and as long as you spend enough time in that conversation to be comfortable with proceeding, you can proceed with them.

