3.12—Here we see in knowledge something similar to what we saw in our first thought experiment about perception. Science must always find itself grouping things together, speaking of species, types, systems, and so on which exist on a different logical type than the individual encounters that make up these groups. Doing so makes possible some knowledge of—or at least a way of functionally describing—larger patterns of interaction. Doing so does not necessarily sacrifice the dynamics that produce this aggregate discernment. Instead, this maneuver creates two domains of inquiry: the inquiry into any specific encounter with an object of study, and the aggregation of those entities being studied together.

3.13—Science produces this aggregation effect systematically so that it uses an aggregation of empirical data to go beyond any given empirical moment. This maneuver permits science to expand the scope of empirical inquiry beyond what is immediately experienced. While the technologies of the microscope and the telescope are necessary for expanding the scope of what is inpresent experience, it is the printing press and the circulation of observations that permit the cataloging and accumulation of observation that could extend to large groups of organisms and places.

3.14—In this accumulation, the conception of a larger population or species starts to take on new meaning, as categories (e.g., species, populations, geological formations) that function, much like the city, as reference points for an aggregate of relations. With these larger entities, a shift in thought can occur: you can start to consider their relationship on a new logical type that extends beyond any delimitation according to types of objects in question. Rather than speak of a giraffe interacting with a tree, you speak of these species of giraffe interacting with the larger flora of the savanna or, in turn, the ecosystem as a whole scope of relations.

3.15—There is a difference between studying a bat, bats, and an ecosystem in which bats exist. In the first, you are dealing with a particular creature, here in front of you. In the second, you are dealing with all possible specimens grouped together in a category (species). In the move to the ecosystem, however, a more significant leap has been made: the delimiting criterion by which you only study one group of organisms (the category, bat) has been removed, and instead a whole structure of relations becomes the defining factor. An ecosystem becomes anything that can be designated as relevant within a broader field of relations.

3.16—We have now run into something similar to our designation “city”: the ecosystem becomes a domain of relations that includes all relations within a particular spatial scope. However, this domain differs from the city, since the city retains two kinds of forced exclusivity which kept this formulation from being truly scalar: the city is set apart and defined by the humans who would mark out (in their maps and territorial battles) its boundaries, and, more importantly, the city always uses the human as the defining factorfor cities. In other words, even if it is delimited spatially, the city is a grouping of human relations, while the ecosystem does not necessarily retain a distinction with regard to the relevant kinds of relations.

3.17—Bats do not provide the same logical typing of their relations as do humans. The ecologist may attempt to delimit the ecosystem using spatial criteria as we do with cities: everything within X boundary becomes relevant for study. However, this presents a difficulty, since spatial delimitations on this planet are tenuous and not contained. Scientific studies then must make additional choices about how to delimit their ranges of study. They might attempt to use some kind of boundary phenomena, some of which are less tenuous and porous (e.g., a lake or an organism’s body) and some of which are more so (e.g., a river or an organ). This attempt to delimit produces two difficulties. First, any spatial designation within the Earth is already going to have many relations that move across that boundary. This will be the case unless you expand the scope enough that even the ecosystem starts to take on a new set of relations at the scope of the entire planet. The planet then becomes the point of relation for interplanetary interaction (e.g., the sun’s energy, the moon’s gravitational fields, an occasional extraterrestrial object large enough to affect this planet). Only at the level of planet is a meaningful boundary present for delimiting possibilities of an ecosystem as planetary relations (climate, atmosphere, orbit, gravity). Such planetary interactions are then more clearly relations with something we can call ecosystem, which is now a description of conditions for smaller-scale relations, for example, what is available for bats (see 6.30–33).

3.18—Second, even within that spatial designation on the Earth, there exists more to be included than we might originally discern, a fact made clear by the microscope and other technologies that reveal more to be included within the spatial range already designated. The microbiologist arrives and queries the ecologist: are you also including these microbes in the water as part of the ecosystem?1
3.19—In these two problems we encountered a scalar threshold (one in the large, the other in the small). These now prompt us to specify what relations become relevant within a particular range of size. At this point we arrive at scale if we convert something like the magnification power of a microscope into the notion of a range of observation that is not based on any limit or boundary within space (i.e., the borders of a city or lake) but in terms of the size at which one examines that space. Doing so creates this scalar formulation: to inquire on a particular scale means to include every difference able to make a difference(1.19) within a particular size range.All potential differences able to make a difference become relevant for the study of a particular scale, even if we do not immediately find and register them. This also responds to the objection that one might raise to the first point in 3.17: that plenty of things (even small things relevant for bats, such as sunlight) cross the threshold of the atmosphere and the planet. In turning to size range, we become less concerned about the absoluteness of that boundary and more about the range of relations able to be discerned at any given size. In doing so, the individual logical types formulated by any smaller accumulations come together into a far more significant logical typing that is a true scalar shift: all relations seen at X size become a designation of the scale of inquiry.

3.20—To summarize this progression: in scale we take a range of inquiry and group it together according to common attributes (e.g., all Bats, all Humans). Scale then takes this grouping and turns it into a shift in scope tied to physical location (everything in Q boundary). This physical location or delimitation is then converted into a designation of size (everything at X scale). Now that we have arrived at this scalar configuration, a few essential attributes and implications need to be highlighted.

3.21—Most startlingly, rather than being about a selected grouping, scale is inherently inclusive.In fact, it’s fundamentally about domains of inclusion, because it is about what can potentially make a difference—that is, form a relation—at a given scale (3.19; 1.19). This has been signaled in 3.20 by the persistent inclusive signifiers “all” and “everything.”
3.22—The implication of this inclusiveness is that many “shifts in scale” that we speak about habitually are not properly shifts in scale at all, since they are limited by additional criteria. When we speak of “scaling up” in economics or politics—even in our moving to the city and nation—we have performed only a partial shift in scope. Such a shift might function well enough when dealing with the local realm of actions, where human relations are already clearly embedded in a series of interactions with a local environment. But when we speak of global capital as a new scale of relations, we are already eliding the rest of the significant relations made visible at the scale of the Earth. One cannot speak of global economy or global politics without speaking also of ecology, since the shift in scale occurs in the extended range of relations, not in the mere aggregation of a set of entities already thought to be significant (humans). In short, scale implies that the global scale must include everything contained within the Earth.

3.23—While “all humans” may refer to some aspect of another scale, it is not itself this higher scale. Humans, insofar as they are a definable organism Homo sapiens,exist on the scale on which these bodies exist. From a global scale, these humans are a part of a larger domain of relations. The conceptual limitation of our scope of consideration to the human has conflicted directly with the actual change in scale to the planetary that has occurred in practice, perpetuating the neglect that produces the cross-scale disruption of mass extinction, global warming, and widespread pollution. In short, ecology describes the scale of planetary relations, not economics, politics, or culture. Human relations need to be subsumed into ecological relations (as another aspect of ecological relations) alongside the aggregate relations of forests, animal populations, microbial accumulations, fungal networks, and so on.

3.24—In practice, scientists delimit their inquiries to isolate particular factors for study. The filtering of the ecosystem according to bats provides a guiding delimitation in the same way the Homo sapiensdid above for the city; the “ecosystem” can become anything that is relevant to bats. In doing so, we need to acknowledge that this widening of scope has already admitted into the study the excess already potentially relevant at this scale. This is not, as it might seem initially, that much of a problem, since we can invert the formulation according to this delimiting criterion: if I study a bat population, I cannot study everything on the planet, but I can study anything within the planet as they exist for bats. In addition, science is not usually interested in any single bat but in all bats, and bats as they relate and live in portions of an ecosystem. The conclusion here is just the significant but difficult admission that more is present than can be adequately described. This admission makes apparent the additional criteria as limiting factors and admits that these limits, although functional, will always be exceeded in practice.

3.25—We can now more adequately generalize our notion of threshold and rearticulate in a different way the notion of resolution. The final step of this thought experiment moved us from delimitations of numbers of objects to how we are looking at space more generally. We either expanded our range of inquiry until we found a significant boundary at the planet by which we could delimit the ecosystem (3.17), or we turned to the microbiologist to discover more relations embedded within an object (3.18). When we apply this to the ecosystem, we can say that the selection of the range of the British Isles is not a scalar shift, but a limiting oneself to a particular location. Scalar thresholds do not occur because you chose a particular nanometer segment of the world, but because the relations and objects being considered are those that become noteworthy within the scope of a nanometer.
