
3.26—To examine a particular scale is, at least in principle, to open the examination up to everything of note at that spatial range. This “everything of note” indicates that to study anything on a particular scale is to enter into a field of relations that immediately extends to all objects of a similar size. A scale presents a particular field of relations that exists within its own scale domain (1.16). This inclusion does not mean that everything is relevant in a given study (e.g., studying bats); indeed, other criteria no doubt enter for determining relevance. But scale has here isolated a range of potential relations that becomes relevant depending on the scale chosen.

3.27—We can now combine these observations with the concepts of thresholds (1.9) and resolution (1.15). These delineations of scale domains or resolutions are significant thresholds at which the field of relations becomes aggregated and new levels or relations are discerned. When scaling larger from our normal world of objects, the noteworthy objects remain relatively within range until we arrive at the level of the planet. If so, then the most sensible delimitation of range is between our normal set of objects and the global, between local weather patterns (it is raining here) and global weather patterns (climate), between local geological features (here is sandstone) and the whole Earth’s geological patterns, between a local species (the hummingbird) and the larger ecosystem, which ultimately must mean the entire potential to interact as far as this organism can potentially range, that is, the whole planet.

3.28—At each threshold of relations (i.e., scale) there are new layers of complexity that are tied to the new ranges of differences that are able to make a difference (i.e., be considered relations). On a different scale, one finds a whole new range of possible variation to include within the study. Going to the size of the cell produces not just more to consider but a whole new domain of interactions discernible at that resolution. Indeed, the selection of a scale of inquiry greatly affects what you are going to examine in any inquiry. But again, this is not as great of a problem as it seems initially. Rather, studies can provide useful results by taking advantage of the thresholds at which differences become relevant (see 5.10–12).

3.29—These scalar thresholds are further confirmed by how life has compounded itself according to logical types of size. As J. B. S. Haldane noted as early as 1926, all organisms have a particular size in which they function well.2This leads to some significant thresholds at which organisms must not get bigger but must compound themselves by making aggregates of organisms rather than larger organisms. Single-celled organisms work with molecules but can only get to a certain size, at which point the coordination of single-celled organisms becomes necessary for more complex systems. At some point, these become sufficiently intertwined that a new organism is formed that consists of cells. The shift in size thus requires a shift in logical type, which also yields a different scale of perceptual being as this new logical type forms modes of dissecting the relations discernible at that scale (more on these points in chapters 8 and 9). Thus, the perceptual world of the Homo sapiensdoes not exist in the same field of reference that its cells do. The result is that, as long as our cells have what they need, they will do what they do according to a structure that is not necessarily known or fully determined by the larger structure. In turn, the organism next higher to the multicellular world we live in is not groups of humans acting in consort but the biosphere itself, which has always existed as a scale of interaction but which is still in the process, perhaps, of tying itself together as a cybernetically organized entity capable of reflecting on itself.3
3.30—What we have found is levels of relations that form size-bound, scalar logical types. Each of these levels creates another level of objects that function in a different way to the multiplicity of entities contained within that domain. Contradictions can emerge when you relate an entity on one scale to one on another scale, since the scope under which they function and appear distinct is different. That is, when you move across scalar logical types (scale domains), contradictions emerge because you are talking about the same object from two perspectives(1.20, 6.14). We can mark these as scalar contradictionsor scale errors,to distinguish them from contradictions that emerge from within the same scale.

3.31—To invert 3.26 into a given object on a given scale, we might say that examining an object already admits everything within it on the smaller scales and potential referent to any larger-scale entity it is a part of. These relations, however, would be scalar relationsoutside of the field of relations immediately available for that object at that scale (see 6.29).

3.32—As we’ve already performed above (3.23), our language and concepts have a way of dealing with scalar relations in the form of speaking according to “all X” that establishes a relationship between two scales. We have to be careful here: “all humans” relates to “all trees” in a different way than I might relate to the tree in my front yard. This logical typing allows us to relate across scales even as it allows us to distinguish them. For instance, “all bacteria” bear a special relation to the planet’s regulatory functions that, through their aggregate behaviors, adjust the larger makeup of this planet and provide the feedback mechanism under which the Gaia hypothesis makes sense. But to say that “a bacterium” does so is a scale error (3.30).

3.33—Such incongruity underlies our struggle to understand our own relationship to the planet. I do not exist as “all humans,” even though I am included in that set. Yet this “all humans” is significantly altering, in a dangerous way, the terrain and makeup of the Earth’s resources and atmosphere. Yet, I am also included in the set “planet.” The traveling of this relationship between logical types is necessary for understanding one’s relation to ecology. But to assume that one becomes or acts as “all humans”—and thereby can change the world—is not only to misplace oneself on a logical type that does not apply, but may potentially lead one to counterproductive behaviors that neglect the level on which this Homo sapiensexists and acts.

3.34—One can only act on the scale at which one exists.While we know this intuitively, we do not always articulate social change in this way: we become focused on the results made visible on a higher scale (e.g., we need to save the planet; we need to achieve X political change), such that we risk neglecting the sites from which these larger patterns emerge. In other words, we mistake the larger-scale patterns for personal actions. Even when such patterns can be manufactured or altered in some way, this alteration arises only by connecting into a larger system that mediates this intervention on a new scale.

3.35—We can now attempt to distinguish and name the scale domains according to these thresholds of perception and relations. As per 1.16, a scale domain is distinguished at the point where the objects on the previous scale are no longer discernible, that is, no longer able to be held within the scope of one’s examination without creating a scalar designation. From this definition, we have a surprisingly small number of scale domains:
quantum
atomic/molecular (nanometers)
cellular/unicellular (micrometers)
bodily/normal (meters)
planetary/ecological
solar system (range of gravitational field of a sun)
