galaxy
observable universe
We will consider these in more detail in 5.8.

3.36—It is interesting that we have some difficulty naming what I have designated here as “bodily/normal” only because this is the ground zero of scale for those Homo sapiensdefining them. Most terms are inadequate, since they indicate too much content about that scale; for example, the “human scale” implies that it is ours. As a reference point in experience, this normal scale is the perceptual and interactive field on which the bodies of Homo sapiensdirectly act without intermediaries or compounding structures. It therefore also includes very small insects, animals, plants, and nonliving structures of the size we routinely interact with.

3.37—Note that I have left out a number of scale ranges that we might be tempted to include. These might be called organ structureswith reference specifically to the organs of bodies and organelles of cells (see 5.10). These are the structures that life forms as intermediaries between different scales but which do not themselves consist of a significant enough shift in size to entirely change the set of relations. The reason for this should be clear when we consider that the scales distinguished by geographers and political scientists—local, city, regional/state, nation, global—are reduced in this scheme only to two scales: the normal and the global. This is because, as we stated before (3.16, 3.22), city, state, and nation all preserve their human-centered reference (see chapter 9). All organ structures are not significant shifts in scale for the same reason: they keep their tie to an organism and only become significant within that organism rather than changing the whole field of relations according to the size of their interaction. It may be that organ structures are the primary sites for scalar mediation between smaller-scale components (atoms for cells, cells for organisms) and larger systems across a scalar threshold (see 6.14–15). If so, then cities, forests, nations, lakes, fungal networks, and the like might be more properly considered as organ structures mediating the relationship between meter scale relations and planetary relations.

3.38—Following the argumentative form of our move to the Whole as object (1.23) and subject (2.27), we can ask: if scale functions according to thresholds of relations that are, in some way, within the same object, then what is this object that we might study in inquiring into the world? The term appropriate here is “the All.” By “the All” we simply mean “include everything” that could possibly be, not just in terms of the largest size range but all possible resolutions within it. Here the Whole or the One (1.23) is redescribed according to a scope of inclusion rather than a function of unity. Thus, we can describe that-which-is as the One-Whole-All to emphasize these three aspects made clear by the scaling process.

3.39—The All is not a resolution for observation. Rather, it is a threshold of thresholds; it is the inclusion of everything that might be included within any threshold. As the set of all sets, the scale of the All is of a different character than any given scale. Rather than being subject to positive delimitation, the All includes all scales at once but is itself not any one scale. The notion of the All is thus of a different character than anything within it.4
3.40—This All-ness creates two reference points for inquiry: the everything and things within the everything. This is one source of the distinction between the one and the many, whether you are speaking of Parmenides’s two realms, the Upanishadic Brahman and Maya, or the Hermetic microcosm-macrocosm (see chapter 7).

3.41—Even infinite terms like the All contain within them the possibility of adding more. While infinite terms may seem totalizing, they are inherently built on this openness. An infinite itself is not logically totalizing, as is demonstrated by David Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel: if you posited a hotel with a countably infinite number of rooms, all of which are occupied, you can nonetheless always add one more guest to the hotel. When a new guest arrives, you just move each guest from her current room (n) to the next room (n+1) and you’ve opened up a new spot at the beginning.5Scale performs a similar maneuver by fleshing out the All both by adding more scales at which new relations might be discerned as well as leaving open the very limits, spatially and temporally, where relations might be said to exist.

3.42—The scalar descriptions produced by science have greatly expanded what can be considered a part of the All, but they have nonetheless left this openness intact. If anything, science has only reaffirmed that there is more within any given and apparent set of objects and relations as it takes objects that appear to be solid and easily defined (e.g., the body called “mine”) and adds to them the relations of cells and atoms, extensive ecological entanglements, and the thermodynamics of suns and whole galaxies.

3.43—Scalar descriptions permit us to hide the openness and not-knowing already inherent in the basis from which these descriptions are drawn. That is, scale permits us to create maps of relations that intelligibly function within and across those fields of relations insofar as we attend to the scale at which we are describing. But within these descriptions and our knowledge of them still lies a deep and essential not-knowing for three reasons: the descriptions of this All remain indefinitely open to what has yet to be included; these descriptions map relations on a scale apart from the entities themselves; and any knowledge of this vast monolith of description will not and cannot be contained wholly by this point of reference called “you” (more on this in chapter 10).

3.44—These broader implications are entailed by the basis of scale itself as an apparatus of inquiry and way of understanding our own observations. Here, at the end of these experiential origins of scale, we can put together a simple definition that distills these considerations: scale is the systematic accounting for significant shifts in a measured range of observation.4To the BottomThe First Thought Experiment in Scale
4.1—In order for any thing to be said to exist whatsoever, a differential must exist out of which a difference can be discerned. Every differential occurs on some scale at which a fluctuation or movement is able to make a difference. If one goes to a smaller scale, any given differential is no longer able to be used to register a difference.

4.2—Thus, if we posit that there might be a smallest scale at which differentials can be perceived and consider a scale smaller than this, then we might properly say, as Parmenides does, that the world is both One and without movement. This lowest scale remains hypothetical, and it might be that we could extend observational capacities to identify differentials at this smaller scale. However, then we merely move to an even smaller scale to find one at which no fluctuations are discernible. Thus, the Planck length1might be interpreted as the smallest scale at which differentials might be discerned, but it need not be this length for our experiment to proceed. We’ll call this Scale 0.

4.3—If we then return to the scale at which fluctuations (or differentials or quanta) are first able to be discerned, we can track out how such differentials may produce objects at each scale. Let’s call this base level Scale A.
