
4.4—We now need to highlight two essential concepts for the history of physics: a wave is a fluctuation in a continuous substance; and a particle is a discrete object with a discernible difference and boundary, a boundary that marks a concentrated location of affectability.

4.5—I have used the term fluctuationsto indicate something particular about the particle–wave distinction, as it already causes many conceptual problems in quantum physics (indeed, the difficulty with particle–wave duality may be a result of the following observations).2While one might think of waves in terms of common this-scale wave phenomena (e.g., on an ocean), we can conceive wave behavior here as the aggregation of effects—the accumulations of differences that make a difference within what, at Scale 0, is a continuous substance unable to be differentiated.

Figure 2:An example of moiré phenomena. These two circles made of straight lines produce complex patterns and a sense of depth when overlapping. Moire Lines by SharkD is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

4.6—The hypothesis is this: particle attributes (or discreteness itself) are an artifact of viewing how fluctuations from a smaller scale aggregate so as to produce a difference that is able to make a difference on a larger scale.

4.7—Wave interaction, diffraction patterns, and related phenomena, such as moiré and beat phenomena (see Figure 2), demonstrate how fluctuations aggregate through interacting patterns in order to create periods of accentuated and negated interaction.3When two waves interact, they create patterns where some of the fluctuations cancel each other out and others combine to form bigger patterns. If it is true that such wave interference patterns are generalizable as a principle of aggregation, then we arrive at a fundamental scalar pattern.

4.8—The fluctuations at Scale A, interacting with each other, will create patterns of larger and smaller effects that compound certain fluctuations and negate others. If this compounding is at the edge of a scalar threshold (1.9–10, 1.16, 3.27–28) with Scale B it will create a distinct phenomenon: observing from Scale B, the compounded fluctuations at Scale A will make it appear as if an object has come into existence with the boundaries at the threshold at which those aggregate differences are now discernible at Scale B. In other words, from Scale B, only the aggregate effects that make a difference at that level will be observable (able to make a difference at that scale); everything else will be unobservable at Scale B. In this case, discreteness at Scale B is a result of the aggregating wave patterns at Scale A (Figure 3). Thus, an object—or discreteness and particle attributes—becomes a function of the aggregated effects across thresholds of perceptibility/affectability.

4.9—The movement of this object, now appearing discrete at Scale B, might be conceptualized as itself a wave moving along a string. The “object” might appear to retain essential consistency at Scale B while actually changing place in the fluctuating substance at Scale A.

4.10—We have continued to speak of waves to provide this point about motion of larger-scale objects (at Scale B), tie these effects to wave interference phenomena, and connect these aggregating effects to probability waves. However, this can be misleading, since wave phenomena are usually conceptualized as being on the same scale and do not necessarily result in a sense of apparent discreteness. The point here is that, at Scale B, the aggregating effects of Scale A will appear to be wholly discrete—an object clearly distinct and separable from its surroundings. In reality, the “movement” in 4.9 would be a movement in the aggregation of effects as they compound in size across a scalar threshold.

Figure 3:Objects as a result of aggregation. The curve is the aggregating of differences that are now able to make a difference at a larger size across a threshold between Scale A and Scale B. From Scale B it will appear that a clearly delimited object exists simply because aspects of the same substance do not aggregate to a sufficiently large degree to make any difference at Scale B, even though they still exist at Scale A. Image created by Graphit Science & Art, LLC.

4.11—If this thought experiment is valid, then the domain of possible objects at any given scale is determined by the pattern of aggregation on the scale below. Or, to put it another way, these objects are a description of principles or possible configurations of the aggregation of fluctuations on a lower scale. Thus, the possible subatomic particles are delimitations of possible aggregations of the scalar threshold below. In turn, the periodic table could be described as the possible aggregating behaviors of subatomic particles.4
4.12—After the initial move from Scale A to Scale B, the discrete attributes manifest at Scale B will now be the primary factor for determining what happens on the third scale, Scale C, across another scalar threshold. It seems that with each scale, discreteness plays a more important role, so that, for example, planets become far more significant than cosmic dust with less “stuff” that makes a difference in between. This, perhaps, is the significance that quanta originally played in the development of quantum theory: the quantum scale may be where discreteness emerges as a factor in determining the attributes of larger-scale phenomena. Then, on a larger scale, atoms stabilize this scalar aggregation and generate the possibilities for objects at micrometer scales, where molecular motion and forces are stable enough for patterns of energy to be harnessed in microbial organisms and cells. At the meter scale, volatility is further stabilized into the discernible and relatively stable objects of our lifeworld. Indeed, this provides an explanation for why Newtonian mechanics is able to operate alongside quantum mechanics: many have intuited that the issue is a matter of scale, but this thought experiment provides a potential explanation for why.5
4.13—Here discreteness also equals stabilization into relatively determinate patterns in comparison to the scale below. At each level, fluctuations seem to settle into set components with their own attributes and rules of patterning.

4.14—Such stabilization does not necessarily equal less complexity, as is well known in fractal patterns. However, to rediscover the complexity at a particular scale one can widen the scope of consideration, that is, consider a given scale near or at a larger scale. In comparison to the complicated coordination of objects inside a multicellular organism, the organism’s body seems like a relatively stable and simple object. But if we consider that organism in relation to complex planetary interaction, complexity reemerges. Thus, we might say that stabilityis a description of viewing a given object in relation to its smaller-scale components, while complexityis a description of viewing a given object in relation to its larger-scale relations. A Homo sapiensbody is a stabilized pattern of trillions of cells but a part of a complex ecology.

