4.15—All of these motions are happening and aggregating simultaneously. We could generalize out the point made in 4.9 and conceptualize the movement of a human body, for instance, as also the movement of fluctuations aggregated through the substance described by the unobservable Scale 0.

Figure 4:The genesis of objects: layering of objects through levels of aggregation and stabilization. If we generalize out the object form of Figure 3, then we can imagine layers in which sets of objects at any given scale are a result of aggregations of the scale below. Each parabola is an apparently discrete object at its given scale, even though it still is part of the same substance seen at lower scales. These then aggregate into objects discernible at a larger scale. Image created by Graphit Science & Art, LLC.

4.16—We could summarize the whole thought experiment as levels of aggregate effects stabilizing into objects at each level, with their own rules provided at each stabilization generated from simple compounding of effects on a lower scale (Figure 4).

4.17—Every part of substance not discernible at a given scale is, properly speaking, still there. It is just simply incapable of being registered at that scale, although it manifests in other ways as part of the patterns of the same substance. The idea that objects are separated by empty space is a product of this-scale lifeworld and vision. In turn, the idea that outer space is largely empty is a product of scales of the solar system or galaxies, where the significant objects, while themselves incredibly large, also imply large gaps between possible effects able to aggregate at those levels.

4.18—It seems that the “spaces” between objects increase in proportion to the size of those objects. This implies that aggregation tends toward proximity.

4.19—Thus, aggregation might be rearticulated as cohesion, particularly when we arrive at or beyond Scale B. Aggregation would be cohesion if considered in terms of how the things at Scale B are able to come together to have effects at Scale C. These points (4.17–19) might be essential for continued attempts to understand what the various “forces” of physics are describing, such as gravity.

4.20—This thought experiment should not be interpreted as reductionist. The experiment here is about the generation of discernible objects such that it produces objects with seemingly empty “space” between them that serve as discrete entities for observation and interaction at any given scale. It is not an argument about causality except to suggest that it is likely that the parameters (degree of freedom of action and existence) on any scale might turn out to be functionally equivalent to the principles of aggregation on the next smallest scale (see 6.21–6.34). The experiment does identify perhaps the most productive element of reductionism: that it has produced the impetus for defining the ground rules for aggregations of effects.

4.21—This thought experiment does highlight the persistent role of probability in science, an aspect central to the development of quantum physics and in the general applicability of systems theory and nonequilibrium thermodynamics.6Probability here is not just a function of time but is a function of the aggregation across a scalar threshold (see 6.21).

4.22—We can thus make a more general hypothesis about science’s mapping of the regularity of nature: science makes use of the stability able to be defined out of scalar aggregation of effects in order to identify ways that reality is predictable and follows certain functional laws (see 6.39).5From the TopThe Second Thought Experiment in Scale
5.1—If scale can be conceived as a systematic alteration in the resolution of perspective (1.15, 3.44), then we can, as a thought experiment, pinpoint a spatial perspective as a function of a coordinate that is a division—or, more precisely, point of specification—of this One, which also encodes the degree of detail or resolution provided by the coordinate.

5.2—Let’s designate the largest, most inclusive possible perspective of the universe as 1 (see 1.23, 3.38, 4.2). This may be the observable universe, but it need not be. If we should discover more in the universe, then we can, in the style of Hilbert’s Hotel (see 3.41), move the 1 one decimal further up so that what was previously conceived of as “one” simply becomes the first decimal (division) of this new “one.” This maneuver should function as long as any new discovery can be said to be “larger” and not of a different sort or alongside what is (although it remains to be seen what such metaphors, as in the notion of parallel universes, might actually mean, particularly since such theories persistently use metaphors from nonscalar experience, as is the case already in “alongside of”).

5.3—If the largest conceivable scale is 1, then we can specify a location within this 1 as a fraction of 1.

5.4—In doing so, every additional decimal is not a higher degree of accuracy (as it is usually conceived in mathematics and engineering) but rather a kind of zooming in. Thus, if we conceive of 1 as a sphere, then 0.243 would specify a location within that 1 that would appear as a kind of resolution (1.15) of that 1. If we added four decimal places, 0.2438531, we are increasing the resolution while in some sense staying in the same location. One might view this fraction as a kind of sphere within the 1 whose size is specified as a fraction of that 1. As one adds to the decimal, the sphere shrinks to specify a smaller portion of that 1.

