8
−19
5
−35
Planck length
Figure 6:Scale domains charted according to powers of 10 and correlated with a decimal divided out of a 1 at the largest scale. The first column is the example number, split up by digit vertically. These digits are correlated to a power of 10 and divided into associated scale domains.

5.13—Undoubtedly, this experiment has some implications for geometry, topology, and questions of measurement. While this pushes far beyond the limits of knowledge of the present author, we can point to some relevant issues by considering how one might create a kind of inverted Cartesian plane by converting the decimal into a distance from the edge of the 1. Doing so adds to the artificiality of the experiment by requiring a number of things that might not be appropriate. First, we have to posit a homogeneous space and, if we are to make it simpler, that the 1 is the same length in all directions. Then, we have to designate an edge from which to start the measurement. We must then define coordinate directions from which to start the variables, starting arbitrarily in one direction and providing another at a right angle from that, and third, from a right angle in a third direction from their bisection to produce a (x, y, z) coordinate plane. One could then consider the decimal as a distance by taking the highest unit (the 1)—1027meters or 1,000 yottameters (Y) if we’re using the observable universe—and providing three such coordinates. If we are to keep our conception of scale in view, then we need to distinguish between the abstract point of intersection, which produces a theoretically finite point, and what is still able to be observed at that point. We can do this by conceptualizing that intersection as the center point of our sphere of observation within the 1, while the amount we resolve the decimal determines how big the sphere of observation is (see Figure 7).

5.14—This scalar space has some counterintuitive properties, which are useful for helping us continue to think in terms of scale. For one, we could not provide a different number of decimal units in the three coordinates and still adequately speak of it as providing a position, since it would resolve the 1 at different scales. The distance coordinate in each variable is not so much a point on a coordinate plane as an indication of how many of a given unit of measurement we are taking. Thus, if we’re using 1027as our base size, then in the coordinate 0.382057914, the first decimal (3) indicates how many 1026meters, the second (8) indicates how many 1025meters, and so on. One could thus convert the decimal into a number with the final decimal determining the unit of measurement: 382,057,914 exameters (1018meters). This is why we have kept it as a fraction: it keeps in view that this is a kind of specification via fractionation of a whole possible length and accounts for how increased specification produces a change in what is resolved. It would be strange, for instance, to designate the distance as 382,057.914 zettameters (1021meters). We can further note that the lack of additional decimals does not imply that they are 0, that is, that the number used here is 0.382057914000000000, but rather that these numbers have not been specified at all because to specify them would change the resolution.

5.15—This thought experiment provides a means of generalizing Benoit Mandelbrot’s “coastline paradox,” which notes that the contours of a particular object (e.g., the coast of the British Isles) does not have a well-defined length. Rather, the length depends on the scale at which one is measuring, since a smaller scale will include more variations within its measure.2When put in terms of this scalar coordinate plane, we find a generalized coastline paradox for the measurements of objects and processes. Thus, if I wanted to find the boundary of an object, say a planet, and I resolve the decimal to the meter length, I may define this boundary differently than if I resolve it to the terameter (1012meters). In fact, it is unclear the extent to which we might say that this same “point” we call the “boundary of a planet” is even sensibly described at a terameter. The coastline paradox implies that one might find smaller units to describe the coast, but if one were to select too large of a unit then it would not work as a measure at all. Thus, if you measured the coastline of the British Isles with a megameter (106meters), then the measure would exceed the length of the object. The attempt to divide that unit would actually change the unit of measure, effectively changing scales. Something similar must happen in smaller units of measure: does it make sense to measure a coastline at the scale of the nanometer? Would a clear boundary be possible at that scale?
Figure 7:A scalar plane. The outer sphere is the theoretically posited highest point, which is set at 1 and artificially rendered equidistant in three dimensions. An (x, y, z) coordinate plane is set up using an arbitrary starting point at the edge of this 1. Unlike a Cartesian plane, the coordinates (x1, y1, z1) are not given from the intersection of (x, y, z), which is an abstract point, but from the edge of the 1. These might be described either as distances from the edge of the 1 or, more to the point, a decimal as a fraction of the potential length of it. In turn, (x1, y1, z1) is not an abstract point at their intersection but a sphere of observation as large as the decimal is resolved. Image created by Graphit Science & Art, LLC.

5.16—The implication is that we need to match the scale of measurement to the scale of the process in order to adequately study its properties. In practice, we might want to take reference to an object on one scale but measure it on another, but this does not change the domain of relevance for a measure or observing apparatus. If algae are growing along a coast, then do we have a coast measured at a micrometer scale but defined at a meter scale? If we specify more carefully what we’re talking about, then we would have to say that the micrometer is relevant for each individual alga, but for the aggregate algae the meter is relevant. So we have, again, the problem of relevance as a function of resolution (1.15, 3.28).

5.17—We could attempt to conceive of time in relation to these spatial coordinates. To chart time, one would first have to select a range of perception tied to a particular location, observe an object at that range of perception, and then track its progress toward a second point. In this sketch, we can posit here that timescales correlate to spatial scales partially because timescales are already built on the logical typing of spatial scales. Thus, the scale of the planet corresponds to timescales of relevance for that large of an object. (If we consider this point in relation to our first thought experiment in scale, we might say that fluctuations also equal a kind of time range out of which differences might make a difference.)
5.18—Surprisingly, this thought experiment does posit the Homo sapiensas somehow in the “middle” or center of the cosmos in two ways. If we use the “observable universe” as the boundary for our coordinate plane, then this places the observer at the center of possible existence within our scalar coordinate plane (and theoretically someone somewhere else in the universe would have a different starting point for that boundary). However, in a scalar sense we find that the meter is around the center of possible sizes of observation. This is not necessarily a privileged aspect of humans, but of the meter scale more generally: it may be that, just as the micrometer seems to be the appropriate scale for life to begin, the meter scale is the scale at which a certain kind of complex behavior and cognition is made possible.36In the Scalar SimulationThe Third Thought Experiment in Scale
6.1—Imagine that reality was capable of being fully represented in a virtual simulation in which one could pause all motion and zoom in and out much like you can with Earth-modeling software, except with as much detail as reality itself seems to produce. (This is obviously impossible. Specifying the ways that this is impossible as we proceed will tell us as much as the experiment itself.)
6.2—In such an interface, you could have a five-dimensional experience. In addition to the three spatial dimensions and time, one could alter the scale of observation. Thus, one would have five controls: up/down, left/right, forward/backward, time forward/backward, and scale larger/smaller. We can think of this experience as being inside the 1 specified in 5.2. We could even track the coordinates of location via the coordinate system developed in 5.13.

6.3—As per 5.17, for the interface to be navigable, our space and time controls must be scaled as well, so that, for example, at the scale of the nanometer, one moves at the unit of nanometers and in a time range relevant to behavior at that scale.

6.4—Moving through this interface on the scale of the meter would be like our normal experience of navigating this world. But the point is that the interface would be scalable such that one might zoom in and out in a way that would alter the scale of this three-dimensional space.  
6.5—Here we could experience more acutely the transformation of the entirety of the cosmos simply by altering the scale of observation. If you begin focused on a person, at the meter scale you could examine around them, you could even bisect them and see organs and parts, but you would not see cells. When we change the scale to the micrometer, a refocusing—that is, a change in resolution—has to occur, otherwise one would only see big stretches of, for example, surfaces of the skin. But what has happened when you arrive at cells? Can you see the object “body” anymore? Here we find the full generalization of the point made in 1.15: no, the body is no longer visible. Not even organs would be visible except perhaps as what might be deduced from the patterns of the cells in relation to each other (e.g., the curvature of the cells in a blood vessel), the presence of certain larger nonliving parts, or by similar types of cells.  
