6.6—This is not, properly speaking, a “zoom” in the sense of cinematic zoom, which is a result of magnification. Magnification alone will not produce scale, since scale requires a change of resolution.1In our hypothetical interface, this is the difference between moving forward and changing the scale. We can add, in response to critiques of the “smooth zoom,” that the change in scale here is smooth only in the sense that the change in scale can be placed on a continuum.2However, to produce our “controls” that can change scales, we require not a linear change but a logarithmic one, as per our chart in 5.8 (Figure 6). In addition, even if the change in scale is smooth, the crossing of scalar thresholds is clearly not smooth. Rather, a smooth or continuous change in scale produces a discontinuity in observation.

6.7—In this experiment we will speak as if the interface could be produced in visual terms most familiar to Homo sapiensviewing at the meter scale. This is a significant artifice, since it is unclear how much one might render these domains visible. Of course, light is impossible to use beyond a certain scale, and this interface would have to translate other forms of differentiation into visual form to produce these interfaces. In doing so it would highlight isolation, distinction, and separability—aspects most clearly present in vision at the meter scale.

6.8—The idea of bisection mentioned in 6.5 assumes an additional artifice: that we can move through an object that would otherwise be solid. The difference between going “in” in the sense of bisection and “in” in the sense of scaling down highlights a difference in scalar thinking: to go “in” is not to go to a smaller scale.3
6.9—Let us now experiment with using our interface to try to understand something about reality. We can consider three different sorts of questions that scientists might ask and see how we might use our scalar interface to answer them. First, what is X? Second, what causes Y? Third, how does Z work, what does Z do, or, more generally, what will happen next? The first is a question of properties, the second of causality, and the third of predictability and process.

6.10—We must first highlight the strangeness of observing the scalar transformation of objects not as a function of time but rather as a function of a change in spatial scale. How have we changed all of reality without taking any action within it?This aspect is why I have avoided speaking of scales of time as prior to spatial scales. In approaching these three questions with our interface, let’s attempt to avoid time at first to see how scale operates without any action other than the change of the level of observation.

6.11—For the first type of question, we can select a scalar object: What is a cell? To ask this question, we must first switch scales to the micrometer (or slightly smaller), where the phenomena of cells can be resolved. We could then pick out a cell and, without changing scales or time, observe that the cell had certain definable attributes, including cell walls and various organelles. Equipped with a grade school chart of a cell, we could go through the cell and identify its various components.

6.12—Finding a coherent definition for a cell should not be an issue as long as we remain on the same scale. After all, the cell has some clear boundaries at the level of the micrometer, and certain components that make it appear as a separable object. However, if we switch scales, then the object of study will no longer appear like a coherent object. We can experiment with this as a general rule about scale: studying something as a clearly defined object is only possible when we remain at one scale.Thus, while we used scale to find the object “cell,” we find that we cannot easily add a scalar shift back in and keep in view this object for study.

6.13—There are a number of ways that a seemingly separate object might appear not separate within our simulation. Without time, for instance, things might be indistinguishable if there is no discernible space between them until, adding time, they move apart. Moving our simulation forward and backward in time would produce a sense of objectness by permitting things at a given scale to demonstrate their distinctiveness through their ability to move as a unit at that scale.

6.14—Once one has resolved and defined the cell, it may be possible to study the cell from the perspective of the organism or the molecule. Doing so requires that we switch back and forth between the two scales to see how they relate. The result is quite productive: we might be able to see that the cell is a heart cell by noting its location in that organ. We can then specify attributes of a heart cell as opposed to cells belonging to other organs. But doing so requires that we switch scales so that we can discern the relevance of this organ structure to the larger-scale organism. We might be able to acquire something of a distinction between heart cells and bone cells by traveling in the same scale and noting a difference in kind, but only with a switch in scale would we be able to understand this difference as a function of an organizing principle of relevance on another scale. The term “heart cell” thus already refers to the same object from the perspective of two scales. More precisely, “heart cell” categorizes an object observable at one scale (cell) in terms relevant to another scale (heart).

6.15—Could we distinguish a symbiotic microorganism from a body’s cell when remaining on the same scale? This question exposes our attempts to define a system or class of relevance using a larger scale (the organism). If the microorganism is an essential part of the system, why do we call one a cell and another a microorganism (e.g., why is a microphage a cell but a bacterium in your digestive tract not?). One answer is to use DNA, but DNA requires a switch in scales; plus, it does not account for the well-known fact that mitochondria contain their own unique DNA. The point here is to highlight how certain concepts and distinctions can drift from one scale to another and thereby present problems for scientific description.

6.16—We may also study the cell as it is formed by molecules. Rather than merely a strong reductionism, this maneuver has great explanatory power for understanding properties apparent at the level of the cell. Molecular biology is able to, for instance, study the properties of proteins or DNA in order to say a good deal about what a cell is and how it works. But note how this replicates the same pattern we just defined in 6.14 and 6.15; molecular biology effectively selects new objects primarily discernible on a smaller scale (DNA, protein molecules) and studies those in relation to this larger-scale system.

6.17—These last few points (6.14–16) consider only the immediate scale domains. Some scientists study cells in relation to ecology (e.g., the effect of bacteria on the planetary ecology) or study ecological factors in relation to cells (e.g., the role of the great oxygenation event in producing eukaryotes). In these cases we have significant shifts in scale being deployed to say something about what an object is. Indeed, once an object of study gets defined on any scale, we can relate it to objects and processes on any scale—as long as we remember the scale at which each object is defined.

6.18—For these observations (6.11–17) we chose a living object. If we apply these observations to nonliving objects, other aspects arise. Consider the question “What is water?”—or, to place the question on a particular object in our simulation, “What is this water in this glass?” What scale are we to select to answer this question? At the scale of the meter, water in our simulation would include everything within the glass; we would not have the grounds to distinguish the water from its contents (e.g., one is reminded that H2O does not actually conduct electricity). At the micrometer scale we could distinguish the water from any microbial and any large macromolecular components. Only at the nanometer scale could we distinguish the water molecule from other molecules within it. We could then study the attributes of H20, with the understanding that water’s distinctiveness arises at the level of the molecule. We can then observe, for instance, that water at the scale of the planet exists as clouds, oceans, and glaciers and draw some relation among them.

