6.19—We can now continue to develop the concept of thresholding (1.9–10, 3.27–29, 4.8, 5.8–9) and speak about phases of materials. Clouds, oceans, and glaciers are three configurations of the same molecular structure (H20) relating to each other in a configuration that makes them visible and effective at the meter and kilometer scales. In our interface we can see the significance here of phases, since the difference between ice, water, and water vapor might be described by switching scales and observing the relation between H20 molecules at the nanometer scale that changes how they appear and what they are able to do at the meter scale. As systems scientist Ricard Solé notes, there seems to be a scalar nature of phase transitions along a critical point: “the term critical point.  .  . describe[s] the presence of a very narrow transition domain separating two well-defined phases, which are characterized by distinct macroscopic properties that are ultimately linked to changes in the nature of microscopic interactions among the basic units.”4
6.20—Combining 6.18 and 6.15, we can add that the distinction between living and nonliving objects depends greatly on the scale of observation. Because life is invariably a system of smaller-scale objects coordinated into an object on a larger scale, what is considered living depends on the scale used to define the living system. Thus, at the nanometer scale, nothing is living unless we want to consider molecules involved in a cell or microbe as themselves living (then we run into the problems of definition found in 6.15). The point becomes more important at the micrometer scale: in an organism we distinguish between cells and microorganisms as living and material structures (e.g., calcium deposits that make bones) as nonliving. But if we were to change scale to the organism (meter), these “nonliving” components would be an essential part of an organism. Following 6.14, we might say that these nonliving structures seen at the micrometer scale are living in reference to the scale of the meter. This point becomes more relevant in the life/nonlife distinction between the meter-planetary transition, since many things we habitually treat as not part of life—or as mere materials forlife—ought to be properly treated as part of life on the scale of the planet. This point reiterates the significance of the notion of the biosphere and Lovelock’s notion of Gaia as attempts to conceptualize life on the scale of the planet (3.29, 3.32).

6.21—We can now turn to our second form of question, “What causes Y?” While this question seems invariably about the result of action in time, we want to highlight how easily answers to this question can be posed in terms of scale. If we freeze time and stay on the same scale, what can we say about causality?
6.22—The great use of our interface is that we can use it to find a specific answer to a defined problem for the sake of intervention. Medical examples are the most relevant, since they include a presumed problem to locate and fix. Let’s say that I have a terrible headache and a pain in my back. Let’s freeze time and consider what we can do to examine this situation in our interface. We can check for particular causes without changing scales: there might be someone sitting on my back (observing the relation between two objects on the same scale), or I might be able to peer “into” the body without changing scales and identify whether or not there are any fractures or swelling in the spine (observing attributes in objects on that same scale). If we find no fracture (or someone sitting on my back) but just swelling, we have not found a cause of the malady but a symptom of it. At this point it would not make sense to scale up, since that would leave behind the object (the body) that is manifesting the symptoms. Instead, we scale down and examine the cells in the spine, only to find that there are Neisseria meningitidisbacteria present in the spine. Thus, we have found a diagnosis, cause, and potential intervention by going to a different scale.

6.23—Arguably, Pasteur’s great discovery was to pinpoint disease’s primary cause as activity on the microbial scale.5With this notion in place we could always look for a microbial cause for other ailments; we could, for instance, find someone with schizophrenia within our interface and examine if they also have some kind of bacterial cause for this mental illness, as has been periodically suggested. The fringe nature of this theory points to how not all disease is relevant in this way. For instance, another condition might be caused by too much iron (nanometer scale), by other configurations of the system at the micrometer scale (hormones), by DNA sequences, by societal problems, or by patterns in neuronal configurations.

6.24—In these cases we are trying to locate differences (the bacteria) that make a particular kind of difference (the illness), which has been selected in advance. Once we have identified the bacteria as the cause, we can intervene to control that particular object of relevance on other scales: from the epidemic perspective (above the meter scale), we can instantiate quarantines, sanitation practices, and immunizations to effectively target that scalar object. In fact, the effectiveness of this intervention relies on—or even is the evidence for—the proper selection of this difference.

6.25—Significantly, “cause” here is the specification of the difference that makes a difference. If this difference (the meningococcus bacteria) is removed, the disease is likewise removed. To the contrary, if a symptom is removed (taking medicine to control the swelling), then the disease is not removed.

6.26—In actuality, this specification is quite difficult, particularly since we do not have the convenience of our imaginary scalar interface. Even if we did, something like cancer is not nearly as straightforward. How would one find the determinant factor for intervention? Even with a clear specification—cancer is an uncontrolled replication of cells—the larger question remains: what causes certain cells to replicate uncontrollably? Even if damage to DNA produces cancer, what causes the damage? Intervention here might already be of different sorts, which reflects the scale at which one is trying to locate the significant difference: one could fix the damaged DNA, remove the cells via chemotherapy, or avoid the cause of the damage in advance by altering environmental factors (working in a nuclear plant; staying out in the sun too long; smoking tobacco). In any case, the primary scale of interest may be the molecular DNA, but the chain of causality leaves open different scales of intervention.

6.27—The point here is to highlight how scale permits us to identify multiple points of causality by examining the whole scalar configuration. But one can see how there is a general preference for scaling down as a description of causality. Indeed, this could be a definition of reductionism. The caveat for moderating this tendency: scaling smaller describes the same thing viewed in a different way as the cause of that same thing.

6.28—In one sense, there isn’t a cause at all when we switch scales except insofar as we want to identify a particular intervention or effect. Consider the psychiatrist examining mental health: does the presence or absence of serotonin cause depression? If one is depressed, these neurotransmitters are likely less present. Are they diminished because you are depressed, or are you depressed because they are diminished? This is the same brain described in two ways, via two scales: at the scale of experience and at the scale of neuronal components. However, this does not provide a necessary path for intervention. If we alter the balance of these neurotransmitters, one might effectively alter the feeling of depression while still failing to identify the organismic, experiential, social, or environmental configuration that might instantiate the depression. Alternatively, one might fruitlessly alter social or experiential factors and find that the feeling of depression does not disappear. The person being treated for depression is always caught in the conundrum of this scalar shift.

6.29—At the same time, these questions about causality cannot avoid the question of how objects at one scale affect those at another scale. We can define two different senses of scale effectshere. First, there is the effect that occurs when you change the scale of observation. The ecologists Jianguo Wu and Harbin Li, for instance, define scale effects as “the changes in the result of a study due to a change in the scale at which the study is conducted.”6Second, we have the ways in which actions or objects on one scale affect objects or actions on another scale. To separate these two notions, we can keep the name scale effects(i.e., impact of scale) for the effect of scale on our observation, and scalar relations(i.e., impact across scales) to describe how action on one scale might influence action on another scale (see 3.31).

6.30—We can divide scalar relations into aggregation and conditioning. Aggregation is the way that the attributes and actions on a smaller scale accumulate into larger-scale actions and attributes (4.8). Thus, the way that molecules of carbon become a diamond or cells become a body are forms of aggregation.

6.31—Conditioning is the way that larger-scale objects or processes set conditions that constrain, enable, shape, or otherwise influence lower-scale activity.

6.32—Both aggregation and conditioning are a form of “setting conditions” for action at other scales. Aggregation sets out a possible range of configurations in a larger structure by providing delimitations in form and attributes. Thus, carbon sets different aggregating conditions than silicon. Both may be mediated by certain principles of aggregation, some of which might be principles of all aggregation across any scale (see 4.11).
