
6.33—Likewise, conditioning is a setting of conditions under which smaller-scale actions are able to be affected by changing what is available for smaller-scale interaction. For example, self-assembly techniques in nanotechnology set conditions for given materials (e.g., carbon) so that they will assemble themselves into a particular configuration (e.g., carbon nanotubes).

6.34—We have to be careful about how we conceptualize aggregation and conditioning as causal conditions. It may be possible to specify how certain conditions on one scale become effects on another scale, but it is a larger leap to suggest that aggregation or conditioning causes another scale’s behavior even if these provide means of intervention or prediction.

6.35—Ideas of control, including notions of hierarchical power, are constantly falling sway to this problem. In what way do “I” control my hand, if I consider my hand as an aggregate of cells? It might be more accurate to say that action at the meter scale sets conditions under which this aggregate of cells is able to do the things that they do. To replicate this structure at the level of the planet: environmental factors, such as oxygen or carbon levels, weather, mineral sources, and geographic features become essential conditioning factors around which living organisms at the meter scale are able to live and organize. Human interventions at this same scale via large-scale infrastructure similarly set conditions for rather than controls for the organisms (human or otherwise) that live within them. From a scalar perspective, what we call “control” is a limited phenomenon that may apply only to same-scale interactions. More importantly, scale starts to highlight how “control” might be a narrative about causality (i.e., a way of mapping a flow of effects, preferentially written to emphasize human intervention) rather than a fact of phenomena. This, of course, has most relevance in trying to conceptualize control at the level of human governance, but it applies equally to our example of self-assembly of carbon nanotubes. Is the engineer controlling the molecules in setting the conditions for their self-assembly?
6.36—However, 6.35 does not preclude the definition of principles of aggregation and conditioning. To avoid the premature and often merely preferential narrative of control, we can note that such principles work separately from the objects aggregating or conditioning. That is, such principles are not caused by any one component but are manifest in the pattern of them.

6.37—We have unwittingly introduced time to make these points about scalar relations. But if we return to our interface and do not factor in time, then we could theoretically see how attributes on one scale relate to other scales. We could examine the structure of the carbon in a diamond to see how it relates to the sharp edges and shiny surface at a larger scale. Similarly, we could see how the heart cells are conditioned by the organ, specifically the role it plays in the larger organism. In turn, we can deduce how the larger organism sets conditions for these cells by making available certain materials and limits for growth and form, limits that one could see even in the structure of the organism itself.7
6.38—Although we have already implied a great deal about process and predictability, we can now move fully to this third set of questions. We should note that there are some scalar reasons—having to do with the principles of aggregation and conditioning—why we cannot answer the question “What will happen next?” without going forward in time. To illustrate, we can follow Gregory Bateson’s discussion of some related scientific concepts in Mind and Nature.His example: if one were to throw a small stone at a pane of glass, one could not adequately predict the resulting fracture pattern. Counterintuitively, the more controlled and precise the conditions—using homogeneous, polished glass with a stone at a controlled speed—the less predictable the fracture pattern becomes. However, if there is a preexisting mark in the glass, you can predict the pattern to some degree. Out of this example, Bateson derives two principles that are principles of scale:
6.39—Bateson states that convergent sequences are predictable but divergent sequences are not. Divergent sequences “concern individuals”—including “the crack in the glass”—while convergent sequences involve aggregate behavior. Bateson’s point applies to scale more generally: “The movement of planets in the solar system, the trend of a chemical reaction in an ionic mixture of salts, the impact of billiard balls, which involves millions of molecules—are all predictable because our descriptions of the events has as its subject matter the behavior of immense crowds or classes of individuals.” Or, as he says elsewhere, “the generic we can know, but the specific eludes us.”8In other words, aggregation provides predictability by bringing together the diversity of behavior from a scale below into aspects that are more regular on a scale above due to principles of aggregation (see 4.12, 4.22).

6.40—In terms of scale, we can say that breaking points and fracture patterns describe behavior at a lower scale at the point where they make a difference at a higher scale. Without time, one will be hard pressed to predict the moment of transition or pattern, since one cannot easily find the specific lower-scale item that will serve to instantiate an aggregate effect. We would have a hard time scouring our interface at the scale below, hunting for the molecules in the glass that will serve as the path for the cracks in the glass. The exception is when there is something on the higher scale that conditions this lower-scale behavior, such as the scratch on the glass. But even so, this conditioning does not give us complete information in advance about the precise flow of lower-scale events, even if it does delimit to some extent their aggregated behavior.

6.41—Once we add time, we can examine the patterns of conditioning and aggregation by observing what does happen within any object. We might see, for instance, that a breaking point is reached, know that it has to do with molecular-scale interactions, and retroactively identify the location of that instantiation at the scale of the molecules. But the same problem is always pushed forward in time: we can know something will happen but will be hard pressed to find where the threshold will occur without moving again forward in time. We will always be limited in our ability to trace out the exact flow of a phase transition, aggregation, or result of conditioning except in aggregate, after the fact.

6.42—Here we have perhaps come to the limit of the usefulness of the thought experiment without defining the limits of the whole premise. On a basic level, such an interface would have to simply bethe universe, since any attempt to encode this complexity would have to be as elaborate as existence itself. This is most relevant for our discussion of time and predictability, since only in the hypothetical interface could one locate the molecule that forms a breaking point. In reality, the breakage itself is this discovery.

6.43—This is also a point about the great variety of existence implied by scale and about the limits of modeling. Scientific modeling will, of course, take advantage of scale to compress the situation via the aspects discussed here (6.38–41), but its limits might be more precisely defined by considering the scalar maneuvers that science uses to produce anything that can be considered predictability, intervention, and explanation. In chapter 10 we will discuss the function and limits of science as a process of specification.

6.44—This experiment’s interface follows the common ruse of objectivity, imagining a viewpoint outside the interface to observe reality. But all experience is already within the “interface,” not separate from it. In many respects, experience is a result of the operations such an interface would model. But this limit does not mean that this scalar map is an inappropriate way to interpret the knowledge that we do manage to stitch together in the process of science. In fact, Homo sapiens,whether the one called “scientists” or otherwise, is capable of prodding at and mapping these scalar layers of reality precisely because they are a part of it and within it.

6.45—However, in eliding the embeddedness of observation, our interface does not account for perspectives had within or by parts of reality. How does a cell differentiate the scale of the micrometer such that it can respond to events at this scale (the basic maneuver of cybernetics)? This point is essential, since we have already assumed in many of our examples that a coherent world of interaction is able to exist at any given scalar level. Because scale is about the mode of observation as well as the possibilities of interaction, one could not avoid considering how these perspectives function (see chapter 8).

6.46—When we spoke of modes of generating visualized perceptions in the interface (6.7), we were trying to make the interface comprehensible by imagining it in visual forms, which is clearly impossible. Such a visual form tied to the Homo sapiens’s body would also not account for how the same thing might look differently depending on what signals are received by it. If we add this observation to 6.44–45, we arrive more properly at the notion of Umwelt,or lifeworld, as a term describing how any organism selects out parts of reality in a particular way so that it creates a particular environment to respond to.9
