6.47—To understand “what comes next” one would need to understand both cybernetic responses and the contours of an Umwelt,since the responses in the scalar interface require a responsiveness to configurations that are not always present as “objects.” One might experiment with stating this in a scalar fashion: if I were to locate the way that a nervous system will respond to a stimulus, I would still have to relate any given neuron to the whole configuration of other neurons in order to get a pattern that we generally call a “learned response” or, in computer terms, a “program.” Indeed, in computers we see how a program is to some degree a scalar system: it uses the states of its components to build a pattern capable of determining a response. One would be hard-pressed, even with a great amount of effort, to discover in our interface how such a system would respond next without adding in time—that is, by just running the program.

6.48—The notions of pattern and pattern recognition are clearly far more important in a scalar conception, since scale produces patterns out of which one might create rules for both delineation of objects and predictions about their interaction. In this case, pattern is not simply what comes next but the relationship between the larger and the smaller.

6.49—As a final note: within such an interface (or through the systematic examination of scale via science and careful theoretical delineation) we can add three kinds of scalar principles to scale effects (6.29) and scalar relations (constraints and aggregations [6.30–33]). First, principles of how differences manifest and accrue within any scale domain. These would be scale-specific principlesthat might not be generalizable to other scales and would therefore need to be situated within the scales of relevance. As science writers Joel Primack and Nancy Abrams note, “physical laws that apply at one scale do not cease to be true at other scales: they merely cease to matter.”10
6.50—Second, isomorphic principles or characteristicsare patterns or similarities that can repeat between shifts of these scale domains. These provide grounds for making analogous comparisons between scales, such as learning about how to organize a city by looking at a cell.11
6.51—Finally, the principles of scale itself: the conditions under which we use this apparatus, thinking as carefully and broadly as possible about what this simple observational accounting does to our conception of the cosmos. Clearly, this is the aim of this work.Part IIConfigurations for a Theory of Scale
The way of thinking developed in the algorithms leaves open many questions. While the implications of scale are by no means fully clear and apparent, much resistance toward these conclusions may arise from the strangeness of thinking and speaking in terms of scale as it pushes us beyond the realm and structure on which human experience is built. How do we reconfigure our sense of reality if we are to accept these different scales of existence and the apparatus of scale itself?
We need to dwell on the configuration of reality provided by scale as it reworks three basic philosophical notions: objects, subjects, and relations. The bases for the conclusions presented in this section are already stated in some form in Part I. But because scale implies such a significant shift in our way of understanding reality, we have to move carefully through these new configurations.

While much of what follows may seem abstract, the approach here is meant to be experiential. If one adopts the scalar perspective outlined in Part I, what is the experience like? How does one reconcile this perspective with the concepts, assumptions, and ways of speaking built from a nonscalar perspective? How does one resolve the tensions inevitably faced in this reconfiguration? To this end, each chapter will begin with a manifestation of scalar experience in cultural narratives to remind ourselves that these are reconfigurations we all face in attempting to adjust ourselves to our scalar situation.

These three chapters are where I am more properly “scaling theory,” in the sense of running theoretical articulations through scale in an attempt to reorient our way of talking about objects, subjects, and relations. The exegesis here often focuses on theoretical texts, drawn from various theoretical humanities and sciences of the last few decades. In addition, we will face more directly the drift between mystical and scientific ways of thinking and speaking, which we introduced in the Introduction.

These reconfigurations occur simultaneously, so there will be portions of each chapter that could be placed in the others. Although the chapters build on each other, the reader is welcome to read them in any order.7In-formations of the WholeScalar Configurations of Objects
We are being processed along, and as we go we are changed and informed; there is no ontology for us, no concrete being.

What lies hiding within each object? A garden, so to speak: the enchanted garden.

—Philip K. Dick, The Exegesis
Cue the Scalar Invasion
In February 1974 the science fiction author Philip K. Dick experienced what he later described as a massive transfer of information from an alien entity. A combination of sodium thiopental (for oral surgery), a fish sign, and a flash of pink light began a series of visions that lasted for roughly two months.1Dick would spend the rest of his life attempting to understand this “2-3-74” experience, writing thousands of pages of philosophical and theological speculation that he called his Exegesis.This text, which is only recently being transcribed and published, is full of endlessly fractal theories integrating a diverse history of thought as Dick voraciously sought to understand 2-3-74.

At the core of the Exegesisis the Vast Active Living Intelligence System (VALIS), one of his many names (alongside Logos, Zebra, Noös [Mind], and God) for the entity beaming him information. Dick puts much emphasis on this “Vast,” this sense of something larger than himself making contact. Equally interesting is his invocation of Valis as “living information.” This combination—the informatic and the vast—makes Dick’s experience interesting to examine in an account on scale. Consider, for instance, the following passage positioning Valis as a kind of brain:
This vast brain must be an organizing principle. A system of linking.  .  .  . I was taken into a thinking system  .  .  . how, if at all, does this system exist independently from the constituents which it links together? .  .  .  This model (brain-mind) is a good one for my understanding of 3-74.  .  .  . Weare the [physical] brain [components]. The plasmatic entity I saw which I called Zebra must have been the analog for the electrical discharges constantly moving through neural fibers.  .  .  . So my brain, made up of millions of cells, in billions of [electrical] combinations, became one station [cell] in [of] a larger brain, linked to other “cells” [persons]  .  .  . with Christ as the total mind [psyche]. (38:26; 354. Brackets in original)
