This passage gives a taste of Dick’s scalar articulation as well as its strangeness. Underlying this brain-neuron comparison is a search for a scalar view. But is Dick suggesting that the cosmos is a large, intelligent entity already, like a brain? This turn to “Christ as the total mind” is undoubtedly disarming regardless of one’s religious inclinations. Why would Dick turn to such language? Or, given that his speculations also cover basic science fiction alien premises, mystery cults, and at least a dozen religious traditions, why have we run into a discursive form that seems to be, as one critic puts it, “erratic, even crackpot.”2
Dick understood that these writings were unusual, and he incessantly doubted his own articulations. It is precisely this disorienting melding of various discourses—searching for any kind of language for understanding his experience—that makes him so useful here.3Dick’s experience can be classed as an encounter with the strangeness of a scalar configuration of reality. His writing is a manic attempt to understand a world saturated by descriptions and experiences literally out of one’s scale. Dick’s occupation as a science fiction writer, combined with his predilection for asking hard questions about reality, led him to take seriously the disorientation of scalar science and the reality of his scalar experience. But he also struggled to describe this scalar configuration. Thus, just prior to the brain passage, he relates this notion of “brain” to his novel Ubik,which had recently earned critical praise from the literary critics Fredric Jameson and Darko Suvin (after meeting Jameson and Suvin, Dick referred to them as “the Marxists”):
“Ubik” depicted a spontaneous generation of guiding messages from an unknown source, which was ubiquitous. The Marxists took great interest in “Ubik” and wanted to know what Ubik was. My 3-74 experience resembled “Ubik”—why? The presence of the vast (ubiquitous) brain (Zebra or VALIS) of course. In other words, in 3-74 I encountered the mind which in “Ubik” I called Ubik. It is the Logos, St. Sophia, but the Marxists, although evidently aware of its existence (how come?) could not accept that explanation. They may be right; a more modern, more precise formulation may be possible. I am not able to do that; I keep falling back on traditional stereotyped theological terms and concepts. (38:25–26)
In many ways, this is our situation with scale: how do we handle this reconfiguration of reality? What is the appropriate way to describe it? Why does scale find us launching into articulations that, like Dick’s, seem too theological or downright crazy? What is the relationship between these theological articulations and the scientific?
This tension over “Ubik” highlights three aspects of scale that are difficult for us to process. First and foremost, we find the necessity of a highest order of abstraction—a Ubik—which leads Dick to return to theological language. What is this notion of wholeness, substance, unity, or divinity, and why is it necessary for a theory of scale? Second, Dick finds himself dealing persistently with the tentativeness of objects and division. How does this unity relate to the contingency of objects and divisions? What is the status of ontology in a scalar view? Third, he integrates this tentativeness of objects together with the language of information, tying together a condition of perception with an appearance of reality, creating something like an informational ontology. Indeed, he finds himself with one of the strangest points we came across in Part I (1.19): what does it mean to describe objects as information?
As a “fictionalizing philosopher” (Exegesis,75:D-9; 693) rather than academic, Dick was unable to see how these aspects bear a fraught relationship to philosophies that were already becoming popular at the time he was writing. In both postmodern philosophy and certain analytic traditions—in what is known as the “linguistic turn”—there was a recurring push against the necessity of this highest order of abstraction, including any idea of reality as a whole, a one substance, or a transcendental signified. As Cary Wolfe notes, following Lyotard, this “incredulity towards meta-narratives” is perhaps the most characteristic aspect of postmodernism.4While science and these philosophies have often clashed, this attempt to, as Brian Rotman puts it, “take the God out of” various philosophies and sciences (mathematics, in Rotman’s case) mirrors the general suspicion of science toward theological-sounding explanations.5This suspicion makes our arrival at this highest order of abstraction (first at 1.21–28) counterposed to these tendencies, much like Jameson and Suvin’s incredulity toward Dick’s explanation of Ubik. Yet the tentativeness of objects and the role of information are both essential to the linguistic turn.6Dick’s statement that “a superior analogy would be to regard the universe as consisting of language” (4:166; 81) echoes a maneuver familiar in the linguistic turn. The problem for postmodernists reading Dick, then, is grappling with how this informational ontology leads him toward the very thing they find most unacceptable: Ubik. How are we to justify and explain this scalar configuration whereby objects become contingent information provided by and within a unity not divided a priori?
To explore this configuration, I will combine portions of Dick’s Exegesiswith discussions of quantum physics, atomism, ontology, cybernetics, and information theory. Following Dick’s lead, we will first examine the relationship between notions of the Whole and object contingency, particularly as they arise from Heraclitus, Parmenides, and Zeno. Considering Zeno’s paradox as a kind of scaling down will run us into modern attempts to understand quantum physics, particularly David Bohm’s quantum theory. Responses to such holistic theories will then highlight the resistances that arise in working with this scalar form of wholeness and objects. After addressing these objections, we will return to Plato and consider how and why we find ourselves defining objects and thereby separating the many out of the One. This will reintroduce and situate a notion of “difference” within this discussion of scale and objects. It will also lead us to the bewildering formula, provided by the American philosopher Franklin Merrell-Wolff, that “substantiality is inversely proportional to ponderability.”7With this view in place, we can then consider what it would mean to treat objects as information by examining the cyberneticist-anthropologist Gregory Bateson’s notion of information as a “difference that makes a difference.”8Finally, we will consider the results of this informational ontology not just as a concept but as an experience.

In letting this often bizarre fictionalizing philosopher take the lead in this chapter, I want to emphasize the way Dick’s work rewrites these points in more personal terms. First, how would reality appear if it showed itself in this scalar configuration in which “what is” is simultaneously one and many? Second, what would happen with one’s sense of reality if these divisions are now held to be tentative? Third, how does this change our relationship to these prized objects in our lives? These three aspects provide grounds for both incredulity and wacky attempts to rearticulate our relationship to reality, yet our incredulity ought to hinge on the difficulty of grappling with the scalar experience, not a balking at the strangeness of an articulation.9So let us see if we can find a “more modern, more precise” articulation.

Object Contingency and the Possibility of Wholeness
Scale reconfigures reality into multiple layers of simultaneously existing objects. In this way, scale literally re-dissects reality. In scaling to the small, we seem to de-compose, allowing these bodies to give way to cells, and these cells to atoms. But larger scales also entail a breakdown, not of things that appear to be separate but of the division between those things. We live among division; it produces our world of useful objects. And yet, when we consider any significant shift in scale, we see the surprising implication found in 1.21: scale demands that this differentiation of the world has to be tentative, since each new scale revises the same things into completely different objects.10An object can never be taken to exist “in itself”—even if “what is” provides the grounds for these divisions at multiple levels—since the objects themselves will change depending on the scale at which one encounters them. We then encountered the implication (1.23) that reality might be described as a Whole, since any definition of objects requires a selection of the attributes and scale at which one will define objects.

In this argument, scale has provided us with a coherent reconciliation of some of the paradoxes that are at the heart of philosophical inquiry. As the story goes, in Western philosophy Parmenides argued for the unity of being as One while Heraclitus argued for a world of multiplicity and becoming. And yet, we find in the fragments of Heraclitus this clear statement: “Listening not to me but to the Logos, it is wise to acknowledge that all things are one.”11In this reading, Heraclitus’s “everything flows” becomes a condition of the Logos as One: if everything is always changing, then what grounds does one have for saying that that there are separate things? Similarly, a dichotomy is often drawn between Vedanta’s ātman(Self, as equivalent to brahman,the universal) and Buddhism’s anātman(no-self), but we will see how a kind of emptiness of division or self might also be described as an encounter with absolute reality.

Here is the genius of Dick’s 1969 novel, Ubik.In Ubikwe find a perpetual decay of reality as the breaking down of objects. The premise is simple: a bomb explodes among the main characters, but then the story continues as if they all survived. However, as we proceed we learn that they might be nearly dead and cryogenically frozen in “half-life.” The characters learn this through two signs: the decay of objects and the presence of messages from their boss, Runciter, directing them to a product called Ubik, which will stop the breaking down of objects. The epigraph to the final chapter includes an inscription written in transcendent terms: “I am Ubik. Before the universe was, I am  .  .  . I am the word and my name is never spoken, the name that no one knows. I am called Ubik, but that is not my name. I am. I shall always be.”12In this remixing of the biblical “I am that I am,” Dick invokes Ubik not only as the ubiquitous but as the one substance, suggesting that it is this substance that sustains the possibility of existence (just apply Ubik, and reality stabilizes!). But the very condition for discovering Ubik is that objects are slipping away. What if comprehending and sustaining this world—even maintaining life—requires this tentativeness of objects and the substance behind it? This is what we need to unfold in terms of scale.

Zeno and the Continuum Gestalt
We do not need scale to provide us with the sense that the world is impermanent, but it adds a new dimension to this contingency. It helps us see why Heraclitus’s maxim fits with Parmenides’s argument that “what-is is ungenerated and imperishable; Whole, single-limbed, steadfast, and complete.”13Dick cites Parmenides and Heraclitus throughout The Exegesisto highlight this contingency of existence. He suggests that Parmenides was “the first philosopher to prove beyond doubt that what our senses perceive as the Real World cannotin actuality be real” (4:163; 74) while also pointing to Heraclitus’s suggestion that people live unaware, as if they are in a dream (e.g., 5:43; 140).14Dick’s musings on the Sanskrit term mayamake this same argument; this notion of the grand illusion is much misunderstood and maligned, but what if it is simply a description of the contingency of objects? Scale launches us into the same possibility from another direction.

Dick provides us this direction through his playing with Zeno’s paradoxes of motion. His musings on Zeno can be traced back to Dick’s 1953 short story “The Indefatigable Frog,” in which two professors, Grote and Hardy, build a test for Zeno’s paradox: “Take [Zeno’s] paradox of the frog and the well. As Zeno showed, the frog will never reach the top of the well. Each jump is half the previous jump; a small but very real margin always remains for him to travel.”15Here is how the experiment unfolds: Grote and Hardy place a frog in a chamber that shrinks anything in half every time it travels halfway along the chamber. The frog hops along, getting smaller and smaller, until it disappears. Suspecting foul play, Grote examines inside the tube himself, but then Hardy closes the door, trapping Grote within. Grote heads through, shrinking until he is so small that he has to jump from atom to atom until he falls between them and out of the tube.

Dick’s retelling of Zeno’s paradox puts it in the form of a physical encounter with the very small. The condition that tumbles Grote out of the tube is that he could no longer locate any object on which he could move within the chamber or be contained by it. The result: the division process itself takes him outside the apparatus that is meant to divide him. Indeed, there is something interesting about arriving at the atom, the name that was used by Democritus to designate “that which cannot be divided” but was only tied to the familiar scalar objects in the nineteenth century. The twentieth century taught us, in rather horrific fashion, that these objects were not, in fact, uncuttable. In fact, quantum physics arose from the possibility that there are distinguishable quanta within an atom that can be used to designate further entities (electrons, protons, neutrons, quarks, etc.). But the question remains: can this discovery of smaller and smaller objects continue? Do we really find more objects to leap between at these new scales?
Of course, here we are entering controversial ground. On some level I sympathize with Erwin Schrodinger, who in his final book, My View of the World,presents arguments for Wholeness from a Vedantic perspective,16states in the foreword that he doesn’t discuss the conundrums of quantum theory (QT) there, because he “does not think that these things have as much connection as is currently supposed with a philosophical view of the world.”17At the same time, QT does seem to inaugurate a discussion about the insufficiency of certain principles derived from a largely nonscalar conception of objects. Most importantly, it highlights the preference for speaking of things as objects separate and definable in themselves. When we attempt to scale smaller than the atom, objects are first presented in a primarily mathematical sense, which creates questions about their ontological reality and the epistemological conditions under which they are ascribed certain properties (e.g., whether they are a wave or a particle). In retrospect, these observations apply to any scalar observations,but quantum physics forced many scientists to ask these questions in a new way.

