This is one way of making sense of the infamous paradoxes of quantum physics. The problems are partially about whether or not an atomic particle ought to be considered a clear and contained object. Since scale has already launched us into this same territory, there is no need to rehearse the paradoxes here; rather, we can rely on the quantum physicist David Bohm, who describes the implication as follows:
The quantum theory shows that the attempt to describe and follow an atomic particle in precise detail has little meaning.  .  .  . [An atom] can perhaps best be regarded as a poorly defined cloud, dependent for its particular form on the whole environment,including the observing instrument. Thus, one can no longer maintain the division between the observer and observed (which is implicit in the atomistic view that regards each of these as separate aggregates of atoms). Rather both observer and observed are merging and interpenetrating aspects of one wholereality, which is indivisible and unanalyzable.18
We can see that this is what Dick stumbles upon in “The Indefatigable Frog”: in order to continue to divide, Grote must stay within the apparatus designed to divide. But that apparatus itself is inseparable from the process of division, and the reality it produces is “dependent for its particular form on the whole environment.”
While the new divisions produced by physics at the quantum scale are highly successful and useful for many practical operations, the status of these objects as clearly distinct and localizable is, just as with any object on any scale, neither apparent nor necessary. For Bohm, the quantum scale more directly highlights this fact:
Each relatively autonomous and stable structure (e.g. an atomic particle) is to be understood not as something independently and permanently existent but rather as a product that has been formed in the whole flowing movement and that will ultimately dissolve back into this movement. How it forms and maintains itself, then, depends on its place and function in the whole.19
Here we see how we get from Zeno’s paradox to Parmenides’s One by way of Heraclitus’s flux. In terms of scale, what appears to be a clear and discernible object on one scale is only so because of the larger situation in which it is embedded. At another scale—particularly at a larger scale—the same object will and must be taken within the larger possibilities of existence that already make the object possible. Which grounds for division will we hold to be primary? How can we hold any as primary and still admit the others?
We now face a difference in base assumptions: shall we proceed by assuming a priori division, or by assuming that all “things” are in some way undivided from all other things?20Zeno’s paradox highlights this choice. Dick later finds, in the British classicist Edward Hussey, an even clearer articulation of Zeno’s paradox that brings into focus this possibility of division:
Take two objects, say these two books on my desk. They appear to be separated and obviously distinct objects. Zeno points out, to the contrary, that in order for these books to be separate objects, a third thing must exist between them to separate them. Otherwise, they must be considered two nonseparate parts of the same thing. Alright, we say, there is air between them. Then what separates the air from the books? And so on. As Hussey states it, “If something X that is is separate from something else Y that also is, then there must be a third thing Z, distinct from X and Y, to separate them.”21But what is Z? What separates Z from X and Y?
This translates Bohm’s argument into a more general scalar operation. As we divide to smaller and smaller separations, at some point it is no longer functional to base knowledge solely on localizable entities taken as divided from their surroundings. The force of the molecules of air against the molecules of the books interacts precisely because of intertangled fields of force rather than actions of clearly distinct objects. While air and books appear distinct on our normal scale, at a lower scale it is their interaction—that is, the ways in which they are clearly part of the same thing—that is important. Thus a choice must be made: do we still consider them separate entities if they are so intimately related? Is a relation a definitive separation? In this sense we divide in theory, not in reality, for the sake of highlighting or making use of parts of the world that can be considered functionally distinct according to the scale on which we are understanding and working with them.

The views from wholeness and division are two different ways of interpreting our perceptions of reality. As Dick learned from Hussey, Parmenides distinguished two forms, which are two gestalts, or ways of organizing the world: Form I is reality—that which is (Greek: to on); Form II is a negative reality—that which is not (Greek: to me on). Form II is a contingent, fragmented worldview, a product of the ability to categorize and divide. Zeno demonstrates that, in considering our divisions of reality as real, we find paradox. Thus, Form I, true substance, is more accurately described as a unity: that which is, the One, which is Whole. Form II is produced out of a rupture in which we come to believe in and act according to fragmentation without regard for this Wholeness.22
Dick argues, following Hussey, that the atomists took a then-radical approach to solving Zeno’s paradox. They proposed including Parmenides’s Form II, that which is not (to me on), as part of their explanation of the world. Hussey argues that the atomists do so by taking the word for “nothing” (to mēden) and removing the negative prefix (me-) to create a new word for “(no)thing” (to den). The being of nothingness (to den) is thus different from being (to on). In this manner, the atomists claim that “nothingness is just as real as any ‘thing.’”23Following Hussey, Dick argues that the atomists were working against a “continuum” model of the universe. Because the atomists could not think of a world with empty space, when they spoke of kenon(the void), they had to make it “existent and real” in order to have it fit within this idea of continuum. “All I can presume,” Dick writes, “is that the concept of continuum must have obtained prior to the atomists or they would have simply called the void what we call it: empty space containing nothing. But this is mēden”—that is, they would not have even bothered to name this “nothing.” However, “This is  .  .  . what they deny it: the status of mēden” (53:1).

Dick suggests that this continuum view was what he experienced in 2-3-74: “There was one ‘thing’ that is, unity and being perceived and conceived as unity. And space (kenon)signified something other than what it signifies—that is, what it is—in the discontinuous matter view. The key term is Gestalt. Each thing (what wecall ‘thing’) was not a thing at all; it was a part, and functioned as a part (of a whole)” (53:1). This scalar relationship is a gestalt switch in which one sees unity behind division:
Reality—including the percipient as part to whole—is experienced as one, unitary, interested structure.  .  .  . Reality valued this way  .  .  . is such that “the void” (mēden) no longer is accorded existence.  .  .  . Hence there isno void, no nothing; thus all things are seen literally to be connected, and this is what I saw that I called Valis. Not a plurality of atomized discontinuous pieces of matter but, rather, one interconnected whole. (55:1)
The literal nature of the continuum is important. Division can only be considered functional, secondary (which is why it is Form II) to a reality which is continuous first. Once we empty out this differentiation—make it really nothing—Wholeness manifests: “And this turns out finally, when all falsifications are abolished, to be the Eleatic continuum which is the ancient (extinct) true Kosmos; it is still there, but we are unable to see it. We suffer then, a negative hallucination; we don’t see what is not there. We fail to see what is” (55:1).

Occasionally, individuals such as Dick find themselves experiencing this gestalt switch. The result is a transformative experience that is the basis for a definition of mysticism as it emerges in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Worth mentioning here is a text that Dick encounters as early as 1975 and finds useful for understanding his experience: Richard Maurice Bucke’s Cosmic Consciousness.This book and term show up persistently in many conversations about religion, spirituality, and science.24Cosmic Consciousnessis, in many respects, the first extensive comparative study of mystical experience. As was true for Dick, Bucke’s experience of this gestalt switch, which he calls cosmic consciousness, prompts him to conduct a comparative study of similar experiences and provides a reference point for considering this mode of consciousness in evolutionary terms.

Bucke’s cosmic consciousness experience occurred after an evening reading Whitman. On his way home, a “flame-colored cloud” enveloped him which he quickly realized “was within himself.”25The experience produced a realization:
Like a flash there is presented to his consciousness a clear conception (a vision) in outline of the meaning and drift of the universe. He does not come to believe merely; but he sees and knows that the cosmos, which to the self conscious mind seems made up of dead matter, is in fact far otherwise—is in very truth a living presence.26
The term “cosmic consciousness” is a connection between scale, science, and the gestalt change discussed by Dick, suggesting an awareness of the highest scale at which reality is really Whole: “Especially does he obtain such a conception of THE WHOLE  .  .  . as dwarfs all conception, imagination or speculation, springing from and belonging to ordinary self consciousness.”27Here we run directly into the connection between scale and, following William James’s and Evelyn Underhill’s citations of Bucke, what has been designated mysticism. Is this not the major provocation of Dick’s invocation of divine names? What if mysticism emerges in the description of an experience of this object contingency and the manifestation of a Wholeness gestalt?
Quantum Theory Lost in the Continuum Invasion
But what is this notion of the Whole or One? I am struck by the persistence with which any suggestion of monism, unity, or wholeness is disavowed within both academic work and popular culture (cue the signature hippie characterization: “It’s all one, man!”). The same reaction usually arises when attempting to take Dick’s experience seriously. As British philosopher Arthur Lovejoy once wrote, “That it should afford so many people a peculiar satisfaction to say that All is One is, as William James once remarked, a rather puzzling thing.”28
Indeed, James, in the lecture “The One and the Many,” suggests that this “One” might be nothing more than a kind of number worship, partially because “it is so difficult to see definitely what absolute oneness can mean.”29He acknowledges that “to interpret absolute monism worthily, be a mystic,” but then, true to his disclaimer in Varieties of Religious Experiencethat he is not a mystic, he suggests that we “leave then out of consideration for the moment the authority which mystical insights may be conjectured eventually to possess; treat the problem of the One and the Many in a purely intellectual way; and we see clearly enough where pragmatism stands.”30Thus, he pushes against the notion of the One in favor of pragmatic pluralism. Insofar as considerations of Oneness or Wholeness arise today, this maneuver has become standard, partially because, in one sense, James is right: without scale it is difficult to see what absolute Oneness might mean. Scale makes this Oneness clearer and helps us see how its disavowal or avoidance serves to confuse our attempts to understand some aspects of our situation. I want to make the nature and cost of this disavowal or avoidance clear by dwelling further on quantum theory. While Dick only occasionally muses on QT, it provides us one site for considering the difficulties of developing these more modern, more precise articulations.31
