Ultimately, you do not need QT to get to Wholeness and this view of objects. This is quantum theorist Jean Bricmont’s primary critique of the frequently invoked connection between QT and mysticism: nonlocality proves Wholeness just as much as Newtonian gravity does.32Agreed. However, if we go a bit further into QT, particularly Bohm’s theory, we can locate the ways our assumptions about objects manifest. In Bohm’s case, it is essential that his interpretation is an ontological interpretation of QT. What does this mean? As Bohm explains in his final book, with Basil Hiley, the problem is that subatomic quanta are statistical and therefore incapable of providing a straightforward ontological interpretation; it is unclear what these mathematical descriptions are actually about.33What does a Schrodinger wave function (which is used to describe a quantum system) have to do with these subatomic objects (such as electrons)? Bohr’s and Heisenberg’s much discussed limitations (uncertainty and complementarity) are epistemological statements: they are about whether we can know about both the position and momentum of an electron. They provide “a limitation on the possible accuracy and relevance of our knowledge of the observed system” (14). The difficulty arises when we start speaking of the limit of knowledge ontologically, as if our (in)ability to know an aspect means that these objects do or do not have them. The problem is that complementarity is “taken not as a purely epistemological limitation on our knowledge, but also as an ontological limitation on the possibility of defining the state of being of the observed system itself” (14). This is the problem with the common way of speaking of Schrodinger’s cat: the assumption that perception must occur for the cat to be dead or alive is to mix up the epistemological (something comes to know the position of the quantum entity) and the ontological (the status of the quantum particle). Bohm and Hiley argue that this is a “taking the concept of quantum state too literally” (19). Why would something (usually a human) have to observe the quantum state to give it one? This generates the most problematic (and noticeably New Age) interpretations of QT: the idea that observing makes it so. This is to take the epistemological as ontological.

An ontological interpretation of QT, argue Bohm and Hiley, would separate out these epistemological limits from the ontological in order to define what can be said about reality at this scale. However, this turn to the ontological comes with an essential caveat: it is not something knowingthat produces the attributes at this scale but rather the system as a whole.At first Bohm and Hiley are diplomatic about this point, calling it the “wholeness of the entire system going beyond anything that can be specified solely in terms of the actual spatial relationships of all the particles” (58). The more radical conclusion is that this “entire system” is, in principle, the whole universe (see 352–53). In other words, the condition of moving to an ontological interpretation is that the object is not treated in itself at all, but rather as a point of consideration within the entire configuration of the Cosmos. An electron can be said to have determinable attributes only in reference to the “unbroken whole.”34
In practice, one does not need to consider the whole universe, for reasons that “scale analysis” as a method makes clear (see 5.11): within any given scale domain there are thresholds of relevance that permit us to functionally delimit what is relevant for an object. Even though an electron in the Andromeda galaxy affects one in my hand, this connection is usually negligible.35Although this produces grounds for delimiting relevance, this does not mean that these objects exist in themselves. To the contrary, Bohm’s interpretation suggests that such constraints are themselves nonlocal: they depend on things that exceed the object to which the attributes are ascribed. From a fully scalar perspective, this is like noting that the electrons here have some relationship with the Milky Way. Of course they do; they are two resolutions looking at the same thing (see 1.20). But attributes able to be meaningfully assigned to the Milky Way will differ from those that can be assigned to electrons.

Undoubtedly, there is more to the story than I could provide here and, as Bohm and Hiley insist, there will continue to be more “depth and subtlety of laws and processes” as we continue to understand the scales below the atomic (see 319–21). My purpose is not to recount the debate about QT but to clarify the role of interpretative preferences in handling a scalar situation. If we read Bohm’s interpretation of QT as being partially about a willingness to understand the basis of an object in reference to the larger whole, then such a maneuver requires a setting aside of this basic assumption derived from nonscalar experience: that the world must be made of discrete units. For Bohm this is a habit of interpretation, which treats everything as fragmented in advance, “a largely unconscious habit of confusion around the question of what is different and what is not. So, in the very act in which we try to discover what to do about fragmentation, we will go on with this habit, and thus will tend to introduce further forms of fragmentation.”36Bohm notes, with irony, that “in the study of life and mind, which are just the fields in which formative cause acting in undivided and unbroken flowing movement is most evident to experience and observation, there is now the strongest belief in the fragmentary, atomistic approach to reality.”37
We often see remnants of this belief in the humanities when QT is invoked for philosophical ends. We can examine this habitual fragmentation in two recent invocations of QT: Karen Barad’s agential realism and Timothy Morton’s use of Bohm to describe what he calls “hyperobjects.” Both Morton’s and Barad’s projects overlap with many of the conclusions I present here, but each manifests a kind of allergy toward the notion of Wholeness. They thus serve as exemplary ways of reasserting the language of fragmentation even when pointing to interconnection. While Barad doesn’t insist objects are separate, she ignores the potential holistic aspects of her articulation, covering over the underlying unity with the ambiguous notion of the apparatus, and conflating epistemology and ontology. While Morton separates ontology and epistemology, he does so by insisting that objects are separate and thereby denying these aspects of Wholeness even as he points to interconnection and scalar objects.

Barad’s “agential realism” uses her detailed knowledge of QT and Niels Bohr to generalize Bohr’s complementarity of apparatus and object—the notion that attributes of an object are tied to the apparatus used to observe it.38While Bohr limits complementarity to the epistemological situation of the laboratory, Barad generalizes the notion of the apparatus to any material configuration that “enacts a cut” by encountering reality (142). This generalized apparatus allows her to extend an epistemological observation into what she calls an onto-epistemological position: apparatuses don’t merely come to know but performatively co-constitute the things they are coming to know (185).

My impression is that much of Barad’s account could square with Bohm’s but that some important differences arise, specifically in the attempt to avoid appearing to take a mystical or holistic position.39Thus, in a footnote on Bohm, Barad states:
There is an important difference between Bohrian “holism” and Bohmian holism. Bohm’s theory involves a radical holism; everything matters (owing to the radical nonlocality), like traditional holism. By contrast, for Bohr, if one wants to apply the term “holism” at all  .  .  . it must be understood that holism is about (specific) differences (and specific connectivities) that matter—differences within oneness, rather than oneness as a seamless, all-encompassing whole. (459)
The difference here can be understood in terms of how one defines a “system.” When Bohr speaks of a “whole system” he means all aspects of relevance for determining the attributes of a subatomic object. Bohr aimed to bring together the object and the observing apparatus, which was traditionally separate within classical physics. Thus, Bohr emphasizes the unity between the apparatus and object as one undivided system. For Bohm, however, Bohr’s “whole system” is not a whole at all but rather a subset of the Whole that has been delimited within the epistemological situation of the laboratory. In reality, attributes of a subatomic particle exceed this limited situation and may have thresholds of relevance—that is, attributes such as position—before the observation.40When Bohm separates these epistemological issues from the ontological ones, he avoids the problematic and ambiguous notion of the “observer,” which only approaches being unambiguous in controlled laboratory situations. For Bohm, the significant implications of QT—including the nonseparation of any “apparatus” and object—arise in how these “attributes” of subatomic particles require reference to that which exceeds them.41Thus, Bohm’s articulation is also about “differences within oneness” but in a more complete sense—as the many differences that might affect any “object,” including but not only those in a definable apparatus. Thus, the difference between Bohr’s and Bohm’s holisms would be better articulated as epistemological holism (Bohr), a focus on the unity between what is involved in the act of knowing; and ontological holism (Bohm), the unity of all objects which express differently in an ontological sense depending on their configuration within the whole.

When Barad generalizes Bohr’s philosophy she critiques Bohr’s focus on epistemology as inherently anthropocentric and suggests that he “mistakes the apparatus for a mere laboratory setup.”42However, Bohr’s notion of the “apparatus” as a definable entity relies on this limited setup, tied to epistemological questions. Otherwise, as in Bohm’s account, one must speak about the Whole as the system out of which all potential differences might come to bear on any given “object,” subatomic or otherwise. In other words, to make this move to ontology, the system must be expanded indefinitely. Yet, Barad moves Bohr’s epistemological statements into ontology, from the lab to all interactions, while avoiding Bohm’s more “radical holism.” Doing so creates three major problems. First, it retains this confusion about knowing and being, which gives too much power to appearances and attributes arising from an epistemological process. This confusion stems from this expanded notion of the apparatus, which, second, only increases the ambiguity of the “observer.” Finally, these two attributes allow her to simultaneously affirm and deny the existence of boundaries between “things.” Take, for example, the following passage:
Bohr argues against the Cartesian presupposition that there is an inherent boundary between observer and observed, knower and known. That boundary is differently articulated depending on the specific configuration of the apparatus and its corresponding embodiment of particular concepts to the exclusion of others. That is, the object and the agencies of observation are co-constituted through the enactment of a cut that depends on the specific embodiment of particular human concepts. (154)
Like Bohr, Barad is suggesting that at the quantum scale one cannot look at objects as inherently separate from the observer. But while Bohm’s ontological interpretation would drop this “from the observer” and say that “one cannot look at objects as inherently separate,” for Barad, the term “apparatus” preserves this ambiguous entity. This leads Barad to develop a language that indulges the residual habit of fragmentation as these agencies actually “enact a cut.”43In trying to emphasize the ontological nature of these apparatuses, Barad then situates them as material or “physical arrangements”:
Apparatuses are not Kantian conceptual frameworks; they are physical arrangements. And phenomena do not refer merely to perception of the human mind; rather, phenomena are real physical entities or beings (though not fixed and separately delineated things). Hence I conclude that Bohr’s framework is consistent with a particular notion of realism, which is not parasitic on subject-object, culture-nature, and word-world distinctions. (129)
In arguing that apparatuses are inherently physical entities, Barad emphasizes separation, isolation, and cuts in the very argument about nonseparation and entanglement. Thus, while she argues at one point that “separability is not inherent or absolute, but intra-actively enacted relative to specific phenomena” (339), she nonetheless retains a different, agential yet ontological separability: “What replaces  .  .  . spatial separability as the ontological condition for objectivity is agential separability—an agentially enacted ontological separability within phenomena” (175). Thus, in Barad’s extension of Bohr’s language, the apparatus is treated as a site of ontological fragmentation. The question will arise: how do you cut the apparatus from the rest of being? By another apparatus? And we have again Zeno’s regress unless we follow Bohm’s answer: even the apparatus does not exist independently from the Whole. But this final move is the one Barad avoids in dismissing Bohm as a “radical holism.”
The difficulty with Barad’s apparatus is mirrored in Timothy Morton’s relationship with objects. Morton’s work is situated within philosophies that explicitly focus on objects, treating objects as “real entities whose primordial reality is withdrawn from humans.”44This approach inverts the problem just identified in Barad: what determines what an object is? How do we handle the fact that, in scaling, the same object becomes another object? What Morton calls “hyperobjects” are essentially scalar objects; they are “things that are massively distributed in time and space relative to humans” (1). In general, his descriptions of hyperobjects provides an insightful phenomenology of scale. Yet because of his philosophy of objects, Morton is unable to clarify the bewildering nature of these objects. While he says that “we are inside them,” the commitment to the preexistence of objects leads to a confusing and rather dark articulation (20). He argues that “what the ecological thought must do, then, is unground the human by forcing it back onto the ground, which is to say, standing on a gigantic object called Earthinside a gigantic entity called biosphere” (18). And yet, in humiliating this human, he positions the situation as the inaccessibility of a spectral entity: “The gaps and ruptures are simply the invisible presenceof the hyperobject itself, which looms around us constantly” (76).

I’d argue that we have here again a case of an epistemological limitation being confused with an ontological inaccessibility: just because you can’t know something doesn’t mean that this thing preexists in itself as a separate, forever-withdrawing object. Interestingly, this confusion arises in Morton’s interpretation of Bohm. He is rightly excited that Bohm’s ontological interpretation “takes Bohr’s ‘indivisibility’ to pertain to objects beyond (human cognition)” (43). But, true to the allergy toward Wholeness, Morton immediately suggests that “according to the Bohmian view, you aren’t part of a larger whole. Everything is enfolded in everything as ‘flowing movement’” (14). It is unclear how Morton can suppose that Bohm holds this position given everything Bohm states explicitly in Wholeness and the Implicate Order.It seems to me that you can’t, as Morton would have it, have your interconnection and fragment it too—unless you scale. And when you scale, you acknowledge that difference, the very grounds used to designate these objects as things to be in themselves, is not set in place in one way in advance. You can’t designate this vast interconnection a “mesh,” declare that this mesh arises from a viewing from a larger perspective, anddeny the Wholeness aspects: “It’s strictly impossible to equate this total interconnectedness  .  .  . with something beyond us or larger than us. Total interconnectedness isn’t holistic.”45But what is this total interconnectedness other than viewing things according to their function within the Whole?
We are not only inside hyperobjects, we are those objects already;and everything we know and feel and are already is, in certain ways, a part of those objects. The affect here changes significantly. This is the whole gist of the turn to mysticism: there is quite a different affect associated with the great Upanishadic mantra, tat tvam asi—you are that!—in contrast with Morton’s “claustrophobic horror of actually being inside it.”46Both connect the vast to the here—all of this is also Brahman, the Whole—but one recoils in horror from this configuration while the other embraces it and reworks one sense of self around this new perspective.

One/Many, True/False: Rediscovering the Difference in Plato’s Sophist
