And yet, there is an understandable and intuitive reaction to these statements of Wholeness or Oneness. As one recent philosopher put it, “For if being is one, then one must posit that what is not one, the multiple, is not.But this is unacceptable for thought, because what is presented is multiple and one cannot see how there could be an access to being outside all presentation.”47The concreteness of the world beckons! Look at all these objects! If everything is indeed One, then how do we find ourselves with the many? Thus, scale’s counterintuitive nature arises again in this push beyond a nonscalar objects-based lifeworld that we so concretely interact with. In this variant of the attempt to kick a stone as refutation, scale offers a provocation: ah, Dr. Johnson, do you kick a pile of atoms, the Earth, or the Cosmos itself?
Provocations aside, clearly the basic question must be reiterated: even if we accept the One-Whole-All as a legitimate articulation, how do we arrive at this apparent many? Ogling the multifarious scalar forms, we can wonder: how is this multiple not just one multiple but many different multiples at once depending on how we look at it? On what grounds are scale domains produced and transformed again across scalar thresholds such that this concrete world manifests in multiple multiples?
It is worth returning to Plato’s articulation, since Plato is often cited for his attempts to move from Parmenides’s One to allow some notion of the many. For example, Lovejoy’s classic Great Chain of Beingsuggests that Plato’s move from the One to the Many is a contradiction that he calls the “principle of plentitude”: that, in order for the All to really be all, it must also include the Many.48Rather than examining the simple yet profound logic of this statement, Lovejoy declares that Plato took literally a naive statement from “common speech  .  .  . that it takes all kinds to make the world.”49Lovejoy argues that Plato ultimately provides a “combination [that] may seem to many modern ears unconvincing and essentially verbal, and its outcome no better than a contradiction.”50However, Plato’s argument in the Timaeusfits with our account of the All in 3.38. Plato’s formula “that the Whole may be All” (41c) uses for “All” the word hapas,an intensification of pan,variously translated as “absolute all” or “whole.” If Timaeus is going to describe this universe, the ordered All, then he must not leave anything out. If anything is left out then it is not hapas,the Whole-All.

While Lovejoy examines the Timaeus,Plato’s Sophistcouches the movement from the One to the Many in the terms introduced already by Dick and Hussey: what is to on,“that which is”? Usefully, the Sophistsituates this discussion within the dialectic between the idealist and materialist positions (see 246a-c) and the questions about Being and Becoming following Parmenides.51At the same time, the Sophistclarifies the stakes of this philosophical discussion by positioning it within an attempt to define the infamous sophist—the name given for the controversial teachers proclaiming to teach wisdom, rhetorical prowess, and statesmanship. In trying to define the sophist, Plato notes that a sophist might use Parmenides’s argument to defend his sophistry: if we can never speak of “what is not,” as Parmenides argues, then how could anyone claim that what sophists say is not true and that they are not truly purveyors of wisdom as they profess to be? After all, what they say, properly speaking, is. “It’s extremely hard,” says the visitor who has come to discover the sophist with Theaetetus, “to say what form of speech we should use to say that there really is such a thing as false saying or believing” (236e). Surely, to say that anything is an appearance, an illusion, or in any way false, one must have a clear idea of what kind of being a false thing is and how it relates to this to on.

Plato’s solution to this problem of appearance is notto deny the One-Whole-All. Despite a joke about committing patricide of their “father” Parmenides, Plato’s interlocutors follow Parmenides’s separation of Form I and Form II, albeit with a particular account of how one moves from “that which is” to “that which is not,” that is, that which only “seems to be” or is false. His solution is simple: “that which is not” (to me on)is not a negation of “that which is” (to on)but rather is a particular formof “that which is.” The essential maneuver is to examine the nature of difference: if one can admit, to any degree, difference to be a part of “what is,” then you find yourself with a role for “that which is not.”
Plato’s major departure from Parmenides is that he allows motion and change into the cosmos. But to do so, he only needs his interlocutors to acknowledge what we acknowledged at 4.2: that “that which is” is not entirely without grounds for differentiation within itself, whether we call this “fluctuation,” “motion,” “energy,” or something else. In this case, Plato’s evidence that to onis not absolutely immovable is the existence of psukhē(mind or soul), nöos(mind or understanding), and zōēn(life) (249a). In other words, because anything appears at all and things appear to change or grow, somekind of grounds for differentiation is part of what is. But how does this differentiation relate to this One?
As we noted in 4.1–3 about fluctuation, even motion and rest imply “the different” and “the same” (255a). Ultimately, the different has to share with all of these possible categories (“what is”; “what is not”; motion; rest; difference), since difference is required to differentiate them. Here, the different is not a thing but a type—an idea:“we’re going to say that [the different] pervades all of them, since each of them is different from the others, not because of its own nature but because of sharing in the type [idea] of the different” (255e). Here is the crucial distinction: things differentiate not because they are different by their own nature but because one can apply the possibility of differentiation to them. This difference introduces a “that which is not” within“that which is” precisely because it distinguishes it out of the Whole: “So it has to be possible for that which is notto be.  .  .  . That’s because  .  .  . the nature of the differentmakes each of them not be by making it different from that which is. And we’re going to be right if we say that all of them are notin the same way. And on the other hand, we’re also going to be right if we call them beings, because they have a share in that which is” (256b). Such differentiation positions one part of what is in relation to another part of what is, marking off certain things and providing them with names as a “sort of setting of being over against a being” (257e). In a more general sense, “since we showed that the nature of the differentis, chopped up among all beings in relation to each other, we dared to say that which is notreally is just this, namely, each part of the nature of the different that’s set over against that which is” (258d-e). Is this not already what scale changes demonstrate: that reality finds itself distinguishable in different ways whenever any portion of itself encounters another portion? The to me on(not-being) does not enter into being itself qua hapas(Whole-All), but in the way that parts of reality are put up against each other.

Plato gives four sites where this setting of being against being occurs: first, at 260e, speech (logos), belief (doxa), and appearance (phantasia)—to which he, at 263e, adds thought (dianoia). Each of these is a site for differentiation,where a part of what is interacts with another part of what is to produce a difference that can make a difference. Plato has the visitor focus on speech, noting that its relational structure is clear—“it has to be about something” (262e). He argues that the others “are all the same kind of thing as speech” (264b), since each is a way that “that which is” sets itself against itself, permitting a kind of marking off or a chopping into bits via differentiation.52Here, I would suggest that Plato is recognizing a problem of logical typing (see 3.6), or what Ryle calls a “category mistake.”53We provide a name—“that which is”—and then assume that “that which is not” is inherently its opposite. But what if “that which is not”—the true/false dichotomy as we usually conceive of it—is not the same kind of thing as the One-Whole-All of Being itself? The problem is that logos(whether translated as “speech,” “accounting,” or “reason”) is aboutsomething else other than itself but which is still part of the same Being; it is one part of reality put in relation to another part of reality. This is to say that speech is semiotic in character: it picks some “thing,” for example, a sound wave or a mark on paper, and that thing is put in reference to another thing.

The essential leap is that appearance too is grouped together with language, thought, and belief. This is the more significant move that subsequent philosophy helps us make sense of: when Kant asserts that there are a priori categories of reason that construct experience, he is pointing to how the differentiating process of perception requires certain selections of qualia and forms. In turn, when Charles Sanders Peirce first outlines his theory of signs, he conceptualizes this theory as a new set of categories in this Kantian sense.54Peirce’s Kantian yet semiotic categories bring our conception of appearance in line with our conception of language in just the way that Plato was already experimenting with in the Sophist.That is, even perception or appearance takes on a semiotic character; for example, a light pattern is taken by the brain to be grounds for differentiation for the production of experience. In this account, differentiation is already a logical type above Being (that which is) because it is about Being—it is a selection of differences that come together to produce perception by setting a portion of Being against Being.

This setting of a part of Being against another part generates the Many as a realm of differentiation and provides means whereby one might assert truth and falsity within the Many. This account does not preclude forms of epistēmē(practical knowledge) but rather points to how we need to augment such knowledge with a systematic accounting of that differentiation. Scale is one way we trace out and make consistent the differentiations made in perception, thought, belief, and language.55Modern science attempts to more thoroughly prod the possible ways of differentiating reality using new technologies of perception and experiments designed to separate and identify possible grounds for differentiation. These tracings are necessary for combating the kind of scrambling of differences exemplified by the Sophists, which we see today in “post-truth” public discourse. But science is nonetheless a form of knowledge that deals with the Many; its truth is about and within the possibilities and layers of differentiation. If we assume otherwise, we find ourselves with a problem: do we then acknowledge that even these perceptions of the world require a selection of the mode of differentiation? Will we be open to this persistent re-differentiation? The key element here in recognizing this differentiating process is aporia,the sense of not-knowing: to recognize this configuration, the interlocutors must first work themselves into an uncertainty (aporia) about what exactly we might mean by these words “that which is” and “that which is not.”56In this aporia,Plato points to another kind of knowing, not epistēmē,but gnosis:“Some imitators know [oida] what they’re imitating and some don’t. And what division is more important than the one between ignorance [agnosis] and knowledge [gnosis]?” (267c). The knowledge and ignorance of gnosisis about whether or not one knows the nature of these imitations and differentiations. Gnosisis the apprehension of the whole situation in which the different is drawn out from and within what is. Without gnosis,we risk assuming that the tracking of the possible differentiations within the Many (e.g., in science) is the acquiring of gnosisrather than epistēmē.As such, the truth-seeking of science and the truth-seeking of gnostic practices are fundamentally different operations.

It is in the context of gnosisthat we find the rhetorical weight of the declaration that “all is an illusion.” This mystical injunction is not of the same logical type as the operations of science but is rather an attempt to get one to observe this larger differentiating process whereby anything at all is able to be discerned. In the Sophist,Plato may avoid this larger point by suggesting that there are “things themselves” that are then copied naturally in dreams and appearances (266c).57However, articulating the situation in terms of copies and appearances points to an enduring trope of this more general maneuver as exemplified in the final lines of the Diamond Sutra:
A shooting star, a clouding of the sight, a lamp,
An illusion, a drop of dew, a bubble,
A dream, a lightning’s flash, a thunder cloud—
This is the way one should see the conditioned.58
All of these phenomena are fleeting, deceptive, or somehow confused. What if these phenomena bring our attention to something more general about the differentiation process already being undertaken to generate any objects at all?
Ponderability and Substance beyond the Human
What Dick experienced and what scale has brought us to is this simple fact: there are no objects, properly speaking “in themselves.” However, Bohm’s ontological argument, Dick’s experience, and our zeroing out between scales all point to a reality “in itself”—what Kant calls the noumenon—that is not exclusive or reliant on one-who-experiences. However, this noumenon does not and cannot exist as anything less than the One-Whole-All. Kant confuses this point by speaking of an “in itself” for objects:
I do not mean to say that these objects are a mere illusion. For in an appearance the objects, nay even the properties we ascribe to them, are always regarded as something actually given. Since, however, in the relation of the given object to the subject, such properties depend upon the mode of intuition of the subject, this object as appearanceis to be distinguished from itself as object in itself.59
