To avoid this possibility of objects being illusions, Kant relies on the fact that objects are “regarded as” given. Doing so leads him to distinguish between appearance and the “in itself” as both applied to presupposed objects. In turn, Kant banishes any access to this “in itself,” thereby opening the possibility that objects exist in themselves while nonetheless remaining inaccessible.

To untangle this confusion we should again be wary of blending epistemological limits and ontological foundations. Following Bohm and Plato, we can say that the grounds of differentiation can exist in what is, to on.The perception of such grounds, however, requires situating one part of reality with another. This process creates a subject-object configuration. It is only if we preserve any “in themselves” for either subject or object that we would assume that the illusory and dependent nature of objects means that they are somehow created by the subject. Quantum physicists are not conjuring up quarks with no basis outside their brains (a possibility that assumes a great deal about subjectivity and human beings); they have developed complex apparatuses for identifying a difference discernible in Being under certain conditions. However, neither the apparatus nor the object exists “in itself.” Again, we can invoke the essential scalar point: if a different set of differences are selected, atoms will appear—or cells or bodies. Do these differences belong to a pre-given object? If so, which one—the quark, atom, cell, or body? Properly speaking, then, the “in itself” as grounds of differentiation belongs to the Whole, not as Whole (hapas), but as differences that are, in Bohm’s terms, nonlocal properties discerned within it through an implicate ordering.

Therefore, the “in itself” will never appear as an object. But how then will it appear? Even though Kant denies it is possible, Dick nonetheless experienced the constructed nature of these categories. Dick understood this point quite well: “Perhaps you see Kosmos—continuum—when the Kantian categories go because space, like time and causation, is one of them; .  .  .  I’m saying that all three go: time, certainly; that most of all.  .  .  . And also space: discrete plurality gives way to unity because ‘space’ equals ‘void’ and is a Kantian category, which is to say ‘discontinuous matter’ is connected with these categories and is false” (55:1). But, logically, if the categories fall away then so does experience. How could one experience the falling away of experience?
By examining the process of observation itself. Here we can turn to the American philosopher Franklin Merrell-Wolff, who was a careful reader and practitioner of not only Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism but also Kant.60When describing his “ineffable transition,” he speaks of “abstract[ing] the subjective moment  .  .  . from the totality of the objective consciousness manifold.”61In other words, he was able to separate awareness itself from any content or object produced for it. Merrell-Wolff analyzes this abstracting process in relation to Kant’s categories, arguing that this was, properly speaking, notan experience in the Kantian sense, since any experience requires a priori categories. In such an encounter, Merrell-Wolff argues, subject and object drop away, but not merely as a blacking out of awareness but as pure awareness without content. Thus, he calls this state “consciousness-without-an-object.”62While we usually think of consciousness as always “consciousness of,” this presumes that the attribute of awareness can only be ascribed to objects within consciousness.63But what if one becomes aware of the fact of consciousness itself apart from any object that can serve as content for it?64
The result is a kind of zeroing out best expressed by the Buddhist term śūnyata,emptiness.65One might think that śūnyatais contrary to our discussion above about to on.However, Nāgārjuna’s defense of śūnyatain The Middle Wayarticulates something quite similar. Consider the following verse: “If something that is non-empty (aśūnyam) existed, then something that is empty (śūnyam)might also exist. Nothing whatsoever exists that is non-empty; then how will the empty come to exist?”66This argument is a mirrored version of the argument about Being. Śūnyamimplies that a thing does not have an “in itself” because it lacks stability and is dependent on something else both for its origination and its perception. Thus, Nāgārjuna states “Dependent origination we declare to be emptiness.”67Similarly, Nāgārjuna uses the term svabhāva—literally, “one’s own being”—to argue the same: “But how could there ever be an intrinsic nature [svabhāva] that is a product? For intrinsic nature is not adventitious, nor is it dependent on something else.”68If we admit that anything is empty in this way, then we have to ask: what thing is not empty? Is there any “thing” that doesn’t pass away or require something else for its origination or observation?
Thus, consciousness-without-an-object is a not-knowing and a non-experience in the Kantian sense that is best expressed as emptiness.69Crucially, śūnyatadoes not itself exist as an attribute among other attributes of things. Rather, śūnyatais another rhetorical device for orienting us to our situation, focused on the habitual way we treat objects as real. If we treat a term like śūnyataas an idea or category of reason, like Plato’s difference or Kant’s a priori, we miss the point: “Emptiness is taught by the conquerors as the expedient to get rid of all views. But those for whom emptiness is a view have been called incurable.”70Instead, the entire operation is a negation of anyobject of consciousness so that one moves from the Many to the Whole, from any content of hapasto a complete zeroing out of the sense that any thing has intrinsic reality.

The result is that one comes to see objects as a hypostatization. Hypostasismeans “setting under.” In Plotinus the term is used for those ways that Being manifests that are grounded within this Being—the One, the Nous (intellect), and the Soul.71The term can be used in this positive sense for ways in which things are undergirded by substance—as when Dick says that “since creation is a hypostasis of God  .  .  . one should look for beauty in it, as manifestations of the divine” (91:J-89; 755). But this definition leads to a negative meaning: that these things are notthe substance, and hypostatization is the attempt to grant substantial status to what lacks intrinsic nature. Thus, in an earlier passage, Dick says that
in 3-74 I stopped hypostatizing, and there lay the divine stuff in place ofeverything. The theywere gone: the itshone through. From what had been high, low, me, not me, small, large, important, trivial. Liberation, not theoretical but actual. This is the universe organism which I perceived to be the macrocosm—alive and unitary. (24:1; 217)
Here, hypostatization means to consider things as real, to ascribe them an “in themselves.” Siderits and Katsura use hypostatization in this way in translating the following Nāgārjuna verse: “Liberation is attained through the destruction of actions and defilements; actions and defilements arise because of falsifying conceptualizations; Those arise from hypostatization; but hypostatization is extinguished in emptiness.”72Here, actions (karma)and defilements (kleśa,variously distress or affliction) arise through vikalpa,a distinction or difference in perception that, in texts such as Nāgārjuna’s, also comes to mean falsity. Hypostatization is a translation of prapañca,the reification of the diversity of phenomena or excessive (investment in) wordiness.73In other words, distress arises from taking one’s distinctions as reality. This, in turn, is extinguished in śūnyata.

Merrell-Wolff sums up this situation with the formula “substantiality is inversely proportional to ponderability.”74“Substance” here means “the substrate underlying all experience, which is not itself a direct object of experience” precisely because experience must select differences out of which to render experience.75The things most concretely before us—for example, these books, chairs, foods, other people—are those most saturated with differential forms and weight and therefore most removed from substance. To rewrite this field of awareness in terms of cells or galactic events, we have to decrease this ponderability (what we described at 1.27 and 2.9 as a zeroing out). Yet this scalar operation creates new kinds of ponderability. Thus, even though these scalar objects are less ponderable than the immediate sense-world, they are still not substance. At the same time, Merrell-Wolff argues that “there is nothing in this to invalidate the positive findings of natural science,” only that it reorients our relationship to them.76This view suggests that “the objective world  .  .  . is a precipitate from Consciousness in its most comprehensive sense, but it is only partly determinedby perceptual and conceptual consciousness.”77The very partiality of the perception produces the sense of an outside, since only a portion of what is is brought into the perception and conception. In actuality, this independence ought to be conceived “as negation instead of positive actualities.” Only then, suggests Merrell-Wolff, can we “proceed with the systematic development of either a science or a philosophy.”78In turn, “none of this implies that experience is wholly without value but its value is symbolic and instrumental.” Science can proceed for the purposes of epistēmē,as long as we understand its relation to this other form of knowledge and truth (more on science in chapter 10).

In contrast, gnosisis what Dick intuited through a crucial kind of surrender: the surrender of hypostatization or the habit of division itself.79Thus, in the regressing object-world of Ubik,Joe Chip only finds Ubik when he gives up, sitting on a park bench and releasing “some of his vast inertial weight.”80Similarly, Grote, the philosopher trapped in the Zeno’s paradox chamber, must give up before he can escape: “how long would it be? .  .  .  Suddenly a terror rushed through him. ‘Maybe I shouldn’t figure it out.’”81In turn, Dick experiences over and over again these moments where he, too, gives up—but not for despair but toward this larger gnosis:“I give up. Its hold was broken over me in 3-74—Salvation is real” (21:17; 416).

Toward an Informational Ontology
How, then, are we to describe objects?
Dick will throw into the mix the final provocation of this chapter: the assertion, first published in the novel VALIS,that “The universe is information.”82Not only this, but objects are specifically hypostatizations of this substance now called information: “We have hypostatized information into objects.”83What does this mean?
We can start from the point discovered in 1.19: that objects are those differences that are able to make a difference at a particular range of observation. If we combine this with Bateson’s definition of information as a “difference that makes a difference,” then we seem to be implying that objects are, properly speaking, information. Why has scale led us here, and what does it imply? Let’s consider more closely Bateson’s definition:
Kant argued long ago that this piece of chalk contains a million potential facts (Tatsachen)  .  .  . but that only a very few of these become truly facts by affecting the behavior of entities capable of responding to facts. For Kant’s Tatsachen,I would substitute differencesand point out that the number of potentialdifferences in this chalk is infinite but that very few of them become effectivedifferences (i.e. items of information) in the mental process of any larger entity. Informationconsists of differences that make a difference.84
Bateson uses the example of running one’s hand over a surface to identify a raised surface: information is provided by the signal of differences detected by the hand. He suggests that all senses work in similar ways, using different media to detect differences.85Later, Bohm adds to Bateson’s definition: “Information is a difference of form that makes a difference of content, i.e., meaning.”86But by “content” or “meaning” here, Bohm means the effect that a form will have—how it will “in-form” in the more literal sense of imparting form. He points, for example, to a radio wave: “The form in the radio wave thus literally ‘informs’ the energy in the receiver, i.e. puts its form into this energy, and this form is eventually transformed (which means ‘form carried across’) into related forms of sound and light.”87Both Bohm and Bateson suggest that this operation is far from an exceptional kind of thing, but exists anywhere we find patterning and the conveyance of structures of form. Thus, as further examples, Bohm discusses the aggregate behavior of electrons and Bateson discusses the repeated patterning of spirals in biology.88
This imparting of form might be read in relation to epistemology, that is, considering how differences function for a structure of mind. However, the observations about difference at 1.19 and 3.28 and Bohm’s ontological interpretation suggest that such differences might make a difference in a broader sense, with epistemology simply a special case of this information flow.89Objects become information in the sense that they are whatever can make a difference at a particular scale; they are what can pass along form as patterns of difference. In Bohm’s formulation, just as radio waves are passive (yet present) information that is only made active by the encounter with a receiver, there is passive information in any system that is made into active information by the energy of an object such as an electron.90In scalar terms, we might say that a water molecule does not make a difference at the scale of a meter because its form is too small to be transferred; it must come together into a larger form—the water in a glass, perhaps—to be a form that in-forms (or is in-formed by) the glass (see 6.18–19). Likewise, the human body shapes the formal arrangement of its aggregate cells and molecules, but it does not in-form the individual cells and molecules; this occurs in the interaction and structure where the whole “form” of the body is no longer directly available as a mode of differentiation. Undoubtedly, cross-scalar “information” exists, but it would have to be a product of pattern, which will always mean an aggregation of differences or a constraining of possibilities of differentiation (see 6.30–36).

