This conception of objects may seem to grant a kind of agency (as Barad does) or in itself (as Morton does) to these objects. We must tread carefully here: the passing of form isthe aspect that makes an object appear. Does this ability to in-form belong to a preexisting object? To the contrary, we can suggest that objects are signsof patterns of existence as they aggregate. Thus, second-order cyberneticist Heinz von Foerster defines objects as constraints arising due to eigenvalues. An “eigenvalue” or “eigenbehavior” is a stability that arises from combined or recursive values in vector mathematics. Foerster extends this mathematical term to any stabilities that arise from combined behavior.91Using 4.12, we could say that reality presents itself with emergent stabilities at a particular scale that are a result of activity of lower scales. An object exists in a seemingly external sense through this stability. Attributes then become linked with—further stabilized onto—an object as a sign of the capacity to work with particular differences (i.e., constraints) localized onto that object. Thus, Foerster describes “objects as signs, symbols, ‘tokens’ for eigenbehaviors.”92In this account, objects are information when portions of reality are gathered together and able to function as a unit.93Using this eigenbehavior, an object becomes a site for meaning when encountered by another unit capable of making this information active.94In the case of humans, the various patterns of difference in a sensory field combine with all of the patterns of difference of the body on multiple scales (bodily needs, social expectations, ecological pressure) to identify an object (e.g., an apple) as something of note and of a certain character and value. This is, in a sense, to entangle epistemology and ontology, but only insofar as one must have parameters for differences to make a difference. Once these parameters are selected, they are part of the ontological situation, but in a way that must also be distinguished carefully through a tracing of the epistemological configuration. This is what scale performs: it marks an epistemological configuration required for an ontological presentation so that we can say with some clarity what arises from what part of the configuration.

Dick notes that “our problem in distinguishing the structure stems from the fact that much of this information  .  .  . is not recognized by us as information at all” (55:41). Once we see this information aspect, we are able to view these objects as parts of a larger structure, arranged together in a form that arises from their role in the larger structure: “its structural basis—that is, it constitutes a unity—on the basis of information” (53:14). But again, Dick is not implying that objects are just what you make of them. If they were, then no description on other scales would be possible, since scale requires the rewriting of objects in your lifeworld. Instead, there is a disinhibition of the usual stance toward objects so that we are able to see these objects in relation to the total system:
What I saw about the external disinhibiting structure which evidently surrounds each human being  .  .  . was the utilization of every sort of datum, especially visual, so that when required that particular datum projected a signal  .  .  . which the intended person to be disinhibited received.  .  .  . The intended individual would experience a sudden transformation of the ground-set formation of the environment around him; one item would come forward, alter from ground and become set, then go back once more, to resume its passive or inert mode. (4:147; 70)
Observing our relations to objects is a way of tapping into and observing the structure of possible relevance encoded into any object. After all, why do certain objects become relevant? Or, even more, why does scale make new objects relevant in ways that they weren’t before? Consider, for instance, how “climate change” must conjure up a set of relations that reworks certain objects (your automobile) in relation to certain other objects (the hurricane hurtling toward the coast). Suddenly, we experience a “transformation of the ground-set formation of the environment” around us that takes the form of a cross-scalar relation. Such relevance requires a disinhibition to provide new room for this system of linking. Looking from one object (this hunk of metal that burns gas to move me around) to another (a chart showing carbon measurements), a new linkage and significance can be forged.

Ground-Set Disorder and Discovering the Conditions of Perception
But how do we arrive at this view of objects? Dick notes that “the information basis of reality became available to me, due to the meta-abstraction” (53:39). In turn, this notion of information helps us understand the meta-abstraction process performed by scale.

Bateson notes that “it takes at least two somethings to create a difference.”95He argues that overlaying two perspectives forms a logical typing, which produces new information about that information. For example, in order to produce binocular vision “the difference between the information provided by the one retina and that provided by the other is itself information of a different logical type. From this new sort of information, the seer adds an extra dimension to seeing.”96When we arrive at a new scale, just such an operation occurs. To consider the Cosmos as atoms or galaxies is to provide a second mode of vision, a whole new set of differences, that provides a new dimension to reality (see 2.5). This overlaying does not just provide multiple ways of dividing the Cosmos; it also, as we have shown throughout this chapter, provides a reflection on the very dividing process itself. Thus, while we undoubtedly can flesh out objects and relations at new scales, this new information about this differentiating process is always available as soon as we overlay any two of these perspectives. Hence, the basic provocation of this book functions by overlaying these perspectives within a single object: how is it possible that this body is both cells, galaxies, atoms, and a part of an ecology?
Here we have Dick’s “quantum leap in understanding,” which “involves a meta-abstraction” (55:41). There is a moment, in thinking about these layers of being, where we realize—
Wait a minute: I’m missing something terriblyimportant. In 2-74 I realized about the two coaxial worlds here sharing one space-time. In 3-74 I saw the set-ground; I then was discriminating the two worlds each from the other—and yet this was only an extension into particulars of the 2-74 meta-abstraction itself! The meta-abstraction was in itself a seeingof this; once the concept was there the rest did follow. (55:41)97
In binocular vision, this process of patching together these perceptions to create depth has been integrated into our perceptual-conceptual system. With scale, however, we find something new—an extension beyond this system of perception that is about this system. It provides new depth, but a depth that has to be integrated, properly understood, and adequately assimilated into our approach to the Cosmos. Hence, the radical reconfiguration that scale has launched us into.

Negation and Affirmation in the Microcosm
Dick makes this reorientation inherently personal. In this register, the One and Many might be more adequately articulated as the microcosm-macrocosm or the Atman and the Brahman. These distinctions are directly about the reconciliation of the personal (here) with the infinite One-Whole-All. In the continuum model, the undoing of our habit of division rewrites subject-object interactions within a scalar relationship: “and of course in kosmos—truly understood—the percipient is part of the structure, not outside it, and ideally shares in its mind.  .  .  . ‘inner-outer’ signify only ‘macro-micro’” (53:6). By relaxing this habit of division in relation the object-subject called “me,” objects themselves take on a different role and form: “a given object or event can play one role in our world [the discontinuous view] and quite another in thatworld [the continuum view]. In thatworld its role is one of pure function as part within one unitary integrated system: the part derives its identity, meaning, significance, and purpose fromthe total system, and, alone, signifies nothing at all” (53:14). Here, the Homo sapiensdoes not become the reference point within the Whole; rather, the Whole becomes the reference point of value for all objects, but only if you integrate yourself into itas part of the Whole.

In continuing to attend to his own scalar experience, Dick examines this mass of pages he has produced and declares:
I qua author am a function of it!I am a mouth piece for it.  .  .  . My corpus of writing is a true picture of the reality situation, since the macrobrain is the actual author. But the “audience” isn’t us here but the outside;then Zebra, the macrobrain (Logos) is in here, inside this “bubble” with us. Reporting back out to its source. Of course it’s here with us; I sawit; we’re init. (21:14–16; 416)
In making this statement, Dick is not asserting control but yielding it up: “Zebra continually guides (controls?) us as we move (are moved) through the ‘maze’ of life—disinhibited constantly and at the right time and place by the right signal” (25:11; 230). The negation of a negation, the selective undoing and remaking of divisions within the Cosmos becomes the very path of our way through the “maze of life.”
Thus, the most clearly scalar vision in Dick ends with a reconfiguration of control. In Divine Invasion,this “Hermetic transform” travels through this inner-outer Möbius strip:
By degrees, the transform took place. He saw outside him the pattern, the print, of his own brain; he was within a world made up of his brain, with living information carried here and there like little rivers of shining red that were alive.  .  .  . Meanwhile he introjected the outer world so that he contained it within him. He now had the universe inside him and his own brain outside everywhere. His brain extended into the vast spaces, far larger than the universe had been. Therefore, he knew the extent of all things that were himself, and because he had incorporated the world, he knew it and controlled it.98
To access this configuration, the character must mirror within himself the pattern of living information both within and without his brain. Within this introjection, understanding comes from converting the inner-outer into the micro-macro. In doing so, he ends with this sense that, having incorporated the world, he knows it and controls it. But this knowledge and control is now entirely different: one knows and controls it as the totality of that existence itself,not as the small-scale object in aHomo sapiens body.In other words, one knows and controls it because one is it. Such “Knowledge through Identity,” as Merrell-Wolff names it, emerges from a relaxing of the habit of division and the supposition that one (as body) controls or even is anything apart from the Whole.99
The control here is thus quite different from any human-based power, particularly the synecdoche that would claim the Whole for the human (see chapter 9). Rather than individual control, possession, or comprehension of objects, the end of a fragmented view permits us to work with those entities within the Whole. This, argues Bohm, is the ultimate result:
It is proposed that the widespread and pervasive distinctions between people (race, nation, family, profession, etc., etc.), which are now preventing mankind from working together for the common good, and indeed, even for survival, have one of the key factors of their origin in a kind of thought that treats thingsas inherently divided, disconnected, and “broken up” into yet smaller constituent parts.  .  .  . If he thinks of the totality as constituted of independent fragments, then that is how his mind will tend to operate, but if he can include everything coherently and harmoniously in an overall whole that is undivided, unbroken, and without a border  .  .  . then his mind will tend to move in a similar way, and from this will flow an orderly action within the whole.100
