As we hold these objects as real in-themselves, the forces of consumption and strife proliferate as we find ourselves struggling to hold on to these objects, acquire more, becoming jealous over what others have, and becoming confused by things that appear to be separate but are nonetheless intimately related. Dick’s Divine Invasiondramatizes this contrast between fragmentation and wholeness as a battle between good and evil: the expression of Belial takes the form of the “accuser,” the Jewish mystical name for Satan, which makes the characters see everything in their worst light. In a world of isolated objects, all regresses toward this dismal, fragmented sensibility. By contrast, Emmanuel, The Advocate, restores the sense of beauty to the world, allowing the individuals to appreciate what is already before them as a function of the Whole. Likewise, in our experience of scaling, these objects retreat, become small, are transformed but, most of all, are enmeshed with us in the larger Whole. Scale returns us there and requires this return if we are to permit this new configuration to truly in-form our sense of existence.8I Am the Transhuman CosmosScalar Configurations of SubjectsThe Vantage Point
Floating in the depths of space, Apollo astronaut Edgar Mitchell has a moment to pause and dwell on the view:
Then I looked beyond the earth itself to the magnificence of the larger scene, there was a startling recognition that the nature of the universe was not as I had been taught. My understanding of the separate distinctness and relative independence of movement of those cosmic bodies was shattered.1
This scalar vision connects this Homo sapiensto a being far greater than the limited flesh and bone of this body. The sentiment echoes like an intergalactic Thoreau remixed with Carl Sagan: The vast Cosmos! The actual universe! The common molecules! The exchange of starstuff! Contact! Contact! Who am I? Where am I?
In processing this dislocation, this disorientation provides a significant and powerful new reorientation of Mitchell’s whole way of seeing, thinking, and being:
I experienced what has been described as the ecstasy of unity. I not only sawthe connectedness, I feltit and experienced it sentiently. I was overwhelmed with the sensation of physically and mentally extending out into the cosmos. The restraints and boundaries of flesh and bone fell away. I realized that this was a biological response of my brain attempting to reorganize and give meaning to information about the wonderful and awesome processes that I was privileged to view from this vantage point.2
Significantly, the realization is not simply about the cosmos around him but about “Edgar Mitchell” himself as these “restraints and boundaries of flesh and bone” drop away into the scalar experience. In this statement, Mitchell launches us into the implications reached in 2.23–29: that scale radically reworks our notion of the “I.” Scale reconfigures not just “subjects” but one’s own sense of being-a-subject as a clear entity tied to a discernible structure. As scale presents experiences that exceed this seemingly apparent body, it renews the perennial question: what, then, am I?
Here, scale runs us into the much-heralded death of the humanist subject—the suggestion that the human as a clearly contained, autonomous, separate self does not hold up under closer scrutiny. Scale both provides one way of examining this new configuration and helps clarify the difficulty of this question of the subject. Who, we might ask, is this body called “Edgar Mitchell” floating in space? What of his situated viewpoint? What of the structure of vision as embodied, formed from an eye floating in space? Who, then, is experiencing this dissolution? After all, even in this transformation, this viewer notes “that I was privileged to view from this vantage point.” In the current critical landscape, we move too quickly to the political and social constraints that appear to be and produce “Edgar Mitchell,” reasserting this coherent subject at the very moment of its becoming-open, becoming posthuman. Undoubtedly, the white-male-scientist subject position was essential to getting this Homo sapiens“Edgar Mitchell” into space. Yet, even this position was not enough to withstand the overwhelming effect of this scalar vision. What is this becoming-vast such that Mitchell feels himself pulled apart and replaced by this sense of extending out into the cosmos?
Not only is the seeming paradox of this dissolution of the subject produced by scale, but scale provides some ways of renewing and reexamining the problems of subjectivity, identity, experience, and consciousness. Scale produces a situated dislocation (2.18); it dislocates the perspective from the delimited structure of the body even as it accounts for this dislocation. In scaling, one’s identification with any object—especially the body—is dissolved to make way for the multitude of new objects (cells) and connections (ecological relations of the planet). However, experience remains localized in an interpretive configuration: seeing still occurs. Rather than reinscribe this experience as subject—as “me”—scale prompts us to ask again: who scales? To answer this question, we can attempt to find an “object”—the organism, perhaps—to designate as the one who is experiencing. Yet doing so leaves this subject untouched by scale. When we scale this object-made-subject, who remains to scale? Only one answer remains: this is the Cosmos, the Whole, scaling itself. The simplicity of the conclusion here—nothing more that Carl Sagan’s “we are a way for the Cosmos to know itself” or the Upanishadic tat tvam asi(thou art that)—does not avoid the difficulty of this configuration. Despite the common declarations of the death of the self, the inessentiality of the ego, or identification with the Cosmos, we still find ourselves retreading this ground for good reason: how do “I” handle a configuration of reality that suggests that “I” am not what I appear to be? Even if one experiences this dissolution, the question remains: what is the relationship between that experience and this one?
These paradoxes of subjectivity are the counterpoint to the paradoxes of motion we discussed in the previous chapter. In this chapter I want to first highlight how these paradoxes of individuality have arisen in posthumanist philosophy and philosophy of mind. These will provide the grounds for tracing out specific maneuvers used to reassert individual subjectivity even in attempts to get beyond subject-object dualities—specifically, autopoiesis theory, critiques of disembodiment, critiques of totalizing perspectives, and calls for situated knowledge. While each of these in some way critiques nonscalar subjectivity, none provides a fully scalar configuration of the subject. Examining the residual individuality present in such critiques will open a space to more directly face the seemingly paradoxical nature of scalar subjectivity. I will situate the major conceptual difficulty in this distinction between the specificity of an experience and the attempt to separate out definitively that which produces the experience. In what manner is experience situated? This discussion is summed up by the scalar formula “epistemological specificity does not equal ontological separability.” Finally, I will to return to the history of thought dealing with the nature of the human to suggest that this articulation might be called a “mystic transhumanism”—“transhuman” because it resituates the human within a cosmic context, and “mystic” because it transforms these subjects in the encounter beyond their supposedly contained identities.

Dislocating the Subject
In recent attempts to grapple with these changes in subjectivity, it has often been suggested that if we deconstruct the subject-object distinction, we are also getting beyond the various ways that humanism has conceptualized subjectivity. In early postmodern theory, this decentering of the subject was grounded in an argument that the ego or coherent self is an illusion.3As this critical stance has morphed into what is now called “posthumanism,” this incoherency of the self seems to have been flooded out by a proliferation of theories that treat the subject as various enactments, performances, social regulations, and the like. The tentative or illusory nature of the self has become a more or less hidden assumption behind theories of posthuman subjectivity.4If the subject is able to be perpetually co-constituted then, by implication, the subject is somehow inessential. Our question about the subject who scales refocuses on this inessentiality and provides a new way to examine the contours of the subject and associated terms—mind, consciousness, identity, and individuality.

In posthumanism we see a shift in emphasis from deconstructing the subject to decentering the human. As an explicit scholarly current, posthumanism, according to Cary Wolfe, “names a historical moment  .  .  . which [performs a] decentering of the human by its imbrication in technical, medical, informatics, and economic networks.”5In this invocation of networks, Wolfe is pointing to a fundamentally scalar dislocation. The human is imbricated not just in the usual sociocultural networks of immediate this-scale experience but in networks that pull the human into other levels of interaction. In this entanglement, Wolfe argues that “the posthumanist form of meaning, reason, and communication” is “untether[ed] from its moorings in the individual, subjectivity, and consciousness.”6In this statement he targets a notion of the subject as inherently present to itself as a clear, individual, autonomous agent of action capable of observing itself. The challenge from posthumanists is: are humans actually those things?
This critique of the subject is not exclusive to posthumanists; it also stands as a crucial moment in philosophy of mind, as exemplified by Gilbert Ryle’s 1949 work, The Concept of Mind,which critiques the Cartesian myth in which the subject becomes a “ghost in the machine.” Yet, Ryle highlights a difficulty: an essential part of his critique is that it is a mistake to think of mind and matter as two different kinds of things. In contrast, Ryle argues that the difference between mind and matter is an artifact of a logical typing—in his terms, a category mistake.7As a result, he becomes associated with behaviorism (a misapprehension anticipated by Ryle himself) and other materialistic theories of mind.8After all, if mind is not separate from matter, then it is easy to suggest that matter causes mind. One might ask the same thing of posthumanists: if the self, mind, and consciousness are inessential, then what is mind?
The various solutions to these questions first run into what Elizabeth Wilson once noted as the “compulsive antiessentialism” of critical theory: a denial that critiques of the subject are, in any way, reducing ourselves to matter or biology.9Wilson and others have since produced more nuanced readings, including the sort we already saw from Barad in the previous chapter. But we can wonder here if we’ve lost sight of why we’ve found ourselves in this tangle about the subject. Is this question not made newly fresh by pulling this “self” out of the apparent and intuitive fact of “me” as this body—or else, in the form Ryle critiques, this body possessed (“my body”) by a presumed cogito? We then have this scalar choice again: do we seek another scalar object (now the cells or the social network or the atoms) to explain the presence of this experience, mind, and subjectivity?
One might notice that this question of the self or subject has already run us into the question of individuality: one seeks a subject in a form that is localizable as a separate, individual entity. Yet what if this intuition of individuality is an underlying scalism more fundamental than (but still inherent in) humanist subjectivity? This question about individuality even manifests in scientific discourse in questions about the descriptive accuracy and functional utility of asserting clear and inalienable individuality. For instance, in an article published in the Quarterly Review of Biology,Scott Gilbert, Jan Sapp, and Alfred Tauber argue against the functionality of individuality in biology. Picking up on posthumanist tropes, they argue that the discovery of the microscope and more recent technologies “lead us into directions that transcend the self/nonself, subject/object dichotomies that have characterized Western thought.”10The article then surveys theories of individuality within biology and argues that each of these fails to take into account the essentially scalar relations of both the diversity of cellular structures and the microbes that saturate any given organism. This argument demonstrates how a presumption from this-scale experience (that “I” am an individual) confuses research on other-scale objects (e.g., the immune system response). Might we then ask how this presumption of individuality also corrupts and confuses our thought more generally?
In posthumanism this question of individuality is expressed by Wolfe’s “we are not we” or “persons aren’t persons.”11In facing this statement we might nonetheless want to render as functional certain notions of individuality. Such attempts miss an essential difficulty: that our tendency to treat individuality as set in advance overshadows and continually corrupts our capacity to take into account the ways supposed individuals are not, in fact, individuals. Attempts at reinscribing individuality usually share a similar feature—an attempt to remain on or privilege one scale—and therefore avoid the most important reorientations inherent in scale. When, in preserving some sense of individuality, are we just searching for another thing to pin our sense of self on?
In facing this sense of self, a further question arises: are we speaking of the subject, individuality, and identity from the first person or the third person? This question was introduced by Thomas Nagel and developed by David Chalmers as a return to a bare phenomenology of consciousness—the “what is it like to be X?” In terms of scale, this question might be read as an attempt to return to the scale of here and ask again about the nature of experience. Nagel’s original article begins by citing scalar shifts, asking what makes the “mind-body problem unique” in contrast to “the water-H20 problem or the Turning machine–IBM machine problem or the lightning–electrical discharge problem or the gene-DNA problem or the oak tree–hydrocarbon problem.”12In contrasting the mind-body problem to these clearly scalar examples, is Nagel denying that consciousness is also a scalar problem, or is he suggesting that we locate the problem at the scale of here? The former question can be found in Daniel Dennett’s opening bewilderment in Consciousness Explained: “How on earth could my thoughts and feelings fit in the same world with the nerve cells and molecules that made up my brain?”13The latter is what Chalmers develops in his seemingly antiscalar argument: that consciousness cannot be described in terms of microphysical facts.14However, Chalmers’s argument is also in scalar terms, beginning with an extensive description of the H20-water problem and then arguing that consciousness cannot be reduced to its components in this way.15In this form, one might argue that Chalmers is actually attempting to relocate experience at the scale at which it emerges: right here. In this form, Chalmers and Nagel highlight the possibility that the intuition of individuality and self is based on this specificity and irreducibility of experience. Perhaps we hold to individuality because on an intuitive level we feel that we are individuals, and on a conceptual level we need to account for the specificity of experience. After all, just as I am not currently experiencing Times Square in New York City, I don’t experience other scales. Surely this particularity of perspective must be accounted for.

But still—is it mine? Who is that?
Delineating the Subject
Even after humanist notions of the subject are deconstructed, we can attempt to reclaim the self as an individual who is subject. Let’s map a few options in terms of scale before turning to a few particular cases. The previous section implied four options, which in a scalar shorthand we can call up (network), down (physical/component), out (content “here” treated as objects that are “other”), and in (experiential qualia). Here we can consider these four directions in relation to three aspects available at this scale: the body (an object), the person (as a present social designation), and mentality (thinking, experiencing).

