The body is the most readily available aspect: the intuition of myself as the body is based on this-scale experience, where this body appears as a distinct object that is mine. This is to read the body as “me” according to experiential qualia (in). One could also read the body in terms of the structure of the body that produces an “in”: “I” am the body-apparatus that perceives and responds or is set apart from others via a particular location “here” (out). Alternatively, I can describe myself as a Homo sapienswho is differentiated according to evolutionary and ecological criteria (up). In a material reductionist mode we can describe the body according to its components, including selecting smaller-scale markers, such as DNA, to stand in for a sign of identification (down).16
One can also focus on selfhood in relation to social aspects present at this scale. One might treat the “I” as a political designation or socially reinforced reference point (up). We might note how this entity is created out of various material and economic conditions (down). Finally, politically and socially oriented phenomenologies treat the self as a subject who is a site for communal constraints and interests (in) or who, in being hailed by others (Althusser’s interpellation), is constituted as the subject of address or action (out).

The target of posthumanism is usually the identification with the self as the mental apparatus. Yet even if we critique Descartes’s cogito,Chalmers’s argument could be used to suggest that “what I am” is the irreducible consciousness presented within experience (in). Alternatively, we can explain mental/inner life according to cultural or linguistic constraints (up), as the subject for the conditioning of behavior (out), or according to unconscious attributes, whether we follow the psychoanalytic notion of “the unconscious” or call these attributes the functions of neurons (down) (see Figure 8 for summary).

Up
Down
In
Out
Body
Ecology
Molecular system
Apparatus that produces experience
Location (contra others)
Person
Political entity
Economic entity
Site of social significance for
Subject of address/action by others
Mind
Cultural/linguistic subject
Unconscious or brain
Cogitoor experiential specificity
Subject of conditioned responses
Figure 8:A topography of options for individuating the subject.
