
We can now examine some configurations of individuality, self, and subjectivity that could be used to critique accounts such as Mitchell’s. These are essentially critiques of nonscalar views of subjectivity, but since they do not provide a scalar diagram of the subject, they have crucial ambiguities that need to be ironed out if we are to find a scalar configuration of subjects. Examining these will therefore highlight problems in our notion of subjects, identify ways scale resituates these problems, and introduce some essential aspects of a scalar notion of subjects.

Losing the Mind in Returning to the Body
It may appear that this theory of scale has reinstated the distinction that so much recent work has attempted to dismantle: the mind/body distinction. In this scalar configuration we become confused about what “the body” is in contrast to a conceptual apparatus—like scale—for interpreting and dissecting this body. However much we would like to return tothe body, the body itself has already become something other than what “I” usually think. Nonetheless, arguments about the mind/body distinction often seem to suggest that the return to this body is a relocating of oneself inan entity.17
In reviewing recent material feminisms, Vicki Kirby describes this move as an attempt to expunge the remnants of an anthropocentrism that would place the “human species being as sole author and reader of its world.”18Yet, in this reworking of the human, we find the same problem of identity: “If being is a diffracted, non-local manifestation ofthe world’s Being itself, it is nevertheless, and at the same time, a local and very specific punctum, or concrescence, ofthat same world: although the individual is not in position to the universal, .  .  .  individuation is always and necessarily unique” (18). This is the perplexing scalar shift we are examining here. However, in framing this return as bodily or material it becomes difficult to rethink the distinctions of mind/body, interpretation/matter, culture/nature that are at stake. Thus, Kirby declares the riddle to be “how should we  .  .  . comprehend the goop and spill of corporeal interiority, the bone, muscle, and sinewy connections  .  .  . the greens, reds, yellows, and browns that pulse and ooze just under our skin?” (19). Curiously, this gloss is noticeably nonscalar: it doesn’t start with the more bewildering fact that this goop is actually a dynamic and distributed network of chemical interactions and a lively set of bacteria in your gut.19This return to nonscalar language permits Kirby to retain here the possessive “our” in relation to the body (they are our bodies), which in turn permits her to posit something like the very authorship that ought to be expunged as an anthropocentrism: “We need to consider if a discursive analysis ofthe body is authored bythat same goop and spill” (20).20But, we might ask, by the microbiome or the ecology?
Of course, Kirby is complicating the body even as she invokes it. I am pushing at this articulation in order to identify three ways that this turn to the body can interfere even with this task of taking this flesh and bone seriously. In rescaling to these objects called “body” or “matter,” we risk forgetting the essential abstracting required for this scalar shift. In response we can inquire about the scalar nature of the mind/body, information/material, and nature/culture distinctions. In each case, what is the immaterial and the disembodied?
First, the simplest point: the nature/culture distinction is a scalar distinction. In this regard, scale is quite useful for the question organizing Kirby’s edited collection—“What if culture was nature all along?”—or in Evelyn Fox Keller’s mirage of nature and culture.21When one argues against material, biological, or atomistic explanations, using arguments from the social or the cultural, one is attempting to change the scale of relevance or importance. But to suggest that bodies or subjects are socially determined is to operate under the same scalism being resisted. In turning back to the material or biological, we need not leave behind the social/cultural but understand that we are mapping different scales of influence.22We need to understand the scalar relation between such things as bacteria, molecules, social systems, and ecological constraints without reifying any of these as inherently determinant of the others (6.34). Instead, scale helps us understand some of the problematic maneuvers performed in science, technology, and medicine, as Annmarie Mol does when she notes the ways in which medicine makes the body multiple.23
Second, scale disrupts and reworks what we mean by “embodied” and “material” in a way that confuses many invocations of these terms. For instance, take N. Katherine Hayles’s critique that information has been disembodied:
Information, like humanity, cannot exist apart from the embodiment that brings it into being as a material entity in the world, and embodiment is always instantiated, local, and specific. Embodiment can be destroyed, but it cannot be replicated. Once the specific form constituting it is gone, no amount of massaging the data will bring it back.24
What does Hayles mean by “embodiment” other than the lower-scale substrate in which information is instantiated—the transistors or cells that carry the pattern? While cybernetics and information theory deal with “patterns rather than physical entities,” this does not mean that information inherently loses its body.25While Hayles is right in resisting the maneuver that privileges larger-scale patterning, the return to embodiment confuses what is at stake: a difference between the patterning of components for the sake of larger-scale behavior and the instantiationof that pattern in a lower-scale substrate (see 6.30–34). In this regard, “embodiment” cannot be replicated, because any given instantiation of a pattern will not always translate to a different substrate. At the same time, Hayles makes clear that her return to embodiment is an attempt to resist carrying forward a humanist notion of the self: “What is lethal is not the posthuman as such but the grafting of the posthuman onto a liberal humanist view of the self.”26Her prime example—Hans Moravec’s fantasy of brain uploading—already presumes a coherent identity able to be read, copied, and transferred into another medium without fundamentally changing its structure and form. However, Hayles’s return to the language of embodiment obscures how embodiment provides one primary basis for this sense of “I.” While fantasies of brain uploading may glorify information apart from the body, they preserve a sense of self partially derived from the sense of being embodied.

The problem of embodied information might be better conceived as a use of scalar structures for the sake of abstraction. In this case, scale will help us, third, to specify the nature of the abstraction. We can begin to do so by again starting with a critique of this abstraction, as exemplified by an early moment in the feminist science studies conversation: Evelyn Fox Keller and Christine R. Grontowski’s “The Mind’s Eye.” In connecting feminist critiques of disembodiment with objectivity in science, the authors posit two modern scientific assumptions about the knowability of nature: “the separation of subject from object” and “the move away from the conditions of perception.” These are said to be a “retreat from the body sought in Plato’s epistemology.”27
However, this “retreat from the body” was an attempt to instantiate a systematic accounting of our mental apparatus whereby we experience reality. In Plato’s Protagoraswe see scale enter as a need to account for perceptions:
“Do things of the same size appear to you larger when seen near at hand, and smaller when seen from a distance or not?”  .  .  . “If then our well-being depended upon  .  .  . doing and choosing large things, avoiding and not doing the small ones, what would we see as our salvation in life? Would it be the art of measurement or the power of appearance? While the power of appearance often makes us wander all over the place in confusion, often changing our minds about the same things and regretting our actions and choices with respect to things large and small, the art of measurement in contrast, would make the appearances lose their power by showing us the truth.” (356c-e)
We need to move from perception to taking measure of our perceptions; otherwise we find ourselves changing our minds (or words) about the same things, speaking of them sometimes as atoms and molecules, sometimes as cells, sometimes as bodies, sometimes as larger ecologies. Rather than a retreat from the body, this “art of measurement” is an attempt to rebuff the presumption that the world produced by the Homo sapiensbody is singular, coherent, and fully present.

As discussed in the last chapter, Plato’s push against privileging the body is not about knowledge (epistēmē) but rather an attempt to open ourselves up to the various ways reality presents itself. Thus the Theaetetus,which Keller and Grontowski reference for Plato’s discrediting of knowledge derived from the senses, is a text about the problem of considering knowledge as certain and absolute. Keller and Grontowski cite only one moment in the conversation attempting to define “knowledge,” in which the interlocutors discard knowledge gained from the senses.28The remainder of the Theaetetuscontinues to inquire into knowledge, focusing on this incapacity to delimit oneself clearly and wholly as the knower.The dialogue goes on to posit but then discardtwo additional notions of knowledge that seem to be at the core of the modern scientific conception of knowledge: opinion or judgment (doxa) and opinion accompanied by an account or reason (logos). Importantly, it dismisses both of these by asking who hasthe knowledge, which undermines each definition since it is unclear who is present to know through opinion or reason (e.g., at 197b). In the end, the dialogue does not create a satisfactory definition of knowledge but produces a different result: “You will be more modest and not think you know what you don’t know” (210c).29This turn to humility is essential. Without it, an argument like Plato’s can lead to the problematic notion of objectivity that Keller and Grontowski are critiquing. The problem comes not from this mind/body distinction itself but from the inability to conceive of knowledge as not fully accessible to a coherent human entity delimited as “I.” Thus, Keller and Grontowski argue that “insofar as it does not seem possible to conceive of knowledge as a passive recording of data—human pride alone would seem to preclude such an epistemological posture—then a sharper division between visual and mental sight was necessitated.”30Human pride—that is, the attempt to claim the human (“me”) as the knower-as-coherent-entity who has knowledge—prevents us from considering the more radical cross-scalar configuration in which something like “knowledge” emerges.

What, then, isthe separation of mind and body that we found here in scale? Part of the difficulty is that, in Plato, the word for “mind” or “soul”—psukhē—is filling in for too much, including at least thought, memory, ego, and reason.31What we need for scale, however, is the level of abstraction above perception: a perception of perception, a capacity to measure, compare, and dissect these various perspectives and components. While this capacity may require thought, memory, and rational capacity, it does not require a sense of identification that takes this “mind’s eye” and ascribes it to a cogito.Usefully, in Sanskrit terminology, ego is separated from thought, memory, and reason as ahaṃkāra,which can be translated as “the ‘I’ who is the doer.” Ahaṃkārais almost always said to be an illusion, and thus could be glossed as “the I who supposes that it is the doer.” To the contrary, citis attention (the capacity to attend to), and manasindicates more complex mental formations such as those that reflect back on and organize sense data.32Neither citnor manasrequires an ego, ahaṃkāra,the sense of you as the doer. To the contrary, Plato’s Theaetetussuggests that egoic identification corrupts the process of attending to any concept or perception as one fails to take into account the ambiguity of the one who is taking account.

The perception of perception does not trump or eradicate the body but operates at a meta-level above it in a way that may require a scalar shift.33It is a way of reflecting back on, organizing, and dissecting those structures of presentation even for any apparatus we call “body.” It can be confusing to call this process “embodied,” since it reflects onthis capacity to be and form bodies and therefore is not confined to or completely limited by any given object—such as the object called “brain.” Without an egoic designation of subject, any perception can be said to include not just brain but eye, light, object, memory, social meaning, hormones, evolutionary vectors, and so on. In short, every perception becomes a point at which the whole Cosmos reads itself at a particular moment. This configuration is not disembodied so much as all-bodied insofar as no delimitation can cut the subject off in advance from the manifold relations that contribute to its form.

Subordinating to the Social Marker of Power
Before we go further in this thought, however, we should pause to note that many critiques of experiences such as Edgar Mitchell’s are aimed at structures of control, power, or agency. The rhetorical weight of such arguments is tremendous, particularly in their turn to the political, such as in Donna Haraway’s “Vision is always a question of the power to see—and perhaps of the violence implicit in our visualizing practices.”34If we hold our “selves” intact, we can become a “subject for” or “viewer of”—a viewer that then engages in an ego-driven structure of exploitation and pleasure.
