
This critique makes it easy to target resemblances of the contemplative trope of a zeroing out of our identity (see 2.9). For example, take Emerson’s famous statement “Standing on the bare ground—my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into infinite space—all mean egotism vanishes. I become transparent eye-ball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am the part or particle of God.”35We can understand this sentiment if we read it in scalar terms. Much like Mitchell, Emerson feels himself pervading all of reality as part of a much larger entity. The visionary experience hinges on this becoming “transparent eye-ball” as a feeling of “mean egotism” vanishing. Only then is this vision made possible, not as a limited perspective called “mine” but as part or particle of the divine—the Cosmic Whole—seeing itself.

To read this vision in terms of the power of visualizing practices is to reinsert the egoic relation that is being undermined by insisting that this perspective is a coherent site of power. In cultural criticism this maneuver often arises from applications of Susan Sontag’s critiques of photography and Laura Mulvey’s critiques of film. Mulvey critiques a specifically this-scale male gaze directed at women in a way that corresponds to sexual pleasure.36Sontag applies a similar notion of the voyeur to photography as not only a form of erotic pleasure but as an indulgence in curiosity, detachment, ubiquity, and mastery.37Both arguments have been extended to all kinds of film, photography, or even to conceptions of nature more generally. These arguments might be summed up by one example that, although lacking in nuance, accumulates the language of such critiques: in his critique of nature images, Bart H. Welling argues that they train the eye to be “solitary, central but remote, omniscient, all-powerful, potentially violent, pleasure-taking, commodifying, an all seeing but simultaneously invisible consuming malesubjectto its marginalized, decontextualized, powerless, speechless, unknowing, endangered, pleasure-giving, commodified, consumable female object.”38Here vision is turned into a hegemonic relationship in which the person viewing nature derives pleasure from the position at the expense of the object. When we add critiques of virgin nature, such as Carolyn Merchant’s critique of the female nature of Western recovery narratives, we find an indictment of the idea of Nature that is essential to Emerson’s argument.39
These arguments are a necessary critique of a certain, nonscalar way of narrating Nature, but they are not grounds for dismissing Nature as a concept—as has become popular in ecocriticism—nor do Emerson’s and Mitchell’s experiences fit this critique of the male gaze.40Mulvey’s critique is about the preservation and indulgence of the very thing we’re trying to deconstruct: the male gaze derives its pleasure from the “satisfaction and reinforcement of the ego.”41Likewise, in Sontag’s voyeurism the distance to the image is a way of keeping oneself intact, which permits the relation to be an indulgence and curiosity. Rather than distance and egoic indulgence, Mitchell and Emerson experience a ubiquity conditioned on their dissolution in the view. A voyeuristic approach to such views—or Nature more generally—hinges on not implicating oneself into the view.To the contrary, taking “this perspective” as a zero point (2.9) results in quite a different subject position: an emptying out of the power one egotistically claims within this limited human body.

Situated in/out of Position
This yielding of the remnant identification is essential for any accounting of the production of an experience. The elephant in the room here is Haraway’s “Situated Knowledges” and her much cited notion of the “god trick.” Like the critiques already cited, Haraway was instrumental in reworking a particularly distorted and hegemonic claim about knowledge. Opposing the domineering view of humanity and science, she critiqued this sense of transcendence and argued for a return to position, situatedness, and the body. The term “god trick” captures the general spirit: that the claim for transcendence is a trick, an illusion in which man pretends to be in a godly position:
I am arguing for a politics and epistemologies of location, positioning, and situating, where partiality and not universality is the condition of being heard to make rational knowledge claims. These are claims on people’s lives. I am arguing for the view from a body, always a complex, contradictory, structuring, and structured body, versus the view from above, from nowhere, from simplicity. Only the god trick is forbidden.42
We can see how this intuitive reference point of “my” experience would provide an underlying sensibleness and weight to Haraway’s distinction. Any perspective said to be beyond this situated, bodily perspective would seem to generalize out this experiential configuration. Such a generalization would not only be problematic; it would be skewed, partial, and not very useful for science. While I am not arguing here against situating knowledge claims, we see in scale that there are crucial ambiguities about defining and delimiting this situatedness. In scalar views there is something like a transcendent view that moves away from the body itself (2.10–12), zeroes out the perspective as “mine” (2.9), and dislocates from any single perspectival configuration (2.15). Thus, when Haraway declares that “feminists don’t need a doctrine of objectivity that promises transcendence” (579), we ought to hesitate. Does scale not provide us with something like a transcendence that is required to account for various modes of experience?
I’d suggest that Haraway is targeting a particular kind of transcendence that should be distinguished from an earlier, contemplative “view from above/nowhere.” This contemplative transcendence is described, for example, in the anonymous fourteenth-century text The Cloud of Unknowing,as a becoming-nowhere, but not as a place of impeccable and impenetrable self-hood:
Do nottry to withdraw into yourself, for  .  .  . I do not want you to be anywhere; no, not outside, above, behind, or beside yourself. But to this you say: “Where then shall I be? By your reckoning I am to be nowhere!” Exactly. In fact you have expressed it rather well, for I would indeed have you be nowhere. Why? Because nowhere, physically, is everywhere spatially.43
This view is already necessary for scale; if we want to be able to work with and acknowledge the multidimensionality that is already implied by scale, then we have to dislocate ourselves from the perspective already said to be situated “here” in the body, at this location, in this single form (2.8).

However, this account is not, I’d argue, Haraway’s primary target. Instead, the god trick is more properly a failingto zero out in this way. The target text is more appropriately Thomas Nagel’s The View from Nowhere,published shortly before Haraway’s essay. Nagel’s argument hinges on the capacity to set aside a located perspective in favor of a more objective “view from nowhere.” Here is the primary passage of interest:
The basic step which brings [the view from nowhere/the objective self] to life is  .  .  . simply the step of conceiving the world as a place that includes the person I am within it, as just another of its contents—conceiving myself from outside.  .  .  . So I can step away from this unconsidered perspective of the particular person I thought I was. Next comes the step of conceiving from outside all the points of view and experiences of that person and others of his species.  .  .  . That is the beginning of science. And again it is I who has done this stepping back, not only from an individual viewpoint but from a specific type of viewpoint.44
One can see the problem with this seemingly scalar articulation. This “step away” is an artificial claiming of a perspective that speaks for or contains the perspective of others. This considering “others of his species” becomes the speaking for these “others” who are not allowed to speak themselves. The possibility of “conceiving myself from outside” is then a trick granted by the privilege of a decidedly limited perspective of a subject who, not already being set aside as an other, is able to claim the process of knowledge.

Yet Nagel’s view from nowhere is explicitly notwhat we just saw in Cloud.Thus, Nagel states that “I know this sounds like metaphysical megalomania of an unusually shameless kind. Merely being TN isn’t good enough for me: I have to think of myself as the world soul in humble disguise.  .  .  . I am not saying that I individually am the subject of the universe: just that I am asubject.” In disavowing the nondual position, Nagel has retained his identification with the delimited position he labels “TN.” He fails to see that it is more egoicto retain that position, since it leaves this “I” intact (“again it is I who has done this stepping back”). The result is that the maneuver is strictly imaginary—he proceeds “as iffrom nowhere”—and therefore generalizes a delimited and partial perspective while nonetheless identifying himself with this delimited experience.45
When Haraway calls out the trick, she attempts to undo the contradiction by reaffirming the place of the body as the source of perspective, returning the “I” back to the eye. But in doing so, she carries forward the same identification: assuming that “I” am located in a clear entity situated in a single, definite, and located way. Thus, she invokes the body first: “We need to learn in our bodies, endowed with primate color and stereoscopic vision, how to attach the objective to our theoretical and political scanners in order to name where we are and are not” (582, emphasis added). The task of naming “where we are” still runs into the problem of who “we” are to begin with. Recognizing this risk, Haraway moves away from the body as coherent even as she invokes it, stating that “feminist embodiment  .  .  . is not about fixed location in a reified body  .  .  . but about nodes in fields, inflections in orientations, and responsibility for difference in material-semiotic fields of meaning” (586). This passage deflects the question of the body’s clear constitution into a sociopolitical network. In doing so, Haraway is able to disavow the need to know who exactly this subject is, while insisting that our knowledge be situated and held in reference to discernible structures of power: “We are not immediately present to ourselves. Self-knowledge requires a semiotic-material technology to link meanings and bodies. Self-identity is a bad visual system” (585). In denying self-identity but retaining an insistent situatedness, Haraway leaves only the external determination of that situatedness, a conceiving of one’s position based on how it functions within a network of relations. No longer a matter of where “I” am, the “situated” location of knowledge becomes a determination within a community of others that is always partial: “The knowing self is partial in all its guises, never finished, whole, simply there, and original” (585). And yet the “knowing self,” however partial, is still a self to be situated.

In some ways, Haraway’s insistence that we “see from both perspectives at once” seems to fit with what scale requires.46And yet Haraway’s damning characterization of the view dislocated from the position of the body runs counter to anything that scale produces. We thus need to be wary of this potentially inverted version of Nagel’s argument. Like Nagel, Haraway risks wanting the self in both ways, at one point affirming the clearly definable and locatable nature of one’s “situated” position, at another invoking what exceeds that position and thereby determines it. But then how is this knowledge situated? By others?
We pointed to scale as a kind of situated dislocation (2.18) in order to respond to this ambiguity. Scalar perspectives can hardly be called “mine” in the usual sense. The problem is that we are already so entangled with such perspectives that we do not usually account for this problem of identification as central to our assumption about what it would mean to situate “my” perspective. In turn, the body (as a this-scale object) cannot go to another scale in the sense of acting on directly on another scale (3.34). But the mind (i.e., mental apparatus) can and does—in fact it is already made up of and connected into those scalar domains of relations. However, to get to this view, we must first expunge this delimitation of this mind as inherently here and mine. Thus, self-identity is a bad visual system if by “self-identity” we mean egoic identification within any limited entity. But the complete undoing of self-identity would look like a view from nowhere.47
Only when the “I” is zeroed out in this way, even becomes the Cosmos itself, do we arrive at the zeroed-out position that includes the contingency and openness necessary to begin measuring any experience. Thus, in the centuries-long and complex debate over the nature of the “self” in Buddhism and Vedanta, Shankara stands out for arguing that the crown jewel of discrimination is the inquiry into the difference between the egoic self-identification and non-egoic identification with the Whole (Brahman). Insofar as we leave that “self” in any limited configuration, what is wrapped up in that “self” is the unaccounted-for distortion permitted to preferentially skew how we situate an experience or knowledge. These remnants of identification produce the god trick in which a limited sense of self is smuggled into a view beyond its limits.In responding to Buddhist refusals of any articulation of a self (anātmanversus the ātman), Shankara points to identification only for the purposes of reidentifying with the Whole. This becomes necessary because the operation of reconciling “this” experience with the Whole is an inherently difficult scalar operation of moving from the jīva—the seemingly separate body—to the ātmanas brahman(Whole) experienced here, through an active expunging of the ego (ahaṃkāra).48
System Identification and Closure from Environment
