We can now begin to see a scalar configuration of subjects. However, even a scalar view of subjectivity might still carry forward this base assumption that individuals are separate, in advance, via some notion of the “organism.” In response, one more theory is worth examining: the theory of autopoiesis, which was developed by the biologist Humberto Maturana and the philosopher Francesco Varela and has made its way into broader theoretical conversations primarily through the German sociologist Niklas Luhmann. An autopoietic system “is a network of processes that produces the components that reproduce the network, and that also regulates the boundary conditions necessary for its ongoing existence as a network.”49This theory positions individuation as a result of an ongoing maintenance of a system by that same system. In one sense, it keeps in view two different scales: the scale at which the individual is discerned (e.g., the body of a Homo sapiens) is connected to the scale at which change is continually occurring (the cellular/microbial). In fact, Maturana came to the theory of autopoiesis because he sought a “language that would permit me to describe an autonomous system in a manner that retained autonomy as a feature of the system.”50Therefore, the organism is said to be individual because it maintains the system of lower-scale interactions that stabilize as a body on a different scale.

This individuality is both mechanistic and based on a notion of the network.51Despite the scalar nature of the description, we can ask: does the system as a system treat itself as a coherent entity set apart from the rest of reality? The sticking point is always going to lie in the extent to which the system must inevitably be “open” (the theory emphasizes the closed nature of the system) to that which is outside of it in order to maintain itself. There is always a residual porousness that permits what appears to be foreclosed on one scale to be revealed as interpenetration at another. Just change the scale one more time and individuality becomes less important than porousness, in how the ecosystem, for instance, is taken in and used and reworked by the body of the Homo sapiens.From which scale is this system said to be an individual? Wolfe points to this as a paradox in his discussion of autopoiesis: “the functional distinction system/environment” run up against the “means of autopoiesis and self-referential closure as a means of self-preservation.”52However, our discussion suggests that this paradox is only created if we assert that individuality is an actual designation rather than a functional, partial, and secondary delimitation.

Crucially, Maturana and Varela entangle this problem with questions of mind by arguing that autopoiesis also creates a phenomenal domain (xxi). Thus they argue against “evolutionary and genetic notions” that “treat the species as the source of all biological order,” since such explanations do not “provide us with a mechanism to account for the phenomenology of the individual” (115). In fact, they argue that there is the need to provide “a mechanism for the definition of the individual” because we need to define and account for these phenomenal domains. Maturana and Varela thus insist that individuality is necessary for ascribing a phenomenological domain toan organism, which is treated as a pre-given unity; they simply assert “that machines are unities is apparent” (77). In turn, a “phenomenological domain is defined by the properties of the unity or unities that constitute it, either singly or collectively through their transformations or interactions” (116).

Do we have to assume the unity of an organism to account for the specificity of a phenomenal experience? I’d like to propose that this argument is backwards. It still assumes, in advance, a clear individuated organism producing experience. In contrast, we need to start from a simpler point: an experience occurs. This experience might be considered constitutive of what we call a “mind,” but it is not clearly and inevitably tied to a particular system. Only with an additional observation do we call this system a unity as we attempt to explain the configuration of reality that produces that experience. In contrast, Maturana and Varela assume the unity not only of the autopoietic system but also of the observer: “Anything said is said by an observer” (8). But how do we move from the particularity of experience to the assertion that the observer is a separate, coherent, individual reference point? Only in an additional observation that says either “this phenomenal realm is me” or “that (organism) is an observer.”
To get to this point, one has to ask one more time, as does fellow second-order cyberneticist Heinz von Foerster, “Who sees this observer?”53Foerster turns the question not to the external “observer” but to the observer here observing the observer. On this basis, Foerster notes that, while he always found autopoiesis a “very significant definition” of life, this definition operates with too much assumed. Specifically, it is “centrally concerned with what would then be a living system.”54In other words, the organism is presumed first and then autopoiesis and phenomenal domains arise from that assumption. But, as Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber argued, assuming individuality is not as useful even for biology as we might suppose. Foerster’s position on identity is more recursive: “For me, ‘I’ is a folded up recursive operator of infinite depths, but one can operate with it.”55This may be more appropriately functional, but only if it leaves open the possibility that the sense of self is an additional delimitation within an experience that has already been generated.Only in the recursive observation of the observer observing itself does the system get defined as a system, an “I,” an individual (more on this in chapter 12). The question will always be: do we, in practice, really leave this defining process open?
The openness is particularly significant because of the potential relationship between scale domains and phenomenal domains. If we fail to acknowledge this secondary nature of the designation of “self,” we find ourselves with a significant omission that prevents us from, among other things, understanding scale. After all, scale requires that we admit that within this phenomenal experience is already the action of things not discernible, but which nonetheless contribute to this system both in terms of action and experience. We risk leaving out in advance additional content and qualia already in an experience but not identified (either by this self-referential thought or by others) as being part of the system. Here we find the strange twist that is expressed, for example, in Andy Clark and Chalmers’s extended mind thesis: because these phenomenal domains are identified with the body, it is surprising to argue that cognition and other forms of mental awareness inevitably happen outside these boundaries.56In turn, the long history of speaking in terms of the unconscious does the same for other scales. But within your phenomenal domain is already the “unconscious” of the cellular, the ecological, and so on. We become confused at how these are also a part of “me” because we do not recognize that “I” am already those things, even if they are not direct contents recognized in experience. What if we must scrub ourselves of this primary self-identification in order to see within our “selves” this scalar situation?
Problem of Self, Problem of Experience
Even though scale pulls our experience out of the scale of the body, we still have to explain its relation to the here of experience. These examples have shown that we need to separate out the problem of mind/experience from the problem of identification/self. Theories of mind, particularly Chalmers’s hard problem of consciousness, point to how structures of mind produce an experience not reduced to those components. Yet this problem of consciousness is also a problem of positionality or situatedness—an accounting for and specifying how an observation is created by and out of a particular nexus of factors for parsing reality. The problem of identity haunts this whole question, because identification is not the same as situatedness. Identification requires an additional delimitation of that experience. To put it in Nagel’s phraseology: we might acknowledge that there is something it is like to have a particular experience and then, apart from that, is the description of who or what produces that observation (e.g., a bat). The whole confusing conundrum lies in accepting the lack of definitiveness of the observer or apparatus even as a particular observation is presented with certain attributes, providing certain information, and presenting grounds for knowledge (epistēmē) and response.

To summarize the thesis most axiomatically: epistemological specificity does not equal ontological separability.Just because we find particular experiences that are produced from a unique configuration of reality, and just because these require careful accounting to say anything about how they are produced and what they apply to, it does not mean that these experiences are attributable to coherent and contained subjects. The problem repeated in the previous sections is that this axiom is inverted or avoided: either we assume ontological separation first and use it to account for epistemological specificity, or we take epistemological specificity as evidence of ontological separation. Much remains to be said about the grounds for tracing epistemological specificity such that we can say anything meaningful at all about the production of experiences without assuming individuality in advance. We do not need to propose such a theory of mind here. I only want to posit that first starting with criteria for mind permits us to designate phenomenal boundaries before we provide physical ones.Such a formulation would be more consistent with this scalar configuration toward subjects and provide us with some grounds for acknowledging the specificity and uniqueness of experience without claiming it for and by a particular segment of reality to be called “subject.”
Finding Transhuman Consciousness
What, then, do we make of this “subject” Edgar Mitchell, floating up in space and becoming larger than himself? In a real sense, he has scaled beyond himself, feeling and seeing that what is already within his experience is far more than might be attributed to this little body. In this situation, we might scale back to here and reconsider anew the human gaping out into the scalar vastness. If we do not merely reassert that locality but instead attend to how that locality is reconfigured in scale, then we find ourselves with quite a different perspective on this whole prospect of perspective. The human is not left behind but newly placed and positioned in this extended and layered reality of which it has now become aware.

Properly speaking, such an account would not be a posthumanism (even if it pushes past what is called “humanism”) but a transhumanism. As Andrew Pilsch has made clear, the term transhumanismis not merely the recent techno-fetishization that yields notions like brain-uploading of the sort that Hayles critiques. As Hayles demonstrated in her reading of cybernetics, such philosophies are plagued by a remnant fantasy of the humanist subject even as that subject is deconstructed by the very technologies supposed to preserve it. In Pilsch’s account we see an alternative and perennial tradition that transforms this human subject: a “mystic transhumanism” or “cybernetic mysticism.”57When Pilsch introduces the Jesuit anthropologist Teilhard de Chardin as central to this mystic transhumanism, it is not brain uploading or fantasies of living forever that are emphasized but a radical “reorientation of consciousness” (125) that hinges on the “ability of consciousness to reflect on itself” and continue to expand this conscious reflection (126). A transhumanism that denies these mystical elements—for example, in Nick Bostrom’s desire for a transhumanism “without resorting to wishful thinking or mysticism” (121)—risks preserving this self as the ego-who-transcends.

In invoking transhumanism, I want to further Pilsch’s suggestion that the way to understand our transhuman condition “is not [through] more data or more gadgets but a more mystic transhumanism” (61). While some posthumanisms turn away from the human, a mystic transhumanism reorients the human subject within the larger possibilities of experience that we encounter in scalar descriptions. Thus, Franklin Merrell-Wolff, in discussing the possibility of transcending Kant’s a priori limitations in consciousness-without-an-object (see chapter 7 here), stumbles upon transhumanism as a label for this configuration:
It may be valid enough to assert that human consciousness qua human is always [conditioned, e.g., by time], but that would amount merely to a partial definition of what is meant by human consciousness. In that case, the consciousness that is not time conditioned would be something that is transhuman or nonhuman.  .  .  . It is in the power of man to transcend the limits of human consciousness and thus come to a more or less complete understanding of the factors that limit the range of human consciousness qua human. The term “human” would thus define a certain range in the scale of consciousness—something like an octave in the scale of electromagnetic waves. In that case, the present system implies that it is, in principle, possible for a conscious being to shift his field of consciousness up and down the scale. When such an entity is focused within the human octave, it might be agreed to call him human, but something other than human when focused in other octaves.  .  .  . On the basis of such a definition, this philosophy would not be a contribution to Humanism but to Transhumanism.58
In this articulation, the human is defined by the ability to become aware of its own limits, to trace extensions beyond these limits, and to situate its present experience within these dislocations. Insofar as “human” indicates a limit and configuration of experience—the Umweltor lifeworld, as biologist Jakob von Uexküll once labeled it—of the Homo sapiens,then the human is one register of the possible ways of encountering, experiencing, and dividing the world. Perhaps, we can call this “human register” reality viewed at the scale of the meter and filtered through the particular differences relevant to this organism. However, even in this definition, scale makes us aware of that which exceeds this delimitation. Thus, Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo describes the individual in these terms: “As the movement is one and indivisible, so he who is present in the movement is one, sole and indivisible.  .  .  . What then must be the spiritual position of the personal worker? .  .  .  He is a center only—a center of differentiation of the one personal consciousness, a center of determination of the one total movement.”59Here the posthumanist decentering of the human is turned inside-out as any structure of mind is made a center—not as thecenter but rather a figure and shadow out of which the Whole experiences itself (see 5.18).60Icannot be this figure or center, insofar as anything can be kept here as ahaṃkāra,the one who pretends to be apart from the One-Whole-All.

In fact, this ego-structure will never fully function because what it attempts to claim is already a shadow reflected within this All. Everything short of arriving at the Absolute is a cut made without truly accounting for this cut performed as “oneself.” As the twentieth-century sage Ramana Maharshi argued, the first cut is always between “I” and the rest of the cosmos. That is, the ego-structure is the first partial-whole (1.28) designation (the subject) out of which all other partial-wholes (objects) are identified (see 2.24). Examining this sense of the “I” is the necessary condition for getting beyond subjects and objects: “The ego’s phenomenal existence is transcended when you dive into the source from where the ‘I’-thought [aham-vritti] rises.”61However, this transcendence does not eradicate all sense of selfhood, but only the sense of self as anything less than the Whole: “You must distinguish between the ‘I’, pure in itself, and the ‘I’-thought.  .  .  . If you stay as the ‘I’, your being alone, without thought, the ‘I’-thought will disappear and the delusion will vanish forever.”62
At the same time, if we follow this logic carefully, the transcendence is not a transcendence at all but a returning to what one truly is: the Cosmos looking back at itself. Otherwise we are forced to ask, with Maharshi, “Transcending what, and by whom? You alone exist.”63But we can augment this “you alone” with the careful negation, drawn from the Ribhu Gita, one of Maharshi’s favorite texts: “I am not the individual. I have no differences. I am not thought nor do I have any mind. I am not flesh nor do I have bones nor am I the body with ego [ahaṃkāra].”64Edgar Mitchell feels his flesh and bones extending out into the cosmos. He suddenly feels certain “scientific facts about stellar evolution [take] on new significance” as he feels how this body was churned out from the unknown abyss.65A billion suns explode over billions of years to evolve out bits of starstuff that rocket themselves up to space to get a better view of the vastness. This bundle of cells feels, looking out, torn apart, echoing the Ribhu Gita: “ever of the undivided nature am I; ever devoid of measure. Ever of the pure and singular form am I; ever the consciousness alone” (22.29). The measure by which this world is measured here is itself not the Absolute it persistently measures. Yet the Absolute measures itself, in this form here to be illuminated within itself: “Ever of the nature of true measure am I; ever the illuminator of existence” (22.30). And yet, and yet, we pause once more for this limit to be exceeded: “I am not the one who measures. I am not that which is measured. I am not all. I am the supreme. I am the form of complete knowledge [sarva-vijñāna-rūpo]” (22.35).

