Thus, in examining this “I-thought” we find the transcendence from part to whole and back again to this here and now. This transition has the power to eradicate the sense of absoluteness granted to the temporary and the partial, the permanence we grant to these shifting forms, and the hold by which this realm of appearance binds us. Without this reconfiguration of identity, the view held as “mine” is always dark and partial. In this way, we stumble into Paul’s first epistle to the Corinthians: “For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when the perfect [teleion,the complete in all its parts] comes, the partial will come to an end.” Everything done by this body and mind is partial, but in examining itself, this partiality already sees into its own partiality. “Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, as I am fully known.”66
This strange Möbius strip is depicted in the film Interstellarwhen, in search of a solution to save the human race, the interstellar astronaut named Cooper falls into a black hole. There he finds a replica of his daughter Murph’s bedroom repeated endlessly around him, each iteration showing a different time of the same place. He realizes that this is some kind of interface by which he can transmit data about the black hole gathered by Tars, the robot who also fell into the black hole, through space-time back to his daughter on Earth so that she can complete their antigravity spaceship. As he realizes what he needs to do, he suddenly understands why he must be there to do it. Speaking of the mysterious “they” who made this trip possible, Cooper and Tars finally realize their situation:
Cooper:All of this is one little girl’s bedroom, every moment, infinitely complex. They have access to infinite space, but they are not bound by anything. If they can’t find a specific place in time they can’t communicate. That’s why I’m here, to find a way to tell Murph, just like I found this moment.  
Tars:How, Cooper?
Cooper:Love, Tars. Love.  .  .  . My connection with Murph  .  .  . it is quantifiable. It’s the key.

Tars:What are we here to do?
Cooper:Find out how to tell her.  
Precisely because “they” are beyond space-time—in some way infinite or exceedingly vast—they need a limited entity to go into the black hole and take the measurements. Cooper and Tars are the devices by which that precise moment is found and communication is made possible. This human circuitry is always just this: a means for the Cosmos to see, feel, think about, and do just what is right here—as a navigation of itself particular to the limits of this human configuration. Once we realize this—“that’s why I’m here”—we are open to do the task at hand, to find a way to tell Murph, to find a way to do whatever it is we need to do. (But how? Here we struggle to find the word to articulate the sense of already being drawn and connected into this reality—why not call it love?) After this recognition, the ingenuity by which this task is carried out naturally emerges from the mental and perceptive capacities already present in the delimitations of our experience. However, this whole perspective can only be acquired if we ourselves go through the black hole, into the abyss in which our sense of egoic self is lost. Only in this involution do these fundamentally transhuman views manifest as a reorientation wherein the limitations of this flesh and blood are suddenly imbued with a renewed purpose and meaning. Then the mouth opens to speak, the hands find themselves writing, the breath continues to intake the cosmos, the careful judgment measures the perception at hand, and we move forward through space-time.9Cutting and Claiming EverythingScalar Configurations of RelationsThe Earth from the Heavens
Rusty Schweickart finds himself circling the planet. In this circumambulation, he does what most humans seem to do: he finds what he recognizes. First, upon waking up, North Africa, and then, after breakfast, the Mediterranean, and so on. In this circling, his initial insight is about this civilization: “And you realize in one glance that what you’re seeing is what was the whole history of man for years—the cradle of civilization.”1A fine enough conclusion, but one still predicated on familiarity and human relations. Thus, as he moves along, he finds “finally” the “coast of California and look[s] for those friendly things”—“there’s home.”
But he doesn’t just do this once, but “again and again and again.” After a while he finds himself experiencing a gestalt shift: “When you go around it in an hour and a half you begin to recognize that your identity is the whole thing. And it makes a change.” This change culminates in what he famously describes as “there are no frames, there are no boundaries.” These forms of human conquest, powers, and priority are revealed as spurious and temporary impositions on this large-scale entity. Suddenly, this scalar view provides a new sense of priority and a new sense of relations: “That relationship [with the planet] is no longer what it was.” Schweickart doesn’t stop there but, invoking his peers who left near-Earth orbit, adds:
And now he looks back and he sees the Earth not as something big, where he can see the beautiful details, but he sees the Earth as a small thing out there.  .  .  . The size of it, the significance of it—it becomes both things, it becomes so small and so fragile, and such a precious little spot in that universe, that you can block it out with your thumb, and you realize that on that small spot, that little blue and white thing is everything that means anything to you.

This now familiar trope has been repeated in numerous contexts, from environmentalism slogans to existential musings in popular television. This trope uses a higher-scale vision turned back on the Earth to input into that vision the whole field of relations and priorities on which human life is built. The result is a diminishing of their significance for the sake of reworking their importance within the larger Cosmic context. But this vision is also balanced by this return to the specificity: it becomes, not just insignificant but a “precious little spot.”
Of course, this trope has a deep history prior to space travel. We can, as an introductory comparison, sample two additional examples. In her “showings,” Julian of Norwich experienced a noticeably scalar vision: “And in this vision he showed me a little thing, the size of a hazel-nut, lying in the palm of my hand, and to my mind’s eye it was as round as any ball. I looked at it and thought, ‘What can this be?’ And the answer came to me, ‘It is all that is made.’”2The change created by this vision is written now as a result of a limited human perspective: “This is why those who choose to occupy themselves with earthly business and are always pursuing worldly success have nothing here of God in their hearts and souls; because they love and seek their rest in this little thing.”3We could likewise refer to the essential passage from the Bhagavad Gita, in which Arjuna encounters the true form of Krishna: “There Arjuna then beheld the entire universe as One, divided in many ways in the God of Gods. Filled with amazement, hair standing on one end in ecstasy, he spoke these words: O Lord, I see within your body all kinds of beings assembled.”4The basic maneuver is the same: a larger-scale reference point is invoked that not only diminishes but includes and reorients all of the objects and relations available within human experience. The result for Arjuna, as for Schweikart and Julian, is a whole new relationship to the reality around him as he is called forth to the familial battle framing the Gita.

I put Schweikart’s speech next to Julian and the Bhagavad Gita to highlight this emphasis on transformation of values and relations. But it also highlights the distinctively contemplative nature of the experience. Here we run into another persistent trope of the Space Race seemingly in tension with this contemplative experience: that this vision is a leaving behind and a forsaking of the important concerns of this planet.5For example, in the opening reflections of The Human Condition,Hannah Arendt responds to the excitement over the launch of Sputnik with this critique:
The immediate reaction  .  .  . was relief about the “first step toward escape from men’s imprisonment to the earth.” And this strange statement, far from being the accidental slip of some American reporter, unwittingly echoed the extraordinary line which, more than twenty years ago, had been carved on the funeral obelisk of Russia’s great scientists: “Mankind will not remain bound on this earth forever.”6
There is undoubtedly something in space travel that “seems to be possessed by a rebellion against human existence as it has been given” (2). Arendt’s response might always arise in encountering Schweikart, Julian, or the Bhagavad Gita: but what about the Earth?
Arendt’s critique focuses on the scale of Homo sapiens,focusing primarily on alienation from this-scale existence. Thus she places the Space Race in the context of three other major world events: the colonizing of the Americas, the Protestant Reformation, and the invention of the telescope, which made possible a “science that considers the nature of the earth from the viewpoint of the universe” (248). The result of this viewpoint, she argues, is alienation:
The greater the distance between himself and his surroundings, world or earth, the more he will be able to survey and to measure and the less will worldly, earth-bound space be left to him. The fact that the decisive shrinkage of the earth was the consequence of the invention of the airplane, that is, of leaving the surface of the earth altogether, is like a symbol for the general phenomenon that any decrease of terrestrial distance can be won only at the price of putting a decisive distance between man and earth, of alienating man from his immediate earthly surroundings. (251)
Arendt rightfully identifies a basic problem with scale: “But it could be that we, who are earth-bound creatures and have begun to act as though we were dwellers of the universe, will forever be unable to understand, that is, to think and speak about things which nevertheless we are able to do” (3). We are now able to do things that extend beyond our terrestrial lives and the limits of these human bodies: this is a fundamental implication of scalar science and technologies. However, Schweikart’s return to the preciousness of the Earth—indeed the entirety of the scalar discourses we are examining here—makes one wonder if, in fact, we will forever be unable to think and speak about these things. As we have noted (2.8), scale always is a relation between two experiences, one of which will include the here. The implication is that we would only be alienated from this-scale experience or be unable to speak of it if we do not properly understand these views and actions in terms of scale.

This clash of tropes—between the discovery of insignificance and the reassertion of values derived from this-scale existence—points to a need to reexamine how scale morphs human views and values by pushing them beyond the human. The problem of alienation is essential for highlighting how one can forget, in a scalar view, that Homo sapiensbodies dwell on the surface of the Earth. But the greater point is that we must rework our sense of the human condition around this new scalar perspective. Arendt, in her attempt to return us to the Earth, opens up the question but, without a conception of scale, is unable to see the new map of relations that scale makes possible.

