This chapter will examine this tension between classical or intuitive ways of mapping relations and those encountered in scale. Here, I want to focus on another trope—synecdoche, the part filling in for the whole—to examine how scalar remappings of relations come into tension with nonscalar vestiges of thought and articulation. This chapter will introduce this trope in relation to the scalar views from above, then consider how synecdoche highlights the primary scalar tension in our way of conceptualizing relations. We will then examine this tension in the humanities and social sciences, specifically geography, sociology, and political theory, by examining some critiques of this synecdoche that have been, curiously, situated as critiques of scale. We can then apply the same questions to the sciences, examining the scalar synecdoche as it emerges in systems theory and related sciences as well as nanotechnology. We will then return to this tension between the contemplative and the active, the here and the scalar, to consider how such remappings are also implicated in the personal alteration of one’s system of values and one’s relation to the Cosmos.

Dreams of Transcendence: The Colonizing and the Transformative
The Homo sapiens’experience of the world is rooted in a particular scale of perception and filtered according to its needs (whether biological or social). This perspective becomes normalized within our language and thought. But even the simple perceptive variances created by distance (1.1–3) already confound our ability to render this experience coherent. Thus, scalar views have long been used as a trope for reorienting human relations, even prior to the scientific extension and systemization of scale. Many such articulations were mystical in character, since they spoke of a reality that exceeded the human. Others were political in nature for the same reasons that we found in 3.9: the aggregation of human efforts is one of the most readily available means of considering the coming-together of smaller objects into a larger unity. Sometimes both purposes occur together, as they do in Plato’s Republic,where Plato discusses the republic in order to discuss the ruling of the soul, as a kind of scalar isomorphism (see 369a). Similarly, the Bhagavad Gita’s setting in the battlefield puts the transcendental experience in the context of the necessities of politically charged action.

These contemplative and political invocations of scale are often conflated, but I want to separate them here in order to highlight an essential difference in their form and effect. Depending on whether and how the human is expanded into, preserved, or reworked in such scalar views, one can distinguish the contemplative, transformative invocation of scale from the political, controlled vision of scale. Contemplative scalar articulations transform this-scale experience, using scalar views to pull us out of, make strange, and rework our priorities. Political scalar views tend to extend the human into realms that exceed the Homo sapiensbody by attempting to map, gather, and claim these larger views as a structure of power. This practice is best represented by mapmaking, which scales drawings according to known attributes of a landscape and focuses on the objects we hold important: cities, landmarks, roads, rivers, and, most importantly, political boundaries. These two scalar views exist in tension and cannot be reconciled, since one attempts to claim the scalar view in this-scale terms while the other rewrites this-scale reality in a scalar view. Even those that position the contemplative view in relation to the political, such as Plato’s Republicor the Bhagavad Gita, must be distinguished based on whether and how the human is reworked in the view.

Consider another precursor to Schweickart’s vision: Cicero’s Dream of Scipio.In this work, the Roman general dreams of ascending to the heavens where he has a conversation with the deceased Africanus. In this narrative, colonial desire is positioned as a resistance to transcendence: Scipio resists bringing his gaze away from the Earth, leading Africanus to declare: “Come! .  .  .  how long will your mind be chained to the earth?”7Nonetheless, Scipio persists in focusing on the Earth, leading Africanus to declare: “For all the earth, which you inhabit  .  .  . is a kind of little island surrounded by the waters of that sea  .  .  . and yet though it has such a grand name, see how small it really is! .  .  .  you can certainly see in what a narrow field your human glory aspires to range.”8Here, in the midst of Roman imperialism, is a declaration of the futility of empire, of the smallness of any possible actions that seek to dominate the Earth. This view is thus antithetical to the colonizing, mapping enterprise; it requires a turning away from the details of the surface that one would like to dominate for the sake of reworking this sense of value and priority that is the impetus for that very domination.

However, it is easy to dismiss the more transformative, contemplative encounter on the account of the political. For example, in his archaeology of representations of the Earth, Dennis Cosgrove places the two elements together as if they are unavoidably entangled: “The history of such representations is complex, connected as closely to lust for material possession, power, and authority as to metaphysical speculation, religious aspiration, or poetic sentiment.”9While he appears to separate out the two, Cosgrove subordinates possible transcendence to colonial desire:
The dream of human flight sufficiently high to offer a global perspective is an enduring theme of stoic philosophy.  .  .  . This is the implication of whole-earth literature from Cicero, Lucian, and Seneca which offers its male heroes their destiny in synoptic vision. Their teloscombines an imperialistic urge to subdue the contingencies of the global surface with an ironic recognition of personal insignificance set against the scale of globe and cosmos.10
Cosgrove distinguishes the two aspects only to conflate them, ignoring that these writers were explicitly critiquing the colonial enterprise. He deems this recognition “ironic,” but, except in that Lucian’s A True Storyis a satire, all three are quite serious about the sentiments instilled by their visions. This critical move imposes onto these texts the very thing being critiqued, reinscribing forms of difference only discernible at the scale of human bodies and imposing them onto the scalar experience. In response, we need to more carefully trace how and to what extent we have succeeded in following the contemplative revision of the human rather than the colonizing extension of it. This difference is a difference in effect (what does the articulation lead us to think and do?) that might be traced out in the history of political theory, technological and scientific articulations of control, and our use and misuse of contemplative transformations.

Synecdoche and the Claim from Above
Let’s first examine how the human comes to fill in for other scales of relations by examining this tension in NASA historian Frank White’s attempts to articulate the power of the perspective granted by space travel. In outlining what he calls the “overview effect,” he first invokes the experience of the airplane:
From 30,000 feet, [the city] looked like little toys sparkling in the sunshine. From that altitude, all of Washington looked small and insignificant. However, I knew that people down there were making life and death decisions on my behalf and taking themselves very seriously as they did so. From high in the jet stream, it seemed absurd that they could have any impact on my life. It was like ants making laws for humans.11
White uses this view to note how a change of scale equals a change in value: what seems significant is seen to be insignificant. Then, remembering that lower-scale set of values, White reflects on how absurd it is that people would think they have such great power over this vast landscape—they are simply too small. It follows that the power associated with these individuals is an erroneous conception: the assumption that an individual might control all of this is like assuming ants form laws for humans.

Here we encounter a nonscalar assumption: that the larger is more powerful than the smaller. This assumption is a staple of science fiction, as in the opening of H. G. Wells’s War of the Worlds: “as narrowly as man with a microscope might scrutinize the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of water,” man too is being scrutinized by the Martians.12Then, when the Martians attack, they “took no more notice  .  .  . of the people running this way and that than a man would of the confusion of ants in a nest against which his foot has been kicked.”13White’s invocation flips this trope: the humans aren’t controlling the ants; instead, the “humans” are the larger world viewed from the airplane. The absurdity is that a smaller organism (the ant) could control a larger one (the human). Of course, this ant-human distinction is noticeably nonscalar, since it does not cross a scalar threshold. In more properly scalar form, the analogy would be the absurdity that a single human could control the planet or that a single cell could control your body.

In these terms we discover the problem of synecdoche, taking the part for the whole. Scale naturally produces synecdoche when we attempt to situate a larger-scale view with a smaller-scale view. When in the middle of a city, I might take any part as representative for the city because this “city” is already too large and too abstract to clearly discern. However, it is only when we stay at the same scale that we can use any one of these objects to fill in for that larger-scale category, since at that new scale this synecdochic object is no longer visible. A scalar synecdoche thus inappropriately subsumes a higher-scale view to a lower-scale object. This synecdoche is pervasive within political rhetoric and conceptions of power; just as we replace the entire power structure of the United States with “Washington,” the politicians there place themselves in a synecdochic relationship with this geographic region. A fully scalar view challenges this synecdochic assumption. White points to this conclusion in a definitely contemplative register: “From the airplane, the message that scientists, philosophers, spiritual teachers, and systems theorists have been trying to tell us for centuries was obvious: everything is interconnected and interrelated, each part a subsystem of a larger whole system.”14
The view of this “whole” is not equivalent to the attempt to claim or control it. Even White misses an essential part of this situation: that the Homo sapiensbody does not actually go to another scale. Rather, in the view from above, the Homo sapiensviews another scale but still exists at the meter scale. Just as one can only act on the scale at which one exists (3.34), viewing another scale is not equivalent with intervening in that scale.15White falls prey to this conflation when he notes that the view from the airplane allows him to, in some sense, “see the future”: “I knew that the car on Route 110 would soon meet up with the other car on Route 37, although the two drivers were not aware of it. If they were about to have an accident, I’d see it, but they wouldn’t.”16The crash here is only imaginary. If he were to communicate with both drivers to tell them of the impending interaction, the drivers would think it absurd: so what if they are heading toward each other? It is their role as drivers to navigate that lower-scale interaction. In translating scalar views to scalar relations, one must always make use of some intermediaries—either because you are literally too distant or too large or small to make the intervention directly (see 6.29–35). In such extensions, a far more subtle yet just as essential synecdoche has occurred: you fill in yourself for the whole complex of extensions that make the scalar intervention possible. How can we properly trace out scalar relations if we continually commit this kind of synecdoche?
Expunging the Intuitions of Power: The Feudal between Hobbes and Whitman
In political theory we can see most clearly how our conception of scalar relations is riddled with nonscalar assumptions. The famous frontispiece of Hobbes’s Leviathancontains the great representation of the scalar synecdoche in which the king fills in for the aggregate of humans he rules (Figure 9). Clearly, this is a synecdochic scale-trick in which the king comes to fill in for the aggregate. The question is: have we truly thought through a scalar vision of this aggregation that is purged of this basic synecdochic maneuver? And, lest we think this problem only manifests in political and social organization, consider how readily we perform a similar scale-trick on the body: “I” am said to be in control of and responsible for this whole aggregate of cells, molecules, and microbes contained within the boundaries of this skin. This statement restates the central thesis of the previous chapter.

