In some ways, the development of democracy was a watershed moment for refusing this synecdoche and rethinking social organization through a more scalar view of aggregation. While there are undoubtedly versions of democratic theory that head in this direction, we can follow Walt Whitman’s characterization of the problem as something we are trying to work toward rather than something we have already achieved. I’d place Whitman’s Democratic Vistasas the foundational text for a truly scalar political theory. He places the task of democracy as a task of surmounting the “history of Feudalism,” his term for this set of assumptions in which the aggregate is subordinated to a subset of that aggregate.17His text is replete with scalar analogs—the geological (31), the digestive (25), the meteorological (68), the microscope (14), the atomic (30)—as he attempts to refigure the task of democracy. He articulates the task as a rethinking of the individual and the aggregate in a way that simultaneously respects the individual and the aggregate without reducing one to the other:
We shall, it is true, quickly and continually find the origin-idea of the singleness of man, individualism, asserting itself and cropping forth.  .  .  . But the mass or lump character, for imperative reasons, is to be ever carefully weighed, born in mind, and provided for. Only from it, and from its proper regulation and potency, comes the  .  .  . chance of Individualism. The two are contradictory, but our task is to reconcile them. (15)
In scale the two are not contradictory but rather conceivable as two different scales of viewing what humans are and do. Whitman takes us in that direction in his imperative to simply “include all” (21) while situating these individuals in the capacity to rule themselves (22). But his main provocation is that we have yet to discover and fully integrate a scalar view of political, social, or economic organization. He places the vista of democracy at this juncture where we rewrite our whole way of speaking and thinking about our relations in a way that expunges these nonscalar assumptions. If this goal is yet in the horizon, it will be useful to examine a few accounts that head in this direction in order to identify further remnants of a nonscalar view of relations.

Figure 9:Behold the synecdoche. Frontispiece to Hobbes, Leviathan.Andrew Crooke, 1651. Holmes Collection, Rare Book and Special Collection Division, Library of Congress.

Critiques of (Non)scalar Diagrams: Sociologies, Geographies, Assemblages
Curiously, recent arguments moving us toward such a scalar articulation come from those critiquing scale. These thinkers are resisting the ways erroneous scalar discourses have confused or misplaced the individual and aggregate. We can highlight a few here: Bruno Latour’s actor-network theory, the geographer Sallie Marston’s critique of scale, Nancy Fraser’s Scales of Justice,and Manuel DeLanda’s assemblage theory. Despite their differences, they share a tendency toward a flattening of relations (in DeLanda’s terms, a “flat ontology”), moving toward some conception of a network as a nonhierarchical field of relations that emphasizes how these relations are created and mapped. This map is then said to be inherently about structures of power, exclusion, and totalization. All four are trying to refuse the synecdoche just discussed, but since they are unable to see this synecdoche as a scalar error they treat their articulations as a critique of scale.

Latour’s actor-network theory (ANT) treats all things as actors within a network of relations. ANT integrates “nonhumans” into social theory—including scalar objects such as microbes.18Each “actant” participates in a field of relations and has a role in the network. This framework pushes against the synecdochic subordination of some objects to others (e.g., the cell subsumed to the body). Furthermore, when discussing social science methods, Latour attempts to avoid the micro and macro distinction, in which a researcher might subordinate local instances to general principles, the reverse, or some compromise between them. He positions this avoidance against the Hobbesian view when he argues that “the body politic is a shadow, a phantom, a fiction” (171).

Such an account includes objects on different scales, but its “irreducibility” creates a problem: how does one treat both cell and body as equally relevant things when they are, in some respects, the same thing? This flattening leads Latour to treat scale as just another relation: “A new topographical relationship becomes visible between the former micro and the former macro. The macro is neither ‘above’ nor ‘below’ the interactions, but added to them as another of their connections.  .  .  . There is no other known way to achieve changes in relative scale” (177). Likewise, Latour argues that “scale is what actors achieve by scaling, spacing, and contextualizing each other” (184). Scale, in this view, is another variable and contingent relation. More recently, Latour further claims that “there are not, in the world, beings large or small by birth: growth and shrinkage depend solely on the circulation of scripts.”19He suggests, further, that we must “resist the temptation to take differences in size as explanatory in itself.”
In this view, scale is produced and, as such, is a contested notion that is reworked and mobilized for various ends. The extensive conversation on scale in geography is largely founded on this basis. The problem is that geography, particularly human and political geography, is primarily interested in mapping human structures of power. As we noted in 3.37, geographers split scales into a largely human series of layers: body, urban, regional, national, global.20This schema conflates the logical typing of human relations (discussed in 3.2–9) with the logical typing of scale domains, resulting in a skewed, human-centered view of scale. Doing so produces the critiques of scale as a socially constructed hierarchical ordering of power, since these scales are only discernible within human relations and are clearly a way of mapping those relations.21Furthermore, this conversation often extends the philosopher Henri Lefebvre’s notion of space as produced to scale in a way that is echoed in Latour’s pointing to the “very production of place, size, and scale.”22Thus, when Marston, Jones, and Woodward call for a “human geography without scale” they point to a “need to expose and denaturalize scale’s discursive power.”23These geographers would discard scale entirely due to the difficulty of “disentangling scalar hierarchies from  .  .  . its army of affiliated binaries” (421). By this they mean the value-laden ideas we have about the local or the global—for example, associating the global with the abstract, open, or detached. Finally, the authors use Haraway’s notion of the god trick (see chapter 8 here) to argue that removing scale from geography resituates the researcher at the scale of the body: “How  .  .  . can a researcher write seriously about situated positionality after having just gone global?” (422).24
Nancy Fraser’s Scales of Justicelikewise limits scalar distinctions to the human, distinguishing the domestic, the national, and the international as the significant scalar shifts. From these assumptions, Fraser sees scale as a means of navigating who matters, using the idea of the frame or the map to note conflicts of the “who” of any political body. When conceived in this way, politically charged questions of inclusion/exclusion arise (the statement at 3.21 that “scale is inherently inclusive” is responding to this conception). Fraser likewise focuses on scale as socially constructed, speaking of three “frames” by which we organize the scalar relation of politics: “Given a plurality of competing frames for organizing, and resolving justice conflicts, how do we know which scale of justice is truly just?”25This framework of frames places justice within a limited conception scale. At the same time, Fraser acknowledges that current conflicts emerge from the breaking down of classic scalar designations, such as the power ascribed to the nation-state. In an appropriate denial of the scalar synecdoche, Fraser points to the undoing of the “political imaginary” that “invested a state with exclusive, undivided sovereignty over its territory.”26
Manuel DeLanda’s assemblage theory similarly critiques totalizing practices by combining the language of systems science with the larger Marxist tradition that has critiqued top-down hierarchical notions of power.27DeLanda uses emergent properties and irreducibility (that the parts cannot be reduced to the whole) to create a nuanced concept of assemblages, but his means of justifying this integration reveals some confusing assumptions:
Without something ensuring the irreducibility of an assemblage, the concept [of the assemblage] would not be able to replace that of a seamless totality. If the parts of a whole are reducible, then they form an aggregate in which the components merely coexist without generating a new entity.  .  .  . Making the properties of a whole depend on the interactions between its parts ensures that these properties are not taken to be either necessary or transcendent.28
The rejection of the transcendent and the necessary here is another attempt to push against the scalar synecdoche. DeLanda argues that we rework “reified generalities like ‘the State’” (16) while still arguing for the use of “levels of scale” to articulate layers of assemblages (17–19). However, his articulation lacks a theory of scale to account for these levels and how they affect assemblages. His rejection of the language of transcendence mixes a critique of scalar synecdoche with the thresholds of affectability implied by scale (3.27–28). Thus, even though DeLanda is right to note that different things can be considered individuals on any given scale, he follows Maturana and Varela (see chapter 8 here) in granting this individuality too much ontological status (22). Most importantly, he suggests that “entities operating at different scales can interact with one another, individual to individual, a possibility that does not exist in a hierarchical ontology” (20). But have you ever actually interacted directly with a single cell in your body qua cell? Have you done so with the ecology of the planet?
In all, we can be sympathetic to these accounts as working toward methods of tracing scalar relations and highlighting some of the problems in articulations of scale. But without a theory of scale, the second interferes with the first. Undoubtedly, a properly scalar assemblage theory, geography, legal-political schema, or ANT can be crafted, but each would require a new articulation and justification that took into account our scalar observations. There are a number of things that we need to account for in particular:
First, we must be wary of nonscalar notions of hierarchy or layers of relations, understanding that they arise from humans attempting to apply nonscalar conceptions to scalar shifts. The diagram of scales based on human criteria is only the most obvious of these (3.16).

Second, scale is not “made” in the same way that assemblages are made, and it is prior to the definition of “actants.” Assemblages are assembled.29They are formed, reformed, and reworked by various connections and actions. Scale designates levels of observation. Thus, scale is made in a very different way than assemblages and, in some sense, exists apart from them. We cannot define “actants” without this consistency whereby we delimit the sites for tracing relations. Size does, in fact, matter; otherwise you lose reference to what you are talking about, because scalar relations always deal with the same thing viewed on different scales (1.20).

Third, critiques of narratives of scale are not the same as scalar critiques. As a non-arbitrary script establishing a consistent means of accounting for perspective (2.3), scale contains means of separating narratives about scale from what scalar observations demonstrate. Again, this is more potently situated in the conflict that occurs when human-based nonscalar assumptions come into tension with what we find when we scale beyond the human. When Latour, Fraser, and Marston claim that scale is socially constructed, they are conflating these two operations. In addition, when Latour argues that scale is a circulation of scripts that is not invariant, he is confusing the products of scale with the apparatus of scale itself. The products of scale are indeed variant: at one moment we rally around bodies as products of DNA, at another as parts of an ecosystem, at another we tie the two together through multinational corporations manipulating the flows of genes. But scale itself is not variant; if it were, again, we would be unable to track what we are even talking about. Likewise, geographers are right to note that conceptions of scalar action are created, contested, and mobilize for various ends, but this politics of scale inevitably comes into contact with the possibilities and constraints of scale itself.

This is essential for the critique of totalization. Fraser, in particular, is tracing the unraveling of a narrative that is a doubling down of the Hobbesian view of scale. As historian Anne Harrington has shown, there is a direct line between early-twentieth-century nationalism and a form of holism that emerged in science as a response to reductionist views of biology.30The emphasis on “the whole as greater than the sum of its parts” provided a basis for a modified synecdoche, combined with the assumption that the larger rules the smaller, in which the nation becomes the reference point that subordinates its subjects. Harrington shows how this frame is then adapted into Nazi notions of wholeness. Fraser then places this narrative in the context of the attempt “to re-engineer human life on a mass scale.”31These endeavors arise from a tainted, human-exclusive, power-driven view of scale. To the Hobbesian synecdoche they add the scalar errors in which we assume that to unify is to totalize and therefore one must police the who and the how of inclusion. But scale is inherently inclusive within any given domain (3.21), and unity is a function of a change of perspective (1.22), not something made. In critiquing this narrative of scale, as Arendt is doing following World War II, we find ourselves rejecting scale itself, when, to the contrary, more carefully attending to scale helps dismantle the basis for that totalizing worldview.
