
Fourth, we need to attend to when there is a scale shift versus a logical typing of assemblages or relations. Assemblages can be across scale domains but do not have to be. This is a problem that DeLanda inherits from systems theory, which we will explore in the next section.

Fifth, we need to be clearer about emergence and its relation to both patterns at the higher scale and individuals at the lower scale. That is, these cannot simply be flat relations, since any object in a given scale domain can only act on another scale domain through an aggregation or disaggregation (3.34, 6.30–32). We need to modify our vocabularies of relations so that we do not preserve these assumptions about causality while still tracing out how, for example, bacteria mobilize into organismic effects or humans mobilize into global action. Doing so is difficult, partially because we often want to preserve the agency of objects relevant at one scale into another scale, as we do in speaking of global action. But the question should first be: what isthe scalar object? Is a corporation, for instance, a scalar entity in the same way our body is? From the scale of the Earth, what does it look like? We need to be on guard for confusions that arise out of these shifts in scale. For instance, we could conceptualize autonomy or agency of actants as both scale-specific (acting on a given scale [3.34]) and arising from scale specificity (something can be treated as a unit because it appears as an object at a given scale [1.19, 5.11]). Indeed, much could be developed out of DeLanda’s observation that “larger assemblages emerge as a statistical result,or as a collective unintended consequence of intentional action.”32
Given these problems, we can agree with Whitman that such careful clarifications are on the horizon and that it will take time and significant adjustments to our ways of conceptualizing our relations and our economic and political structures for handling them. Indeed, the provocation set out in 3.23 that ecology encompasses economics, politics, and culture alone requires a seismic shift. In integrating nonhumans into the mix and attempting to think through how to integrate them into human relations, perhaps these thinkers have pushed us in this direction. But this inability to handle scale confuses the terms at the outset. Perhaps this confusion merely shows that we need to more fully expunge the nonscalar intuitions of power. To this end, I want to turn now to systems theory and second-order cybernetics and consider the same questions about scale.

Cell Theory, Systems Theory, and the System Dialectic: Bertalanffy and the Tracing of Scalar Relations
Harrington’s history of holism in the sciences points to a larger dialectic generated by reductionism between using the small to explain the large versus the large to explain the small. She traces this dialectic through nineteenth-century cell theory, which was framed by Rudolf Virchow in 1855 as evidence that “life was nothing more than the activity of individual cells.”33Harrington positions cell theory as one moment in an “uneasy balancing act between individualism and unity” that sets up debates about vitalism and holism (12). Thus, Virchow too stated that “the significance of the constituent parts  .  .  . will at all times be found only in the Whole” (12). Considering the cell as a base unit produces both the potential reduction of life to the cell and the framework to consider how these parts come together in an organism.

The relatively late arrival of cell theory represents a crucial moment for scale, because it forced scientists to consider the intermediary points of reference that arise at different levels.34With cell theory it becomes newly possible to question how these atoms and chemicals come together.35Thus, Virchow positions the cell as a halfway point between the organism and atomic-level action: “Within this locus [of the cell] it is mechanical matter that is active—active according to physical and chemical laws.”36While this in some way reduces life to the cell and the cell to the molecular, it also makes it possible to see the cell as the intermediate point of consideration. No longer is the question about how atoms make organisms, but first how atoms make single-celled organisms, and then how cells make multicellular organisms.

With cell theory in place, the question of how the “whole is greater than the sum of its parts” enters in the early twentieth century not simply as a vitalism but as a question about how we cross scalar thresholds to form larger-scale entities.37The history of this transition to a scalar view remains to be written; here I merely want to highlight how the question of parts and wholes becomes scalar in a new way once we conceptualize these as layers of interaction whereby the relations of atoms become relations of cells that become relations of bodies. This more scalar view makes possible not only the reduction of life to nonlife but the counter-reductionist, larger-scale move whereby one invokes the larger to explain how the smaller comes together. When systems theory is developed in the twentieth century by the biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy, for instance, he sees his work as firmly in this dialectic, situating systems theory against both analysis of elementary units and mere summation.38He argues that biology needs to account for “conditions within the whole” and for “properties that are absent from its isolated parts.”39To do so, biologists must think of life in terms of systems, organization, and levels in order to provide a new dimension of explanation: the “formulation of principles that are valid for ‘systems’ in general.”40
Bertalanffy does not need to conceptualize this move as antithetical to physics even as it refuses the traditional reductionism. To the contrary, he notes that “the advancements of physics tells [sic]a different and much more exciting story,” where “new fields of phenomena, especially of organization, occurs [sic]in the way of a synthesis in which originally separate fields fuse into an integrated realm.”41This upward movement makes a more fully scalar conception of forces and relations possible. Until we have this counter to reductionism, we do not have a scalarconception of relations,since scientists merely go to smaller and smaller scales as the prized domain for interaction. As soon as we work back from the small to the larger, scientists find themselves needing at least three new kinds of principles: principles of aggregationto account for how the small gets to the large (6.30), principles of conditioningto understand how the large sets conditions for the small (6.31), and principles of specificationthat account for what scale is relevant in any observation (5.11). In introducing these within the notion of the system, Bertalanffy points to what we can call scale complementarity:
There is a kind of complementarity between analytical and global treatment of biological systems. We can either pick out individual processes in the organism and analyze them in terms of physico-chemistry—then the whole, in its enormous complexity, will escape us; or we can state global laws for the biological system as a whole—but then we forsake the physico-chemical determination of the individual processes.42
Scale domains produce a scale complementarity: depending on the scale of observation, you will see and interact with different aspects of a system. Given this complementarity, we can then articulate principles and possibilities of aggregation and conditioning (see 6.30–34).

With this properly scalar conception, the dialectic between holism and reductionism can end in the practice of scalar specification. In Bertalanffy and like thinkers we begin to find a more fully scalar view of life where “the unifying principle is that we find organization at all levels.”43It is for this reason that this book is pushing so adamantly against the anti-hierarchical, anti-transcendent sentiments prevalent in the humanities. Contrary to Latour’s suggestion that hierarchies and cybernetics cannot grasp the complexity of relations, without such theories we will be unable to properly trace our mappings and interventions.44
Innovations in the Tracings of Scalar Relations
If scale is central to all of science, then we can query some scientific productions to demonstrate how one might articulate and map scalar relations, but also to identify remnants of the scalar synecdoche and like problems in these articulations. We can apply these questions to the entangled discourses of cybernetics, systems theory, information theory, statistics, computational biology, and symbiogenesis theory. Doing so can highlight possible ways of building things up, but it will also further highlight the persistent remnants of a nonscalar view in these new innovations.

Take, for instance, cybernetics. Cybernetics created a potentially scalar means of mapping how system-level constraints provide grounds for smaller-scale behavior. An account of scalar relations requires formalized tracing of levels of feedback within a system (6.45). The problem is that, from the outset, the most vocal proponent of cybernetics, Norbert Wiener, described feedback in terms of control from a “centralized regulatory apparatus.”45Doing so carries forward the scalar synecdoche, leading to critiques such as those levied by the historian Peter Galison, that cybernetics was formulated “explicitly in the experiences of war” and preserves, at the core, this desire to control.46Yet this synecdochic, controlling view is not as unavoidable as Galison argues. In 1966, Bateson resituates cybernetics in the context of the self-perpetuating feedback loops generated by war, arguing that cybernetics provides some means of reflecting on these loops: “The question is how can we get away from the rules within which we have been operating.”47He argues that “latent in cybernetics  .  .  . [is] a means of changing our philosophy of control and a means of seeing our own follies in wider perspective.”48In tracing the structure of feedback and self-regulation within systems, one can see the disparities in our own conceptions of control. In doing so, we might start with the synecdochic interpretations of any central notions from cybernetics (emergence, autopoiesis, feedback, etc.). In what ways can we call intervention in these things control?
A parallel problem arises as cybernetics becomes entangled with systems theory: when is a system a scalar system? Must systems be scalar? Or can we distinguish between systems that remain on one scale and systems that cross scale domains? Bertalanffy, for instance, defines a system as “a set of elements standing in interrelations.”49But there is a substantial difference between elements on the same scale domain and elements across scales. If the human body is a system, do we mean a system of cells, microbes, and molecules or a system of organs? The latter does not cross a scalar threshold. The problem becomes particularly apparent when sociologist Niklas Luhmann applies second-order cybernetics to sociological systems. The primary examples for Maturana and Varela’s autopoiesis (see chapter 8 here) are cells.50When we apply the same schema to social systems, however, “systems” such as the nation-state are not a scalar analog to cellular maintenance of molecules.

Maturana and Varela disagreed on this extension of autopoiesis. They provide the basis for autopoietic hierarchies, citing multicellular organisms as the example (110), but then ask:
What about human societies, are they, as systems of coupled human beings, also biological systems? The answer to this question is not trivial  .  .  . such an answer requires the characterization of the relations which define a society as a unity (a system), and whatever we may say biologically will apply in the domain of human interactions directly, either by use or abuse. (118)
