
What these methods seek is an understanding of the possible forms and constraints of scalar aggregation (6.30–32). For instance, consider the notion of attractors, which Kauffman describes as the area that a pattern tends to converge on (78–79).69Kauffman notes that “under the right conditions, these attractors can be the source of order in large dynamical systems” (79). “What we need,” he suggests, “are laws describing which kinds of networks are likely to be orderly and which are likely to succumb to chaos” (79). These models of aggregation are attempts to understand conditions and possibilities of the emergence of particular changes across scales. These computational models imply that thinking in terms of growth and cultivation may be more appropriate for all scalar developments, since we allow these aggregations to unfold rather than directly craft them, as we do with many this-scale objects.

At the same time, the approaches just discussed more or less empty out the content of the lower-scale entities in the search for laws of aggregation or conditioning apart from the components involved. This imbalance points to a need for additional theoretical tools for examining the grounds for lower-scale aggregation, particularly in living systems. After all, forms of interaction, particularly cooperation, make possible more pointed aggregation of effects on a larger scale. This is the significance of the work of Lynn Margulis, Jan Sapp, Soren Sonea, and other biologists who pioneered a more properly scalar way of thinking of the collaborative nature of life by considering bacteria more carefully and generously. Margulis, in particular, made two scientific contributions arising from this microbial thinking: her reintroduction, expansion, and defense of symbiogenesis and her early contributions to Gaia theory.70As an evolutionary term, symbiogenesisrefers to “the origin of new tissues, organs, organisms—even new species—by establishment of long-term permanent symbiosis.”71Margulis also collaborated early with James Lovelock on the Gaia hypothesis, largely because Lovelock needed some means of explaining what on Earth produced feedback mechanisms.72Margulis’s answer: microbes.73Later in life, Margulis reflects on the connection between these two ideas with the phrase “Gaia is just symbiosis as seen from space.”74
Both of these ideas are exercises in scalar thinking that demonstrate how scalar discoveries rework common assumptions about life, control, and humanity. Thinking with bacteria permits Margulis and her son and coauthor, Dorion Sagan, to provide powerful descriptions overturning humanist, nonscalar assumptions. For instance, in Microcosmosthey write: “It is not too whimsical to say that if we feel at loose ends, of two minds, beside ourselves, going to pieces, or not together, it probably because we are. Real organisms are like cities.”75By this they mean not a Hobbesian body politic but a city full of all kinds of people, animals, plants, objects, and, especially, microbes. Symbiosis is the common and pervasive element. The lives of bacteria are already entangled together and constantly interlocking, cooperating, and mashing into each other.76These Homo sapienstoo can be considered aggregates of microorganisms. As the sociologist Myra Hird puts it after an extended study with Margulis, we “must also somehow recognize that ‘I’ am bacteria, that bacteria are us.”77
Symbiosis also permits us to set aside two of the most persistent ideas associated with scale: the notion of the hive mind and the “great chain of being.” Clearly, the trope of the hive mind preserves a synecdochic view of aggregate cooperation, as if components must be of “one mind” to coordinate behavior. To the contrary, a scalar view of symbiosis suggests that smaller-scale behavior (even noncooperative behavior) can actually produce coherent larger-scale behaviors—even cogitation—at a new scalar level. Indeed, this is already inherent in Teilhard de Chardin’s and Vladamir Vernadsky’s notion of the nöosphere, the name they give to the mental formations emergent from the aggregate rather than subordinating this aggregate.78While Teilhard positions man as an essential moment in the evolution of the nöosphere, this scalar conception does not maintain the classic “great chain of being.”79In this new hierarchy of being it is not minerals, plants, animals, humanity, angels, and gods arrayed in levels of power, but atoms, microbes, organisms, ecologies, solar orbits, and galaxies as perspectives on the dynamism of the cosmos.

Reeling at/in the Extensions (of Man): Fantasies of Control in Nanotechnology
Of course, humans do find themselves interacting with different scales in more and more deliberate ways. The problem is that, in our increasing awareness of these entanglements, the category of the human tends to claim these relationships in both affirmative and negative ways. While the last section considered scientific methods for building things up, scale points to a broader need to reconceptualize technological interventions as symbiotic extensions with agency distributed along the apparatus
While we can feel the distress of this synecdochic claim in ecological crisis, we can see the way it operates in the discourse around nanotechnology. Two texts lay the foundation for the rhetoric of nanotechnology: Richard Feynman’s 1960 talk “There Is Plenty of Room at the Bottom” and K. Eric Drexler’s Engines of Creation.80Drexler’s influential vision of nanotechnology combines two ways of imagining the scalar intervention. The first, derived from Feynman, suggests that one can make a set of “slave ‘hands’ at one-fourth scale” and then “wire them to my original levers so they each do exactly the same thing at the same time in parallel.”81One uses these hands to make smaller hands and attach those hands to this set—and so on until one arrives at the nanoscale so that one might precisely position atomic components. This scheme imagines a synecdochic extension of the Homo sapiensto the atomic scale. Feynman thus declares that we could “arrange the atoms the way we want; the very atoms,all the way down!”82Drexler follows this maneuver: “our ability to arrange atoms lies at the foundation of technology  .  .  . [but] with our present technology, we are forced to handle atoms in unruly herds.”83In contrast, nanotechnology is a “molecular technology” that will “handle individual atoms and molecules with control and precision” (4).

Yet, Drexler adds to this his most persuasive maneuver: the claim that nanotechnology already exists in cells and microorganisms: “More complex patterns make up the active nanomachines of living cells” (5). This act of renaming cells as “nanomachines” and cellular components, such as ribosomes, as “molecular assemblers,” permits Drexler to, in a sense, “prove” that precise atomic manipulation is possible: “Ribosomes are proof that nanomachines built of protein and RNA can be programmed to build complex molecules” (8). This maneuver, which became standard in nanotechnology discourse, conflates not only the biological and mechanical but also two different scales of machinery: “All machines use clumps of atoms as parts. Protein machines simply use very small clumps” (6). At stake is the possibility of extension of human control and interests into the molecular scale. But is there not a significant difference between Feynman’s iterated extension of the large scale into the smaller scales and the operation of cells?
Fifteen years later, Richard Smalley challenged Drexler’s ideas on this basis.84Smalley contends that there are challenges specific to the nanoscale that make this Feynman-extension impossible. The resulting debate between Drexler and Smalley is largely about this tension between Feynman’s model and the biological.85Smalley challenges the notion of “molecular assemblers” from the position of biology, pointing to the need for water, the messiness of a cellular environment, the need for nutrients, and so forth (40). Drexler’s response is surprising; he insists that molecular manufacturing is not biological at all. Rather, it uses “productive machinery—factories—to build smaller factories, leading ultimately to nanomachines building atomically precise objects.  .  .  . Although inspired by biology  .  .  . Feynman’s vision of nanotechnology is fundamentally mechanical, not biological” (40). This description reinserts the scalar conflation, suggesting that we can manufacture on the molecular scale in a relatively similar way to the way we manufacture on this scale. Smalley’s final response returns again to this biological-mechanical switch, making clear that it is also an assumption about scale and control: “You are still in a pretend world where atoms go where you want because your computer program directs them to go there” (42). Smalley’s challenge is about appropriate understanding of scale and the problems that arise in extending this-scale understanding to the nanoscale. As we do find ways to develop machines on the nanoscale, they will need to be able to perceive, make use of, and interact with a different field of interaction that must rely on scale-specific capacities to respond to the dynamism at that scale.

Smalley’s point is also about popular understanding of these technologies. In conflating biological-mechanical, this-scale and nanoscale manufacturing possibilities, Drexler must enter a “pretend world.”86As Colin Milburn has described extensively in his book Mondo Nano,nanotechnology has developed largely through virtual simulations, speculative capital projects, simulated interfaces for imaging atomic-level manipulations, and gaming cultures that imagine such interventions. These simulations reflect an ongoing obfuscation of the way that nanotechnology is tapping into attributes already present at the nanoscale. Milburn describes this confusion as the treating of “bits as binary digits, and bits as matter broken apart.” But even Milburn seems a little too engrossed in the virtual extension, suggesting that this “dream of digital matter” permits us to “enact our prehension of the molecular world, reaching down to feel its vibrations and tensions, biting into it and getting a taste for it. The  .  .  . repetitive pattern of total nanodissections [in nanotech video games]  .  .  . serves to allegorize the processes—both technical and social—whereby matter is made data and data is made flesh.”87But we have to wonder: is this digital extension really making matter manipulable or is this a way of narrating the extension—a fantasy contingent on the digital simulation that disguises the conditions of such extension?
Clearly, nanotechnologists will have to learn to work with the dynamics of the nanoscale via more and more complex intermediaries. Yet, even as we move closer to creating nanomachines similar to Drexler’s assemblers, we continue to write over these extensions by eliding the implication of the biological conflation. Thus, in a 2017 Naturearticle outlining a design for a molecular machine, we find the same trope again:
This first-generation machine augurs well for the development of small-molecule robots that can be programmed to manipulate substrates to control synthesis in a form of mechanosynthesis (that is, the use of mechanical constraints to direct reactive molecules to specific molecular sites [here they cite Drexler]), in a manner reminiscent of the molecular construction carried out in biology.88
Clearly, we are on our way toward some extraordinary and newly reworked entanglements with the nanoscale. But, as we do so, will we continue to elide the dynamism of that very intervention, overwriting in terms of control, manipulation, and direction the highly complex processes that we find ourselves examining and intervening in?
In response, we do not necessarily need to reel in our technological capacities or turn back the clock on the forward momentum of a research agenda that already seems to have its own self-sustaining cybernetic reinforcement. Instead, this discussion suggests the need to reel in our own illusions of grandeur and stop reeling at the entanglements we find ourselves engaged in. Perhaps then we will be able to work with these new scalar relations, avoiding both the fantasy of domination and the horror at the interventions, and come to appreciate these scalar extensions as new forms of scalar symbiosis.

Iterating the Scalar Calibration
Circling around these scalar relations—ecological entanglements, DNA unfoldings, nanotechnological interventions, fractal thermodynamic patterning, cellular aggregations—we find ourselves losing our grip on the familiar and the assumed. Like Schweickart, we look for home, but find, when it circles back around, that home is not what we had presumed it to be. When and if we stop pitching a fit about this new dynamism, we can look around and observe that all the things we hold valuable, essential, and inevitable are reworked in a complex layering of relations.

But the “when and if” is essential, particularly in facing our current ecological imbalance. If we are to “stay with the trouble” and learn to make kin, as Haraway has encouraged, we need to work with and learn to use the rhetorical technologies, as Richard Doyle calls them, that serve as “attention attractors” that manifest and make possible a new responsiveness to these scalar relations.89As Doyle argues, the persuasiveness of scalar views “seem[s] to hinge on an experienceof this interconnection as well as an understandingof it.”90In Part III we will turn to the rhetorical technologies associated with scale, but here we can conclude our discussion of scalar relations by considering the effect of this new configuration: what is your own relation to these scalar relations?
The result, as we saw already in Schweickart, is a recognition of the contingent nature of the categorizations and mappings derived from human experience or imparted by human inquiry. All human values, languages, and conceptions are maps built of the relations and orders of the cosmos, maps that solidify into forms of preference, structures of association, and weighty implications. Scale requires that we bring these structures into view so that we can rework them by hooking them up into relations far exceeding ourselves.
