
For the scientist, some mode of observing one’s preferences is required to achieve something like an objective view in examining these relations as one distances oneself from the categories and relations you think you know. For the nanoscientist, the understanding of nanoscale interventions as not tightly controlled is not some New Age rewriting; it is an attempt to more adequately acknowledge the dynamics of the apparatus. For the biologist studying evolution, symbiosis is not a new Lamarckian trend but an acknowledgment of the variety of factors that contribute to the dynamics of life. For the ecologist, testifying to the role of humans in affecting this planetary ecosystem is not an attempt to insert politics into science but rather an attempt to trace our deep interconnection with the planet. In understanding these relations, values do not have to be left aside; they need to come into view to be reworked. As our value systems inevitably come into friction with these scalar tracings of science, we all need to find means of permitting our values to be transformed by these discoveries.

This task of transformation is not delivered by scientists as keepers of truth, nor is it displaced from us in some kind of social-political seismic transformation. Societies are not the scale at which such revaluation occurs for you—to suggest so is already to drift toward the inverted synecdoche in which society determines value structures within all individuals. Instead, such reconfiguring requires each of us to bring into view the structures of association and value embedded within these brains and bodies. Thus we circle back to the trope of the transformation created by the scalar view, combined now with the trope that one should, first and foremost, tend to oneself. Indeed, this is the trope already in Plato’s Alcibiades,where Socrates demands that the young ruler first learn to know himself before attempting to rule others. Or likewise, in Socrates’s last advice in the Phaedothat “If you take care of yourselves you will serve me and mine and yourselves, whatever you do  .  .  . but if you neglect yourselves  .  .  . you will accomplish nothing” (115b). In this task of contemplation, the result is a transformation of your base values as they are brought into view and reworked.91As Aurobindo describes it: “By dwelling in this cosmic consciousness our whole experience and valuation of everything in the universe will be radically changed.”92
This refiguration is already at the core of Pseudo-Dionysius’s coining of the term “hierarchy”: “The goal of a hierarchy  .  .  . is to enable beings to be as like as possible to God and to be one with him.”93Such hierarchy is “a state of understanding and activity of approximating as closely as possible to the divine” (153). In other words, before hierarchy was co-opted into a description of human social castes, it was a description of the attempt to reconcile these layers of being and calibrate them to the All. This truly scalar hierarchy does not subsume cells to bodies or bodies to cells—or any similar scalar subordination—but rather “ensures that when its members have received this full and divine splendor they can pass on this light generously and in accordance with God’s will to beings further down the scale” (154). In other words, the scalar hierarchy describes and guides these Homo sapienstoward the capacity to respond to this new configuration of relations.

We can hesitate for a moment on the zealous tone of “pass on this light,” but only to understand that this is not a merely religious thought. Undoubtedly, in the aggregate we can help bring into view this structure of values, but we always need to be wary of misplacing the scale of this transformation. This tension is brought into relief by religion and any other social structure or personal vendetta that attempts to synecdochically claim this process of value regulation for itself. Further tension is brought into view by our current political discourse, as we persistently submit to the scalar confusion where the larger is the more powerful and we permit our leaders to fill in for the whole both in name and practice. As Aldous Huxley wrote in 1945 at the end of the war partially built on this terrifying holism, “the cult of unity on the political level is only an idolatrous ersatzfor the genuine religion of unity on the personal and spiritual levels.”94
We can take this one step further and suggest that the tendency today, both in popular forms and in critical theory, to read everything in reference to the political risks something of a synecdoche and scalar rewriting. The personal cannot always be read in the view of the political. Undoubtedly, the personal is political, just as it can also be seen as economic and ecological. But these scalar reference points risk overtaking and rewriting this-scale experience without appropriately tracing the scalar feedback on which they are grounded. Such communal frames might then be configured on competing grounds, as ways of rereading your and, most importantly (as we turn in judgment to our neighbor), others’ actions in terms of the economic-political (as in neoliberal views), the ecological-political (in environmentalism), or the ethical-political (generalized standards of behavior, derived from religion or elsewhere, that one would like to impose on the general populace). In each case, one’s immediate world and this-scale social interactions are rewritten from a perspective of the aggregate.

Thus, returning to Arendt, we must rediscover that the active life, however important, cannot subordinate or forget the contemplative life. In treating scalar views as an alienation of this-scale existence, Arendt would have us think that such revaluations are antithetical to a proper tuning of ourselves to each other. Thus she reinforces the idea that “the philosopher’s experience of the eternal  .  .  . can occur only outside the realm of human affairs and outside the plurality of men.”95Although Arendt by no means leaves behind the contemplative life, this assumption—that the contemplative is antithetical to the active—is too easily invoked to critique the contemplative.96But losing sight of this contemplative transformation is just as much an alienation from this-scale existence, as we disavow our personal transformation in view of the transformation (or lack thereof) in the community. Why does it matter, we say, if I tune to these ecological relations, examine my implicit racial bias, or understand my technologies as symbiotic if we, in the aggregate, do not? The very form of this question is a scalar confusion.

We are currently in the midst of an immense scalar calibration on dozens of fronts, both individually and collectively, as we adjust to these newly elaborate scalar entanglements. As Bateson describes it, calibration is the repeated adjustment of a system in response to feedback.97In prodding scalar relations, we are receiving feedback that indicates something about our relationship to these levels of relations. But no one feedback loop is a calibration. Rather, calibration occurs through repeating that feedback so that adjustments can be made based on that repeated information. This calibration is an inevitably difficult process that also occurs on multiple scales. In this feedback we need to remember that even widespread resistance to this information is itself part of the calibration.This tension arises because these cross-scalar relations create what Bateson calls a “double-bind,” which he describes as the relation between two levels of abstraction improperly calibrated.98This double bind arises from the human, at this scale, seeing all these scales of relations that they both are and are not. This double bind is resolved by going to a higher logical level, which is not here a higher scale but to a comprehension of scale itself.

From this perspective, perhaps, we can find ourselves in a new relation that delights in these multiform relations. In this spirit, we can leave off here with Whitman’s scalar invocation in which all relations are recognized within the fractal unfolding of what is:
I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey-work of the stars,
And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg of the wren,
And the tree-toad is a chef-d’oeuvre for the highest,
And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,
And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery
I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and self-contain’d,
I stand and look at them long and long.

They do not whine about their condition,
They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
