Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of owning things,
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.

So they show their relations to me and I accept them99Part IIIRhetorical Technologies for a Theory of Scale
The Algorithms and configurations presented in Parts I and II do not fully account for one of the strangest aspects of scale: the problem it poses for representation. Because scale occurs outside of human experience, it must be re-presented at this-scale. Inevitably, its representations will be partial and distorted. These representations take a part of this scale and have it stand in for something on another scale. In this process, even science finds itself limited to particular maneuvers that make its descriptions possible as an attempt to track and account for these distortions and piece together these partial views. Chapter 10 will thus examine the operations of science as well as the role of those in the humanities who study science (what is known as science studies). In turn, because scalar depictions will be in some way obscure, they require a particular approach to reading and critiquing that, in a few important ways, run counter to many of the tendencies currently in vogue in cultural criticism. Chapter 11 will thus examine the structure of scalar representations in order to outline ways of approaching such depictions.

In addition, as I have made clear throughout this work, scale provides a transformation not only of reality and but also ourselves. How can these representations produce this transformation? Such representations must not only act as a means of conveying scalar information (what we usually speak of as facts) but also function as rhetorical technologies for assisting us in comprehending scale. All of the chapters here will deal with this question, but the final chapter takes it on most directly, thinking about the scalar relationship between brain and experience in relation to contemplative practices.10Mapping the Vast UnknowingThe Science of Scale, the Scale of Science
Theaetetus:What do you mean, everything?
Visitor:You don’t understand the first thing I say! Seemingly you don’t understand everything!
—Plato
If all knowledge were intuitive, there would be no need for science.

—Joel R. Primack and Nancy Ellen Abrams, The View from the Center of the Universe
Science between Suspicion and Skepticism
At the edge of the solar system, the disembodied voice of Carl Sagan speaks of the pale blue dot of the Earth and, with that voice soaked with homey wisdom, demands that we take into account the vastness. Television radio waves surpass the Voyagerspacecraft in which the golden disc soars out into space, awaiting discovery. Within some of these waves lie a thousand iterations of Sagan’s opening lines of Cosmos: “The cosmos is all that is or ever was or ever will be.”1
At the edge of the observable universe, Neil deGrasse Tyson takes his place next to his idol to take us once again through the cosmic calendar, this time enhanced by CGI, an even bigger budget, and a major production studio. Yet before Tyson can speak, this 2014 version of Cosmosreplays the opening clip from Sagan’s original performance, repeating this dramatic statement of wondrous science.

And yet, this opening line remains a strange statement. How do we comprehend a science of the Cosmos if it is defined in this way? To what do these words refer? We exist here, in this room, with our everyday affairs always in front of us, occupying our time and attention. All of this, says Sagan, is part of the Cosmos. But so is everything else, including what we haven’t yet thought to include. What, then, is the Cosmos that we are called to comprehend?
In Part I we spoke of the Cosmos as an inclusion of all that might be observed on any given scale (3.19) and as all that might be observed at all scales (3.41). The “all” in Sagan’s definition of Cosmos aligns his mode of description with the All as described in 3.38: the simple injunction to “include everything.” Sagan’s Cosmospoints to how science has continued to expand this All, fleshing it out with quarks and galactic bodies, cells and planetary relations (3.42). Yet this expansion into “all” things is puzzling, since it must include all kinds of difficult-to-comprehend objects, including those we do not yet have the means to understand. This is the topic we want to take up in this chapter. I want to consider what kind of map science is, such that it might hold authority to extend our knowledge into these scales that exceed our immediate experience.

In Sagan’s sincerity we find these questions of scientific authority tied to wonder and an effusion of affect:
Our contemplations of the cosmos stir us. There is a tingling in the spine, a catch in the voice, a faint sensation as if a distant memory of falling from a great height. We know we are approaching the grandest of mysteries. The size and age of the cosmos are beyond ordinary human understanding.2
Sagan invokes scales of time and space far beyond the human as the fount from which the mysteries of the Cosmos move us to a new form of contemplation. But, what exactly does this affect-laden characterization have to do with science? Has Sagan lost his scientific grounding? Perhaps we ought to ascribe to Sagan a different role, the prophet, as Ann Druyan seems to do in Sagan’s posthumously published Varieties of Scientific Experience.Comparing Sagan to the biblical Joshua, Druyan declares in her introduction that Sagan tried to knock down the “wall[s] around our souls that keep us from taking the revelations of science to heart.  .  .  . We are spiritually and culturally paralyzed, unable to face the vastness, to embrace our lack of centrality and find our actual place in the fabric of nature.”3Situated this way, Sagan’s rhetoric serves a moral and quasi-religious function, delivering the discoveries forged within the citadel of science to those bereft of its knowledge.

