Of course, there is something obnoxious about this characterization. It reeks of the suspicion that, even as scientists counterpose themselves to religion, they assume its mantle as the arbiters of truth and morality. In response, the scientist rails against this attitude, turning the conversation back to the practices of science, arguing for its rigor, skepticism, and discipline as the ground for this authority. After all, science has long been in the business of resisting the pseudoscientific, the superstitious, and the speculative. Sagan was also adamant in his defense of science and in working against superstition. However spiritual in tone Sagan’s work might be, much of Varietiesfocuses on dismissing and otherwise arguing against traditional conceptions of religion and spirituality, and his final book,The Demon-Haunted World,is another defense of science against superstition.

The year Sagan died—1996—also brought the Sokal hoax, in which the physicist Alan Sokal published an article in the postmodern theory journal Social Textthat he then declared a deliberate hoax. If Sagan had been alive to see the years of debate and scornful dismissals that followed, he likely would have agreed more with Sokal than those who defended critical theory.4When I began my education in science studies twelve years later, the Sokal affair was still simmering enough that it was taught in my literature and science course. Nothing seemed resolved at all between these two cultures.5If anything, the situation has been amplified by another major development: an increase in the tenacity and visibility of overt denialism and obfuscation of science that has now been called the “post-truth” era, which seems to accept a politicization of science in order to undermine disagreeable science. This so disturbed Bruno Latour, one of the targets of the Sokal affair, that his 2004 article “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam?” revisits his role in this controversy, recasting his intervention into science that became the core of science studies.

Sagan, it seems, left this world just when the tensions were about to burst over the epistemological validity of science, the appropriate domain of its descriptions, and the ways to justify its practice and authority. In miming the caustic comparison of Sagan and religion, I want to return us to a moment before the conversation reached this degree of furor. In this context, I want to take some space to comment on both the practice of science and science studies. After all, scale thrusts us across these two cultures and forces us to ask questions anew about these attitudes that recur in both science and cultural criticism: critical, skeptical, suspicious, incredulous, concerned, distressed, ignorant, beguiled, nonsensical. Quietly, late to the party, unfashionably dressed, a ghost of Sagan inserts: wonder? Perhaps there is a mutual bewilderment that can help us clarify the operations of science and thwart this antagonism between the skepticism of science and the suspicion of critique.

Look again at the premise of this book: in scale we describe, encounter, and intervene in existence on levels outside of normal human experience. How is this possible? What are these cells and ecologies? How does science so confidently make sense of them? How can we speak of them in our everyday lives as if we understand what they are? Are we, scientists, humanists, or anyone, so certain that we know what we are talking about—not in the authority sense (as in “I am knowledgeable in the field of microbiology”) but in an experiential sense (“I know this body as a menagerie of these semiautonomous bubbles of life coordinated in an intricate aggregation”)? Surely there is more to be said to understand a cell than what is written in a textbook and refined, by whatever process, in labs and professional journals. Indeed, the wondrous nature of this transformation implies that this scientific process is not so separate from this wonder. How does this affect relate to the messy yet highly regulated accumulations of scientific practice?
I want to show how the problem of scalar extension and the question of the scale of knowledge gives us one way to resituate the debate over the epistemological status and authority of science. The examples that are most readily invoked as needing the authority of science, such as climate change, evolution, toxicity, or treatments for disease, are usually those that force us to change our behavior in relation to discoveries made at other scales. In turn, scalar examples are those most readily amenable to strong critiques usually called “constructivist” or “relativist”—for instance, Latour’s declaration that microbes did not exist before Pasteur.6We can reevaluate such statements if we situate them in the particular challenges presented by scale.

The argument here is simple: scale points to how science encodes a not-knowing within a knowing (3.43). Given this skepticism and tension over science, some work must be done to situate this rather mystical claim. To this end, I want to pose a simple contrast of four kinds of description of the same object. This contrast will set the stage for a discussion of how science functions as a regulated process of specification. We can then consider this specification process in relation to the epistemological critiques from science studies. In this context, we will discover bewilderment and wonder as the starting point for discovering and working with the inherent not-knowing within science’s knowing. We can clarify this relationship between wonder and science by examining the precedent set by Alexander von Humboldt’s description of a “science of the Cosmos.” This notion of science will leave room to consider what traditions handle the question of transformation beyond the development of this kind of knowledge (epistēmē). To help pinpoint precedents for this endeavor, I will briefly examine this question in Plato’s concern about rhetoric and his relationship to mysticism. Doing so will outline the conditions required to follow out and integrate the scalar extensions of science into this-scale experience.

This chapter also hopes to make clear how a concept like scale sits between the sciences and the humanities. Sagan’s rhetoric serves as a kind of litmus test for how well we have traced and mapped these modes of description: do we understand where and how to situate Sagan’s science in relation to his turn to wonder? The task here will not be a blending of the two so much as a clearer delineation of each so that we can see the function, promise, and limits of both kinds of practice and discourse. Scale will emerge in the middle, operating with the same principles but moving humans to different but equally important and legitimate ends, depending on how it is situated and what it is used for.

Four Descriptions of a Cell
In cell theory we find a simple object we can use to consider the operations of science. This body is made up of cells, which operate in partial independence in a different phenomenal world that nonetheless constitutes the grounds for this body. While many object to evolutionary timescales, dispute over toxicity of errant molecules, struggle to wrap their minds around pandemic-level viruses, or fail to comprehend their relation to a planetary ecology, few seem to find the idea of cells objectionable. No one is spending time on the pulpit denouncing the notion of the cell, and no great education is needed to imagine them. Yet I’d argue that everything discussed in this book can be unfolded from dwelling with this significant scalar shift.

We can outline four options for making-present, describing, and analyzing this scalar object. Undoubtedly, one could think of more, but this sketch will suffice. For all but the last, we can use an image to make it paradigmatic. The first description of a cell is an image, produced by a microscope, which becomes the data on which knowledge of a cell is crafted (Figure 12). Microscopy is the only way we know about cells at all; without microscopes, we could not even speak of their existence. Of course, microscopy was not sufficientfor the understanding of cells, but it provided the basis for their definition as well as the primary evidence.7Such images help form the cell as an “epistemic thing,” as Hans-Jörg Rheinberger calls them: “material entities or processes  .  .  . that constitute the object of inquiry.”8Scientists then develop additional ways of producing data and images used as evidence for further descriptions of this sort.9
Figure 12:First description of a cell: images of—or, more generally, data produced from encounters with—the object in question. This is a transmission electron micrograph of a portion of a neuron. Generated and deposited into the public domain by the Electron Microscopy Facility at Trinity College.

Out of the process of prodding and experimentation used to isolate and address particular questions about the cell, scientists then produce the next two kinds of descriptions (Figures 13 and 14). These kinds of diagrams and images are essential for conceptualizing the operations of cells, mapping their parts, and tracing their processes, as well as then communicating these results both to other scientists and to nonscientists.10One need go no further than the famous model of DNA by Watson and Crick to understand the role of these models in attempting to conceptualize objects and processes on another scale.

Figure 13:Second description of a cell: the diagram of the object. This is a chart showing the parts of the neuron in a way that clearly positions and makes visible all of their essential features.

The fourth description of a cell is quite different. You, the reader, must provide it: it is the fact that these diagrams and image just provided are about your body. This body called “you” is made up of around 37.2 trillion cells, and the brain processing all of this is made up of around 86.1 billion neurons. Your body itself is a description of cells, and your cognitive processing a description of neurons, albeit one that translates from the micrometer scale to the meter scale. What are cells here, in this hand, in these muscles, in this brain?
The first kind of description is any means of examining the world on another scale. It thus also includes other, less direct and less clearly visual modes of prodding scales, such as electron-density maps in protein crystallography or the statistical readouts produced by colliders.11These scalar mediations make use of an apparatus capable of cross-scalar translation, tracing differences only discernible at another scale and presenting them for deciphering. The second description is a way of tracking, placing together, and visualizing this information so that we can make a relevant picture of existence viewed at that scale. The third then mobilizes this picture into a series of relations. All three are essential for the epistemic processes of science; the scalar prodding provides the potential differences, while the models and charts piece together and interpret those scalar encounters. We can then add this fourth description as an essential step: that of bringing the scalar description back into this scale,here, and considering its relation to experience.
