
Figure 14:Third description of a cell: the diagram of a process. This image charts the transmission of a signal across the synapse of neurons. Synapse Schematic by Thomas Splettstoesser is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Should we say that this fourth description is not of cells at all? If so, then we deny any validity and applicability of any scalar inquiries—one would have to say that DNA, climate change, galaxies, viruses, and quarks also have no place in this-scale reality. In this light, this fourth description must be seen as equally important and valid. What are microbiologists describing if not the things in this body? The first three images do not describe the precise nature and activity of the cell in the muscle on your left little finger about halfway between your knuckle and nail, nor do they pinpoint the particular group of neurons involved in processing this sentence. Yet, at least in principle, that is what these descriptions are about. We now can wonder what science is performing: here the most rigorous and sustained inquiry into the nature of these cells appears strangely removed from the reality it is describing. If we are to accept some “reality” in the operations of science, this difference must be the first bridge that is crossed.

A Schema of Specifications
These four descriptions of a cell bring into view different ways that we can consider the operations of science. To admit the validity of the fourth description is to simply note that there are ways of specifying the domain and operations of a description, practice, and concept, that is, what we usually call knowledge. Scale requires such specification, at the least, because what is described in the aggregate (e.g., neurons) may or may not translate directly to any particular instantiation (any particular neuron in your brain).

In the last half century a great deal of work has been done to trace but also critique the epistemological processes of science. I want to reposition this work in terms of how science brings into view these different scales both through intervention and explanation. In the tradition of delineating metascientific models of science, we can generalize the accounting or marking of scale by considering all science in terms of specification.12Here we mean specifications both in the sense of making something precise and in the technical sense of detailing the particulars of a project or technical object, including where and how it might function. The goal here is to see if we articulate more precisely both the valuable function and the limits of science’s mode of inquiry.

To make this concrete, let’s pose another simple example: here is a red bell pepper. Explain it! With an object assumed, we can proceed via descriptions attached to the object. While we can explore the pepper’s this-scale qualities to attach to it things like taste, color, uses in cooking, which of my children like it, and so on, we can quickly find ourselves with scalar specifications. Where did it come from? We find ourselves describing the grocery store, and this pulls us into an economic system described by price, distribution systems, modes of food regulation, and so forth. We can trace it to the farm, and quickly move into large-scale or small-scale ecological relations, the thermodynamic and chemical needs for it to grow, the qualities of the soil, the climate conditions. Remaining with the pepper, we can go to molecular attributes to identify why it’s red or has the texture that it has, explain these using evolutionary pressures such as long-term animal-pepper relations—and so on. We can imagine each of these as a parameter attached to the pepper in a kind of specification chart containing the many different ways to explain this pepper. These specifications say a lot about the pepper; they help us identify it, trace its relation to other objects, explain its characteristics according to particular parameters, and tell us ways it might be used.13In this form, all of these aspects are presented as facts about an object already assumed; we can therefore call them ontological specifications.

But suppose a skeptic arrives at our pepper and asks, “So you say that this pepper is red because it contains something called capsanthin. What is that? How do you know? Does it apply for all peppers?” This kind of question prompts us to augment this chart of specifications-as-facts with specifications about the knowledge process itself, which unfolds into a new set of delimitations about these facts and explains their genesis, justification, relation to each other, reasons for definition, and limits of applicability. These epistemic specificationsare aboutthe first sort of specifications; they are about the process of coming to know. This distinction between the ontological and epistemic specifications becomes embodied in the distinction between the textbook or reference book (such as the Merck Index for chemicals) and the messy practices of science. However, it is in working through epistemic specifications that science is practiced. But this creates a problem: the information about the acceptability of a description, how it was formed, and to what it may apply are all contained in the epistemic specifications. As we saw in a more general sense in chapter 7, ontological presence assumes too much already about the conditions under which that object is formed and described. Both what we call facts and standard knowledge then hide, in a sense, the epistemic specifications within these statements about the object. Doing so can be useful; the Merck Index, a protein database, and a taxonomic classification all provide ways for scientists to build on previous work without having to repeat that work (see 3.11).14Perhaps this does not matter for something like capsanthin in a red pepper, but the tension between the two kinds of specification arises repeatedly at points of controversy, political intervention, when some particular scientific object catches the attention of nonscientists (such as monosodium glutamate), and, as our fourth description indicates, when we attempt to bring that statement back to the pepper in front of us.

The situation becomes more marked when the object in question is from another scale, as capsanthin already is, since the object itself is not brought before us except as a series of specifications gathered around this term, some of which are ontological, some epistemological. Such “objects” immediately invite wonder: how did we find these things out? What do they apply to? What do they have to do with these things here? Scientific practice, it might be said, is the process of developing, sorting out, and making use of these specifications in a way that aims to account for and regulate these epistemological processes so that scientists can say with some precision how and in what context such descriptions apply.

However, out of this epistemological process emerge ontological specifications, that is, facts about objects. Given the power and ubiquity of scientific knowledge, it only makes sense that there would emerge scholars whose goal is to trace out these epistemological processes so as to make clear the process of making these facts. If scientists expect people to change their behavior and worldview in relation to things like DNA, buckminsterfullerenes, climate change, viral vectors, or our struggling microbiomes, then these specifications are not simply a matter for scientists. This is not simply a matter of acceptability, authority, or truth: it’s about making these objects acceptably real, so that we can trace more closely the ways that such specifications may or may not become the basis for new relations, new forms of speech, and new worldviews. This is how I would view the emergence of the various fields grouped together here as science studies.

As science studies has matured, it has provided a rather extensive view of the scientific process. In surveying this literature, we can define the following modes of epistemic specification.

1. The object/epistemic thing—what we defined above as a given object exists in science primarily as an epistemic thing that emerges in and becomes subject to an experimental system.15Such objects are not necessarily assumed in advance, but emerge as a science develops. Scale clarifies that this specification of the epistemic thing must occur first, since scalar objects cannot be taken as obviously present.

2. The apparatus—the device(s) used for tracing differences that make a difference, particularly those on another scale. One must know the specifications of the apparatus in order to be able to use that apparatus as a means of testing hypotheses and descriptions. This includes the accounting for quirks of the device, particularly potential distortions produced by it, and the modes of intervention used to produce knowledge.16
3. The paradigm—the dominant theories and domains of acceptability that guide both questions and interpretations for an inquiry. Thomas Kuhn’s original description of paradigms remains a powerful way of considering how scientists delimit what questions are relevant, how to interpret data, and what kinds of descriptions are acceptable.

