4. Discursive productions—everything from scribbled notes and back-of-the-envelope calculations to conversations in the lab, professional meetings, academic publications, and popular accounts. One can specify how particular aspects of these descriptions relate to, frame, alter, guide, and otherwise create aspects of a science.

5. The scientific culture, or social aspects of scientists—their day-to-day activity, modes of interpreting evidence and rallying behind interpretations of that evidence, trainings, investments, personal biases and quirks, and so on.

6. Relevance for human action—including possibilities for technological development, questions of research support, habitual biases and omissions arising from the cultural milieu, and political exigencies, interventions, or restrictions. One can specify, for example, how the funding priorities of a national science funding agency or special interest group affect what is researched, how it is presented, or even how it is practiced.

7. Experience—as in the fourth description of a cell. One can specify how scientific inquiries relate to the possibilities of experience.

8. Existence—here I want to separate all of the others from the ground of being in order to acknowledge that science is a process of specification out of what is. How is “what is” being resolved? Separating existence from both object (epistemic thing) and apparatus resituates the question about the reality of the things science describes: the cell as an epistemic thing is already the result of a specification. Thus, by “existence” here I mean something abstract only in the sense that it is abstracted from any one object and observer. The specifications in this category navigate the relationship between objects and observers.Thus, this is where I would place scale, as one essential specification of how reality is being examined, described, or understood. Scale is not quite a specification about the apparatus, since it is tying the differences discerned in the apparatus according to their relation to existence apart from any given object. Likewise, scale must be ambivalent about objects themselves even as it traces and relates epistemic things. Scale’s simple abstraction away from any given object or situation likewise means that it also cannot be a specification about discursive productions, human action, or culture. Finally, even as it is tied to experience, its power lies in the consistency whereby it could transform experience by relating it to knowledge gained outside of immediate experience. Thus, scalar specifications function as parameters for the others, relating together epistemic things, apparatuses, human-bound interests, and experience to a reference point about how whatever “is” is being resolved.

These modes of specification emerge more or less simultaneously in science. From the perspective of scientific practice, these are modes of becoming more precise and ensuring that descriptions are adequately understood and applicable. The problem is that, in experience, one already has an apparatus, that is, the senses, which parses reality in a particular way at a particular scale. Science expands these capacities outside of the domain of any single, unaided Homo sapiensbody. In doing so, practices and devices must be developed for clearly tracing and regulating these extensions. This requires diminishing, regulating, or accounting for the role of individual experience, the culture of science, relevance for human action, and description (specifications 4 through 6) so that science can account for how the apparatus adequately specifies the object within the paradigm (specifications 1 through 3). This operation is necessary becausethese objects of inquiry extend beyond human experience. If descriptions were not regulated by specifications in the apparatus, object, and paradigm; if inquiries were not insulated, to some degree, from human interests; and if science did not abstract away from any particular experience, then we could not trace out these inquiries arriving on another scale. How, then, could we speak with any confidence at all of cells or climate change or DNA or viral transmissions?
The Disciplining of Science (Studies)
The products of science—whether textbooks, colliders, television shows, DNA evidence, or political recommendations—arise from the tracing of these modes of specification. In the process, science slows us down to examine our claims and to provide careful parameters for our descriptions. This is why the philosophers Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari describe science as “a fantastic slowing down” that defines “functions presented as propositions in a discursive systems”—what they call “functives.”17Science may, as Deleuze and Guattari characterize it, “provide chaos with reference points,” but only to the extent that it traces and retains these modes of specification.18Here we catch wind of the critique implicit in much of science studies: one concern about this mode of specification is the way it inevitably excludes and precludes. The danger is assuming that these modes of specification contain everything we need to know about reality.This is the problem with converting these epistemic specifications into ontological statements: conditions of knowledge and domains of applicability become buried in statements of fact.

Given this danger, we can understand a certain attitude arising in response to the excessive authority and weight given to science. A distressing characterization can be found, for example, in Martin Heidegger’s argument that “science sets upon the real,” making existence “stand in objectness” so that “at any given time the real will exhibit itself as an interacting network, i.e. a surveyable series of related causes.”19Heidegger relates this practice to his critique of technology, arguing that science performs an “enframing” that results in a “most extreme dominance” in which the world “becomes a standing-reserve to be commanded and set in order.”20Even in this critique, Heidegger largely buys into the presumption that science’s mode of specification captures and totalizes Being. We can step back from this distressing characterization by speaking of science as a specification process that does not capture relations but rather maps and traces them for particular ends in particular, limited contexts. In fact, these limits—that is, its own specifications—are the very reason science functions with any authority at all.This may be what decades of science studies work has made possible: a renewed account of the specification processes of science, not to undermine that process but to further specify the domains of applicability of scientific knowledge.21This is what we did in the fourth description of a cell: point to another configuration of description that brings us outside of the typical scientific specifications but nonetheless bears a relationship to those descriptions.

Given the suspicion in Heidegger’s characterization, we can see how this tracing of epistemic specifications can be situated as an attack on the authority of science. The resulting conversation has hidden somewhat the aspects of science that I want to highlight here, particularly an account of the nature of the not-knowing embedded within science. Some of the difficulty is an artifact of the response to the growth of the authority and scope of science, as well as the way science was reified as a special form of knowledge. Both the sociologist David Bloor, who was instrumental in the development of the sociology of scientific knowledge, and Bruno Latour, for example, were working against the way that sociologists avoided studying the foundations of scientific knowledge by making science a special case, insulated from cultural productions and different from other kinds of knowledge.22Similarly, the strongest studies on political aspects and implications of science arose from feminist critiques, which then developed into particular interventions into the ways that political interests or social bias affect science.23These studies are responding to a conception of science as objective, with exceptional or sole access to truth void of social, personal, or political interests—a view that gave science priority in both funding and interest and emphasized scientific expertise over and against other forms of expertise. The resulting tenor in such work is inherently critical, positioned as a task of demystifying, unmasking, or unveiling the practices and claims of science.24
Latour and others have argued that this critical tenor undermines the hopes that science studies would actually strengthen and bolster science. However, the basic operation of criticism is essential for tracing out and disentangling these epistemic specifications. The problem is that, when situated as an epistemological critique demystifying and complicating the authority of science, science studies scholars such as Latour and Bloor often overstated or confused the nature of this retracing. To clarify, reposition, and defend critical methods, I want to use what we have said about scale to pinpoint three potential confusions that arise when we examine the limits and operations of science. We can take reference to Latour’s widely cited philosophy, method, and characterization of science studies to present one version of these problems.

The first confusion is the reprioritizing, inverting, or muddling of the kinds of specification. In a critical mode, this maneuver may take the form of “we think scientific knowledge is unaffected by X but actually it is.” In this form, the scholar takes an aspect of the epistemic process of science—social relations, cultural forms, rhetorical productions, political influences, ideological biases—and shows how they are necessary for the production of facts. Doing so is not a problem in itself; the problem is when the claim reprioritizes these specifications, suggesting that the social createsscientific knowledge. This maneuver was essential, for instance, in Bloor’s work on the sociology of scientific knowledge; his argument was that, because all knowledge is created through human social institutions, one should position social practices as a, or even the,causal factor in how scientific knowledge develops.25The cause of Pasteur’s germ theory of disease is not just the microbes he is observing but the social practices through which his theory is articulated.26When situated too strongly, this becomes a crossing of domains of specification, counterposing the social specifications under which a fact is accepted with the process of tracing the differentiations on which those social deliberations are based. This problem is implicit in all framing of “social construction”: such studies usually attempt to substitute the scale of the social as the cause (or at least a cause) of something.27
In a series of exchanges, Latour critiques Bloor and others for just this problem, but he does so through an equally confusing operation: muddling the forms of specification by placing them all in the same terms. In Latour’s account, all of the operations of science become “trials of strength” by “actants,” which include nonhuman aspects of reality. Thus, while Latour refuses the prioritization of the social, he does so by essentially generalizing the social. The language he uses is social and political through-and-through, leading to a confusing articulation of the processes of science as it piles together all of these different aspects in the same terms.28As he develops this maneuver, Latour argues that he is moving from a distinction between “what is constructed” and “what is not constructed” to “what is constructed welland what is badlyconstructed.”29This move to quality of construction, combined with the generalized language of sociality, muddles the kinds of constructionthat we’re dealing with. Since all of the epistemic specifications are piled together into this “parliament of things,” Latour gives little space for prioritizing the reflective, filtering practices science uses to make clear and discernible things that are not easily traced out (most importantly, scalar objects). I would suggest that his defenders of science who are antagonized by his critiques are attempting, even if they do so poorly, to distinguish between those parts of science that are constructed by the interaction of nonhumans and those that are constructed by the interactions with humans. It only adds to the confusion to say that it’s all equally constructed—but, by the way, these constructions also include those from nonhumans. While we undoubtedly need to acknowledge the role of nonhumans in producing science, our scheme of specifications implies that one can distinguish a kind of construction that derives its form primarily from an encounter with an object, with other domains of specification adequately accounted for. Is this not what Latour’s naive scientists are trying to say when they say “it is not constructed”—with an implicit “by us”? Rather than characterizing these scientists as foolish, backward moderns, perhaps those of us trained in the nuances of language, rhetoric, and culture can assist our fellow inquirers in clarifying the domain and form of their own operation.

The second confusion is the philosophical maneuver that underlies Latour’s generalizing of sociality: as he makes clear in his exchanges with Bloor, Latour is arguing that scientists aren’t just creating knowledge, they are creating objects. Thus, while Bloor claims that social institutions are responsible for creating knowledge about microbes, Latour makes the stronger claim that, in some sense, science creates microbes.30This is why Latour’s maneuver is “one more turn after the social turn”: “both [Nature and Society] are the results of the practice of science and technology making.”31Or, as he says in response to Bloor’s bafflement with this statement: “Every single one of the philosophical difficulties of the moderns comes from this double bind: driving a wedge [between subject and object] and then, after having rendered problematic the connection, trying to patch it up.”32What we have said about scale, particularly in Part II, indicates that the wedge between subject and object needs to be reexamined, but Latour here gives too much power to these very moderns he critiques. Some “moderns” did not create the subject-object distinction. Latour places this split too late in the epistemic situation. Any experience produces a subject-object distinction(see chapter 8); this is not something uniquely formed in the scientific process.While Latour does not mean to attack science in this maneuver, in an important sense he is, because accounting for epistemological conditions of science cannot proceed as if science is the one creating the split between nature and culture, inside and outside.Systematic forms of inquiry, including science, are designed to examine and trace how and where these divisions are made. We might agree with Latour’s essential point that the configuration of objectivity and the real “out there” is misplaced, but it does not clarify the issue to suggest that science constitutes this difference. Instead, science can be seen as an attempt to account for and systematically produce particular subject-object configurations through these modes of specification. In this view, science is primarily a reflective endeavor: it experiments with its own descriptions and apparatuses in order to see how and where they function. It then uses these specifications to rally parts of the world (humans or otherwise) into particular configurations. While this language may drift close to Latour’s actor-network language, the view is equally close to Bloor’s, who argues that the subject-object distinction is necessary to account for how any interaction is configured.33
The third confusion arises in how Latour remains excessively committed to this question about truth and validity of facts, which, I would argue, obscures underlying questions about the ambiguities and limits of scientific description.34Of course, we need to trace science’s modes of specification. But when Latour moves to the broader questions about the formation of the subject-object distinction, the acknowledgment of nonhuman agency, and the construction of reality, he pushes science studies into territory beyond truth conditions while still insisting this is about the epistemic process of science. Situating this analysis in relation to truth conditions takes this “modern constitution” too seriously, as if it is only in the modern era that such diagrams of nature and society are possible, as if they are generally accepted, rehearsed, and understood, and as if there are not already alternative ways of conceptualizing such knowledge practices. Doing so places science studies too squarely on the same ground as science: both being concerned primarily with the validity of the specifications produced by science. There are, however, far more issues that arise from these specifications. Most apparently, there is the issue of the limits and applicability of these very specifications. In addition to questions about the particular conditions out of which science arises there are also questions of how it makes possible new perspectives and whether and how science results in further transformation of worldview for those engaged with it. In response, we can acknowledge the inherent limits and ambiguity of the very process of specification. In doing so, we can move from questions about truth to other kinds of questions about what these discourses do in different contexts. Is it not different to ask “What is a cell?” in the way we have here? Perhaps this may seem a strange move in a time when truth, accuracy, and science are under assault, but I wonder how it would change the conversation about science if we began with a different question: “What are we talking about?”
From Suspicion/Skepticism to Bewilderment/Wonder
