This last option is not readily apparent in Latour’s philosophy, even as he moves from “critique to concern” in his reckoning with the science wars. This simple question—what are we talking about?—points us to the ways that scientific descriptions pull us out of the scale at which we live and require that we adjust our this-scalebehavior on the basis of this reconfiguring of reality. On the one hand, this is all the more reason we need to figure out new ways to keep intact these matters of fact, so that we can make these extensions with some degree of confidence. On the other hand, these matters of fact are not enough. They become matters of concern not because they are constructed equally by other actants but because they run into tension with a this-scale, human way of understanding reality—when I have to reconcile the struggles of my life (paying rent, keeping a job, raising my kids) with the confusing scalar implications that connect together one scalar object (economics) with another (ecology) in a way that is not immediately apparent and easy to grasp.

In this light, we can wonder about Latour’s move to concern. While I am sympathetic with his echoing of Haraway’s aim for a discourse designed “to protect and to care,” “matters of concern” seems to also imply an overbearing scrutiny regardless of whether or not the thing is clearly understood—or even if we’re certain that we’re talking about the same thing.35Is this not already what happens when science becomes entangled in a concern—about vaccines, climate change, women’s bodies, health-care systems, fracking sites, clean water, or mask mandates? Latour argues that facts are closed while points of concern are open, ready to be composed and recomposed. Yet both facts and these points of concern run into the problem of doxa,the marriage of opinion with social expectation, where everyone proceeds as if the issues at hand are clear and the points of concern are shared. In addition, we can follow Latour’s concern about critique and consider the affect here: does concern not imply worry, of being concerned about your neighbor, certain that something is wrong, that I must get involved and intervene? Is this not the unfortunate result of this insistent sociality? Like parents concerned about their teenager who has been staying out late—and have you seen what he’s been wearing? (and he spends so much time alone)—we find ourselves plagued with an excess of concern as we contemplate our scalar entanglements. Is this the attitude with which we will approach our dear Gaia or our fellow actants?
In this light, we can further reposition the idea of critique and push against Latour’s critique of critique in order to rediscover this more strictly critical maneuver: discovering what is not understood in what we think we understand. Latour’s characterization of critique is both egoic and suspicious, as if the critical move is inherently (1) about me, the critic, getting the upper hand, being more informed, and less naive, and (2) wary or even disdainful of the thing that is being critiqued. Certainly, there is a real target here (Latour puts his early work among them), and we need to scrub criticism of this attitude.36But Latour uses that characterization to throw out what remains an essential move: attending to the conditions, parameters, limits, and implications of a mode of knowledge. Critique does not have to be suspicious; it does not need to reduce an object to something else (e.g., your distress to a death drive); it does not need to be an ego trip where you are the enlightened one bearing the truth to the ignorant. Latour mixes up the general tenor of “being critical” with the Kantian operation he insists that we get beyond: the task of observing how, within any particular experience, there are conditions, assumptions, and components that we may not be aware of but that can and should be examined.

It simply is not true that “what performs a critique cannot also compose.”37Criticism is needed because we already suppose too much about reality.There are already social practices, languages, cultural regulations, personal sentiments, technological infrastructures, genetic inheritances, energy grids, oil sources, residual wastes slowly dissolving in the ocean—all of which must be examined and reopened for us to forge new forms of existence. Is it not strange that Latour would say that “With a hammer  .  .  . you can do a lot of things  .  .  . but you cannot repair, take care, assemble, reassemble, stitch together”?38Need I point out that people do all kinds of repairs and assembling with a hammer? Surely Latour, who would so readily have us rethink our conception of science, politics, and things, understands that if you’re going to repave a road, you must first dig it up?
How bewildering! Do we know what we are haggling about? This, it seems to me, is the fundamental question brought on by a basic critical impulse: what is it that we are talking about? Is it as clear as it seems to be? I’m not taking the strategy shared by Bloor and Sokal and simply accusing Latour of obscurantism; rather, I am pointing to a set of more basic questions prompted by a different affect meant to set stage for a different conversation. What is Latour referring to, for instance, by “nature” when he insists that “ecology seals the end of nature”?39When he says “all the various notions of nature” does he mean Emerson’s nature andthe one that evolved in frontier America, and the national parks movement, and the one assumed by physicists, and the one environmentalists are trying to save? No. In Latour’s own work he means particular notions and stances tied to this term “nature,” such as the world conceived as a place apart or an object to be dominated by a knowing subject. Such aspects, uncovered by critique, do not themselves totalize “nature” in a way that warrants such strong dismissals.

In their deconstructive form, these questions arise from bewilderment, in the not-understanding and confusion that is taken as neither mine (my inability to understand, my not being properly trained in your discipline) nor yours (your obscurantism) but as a way past pretending to understand or that there is only one way that descriptions work, experiences are configured, or actions are performed. What are we even talking about? To what does it apply? How might that be understood? How do we know it? What is not accounted for in this articulation or mode of knowing? How can we work with it? In their most productive forms, these questions hinge on wonder: I wonder what X is? What if we try X? How does X relate to Y? Can there be something else here? Bewilderment is the feeling one gets in a tangle, the “confusion arising from losing one’s way”; it is the acknowledgment of the labyrinthine form of our attempt to understand where we are, what we are doing, and what we are saying (OED). Wonder arises from the astonishment with objects, things, ideas. The two affects are complementary, both moving us to appreciate anew and ask again, more carefully, with less certainty and more interest.40
The same questions could be asked of skeptical scientists such as Sokal when they adopt the same strong modes of rhetoric, which assume too much common ground in the understanding of the terms and acceptable forms of proof. Skepticism is the counterpart to critical suspicion; it risks hiding the need to specify, trace conditions, and withhold certainty behind an egoic, superior affect. In this form, as Latour fairly notes, skepticism has been excellent for “debunking quite a lot of beliefs, powers, and illusions,” but it is also reaching its limits.41The problem arises when scientists make skepticism into an attitude based in authority and mistake their highly regimented mode of specification for the only mode of parsing the world.42
By way of illustration, one can wonder what would have happened if Carl Sagan had taken a different approach in the conversation he recounts at the beginning of Demon-Haunted World.There, he finds himself in the car with a driver who, upon finding out that he’s “that scientist guy,” begins to question him about “frozen extraterrestrials languishing in an Air Force base near San Antonio, ‘channeling’  .  .  .  , crystals, the prophecies of Nostradamus, astrology, the shroud of Turin.” With each new topic, says Sagan, “I had to disappoint him. ‘The evidence is crummy,’ I kept saying. ‘There’s a much simpler explanation.’”43Instead of being skeptical, assuming the role as the arbiter of truth, and simply recounting the evidence for and against such things, Sagan could have asked something different: to what is he referring? I’ve wondered about channeling  .  .  . what is it describing? Why are we so certain these are spirits? What do we mean by that? Undoubtedly these questions can be disarming, and they probably would have confused the driver. But, if done with more nuance and less ego, this approach can respect that there is some configuration toward reality being expressed here. What is it? These questions, if adequately shared, can induce a mutual bewilderment from which we can start to have a conversation about these different kinds of questions, what they apply to, why we hold to them, and what they serve to do.

It certainly is harder to have this kind of conversation with ideas like Atlantis. But many of the things described by science are closer to Atlantis than they are to the immediacies of one’s life—and harder to wrap one’s head around. In science, bewilderment is thus the first step toward working with these broader difficulties and reorientations. This is the method of the current project: it began with a bewilderment (how is it possible that I am simultaneously atoms, cells, quarks, ecologies, galaxies?) and a wondering (how does this apparatus function? Why does it show up in everything from descriptions of mystical union with God to descriptions of ecological entrainment? But also: have you seen the “Inner Life of the Cell”?!).44The method then proceeded by criticism—a tracing of the conditions under which scale can be articulated—but also through other methods of textual exegesis, historical questioning, comparative analysis, and thought experiment. In many ways, I can hardly get past the first detail, the basic structure of scale; I keep unfolding more considerations out of this fractal question that might simply be reduced to a word, with an affect: scale?!
Yet as the breadth of this inquiry implies, such bewilderment can be productive of new avenues of discussion as we unfold a simple point in the many contexts in which it inevitably applies. It is an invitation to step back from the things assumed (the critical maneuver, but here performed mutually, starting first with the critic’s confusion and willingness to admit an impasse) but also to specify (Say more about what you mean by that? I’m not sure that we’re talking about the same thing. I’ve often wondered  .  .  .). Perhaps such an affect and intellectual stance are difficult to maintain. But I wonder if this is only because we get so involved in the matter, concerned about its implications, its problematic uses, its terrible associations, its naïveté. My experience is that such conversations end in discord primarily because someone, at some point, invokes authority, insists on his understanding, or simply runs out of energy (pick it up again tomorrow?). Is this not a practice for humanists to take up: helping ourselves and others step back from this insistent sense of knowing, to trace these disjunctures, and help ourselves navigate these bewildering transformations of our existence?45
If we combine this bewilderment with the four descriptions of a cell, we can notice just how much more there is to ask about what science does and describes. Okay, let’s accept a basic fact like cells. What unfolds out of that? To what does each form of description apply? In this rendering, one notices that, as we add more specifications of the object in the second and third descriptions, we not only learn more about the object but also delimit the domain of applicability by embedding these specifications out of which the diagrams are produced. Science studies shows that these conditions can be made available if we ask the right questions. Since science proceeds by adding onto their diagrams more often than deconstructing them, we might think that they are not interested in asking these questions. To the contrary, I want to show that this simply moves the wondering forward.

On Humboldt’s Bridge: The Sublime Science of the Cosmos
Science encodes a not-knowing in a knowing. We can now explain this sentence more precisely: in defining, examining, and describing an object, imbuing this description with particular aspects that operate according to particular specifications (including a particular scale), science creates knowledge. But this positive articulation is delimited; in reality, it functions as an adequate description because it is limited—we know to what it will apply and why. We know that all cells will have some kind of DNA, that some kinds of proteins will unfold this DNA, and we know how, in order for an aerobic cell to generate the energy that it does, it has to follow a certain chain of exchange among molecules. We do not need to know when and precisely how each and every cell has or does these things, because the description operates according to delimited categories such as “cell,” “respiration,” “mitochondria,” and “DNA.” If we were to talk about prokaryotes many of these descriptions would not apply. They would again apply quite differently—or not at all—if we were talking about the carbon cycle around the Susquehanna Valley or the respiration in a fungus.

This point is not new, but scale brings it into sharper focus. To cite a precedent: this is already within Polanyi’s notion of “tacit knowledge.” Polanyi argues that, simultaneously, “(1) Tacit knowing of a coherent entity relies on our awareness of the particulars of the entity for attending to it; and (2) if we switch our attention to particulars, this function of the particulars is canceled and we lose sight of the entity to which we had attended.”46Polanyi’s ontological version of this is more directly scalar: “(1) that the principles controlling a comprehensive entity would be found to rely for their operations on laws governing the particulars of the entity in themselves, and (2) that at the same time the laws governing the particulars in themselves would never account for the organization of the higher entity which they form.”47Polanyi is here paralleling the same argument about systems that we saw from Bertalanffy in chapter 9 with an epistemological argument: that the diverse specifications we attach to an object do not capture the whole of it.

To appreciate what this means for science, we can rediscover a notion of science that acknowledged the form and effect of this gap in knowledge and, rather than shy away from it, built science around it: Alexander von Humboldt’s “science of the Cosmos.” As Laura Dassow Walls has made clear, Humboldt was instrumental in developing nineteenth-century science, despite being largely forgotten in the United States.48His groundbreaking multivolume Cosmos,published between 1845 and 1862, provides a significant precedent to the scalar terminology and concepts used here; my use of the term “Cosmos” reflects his usage as much as Sagan’s. Walls argues that Humboldt created a way of speaking of “a planetary interactive, causal network operating across multiple scale levels, temporal and spatial, individual to social to natural, scientific, to aesthetic to spiritual” (11). Humboldt’s Cosmosclarifies the value and method of moving from the aggregate of disconnected scientific facts to a sense of connection that spans multiple scales. His methodology aims to “close the gap between mind and nature,” to include everything and see it all together, and a justification of how and why one might do so—all situated in response to the widespread Enlightenment praise of rationality over and against speculation or superstition (9). Thus, we can follow Walls in examining “Humboldt’s bridge” between the sciences and other domains of knowledge at the moment before specialization fragmented this approach (10–11).

Cosmoswas Humboldt’s last work, the culmination of a long career built on a growing network of knowledge, but set to an ambition he had as a young man: “The principle impulse by which I was directed, was the earnest endeavor to comprehend the phenomenon of physical objects in their general connection, and to represent nature as one great whole, moved and animated by internal forces.”49Humboldt describes the experience of looking out over oceans and flat plains, seeing the vast expanses of things, and feeling that these things are interconnected—even as he participates in the practice of examining each of these separate objects. Contrary to the tediousness of careful scientific observation, the patterns he finds induce wonder: “The powerful effect exercised by nature springs  .  .  . from the connection and unity of the impressions and emotions produced; and we can only trace their different sources by analyzing the individuality of objects, and the diversity of forces” (6). He thus connects together this detailed analyzing of objects and forces with the wonder of a broader, scalar view.

