The result of this confluence is that, although we usually speak today of wholeness and unity as contrary to rationality and experience, for Humboldt rational empiricism itself points to such unity: “Nature considered rationally, that is to say, submitted to the process of thought, is a unity in diversity of phenomena; a harmony, blending together all created things, however dissimilar in form and attributes; one great whole (to pan) animated by the breath of life” (23). Humboldt’s parenthetical insertion of the Greek to panis the essential scalar maneuver we have followed above (1.23, 3.38, and chapter 7). He repeats this insertion throughout Cosmos,to remind us that by “the whole” here he means the aggregate nature of the All (51, 62). Include everything, and wonder and interconnection will naturally appear.

Humboldt positions this maneuver in between disdain for poetic sentiments by certain scientists and concerns about the coldness of scientific description by some romantic thinkers. From one perspective, the emphasis on physical observation, experimentation, and mathematical calculation, which he labels “rational empiricism” (30), creates a disparate set of facts that avoids any larger statements about the structure of the Cosmos as a whole: “Physical philosophy  .  .  . when based upon science, doubts because it seeks to investigate, distinguishes between that which is certain and that which is merely probable, and strives incessantly to perfect theory by extending the circle of observation” (18). Rational empiricism relies on skepticism because it aims to investigate what is within any observation. However, as one observes more and more, this empiricism also begins to observe discrepancies to any law trying to describe this assemblage of things. The result is that “instead of seeking to discover the mean or medium point, around which oscillate, in apparent independence of forces, all the phenomena of the external world, this system delights in multiplying exceptions to the law” (18). This is what we have described as the adding on of specifications—the continually adding conditions and particularities attached to any fact.

“Enjoyment” of science, Humboldt argues, arises when one takes into account both the factual correctness and the larger intuitive encounter with this diversity of existence: “The higher enjoyments yielded by the study of nature depend upon the correctness and the depth of our views, and upon the extent of the subjects that may be comprehended in a single glance” (18). This maneuver is based on a scalar shift, using and attending to the details of observation to support and bolster a description, but still keeping in view the larger pattern involved. Thus he speaks of his project as an attempt to “prove how, without detriment to the stability of special studies, we may generalize our ideas by concentrating them in one common focus, and thus arrive at a point of view from which all the organisms and forces of nature may be seen as one living active, whole, animated by one sole impulse” (36). This “common focus” is produced by considering all of these things together at the scale of to pan,the All. At this point Humboldt turns to poetry: “‘Nature,’ as Schelling remarks in his poetic discourse on art, ‘is not an inert mass; and to him who can comprehend her vast sublimity, she reveals herself as the creative force of the universe—before all time, eternal, ever active, she calls to life all things, whether perishable or imperishable’” (36). In invoking Schelling’s critique of a mechanistic view, Humboldt is affirming how a rationally grounded, empirical understanding of the world can itself arrive at a sublime view of the universe.

Responding now to an antiscience version of romanticism, Humboldt argues that this wonder is not couched in the inaccessible. Rather, he relies on the fact that scale also makes, in some way, the inaccessible accessible (see 2.8). Thus, he disputes Edmund Burke’s definition of the sublime as a feeling born from the ignorance of nature (19). By Humboldt’s account, Burke’s definition led to a fear among nonscientists that the knowledge of science is directly antithetical to the wonder, beauty, and appreciation of nature. In response, Humboldt argues:
Whilst the illusion of the senses would make the stars stationary in the vault of heaven, astronomy by her aspiring labours has assigned indefinite bounds to space; and if she has set limits to the great nebula to which our solar system belongs, it has only been to show us in those remote regions of space, which appear to expand in proportion to the increase in our optic powers, islet on islet of scattered nebulae. The feeling of the sublime, so far as it arises from a contemplation of the distance of the stars, of their greatness and physical extent, reflects itself in the feeling of the infinite.  .  .  . The solemn and imposing impressions excited by this sentiment, are owing to the combination of which we have spoken, and to the analogous character of the enjoyment and emotions awakened in us, whether we float on the surface of the great deep, stand on some lonely mountain summit  .  .  . or by the aid of powerful optical instruments scan the regions of space, and see the remote nebulous mass resolve itself into worlds of stars. (19–20)
Humboldt replaces ignorance with vastness as the source of the sublime. Since science allows us to discern how things are actually far more complex, vast, and layered than our usual experience leads us to believe, it creates sublimity through its endless increasing of objects included in this All. The reason for this “imposing impression” is this combining force of scale, of taking together all of these details and adding them to the same set (All) until we see a larger sense of unity emerge (3.12, 3.38). Thus, Humboldt adds the telescope to the classic experiences of vastness: the ocean and the mountain.

This new perspective is produced by accumulating descriptions with as much detail as possible without losing this larger perspective. In this way, Cosmosis an exemplary accumulation of scientific knowledge. Humboldt begins with astronomical phenomena and ends with descriptions of terrestrial organisms, including some brief descriptions of their microscopic features. It is thus a careful gathering of scientific facts honed to direct our attention to seemingly disparate aspects of the universe, on multiple scales, to demonstrate the overarching unity and interconnection that exists within this vast range of things. But in this multitude of things we must not lose sight of the larger unity: “The principle of unity is lost sight of, and the guiding clue is rent asunder whenever any specific and peculiar kind of action manifests itself amid the active forces of nature” (56–57).

The term cosmoscaptures this practice of description, and Humboldt frequently refers to his work as “the science of the Cosmos” (e.g., 36). Humboldt notes that he is using the word in a new way that unites the Greek use of the term with this mode of scientific description. In this use, he is invoking this order in relation to the All (to pan) that might be discerned out of the aggregation of scientific description:
It is by a separation and classification of phenomena, by an intuitive insight into the play of obscure forces, and by animated expressions, in which the perceptible spectacle is reflected with vivid truthfulness, that we may hope to comprehend and describe the universal all (to pan) in a manner worthy of the dignity of the word Cosmos in its signification of universe, order of the world, and adornment of this universal order. May the immeasurable diversity of phenomena which crowd into the picture of nature in no way detract from that harmonious impression of rest and unity, which is the ultimate object of every literary or purely artistical composition. (62)
The prayer-like shape of this invocation is a plea for us to rediscover the sense of wonder at the wealth contained within the Cosmos. The first sentence here places Humboldt’s work within the realm of science, while the last places it within the realm of poetics, positioning these two together in relation to the variety of facts provided by science.

Rhetoric, Mysticism, and Other Traditions of Transformation
While Humboldt’s “science of the Cosmos” converts science into wonder, I am not suggesting that this is the primary task of science or scientists. Do we have a name for this kind of inquiry, which dwells with such bewilderment, considers its form and contours, wonders at and about its transformation of our experience and capabilities, and develops these into a new appreciation and new stance toward the Cosmos? What kind of inquiry is built on the not-knowing required to observe this situation in the broadest view we can hazard and to sit with the disorientation implied?
Here we come to two main targets for scientific skepticism: rhetoric and mysticism. Perhaps we could add a third term, “philosophy” in its most nonlogical, transformative sense, if we can locate a mode of philosophy geared toward effects of articulations rather than logical or conceptual validity, toward gnosisrather than epistēmē.50Regardless, we can locate all three terms in Plato, who lays out these sets of questions and problems in his texts on rhetoric. Reading Plato’s concerns about rhetoric through a contemplative concern for the possibilities of transformation provides a way of conceptualizing these traditions in relation to the kind of approach I’ve been taking here.51
But first, let’s return to the 1990s and note that mysticism was a major source of concern for scientists wary of a growing pseudoscience and antiscience. Sagan’s chapter on antiscience in A Demon Haunted Worldbegins with an epigraph from two New Age writers that combines the language of mysticism with postmodernism: “There’s no such thing as objective truth. We make our own truth.  .  .  . If an idea feels right to you, it is right.  .  .  . Science itself is irrational and mystical. It’s just another faith or belief system or myth, with no more justification than any other.”52This painful pastiche combines humanist notions of agency with the languages of postmodernism and mysticism in order to undermine science. This sentiment, combined with the list of supernatural phenomena Sagan cited above, provides grounds for attacking mysticism. Yet even though Sagan acknowledges that mysticism may, like quantum physics, require extensive training to understand, he does not ask the basic question: what is mysticism exactly? Instead, he sidesteps to the scientific testing of a shaman’s claim to cure people.53If, as we discussed in the Introduction, mystics are those who experience a transcendence of subject-object in a transformative scalar experience, then this has as much to do with healing as race has to do with intelligence.

A sketch of the other target: in 1990, Alan Gross published the widely reviewed and widely criticized The Rhetoric of Science,which became a poster child for overinflated claims and interdisciplinary overreach. Gross was particularly critiqued for his argument that science is rhetoric “without remainder.”54This claim combines the basic premises of the linguistic turn in philosophy with some of the strongest claims from science studies, but tied to the term “rhetoric.” While this maneuver may seem strange to those only familiar with rhetoric as a negative term, Gross’s claim coincided with a rethinking of rhetoric in the academy in the United States, where it had been both banished and preserved in the teaching of writing (in English departments) and speech (in communications departments). The central maneuver in this rethinking—that truth might be constructed in modes of communication—is not foreign to science studies; the problem was largely this term “rhetoric.” Unfortunately, Gross inserts it as a master term, even at one point stating that the work of Latour and Stephen Shapin “is rhetorical criticism in all but name.”55The result is resistance on all fronts, from philosophers of science who trivialized Gross’s notion of rhetoric, sociologists who resisted this renaming of their discipline, and scientists who saw the book as another attack on science.56
And from other rhetoricians. In 1993 Dilip Gaonkar published “The Idea of Rhetoric in the Rhetoric of Science,” which resisted this expansion of rhetoric.57Gaonkar traces this expansion in detail, noting that rhetoricians have gradually made rhetoric an interpretive rather than practical activity (27) but, in doing so, had left themselves with a critical language that was so “thin and abstract that it is virtually invulnerable to falsification” (33). Perhaps most damning is the way that Gaonkar positions the whole maneuver as merely an attempt for rhetoric to colonize and dominate all forms of knowledge (26–27, 34–36). The question here is both about the term “rhetoric” and the methods that might be gathered around that term given its history. Gross was chastened by this critique, editing a collection of responses and substantially revising The Rhetoric of Sciencein 2006 to rework his most controversial claims.58In the meantime, rhetoric of science continued to develop from, to use Gaonkar’s own terms, an “uncoordinated research initiative carried out by a handful of committed individuals” to a field much more akin to other disciplines within science studies in that it displays “internal variation in theory and methodology” (40). This subsequent work, as rhetorician Randy Harris notes, proceeded despite Gaonkar’s critiques, creating an extensive disciplinary dialogue and engaging in broader science studies conversations.59
I recount this conversation about the rhetoric of science to highlight these questions about the notion of rhetoric. Both mysticism and rhetoric share a widely negative association counterpoised with great enthusiasm by those who adopt the terms, both in their academic resurrections in the twentieth century and in the contexts in which they were born. While it may seem an exorbitant task to recover both traditions at once, briefly discussing the two together here will clarify the method central to this inquiry on scale. Most important, mysticism and rhetoric represent two crucial areas in which we easily pretend that we know what we’re talking about, even as they function as pervasive straw men both popularly and academically. So again, let’s be more precise by returning to what is arguably the source for both rhetoric and much of Western mysticism: Plato.60
The standard interpretation, extant already in ancient Greece and Rome and widely repeated by both rhetoricians and their critics alike, is that Plato is theenemy of rhetoric.61Somewhat unconventionally, I’d argue that Plato’s philosophy, when combined with his mysticism, has a positive philosophy of rhetoric that is built on concerns about the power of language. He is specifically concerned about the way we become intoxicated with language,which we can read here as an exemplary form of holding-to this-scale experience and values. Plato leaves open a kind of rhetoric (pointed to in the Phaedrus) that aims to address or keep in view this intoxication while attending to how language shapes the mind. In the language of this chapter, this amounts to addressing the overinvestment or absorption in your acquired mode of specification. Such concerns are harder to see directly in the standard dialogues read by rhetoricians—the Gorgiasand the Phaedrus—but become clearer in the larger canon. The mysticism expressed in the Seventh Letter,the famous cave metaphor in The Republic,the aporiaof knowledge in Theaetetus,the chariot metaphor in the Phaedrus,and the obsession with “know thyself” throughout—as well as Plato’s centrality in mysticism following the Neoplatonists—all make possible a reading of Plato in terms of mysticism that also transforms his view of rhetoric.
