
In the Seventh Letter,the central philosophical passage comes when Plato is recounting a visit to the tyrant Dionysius. Plato wants to see if he is “on fire with philosophy,” as he has heard, or whether he was one of those whose “heads are full of half-understood doctrines” (340b). He notes, akin to the discussion of divine madness in the Phaedrus,that those who hear of philosophy hold fast to “the daily discipline” and undergo great effort to grasp it (340d), but others “persuade themselves that they have already heard the whole of it and need make no further effort” (341a). “Philosophy” here is not a body of knowledge but a transformation that also requires that one becomes “akin to the object” (344a).62The problem, as Plato soon sees in Dionysius, is the tendency to assume knowledge “because of what he had heard others say” and therefore “pretend to a knowledge of the problems with which I am concerned” (341c). Plato then makes what seems to be a strong statement about writing, but which is a standard trope of mysticism: “There is no writing of mine about these matters, nor will there ever be one. For this knowledge is not something that can be put into words, like other sciences; but after long-continued intercourse between teacher and pupil  .  .  . suddenly, like a light flashing forth when a fire is kindled, it is born in the soul and straightway nourishes itself” (341c-d). Writing does not tend to produce such transformations except in those who “with a little guidance [would] discover the truth by themselves” but instead tends to produce “ill-founded and quite unbecoming disdain” in some and “an exaggerated and foolish elation” in others (341e).

Plato goes on to elaborate on this kind of inquiry in relation to names, definitions, images, and knowledge (342b), with a “fifth” topic being the “in itself.” In acquiring this fifth, he says, one must be aware of the “weakness of language,” particularly in “a form which is unchangeable as is true of written outlines” (343a). In the end, “only when all of these things—names, definitions, and visual and other perceptions—have been rubbed against one another and tested, pupil and teacher asking and answering questions in good will and without envy—only then, when reason and knowledge [phrónēsis,a mindfulness, thought] are at the very extremity of human effort, can they illuminate the nature of any object” (344b). If the object here was actually a circle (the example used), then this would be something less than the mysticism that transcends subject-object; but if the object here is that which is at the “extremity of human effort,” then it suggests not an object so much as a whole transformation of perspective, much more akin to the glimpse of heaven described in the chariot metaphor in the Phaedrusor in the leaving of the cave in the Republic.In short, the Seventh Letterpoints to a kind of transformation that requires a different approach to any articulation: you have to test and examine it within oneself (one’s experience, thought, world) rather than treat it like an articulation and, to do so, must admit to a not-knowing, dwell with and prod the articulation, and resist the solidity of first impressions, sense variations, and definitions until a kind of transformation occurs that sheds light on the whole situation. This is the attitude and intellectual approach that I have attempted to take here in examining scale.

This framework provides a different way of reading Plato’s attack on rhetoric in the Gorgias.First, we can resituate Socrates’s questions about knowledge (does a rhetorician know how to build a ship? If not, how then can they speak of whether we should build ships?—see 454d). “Rhetoric,” says Socrates, “doesn’t need to have any knowledge of the state of their subject matters; it only needs to have discovered some mechanisms to produce persuasion, in order to make itself appear to those who don’t have knowledge that it knows more than those who actually do have it” (459c). This well-trod distinction between knowledge and ignorance can be read now as a question of transformative understanding (gnosis) rather than simply a question about epistēmē.After all, Plato is not trying to teach us about ships or any other specific kind of knowledge. The problem is this pretending, this failure to grasp the limits of one’s articulation and knowledgeand proceeding nevertheless. The major issue is that, as he says in the Theaetetus,“their very ignorance of their true state fixes them more firmly therein” (176d); they remain like “the blind leading the blind” (209e); he, as Plato adds in the Sophist,“thinks he knows the things he has only beliefs (doxazei) about” (268a).63
The term doxais less central in the Gorgias,but it is essential to Plato’s concerns about rhetoric. Doxais usually translated as “opinion,” but it also indicates popularity, repute, or social appearance.64In the Phaedrusit appears at the crucial juncture in the chariot metaphor: those who do not glimpse the truth (aletheia) “will depend on what they think is nourishment—their own opinions [doxastē]” (248b). The problematic rhetorician, in turn, simply studies “what the people believe [doxas de plēthous]” (260d), indulging these opinions in order to persuade. This is what is described in the Gorgiasas “flattery,” being “clever at dealing with people” (463a). But the nature of doxais that it requires that you bow to the socially accepted positions and indulge commonly affirmed opinions. This is the core of Socrates’s argument about the tyrant with Polus and Callicles in the Gorgias: the role of doxais repeatedly performed by the incredulous exclamations of Polus and Callicles, as they defer to the crowd or to popular opinion rather than consider the points of discussion themselves.65
However much Plato has Socrates rail against rhetoric in the Gorgias,the whole dialogue is obviously about the conditions of possibility for persuasion—of actually having substantive transformation in thoughts, beliefs, and actions. The Gorgias-like rhetorician supposes, through his mechanisms, that he has the power for such transformations, but he only makes use of existing opinions without understanding the situation or actually changing any minds. Most noticeably, no one is persuaded at all in theGorgias except Socrates,who states at the end: “For my part, Callicles, I’m convinced by these accounts” (526d). Why? Socrates resists doxa,doesn’t pretend that he knows, examines the questions at hand for himself, doesn’t defer to the common understanding, and dwells with these concerns at length. He doesn’t settle for what is “recited in public without understanding and explanation,” but looks for “what is truly written in the soul” (Phaedrus278a). This is certainly a problem for science as its descriptions become recited in public, accepted as doxa,and invoked as if they should be accepted on authority. Who actually is transformed by these new scales of description? How do we rewrite our souls to accommodate this new situation?
This task arises not from a disdain for rhetoric but from a view of rhetoric as psukhagōgia,the leading along of the soul (261a, 271c). This is a different endeavor in both attitude and form from the ignorant rhetoric critiqued in the Gorgias.Thus, here at the outset of the concerns about rhetoric we find a description of a rhetoric that is geared toward leading along minds but does not assume knowledge (in the epistēmēsense) and respects this power of language, particularly its ability to intoxicate its users into thinking things are understood when no significant reorientation (metanoia) has occurred. Indeed, in the context of the chariot metaphor, the whole task of leading along the soul hinges on comprehending the nature of our contingent situation, where we can find aletheia(the unfolding of Being) rather than doxa,a substantive transformation (metanoia) rather than mere affirmation or belief (pistis).

In this view, rhetoric would be the tradition that deals not with concepts qua thought but rather with communication as effect, one that assists us in developing awareness of and greater response-ability to these various manifestations of language and symbols. Rhetoric would not merely be about conveying the truth discovered elsewhere—as Aristotle makes it in his Rhetoricand as is implicit in the usual distinction between scientific practice and science communication. Rather, it would be about analyzing the ways our articulations work, bringing our attention to this intoxication with language and doxa,attending to these possible effects, observing what our descriptions say and don’t say, examining how articulations might work differently in different contexts, and similar operations.

This difference is clarified further if we consider how Plato situates rhetoric in relation to dialectic, which he describes in the Phaedrusas the cutting up of a topic into its “species along its natural joints” (265e). The dialectician considers and examines divisions so as to be clearer and more precise about the language we’re using, while the rhetorician considers these divisions from the perspective of their effects—how they lead along our minds. If philosophy as a domain of inquiry has become primarily dialectic, the development of concepts and the tracings of logic, and science has also become a dialectical process of providing and regulating divisions and descriptions on empirical grounds (what I have here described as specification), these do not encompass or account for this additional task: the question about where and how these descriptions function to change our ways of thinking, speaking, and acting. Likewise, in a more contemplative mode, science and certain kinds of philosophy add to our concepts and descriptions according to particular specifications rather than situate these descriptions within our experience and worldview. So while the rhetorician does not need to pretend to a knowledge of these things (I don’t need to pretend to know everything about how a cell works), the rhetorician would both examine and experiment with these articulations as they extend in all kinds of contexts and implications, whether personal, political, cultural, or otherwise. Indeed, there is an ever greater need for this task, since, in the double movement of increased specialization and more widespread use of scientific terms and knowledge, the risk of simple acceptance of articulations on the basis of doxaincreases.

In this guise, the critique that rhetoric has no subject matter of its own is a strength if the form of expertise is a capacity to attend to the effects of articulation. It is through an awareness of the limits of knowledge that one can attend to such effects. Scientists have to know precisely how their descriptions apply in a constrained context according to an accumulation of specifications. The knowledge problem identified in the Gorgiasis about failing to see the specifications of knowledge: that cooking does not bear the same specifications—it does not apply to the same things—as medicine, even though it appears to be about the same thing. Rhetoricians who ignore these kinds of problems miss the very task of attending to the power and limits of the descriptions they are using. But these forms of knowledge do not exist solely within those specifications (the first three descriptions of a cell) but must, in order to function, extend beyond them to the places where they are meant to apply (the fourth description). Such work does not need to begin with facts as things needed to be conveyed to the ignorant masses, but rather with facts as specified modes of prodding the world that need to be translated out of the particular contexts of their formation so that we can transform our perspectives according to this new information.

Not-knowing Everything
Sagan carries the spirit of Humboldt’s Cosmosinto the visual medium of television, where the scientific aggregation is rendered visually into a scalar form. Since we cannot actually see the view of the observable universe or the scale of atoms except in limited forms, Sagan’s “ship of the imagination” helps navigate these nonhuman scalar thresholds. While Sagan is operating from the same basis as Humboldt, the visual medium assists but also risks hiding these transformative scalar elements.

Consider one of Sagan’s favorite images, in which whole galaxies and groups of galaxies are shown to look something like blurred stars. We have even better photos of this now, such as is found in Figure 15, from the Hubble telescope. The image is worth pausing over: each galaxy shown here contains billions of stars. In reading the previous sentence and examining this photo, one can find oneself staring incomprehensibly at this picture: each of these circles contains billions of stars, you say?
Sagan often reflected on the relationship between large numbers and our understanding of ourselves and the cosmos. Of course he is famous for the phrase “billions and billions,” which was actually coined in Johnny Carson’s parody of Sagan. Sagan’s book Billions and Billionsembraced this phrase and reflected on the importance of using and contemplating such incomprehensible numbers. In discussing exponential notation (e.g., 1034), Sagan notes that “this doesn’t mean you can picturea billion or a quintillion objects in your head—nobody can. But, with the exponential notation, we can thinkabout and calculate with such numbers.”66Yet in an important sense the image below isa picture of billions and billions. But these scalar relations are deceptively concrete: together the accumulation of billions provides a reference point for just how the image ought to overwhelm. Sagan is thus following Humboldt when he suggests that these scalar images and numbers are ultimately an elaboration of the excess, the unending wealth of possible calculation, objects, and description possible even within those things that seem to be relatively apparent.

Sagan highlights how scientific descriptions contain a kind of compression factor that condenses an enormous accumulation of discoveries and ranges of size into something simple and deceptively concrete. In invoking any scientific description, it becomes possible to selectively switch scales to provide new modes of description, all in some way incomprehensible. Thus he gives us the beautiful scalar number: there are 1080elementary particles in the Cosmos.67Such a number is not meant to be comprehended; although it can be used for calculation, it is a notation of the excess beyond what any particular Homo sapienscan see and understand. Rather than expressing a frustration in the sight of this not-knowing, as we have undoubtedly felt when contemplating a number like the trillions of dollars in national debt, we might recognize the productive disorientation provided by such a notation. To do so is to direct ourselves to attend to the scalar reconfiguration.

Figure 15:Islet on islet of scattered galaxies. Image by NASA; ESA; G. Illingworth, D. Magee, and P. Oesch, University of California, Santa Cruz; R. Bouwens, Leiden University; and the HUDF09 Team.
