
As a mode of defining variables and examining their relations, science will always be able to proceed with these images and descriptions, since they will yield practical means of calculation and manipulation. But, as we saw in Humboldt, this elaboration retains the connection to excess, which manifests as bewilderment or wonder. To recognize this wonder is to tune in to how the seemingly complete depiction actually exceeds itself. To sit in this bewilderment is to unfold this diversity within the contours of experience and learn to rework our sense of reality within these multifarious, wondrous layers. May we all learn to sit in this diversity without fear, without excessive respect or disdain for these textbooks, fact checks, and journal articles, and with a patient, careful, yet exuberant wonder.11The Cosmos Seeing ItselfRepresentations of Scale, Scales of RepresentationDemanding the Whole Earth
With his consciousness assisted by the bio-evolutionary adjunct named LSD, Stewart Brand gazes from the balcony of a high-rise. A vision emerges:
The buildings were not parallel—because the earth curved under them, and me, and all of us; it closed on itself. I remembered that Buckminster Fuller had been harping on this at a recent lecture—that people perceived the earth as flat and infinite, and that that was the root of all their misbehavior. Now from my altitude of three stories and one hundred mikes, I could see that it was curved, think it, and finally feel it.1
This experience allows Brand to not only intellectually contemplate the roundness of the planet but also to extend his understanding beyond everyday perception so that he can finally feel what he had before only heard, inducing a monumental and counterintuitive reexamination of some basic assumptions that permit all kinds of “misbehavior.” Immediately, the literally rhetorical question arises: how can we get others to transform their perspectives likewise? “A photograph would do it—a color photograph from space of the earth. There it would be for all to see, the earth complete, tiny, adrift, and no one would ever perceive things the same way.” The hope here is that this photo would act as a nonchemical yet psychedelic—mind-manifesting—adjunct for consciousness, providing a view of a larger scale that would transform both our conception of this planet and our behavior on it.

This vision yielded the “Why haven’t we seen a photograph of the whole Earth yet?” campaign, in which Brand sent badges with this question to a number of members of Congress, public figures, NASA officials, and even Buckminster Fuller and Marshall McLuhan.2When Brand published the Whole Earth Catalogtwo years later (1968), he found just such a photo, taken from an unmanned satellite, to put on the cover. In 1972 the astronauts from Apollo 17 captured the Blue Marble photos, eleven pictures of the Earth in full phase. These photos have been called the most reproduced pictures in human history, and few will doubt their importance in launching the environmental movement and becoming a symbol for a globalized mentality.3Half a century later, however, such images are so commonplace that it is difficult to understand the excitement expressed by Brand.4What did he mean “no one would ever perceive things the same way”? How do we perceive things differently now that we have this view? Given that we all routinely use a similar image—if we’d like, rendered in beautiful interactive 3D—to find our way across town, it is difficult to see Brand’s statements as anything more than a hyperbolic and self-indulgent (even drug-induced, we might say with that grin that those who grew up in the United States in the middle of the drug war find it hard to suppress) wish for a radical social change so prevalent in the counterculture of the 1960s.

Most responses to the photo written today are largely dismissive in this way, if not completely critical of the hope for transformation found in Brand’s statement.5Such a critique is not unfamiliar, however, given that the magazine born from Brand’s magnum opus, The Whole Earth Review,itself published such a critique, by Yaakov Jerome Garb, less than two decades following the release of these photos. In this reading we see a familiar turn to the idea of metaphor: “The image of the whole Earth—proudly displayed on the front cover banner of this magazine—is our culture’s current metaphor for the Earth. This photographic image is not the reality of the whole Earth, but only one possible interpretation of it.”6The article then examines “those qualities of the whole Earth image which most environmentalists do notseem to be aware of, and the ways in which this image is being used to cultivate attitudes that are destroyingthe Earth.”7For Brand, however, this image is hardly as arbitrary as this argument implies. Rather, the vision is about a specific alteration of the way we understand ourselves and the cosmos. The image of the Earth, Brand hopes, will transform our view, since it will provide an experience of something that would otherwise be difficult to experience. The problem is that both these appropriations and the criticisms of them arise from the same maneuver: the whole Earth image is cut off from the organizing principle that grants it its power. That principle is, of course, scale.

This chapter is about the general confusion presented by scalar representations. Such representations are necessary for reorienting and rewriting our worldview according to new scales of existence. In examining these representations, cultural critics tend either to celebrate scaling (usually to the large) or to critique it; there has been less reflection on the nature of scale and how this clarifies the narratives, images, and other representations of scale.8The persistent problem for cultural critics is understanding the relationship between the origins and parameters of scale and the way we represent it. Since scalar perceptions are constructed out of a regulated and consistent accounting of the changes in observations, scale provides some standard for the function and form of scalar representations.

Much of the current scholarship on scalar representations remains critical of scale.9When scalar perspectives arise, many of the theories and ideas we have discussed thus far are frequently inserted as critiques of scale: Haraway’s critique of the view from above, Cosgrove’s colonial eye, and Arendt’s concern about leaving the Earth are some of the most common.10We have already shown the limits and applicability of many of these critiques in previous chapters. Here I want to highlight why depictions of scale are so easily critiqued by explaining the means of their distortion. Doing so will make clear the interpretive challenge provided by scalar images and outline what is required for scalar images to have the kind of power Brand hopes for. The basic argument is simple: scalar depictions are only powerful if they are encountered as scalar. In turn, reinserting scale into such depictions often undoes or reworks many of the appropriations and interpretations that bring them the most criticism, while providing a standard for critiquing depictions according to the degree to which they work within a scalar framework.

Scaling beyond Metaphor
Garb’s critique of the Blue Marble relies on a strong conception of metaphor derived from the linguist George Lakoff. On this basis, he provides a series of critiques of the whole Earth image. Examining this metaphorical reading of the Blue Marble will make clear the structure of scalar representations.

If the image of the Earth from space is a metaphor—“a way of describing one entity in terms of another,” as Lakoff and Garb both define it—then what are the two entities being described?11The image itself is on the same scale as our usual experience; it appears to be a clear entity. But what is this other “entity” it is put in relation to? The difficulty is that this second entity is incapable of being experiencedin a way that clearly defines it as an entity. Thus, the whole Earth image creates an experience for something that, barring our own personal space travel, we are otherwise incapable of experiencing: everything in our usual experience held together. The result makes concrete a scalar idea (the Earth) through a new scalar object (the Earth seen from space) re-presented in a way visible to these Homo sapiensat this scale. Thus, what scalar representations create is an experience about experience: that (the image) is how you experience all of this, when viewed together.

The presence of this scalar relation makes the metaphor non-arbitrary because of the consistent standard provided by scale (2.3) that we hold ourselves to (2.20). The most rhetorically powerful representations will then use a visual form that ties the view to a consistent empirical, human-bound sensory apparatus. In this form, the consistency of the apparatus noted in 1.11 and 2.6 is combined with the measure of scale in order to make both experiences present and adequately situated in relation to each other. The resulting image re-presents this scalar relation as a visual experience, but in order for it to be appropriately understood, the scalar relation must be apparent. To put it in more potent terms: the second entity in the metaphorical relation is normalized human experience itself,which is then transformed by the view captured in the image (2.16). This seems to be what Brand desired from the image: something to render concrete this scalar relation that pulls us outside of our normal experience and renders it on a new scale, while still retaining the persuasive power of the empirical. Literally, you see it.

But we are only affected by it if we include the scalar relation embedded within the metaphorical relation. We can see now why this image presents a great risk: in making something outside of usual experience look like something within usual experience, we risk treating it like just another nonscalar object. The scalar relation becomes buried and, with it, the reference back to and revision of your normal lifeworld. Just as science encodes this relationship into its descriptions, we can lose sight of the scalar relation in the apparent object of representation. For Garb, this elision manifests first as the statement of the priority of the metaphor through the following epigraph from Lakoff:
Metaphors may create realities for us.  .  .  . A metaphor may thus be a guide for future action. Such actions will, of course, fit the metaphor. This will, in turn, reinforce the power of the metaphor to make experience coherent. In this sense metaphors can be self-fulfilling prophecies.  .  .  . The way we think, what we experience, and what we do every day is very much a matter of metaphor.12
This prioritization of metaphor permits Garb to treat the image as both the cause and the manifestation of certain ways of thinking. But the central organizing mode of thinking here is not derived from a metaphorical relation but a scalar one. The elision of the scalar relationship permits Garb to attach other interpretations to the image and argue that these readings are themselves in the imagerather than in ways of approaching the image. Thus he warns that “this banner of perspective and insight is also—just below the surface—a banner of alienation and escape from the Earth.”13Rather than “just below the surface,” the readings presented by Garb are in some sense on the surface, in that they treat the image as just another object to be arbitrarily manipulated. Such readings are not really about the image at all but rather the way the image becomes reworked into different assumptions, interpretations, and uses that are more or less cut off from this scalar relation. Consider the result of Garb’s reading. The bulk of his article consists of objections that are all critiques commonly repeated about the view from above: it is a privileged view, emphasizes the “out there” over the here, is a presumptuous “God’s-eye view,” gives up on the Earth as our home, produces a homogenizing understanding of the diversity on the planet, allows us to neglect the being in “nature” that we feel on the surface, contains the Earth in a single object, becomes an object of domination, and ultimately allows the Earth to be further trivialized and exploited. Undoubtedly, the image, treated just as a metaphor, could be used to these ends or read in these ways. However, such uses treat the image as just another object to be manipulated; doing so, they fail to attend to or distort the scalar relationship behind the metaphorical one.

