Garb’s concern over these alternative uses of the image arose from what he saw as a defilement of it. In a small account found in the sidebar at the beginning of the article, Kevin Kelly recounts a conversation in which Garb flips through a series of appropriations and remixes of the whole Earth image. Frustrated over the defilement of this “totem,” Garb goes on to write this essay.14This feeling is not unusual but arises anywhere there are totems for a simple reason: they have power. And anywhere there is an image of power, some will try to take advantage of it by making use of such surface readings while avoiding the truly potent elements contained within it. If we reinsert the scalar relationship, we can see that such appropriations are actually scalar distortions. The critical task at hand, then, is to rediscover and reinsert scale as the underlying transformative perspective that gives this image its power.

Scale Critique: Responding to Scale Tricks
Because scalar perspectives can only be encountered through some representation, and because they are so counter to our usual way of experiencing the world, we find ourselves with all kinds of distortions, tricks, and erroneous depictions of scale. I want to pause here to discuss four kinds of scale tricks that lay the groundwork for what Derek Woods has already named “scale critique.”15
The first is the assumption that something might get larger or smaller indefinitely. It is partially to target this kind of distortion that we, at 1.31, separated Gulliver’s scaling from the kind of scaling we are dealing with here. The essential difference is that Gulliver’s scaling takes given objects and makes them larger or smaller, whether in actual scaling of operations (the growth of an elephant, tree, or business) or in representations (e.g., Godzilla or King Kong). These kinds of scale are usually conflated, because discussions of scale often start with an object in view; we then consider how such things get larger or smaller. The distinction highlights the limits to this scaling of objects, particularly for living systems (see 3.29). Distortions of these limits can be relatively harmless and even educational (e.g., the classic trope of shrinking small enough to go into the body). However, they do not provide good training in scalar thinking. More importantly, they indulge the tendency to think of things as capable of extending their reach indefinitely despite the inevitability of scalar thresholds.

This notion that growth might expand indefinitely, especially in an economic sense, has been extensively critiqued, most recently by the anthropologist Anna Tsing.16Tsing notes that the “term ‘scalability’ had its original home not in technology but in business. Scalability in business is the ability of a firm to expand without changing the nature of what it does.”17Tsing rightly examines the tension between ecological constraints and economic fantasies of unlimited expansion, which she situates in the unintended effects of agricultural expansion.18At the same time, her arguments about nonscalability misrepresent the problem as an issue with the precision of scale itself. The problem is not the “precision-nested scales” but rather a fantasy about the indefinite scaling of objects that is itself undone by carefully attending to scale (3.29).19
The second scale trick is the overlaying of two very different perspectives without a scalar notation marking this difference. In 2.19 we noted that one way of making these distortions in film is to overlay two perspectives in the same field of vision. This creates a distortion, since the eye does not have a way to distinguish the two perspectives and therefore treats them as one. In this technique we have a clear image of how we perform this overlaying in many images, descriptions, and terms, particularly those that bridge two scale domains. For instance, in 3.32–33 we noted that “all humans” is a term that bridges two scales; humans are only visible at the meter scale, yet this grouping pulls our perspective to the ecological. As we noted at 3.24, these maneuvers are not always a problem. The problem arises when the connection between scale domains is forgotten. For example, take the term Anthropocene,which has recently become a rallying point for thinking about the effect of humans on the planet: like the conflated perspectives in film, this term wraps together a this-scale object (humans) with a planet-scale one (geological patterns) in both space and time. Many writers on the Anthropocene are attempting to productively separate these two notions of the human. Thus, Dipesh Chakrabarty’s four theses on the Anthropocene clarify the scalar nature of this term:
We can become geological agents only historically and collectively, that is, when we have reached numbers and invented technologies that are on a scale large enough to have an impact on the planet itself. To call ourselves geological agents is to attribute to us a force on the same scale as that released at other times when there has been a mass extinction of species20
Chakrabarty acknowledges the differences in scale that make planetary effects possible. The tie between “Anthropocene” and the human is thus essential for highlighting the relation between the two different scales of interaction.21At the same time, the ambiguity of the “us” for the attribution of agency and the work performed “historically and collectively” creates a potential scalar conflation that manifests as the double binds of environmentalism that we noted in chapter 9: we both are and are not the agents. But this is also why Woods has highlighted scale variance—the way objects change across scales—as essential for scale critique: to get from humans to the Anthropocene, one must first cross a scale domain where this phenomenon “human” now becomes something different.22
The third scale trick is forgetting the scale you (or any given action) are on. As we saw in 1.14, the human body does not change scales even in scalar perceptions such as the view from space. In a more general sense, we always risk mistaking these scalar extensions and perceptions as a displacement of the capacities tied to these bodies. We generalized this in 3.34 in the phrase “one can only act on the scale on which one exists.” We have seen a potent conceptual version of this in Thomas Nagel’s distorted view from nowhere in chapter 8. Likewise, in chapter 9 we discussed Erik Drexler’s fantasies of extension as an example of misplacing the scale of the engineer. These problems naturally arise as we learn to develop and work with scalar extensions and scalar relations. We can follow Timothy Clarke and Joanna Zylinska in calling these “scalar derangements,” since they are distorted fantasies of extension to and intervention on other scales, while forgetting both where one is acting from and what scale requires for such action. Thus Clarke’s examples of derangements of scale include the “you control climate change” trope.23Such rhetoric avoids the most difficult aspect of ecology: the need to rethink the here in relation to new data about collective endeavors without reducing one to the other.24
A fourth object of scale critique is scalar overwriting, in which concerns from one scale (usually the meter scale and filtered according to human needs) are mapped onto another scale. We are familiar with this overwriting in mapping software such as Google Earth, which makes it easy to draw human points of interest onto the surface of the Earth. This operation is standard practice in mapmaking; this is one reason why we distinguished cartographic scales from scale itself at 1.32. The major risk here is that such overwriting permits you to retain the priorities and points of interest from another scale. Doing so can be essential for scalar reorientation, since it assists us in tracing elements relevant for another scale, such as describing DNA in terms of what it might produce at the level of the body or when a particular bacteria or toxin produces organism-level effects (as was performed in 6.14–17). However, in such overwriting we need to attend to which terms apply to which scale and how; otherwise we end up with one of the distortions just discussed.

Combining this mapping with the above scalar distortions, critiques of satellite imagery and similar scalar cartographies bring our attention to how views of different scales can be accompanied by attempts to overwrite and claim such scales. For example, the architect Laura Kurgan’s extensive critique of satellite imagery traces the way that such devices are put into service for various ends, from the domestic to the military.25Such critiques trace out the conditions for the use and production of these images so that we can test claims such as whether “high-resolution satellites  .  .  . signify global transparency.”26Importantly, the abuses of this ability to visualize are often a result of exaggerated claims reliant on scale tricks and distortions. Thus, Kurgan notes, in a way that mirrors discussions of visualizing nanotechnology or microbiology, that “no satellite image presents a simple, unambiguous picture of the Earth, and a visit to the site itself can often raise more questions than it answers.”27
In all four instances, scale critique would be the process of comparing these representations of scale with how scale functions in practice. The notion of scale tricks or distortions requires (1) scale as a consistent standard, (2) tying together the two perceptions, and (3) locating the perspectives, including the one that is hidden (usually in the viewer). However, this operation conflicts with a common tenet of cultural criticism, since it requires a reference to a standard. Thus, Tsing and Woods both take issue with the notion of consistency and precision in scale. To be clear, scale does not require a return to a truth standard of representation for a world taken as given in itself, nor is it a tyranny of precision. The precision here is based on the standard implemented by scale, which produces a consistent means of accounting for our observational shifts. Because scale is about observation, the standard of scale is a holding ourselves accountable for these shifts in observation(2.20). This is why scale is so powerful for critique: scale’s simple yet precise accounting for these changes in observation provides a standard for critiquing distortions in our perception of reality and the way we impose on scalar views assumptions derived from a nonscalar, human-based lifeworld.

Portraying Scale Itself: The Power of Scale in Powers of Ten
While scale critique would use scale to critique scalar representations, the task of portraying scale itself is a separate endeavor. This task is inherently fraught, because there is no comparable phenomenon that appropriately isolates the way that objects transform into other objects in changing scales. There is no metaphor for scale that can be drawn from our nonscalar lifeworld.The common metaphors for scale are all derived from this-scale experience: concentric circles, the matryoshkadoll, or the ladder.28Therefore, their modes of embeddedness and layering do not capture the essential reconfiguration presented by scalar experience.

The most adequate way of isolating and demonstrating the power of scale is to take an image of this-scale experience and show it transforming into other scales. To this end, the paradigmatic scalar depiction is Charles and Ray Eameses’ 1977 short film, Powers of Ten.29The concept of Powers of Tenis relatively simple: it begins with a view of two picnickers sitting in a park and then alters the frame of reference, increasing the scale by a factor of ten every ten seconds until it reaches 1024meters.30It then does the same back down in scale until 10-16meters, the size of subatomic particles. In this movement—from a normal view to a planet to a solar system to galaxies to groups of galaxies and then back down to cells, molecules, atoms, and subatomic particles—we see not only the various objects at these scales but also the apparatus of scale itself.

This film is often cited in critiques of scale, with almost universal criticism.31Woods captures the general sentiment when he argues that “if any film qualifies as an example of what Donna Haraway calls the god’s eye ‘view from nowhere,’ Powers of Tenis that film.”32Our account of scale will assist us in responding to the three major critiques. First, almost all of these critiques focus on the seemingly “smooth zoom” produced by the film (see 6.6). The film produces the illusion of movement, and yet it is not, as Vittoria Di Palma argues, moving at all but is rather a change in resolution.33The result for Di Palma is that “the zoom erases divisions between scales, and its rapid progression from one extreme to another renders space and distance irrelevant.”34Second, critics highlight the artificiality of the film’s transitions between scales, as is best characterized by Latour’s question, “In what laboratory would we have to visit to observe cells from the skin of our two amorous picnickers?”35Third, many critics argue that the film preserves an anthropocentric and mastering perspective for the viewer (the essence of Woods’s invocation of it as a god trick).36
We can confirm that such a zoom is a change in resolution, which became a key concept for scale here at 1.15 and throughout Part I. But the idea that this smooth zoom erases the divisions between scales ignores an essential aspect of the depiction: the film shows the changes in scale domains through the transformation of the objects being seen. Space and time are not irrelevant so much as reworked in the logarithmic shift. In response to Latour’s critique about the constructed nature of the images, we can say that this is precisely why we need a depiction like Powers of Ten:scientists do not usually patch together the diverse scales they are mapping. Rather, sciences like ecology, geology, and meteorology produce knowledge at the planetary scale by observing differences that are discernible at the level of the planet. It is because these knowledges are so disjointed that we need something to tie these disparate scales of observation together to portray scale itself. The smooth zoom shows how these levels relate together, using the continuity of the scalar shift to visualize the transformation of our lifeworld into these other scales.37This is what Woods describes as “an explicit effort to describe new objects of science and alter the phenomenological worlds of its viewer.”38
Woods, however, denies Powers of Tenthis status, since it “domesticates the uncanny or paradoxical activity of nonhuman scales using Protagorean/Vitruvian measurement norms of the human lifeworld.”39Interestingly, Monica M. Brannon makes almost the opposite conclusion in her reading of the film, stating that “this new standardized norm conditions a perception that privileges a mechanical objectivity over the narrative, on-the-ground social experience; this way of seeing ultimately reduces spaces to renderings of mathematical measurements.”40Woods and Brannon can make opposite points about this same aspect, because scale is a consistent extension of a measure that is derived from human experience (2.20). Brannon’s critique is not accounting for how this measure is actually tied to “on-the-ground” experience through its reference to an object (e.g., a meter) derived from human experience (2.10, 2.14). Woods’s critique is not accounting for how this extension of the measure pulls experience into these new phenomenal realms by ensuring that scalar experience is tied to and therefore transforms our understanding of our this-scale lifeworld (2.11).

