In retaining a reference to our normal experience, in using the consistency of mathematical extension to move beyond this experience, and in projecting out a view of the world in the familiar terms and format (i.e., visual images), scale ties these transformations of the cosmos to ourselves. Scale is a holding-ourselves to the consistency of a measure derived from our own experience (2.20) and in the process, as we saw in chapter 8, transforms what we think we are. In this light we can be sympathetic to critiques of the narrator of Powers of Ten,since the presence of this voice—particularly the attempt to fill up the less interesting parts of the exponential climb—could work against the transformation being performed by the visuals. Perhaps, as Woods argues, “in Powers of Ten,the narrator maintains his identity on this vast trans-scalar journey.”41Perhaps we could do so as well, leaving our own lifeworld intact and relatively untouched by the images we’re seeing. To do so would be to externalize the whole representation as being simply a representation. If, however, we actually take the transformations being experienced as a transformation of our own lifeworld, then the radical reorientation of scale manifests.

Losing Scale, Losing Ourselves
In contrast, depictions that attempt to cut scale out of the picture lead toward rather different effects. For example, an online graphic by the artist Josh Worth, called If the Moon Were Only 1 Pixel: A Tediously Accurate Scale Model of the Solar System,is built on a refusal to switch scales. It sets its scale at the size of the moon as one pixel (hence the title) and then maintains a continuous scale. The result is a line that allows the user to scroll endlessly through what appears to be nothing. The graphic is valuable for showing how we elide the significant shifts in scale required for understanding the immensity of space. However, this graphic does not actually show scale itself, but rather a single other scale. Not content to merely leave this lesson stand on its own, Worth includes some musing on the emptiness that one can discover at this scale: “When it comes to things like the age of the earth, the number of snowflakes in Siberia, the national debt. Those things are too much for our brains to handle. [after some scrolling] We need to reduce things down to something we can see or experience directly in order to understand them. [more scrolling] We’re always trying to come up with metaphors for big numbers. Even so, they never seem to work.” While we can agree with Worth’s statement about the incapacity to formulate metaphors for scale, the negativity of this sentiment arises from the fact that the graphic is not providing a picture of scale itself but a picture of one single scale. Worth seems to miss that the value of such orders of magnitude lies in how they make these larger things at least marginally comprehensible.

Furthermore, because he is staying on the same scale, Worth is not showing the things already present between and among these large-scale objects. In this elision he finds himself (as we continue to tediously scroll through, feeling ourselves a little bored and listless) able to posit:
It’s a good thing we have these tiny stars and planets, otherwise we’d have no point of reference at all.  .  .  . All this emptiness really could drive you nuts.  .  .  . The brain isn’t built to handle “empty.” “Sorry, Humanity,” says Evolution. “What with all the jaguars trying to eat you, the parasites in your fur, and the never-ending need for a decent steak, I was a little busy. I didn’t exactly have time to come up with a way to conceive of vast stretches of nothingness.”
But evolution did equip us with the capacity to feel wonder at vastness and interconnection. Worth’s graphic cuts out both of these elements by refusing scale and refusing to include those things that do actually fill this nothing, but which he can’t show because he’s not changing scales. The result is boredom, separation, and lack of meaning. This selective scaling also permits him to project this nothingness down to the scale of atoms as well:
Emptiness is actually everywhere. It’s something like 99.999999999999999999958% of the known universe. Even an atom is mostly empty space.  .  .  . Some theories say all this emptiness is actually full of energy or dark matter and that nothing can truly be empty  .  .  . but come on, only ordinary matter has any meaning for us.

This statement privileges the apparent location of the stars and ignores the fact that every star is sending an array of electromagnetic rays and gravitational fields that extend across the entire cosmos. But, as Joel Primack and Nancy Abrams note in their work on cosmology, all things are in some way insignificant on other scales.42From a fully scalar perspective, such insignificance is positioned in the larger schema of interconnection we elaborated on in chapter 7. The nihilism and glorification of this kind of emptiness is built on a persistent exclusion only possible if we ignore scale itself.43
Behold the Earth
What Brand recognized, standing on his balcony and experiencing the curvature of the Earth, was that new modes of imagining and imaging were now possible for making present these seemingly inaccessible scales. Only in the twentieth century can we actually arrive at a physical position where the Earth might be viewed with the same visual apparatus that is used at this scale. While very few of us have made it to that physical location, visual technologies allow us to vicariously take our vision to this perspective in a way more akin to our possible experiences of smaller scales. This movement constitutes a fundamental shift in the rhetorical weight of the images and descriptions produced. However we would like to critique both vision and film technology, these photos and astronaut accounts are on equal grounds with the claims already made by all of science grounded in empiricism.44This is what the Earth looks like, we can say—not naively but in recognition that insofar as we want to invoke any authority of the empirical, this photo also claims these grounds. I thus want to end this chapter with an encounter with this image without falling into the clichés that characterized the rhetoric of space travel around the Apollo missions, and which works through the trivialization of the familiar.45We can thus turn now to the photo itself (Figure 16) to rediscover its capacity to induce scalar experience.

The disc is surprisingly bright—luminescent on my screen, a swirling of white and blue. I feel almost immediately the force of my usual orientation as I recognize Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. Glimmers of Asia appear on the top edges. I am looking directly into the gap between Africa and Madagascar—or slightly below it where the photo appears to be a bit brighter. The rest is ocean and cloud, although after a minute I realize that the big patch of white on the bottom of the disc is probably Antarctica. It appears as if the whole planet is reeling back away from me. But this is my normalization of the planet’s image withdrawing as my brain attempts to orient itself toward the image in a familiar way. These names, orientations, and shapes arise from the thousands of times that I have seen these areas mapped, overwritten with names and borders and places. I am so saturated already with weather maps, geography lessons, and forays into Google Earth that my mind overlays it with those yellow lines and little names. I almost want to reach out and spin it, to search for the place where I am or would like to go.

But none of that is actually here in this photo before me. The longer I look, the less familiar it becomes. That strange textured brown and dark green slab is a strange exception to the white and blue hues that intermingle organically across the disc. The shape of it is no longer what I know as “Africa”—I can’t even see the edge of the landmass on the top left; I was adding it in, knowing it would end there. The longer I gaze, however, the more I have the feeling that even if this globe was oriented the way it often is now—North America or Europe in the center with each continent clearly distinguished and with less emphasis on the ocean—I would still be able to let go of that mapping. These are, after all, only the shapes of landmasses.

Figure 16:The Blue Marble. Image by NASA.

When I stare for a while at the bottom right section, even the designation of cloud and ocean drops away as my mind switches duck-rabbit style between the two, unsure which one is the surface and which one is not. When I let this gaze fall into the division between land and water, the continuity of the clouds produces a surprising depth. Feeling this depth, I let my perspective widen to take in the whole picture. As an experiment, I back away so that I can take it in fully at once. Apparent orbness manifests, the reality of the curvature that Brand glimpsed from his balcony. The edge is suddenly magnificently apparent. My eyes follow it around for several rotations, delighting in the contained contrast with the stark black.

A consideration arises—no, a feeling invades my senses: what amI looking at? I look away for a moment, consider my desk, the scattered books, the light from the window, the trees outside blowing in the wind, my chair, my computer, my cup of tea—where is all of this? Even if this photo was centered on me here, in that splotch of brown and green shaped like the form I’ve come to know as “North America,” the truth is I perceive none of it.Or rather I know I perceive it, but—I seek for another means to say it but can only go to a scalar comparison to describe the experience—it is like saying I see the atoms in my hand when I look at my hand. My mind reels at the suggestion, experiencing both scales at once for a moment. All of this here, is in that orb.And this orb is seamless, vibrant and clear in its spherical vastness. Now the duck-rabbit switch is my existence itself, felt whole, divided, whole, divided. In this disorientation a new thought emerges, as if the voice of the Earth itself: In this multiplicity, the veritable detritus of matter scattered about your little room, do I contradict myself by showing myself as a single object? Very well then, I contradict myself: I am large. I contain multitudes.

Whitman echoes in my head as I bring up these lines on my second screen and see: “I concentrate toward them that are nigh. I wait on the door slab.” The picture is still on my main screen, waiting, demanding its vastness. I become aware of it replicated on the desk before me, on a book, and another, and another, and another—even a business card someone found from a religious organization and passed along to me. This image spins into an icon, each replication a kind of prayer to the vast capacity of this orb to contain such a myriad of beings even as it obliterates the distinctions and reveals itself whole. I feel suddenly as if I speak for the Earth, like my hands type for it, only thus as a kind of plea: “Listener up there! What have you to confide to me? Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening.” I can no longer tell if I am seeing the image or speaking to it—I sidle around its surface—I feel its emanation and feel how I emanate from it. I feel lost in its surface but still embedded, strikingly aware of my feet on the ground, of the pull of gravity—that testament of the immensity of this presence. My mind wraps around this sphere, is contained in it, by it, for it. I speak, the Earth speaks, Whitman speaks (across time):
