I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,
I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.

I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,
If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.

You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,
But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,
And filter and fibre your blood.

Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,
Missing me one place search another,
I stop somewhere waiting for you.46
Like the first chirp of a bird, heard through a waking breath, a touch of agapē—the effluent ānanda(bliss)—penetrates my being and drops into the sight of the Earth as a Whole.12Transformations by InvolutionThe Contemplative Practices of Scale, Scaling ContemplationStep to the Right!
While undergoing a major stroke, the neuroscientist Jill Bolte Taylor experienced her sense of separation and egoic identification shut down. In the TED talk that popularized her experience, she describes the feeling in scalar terms: “I can’t define where I begin and where I end, because the atoms and the molecules of my arm blended with the atoms and molecules of the wall. And all I could detect was this energy.”1In recounting this transformation in perspective, the neuroscientist makes a strange statement: “How many brain scientists have the opportunity to study their own brain from the inside out?” Suddenly, the brain scientist realizes that it is possible to study brain configurations through experience. In this account, this possibility remains only an exceptional moment, as if studying the brain in this way is only possible in a stroke or similar event. Yet this maneuver brings to our attention the fact that experience itself is already a kind of study of the brain’s neuronal configuration, only on a different scale.

When Taylor physically brings a human brain onto the stage, she creates a confusing contrast to the poetic description of the experience. It seems that the authority of the account lies in the material invocation of the brain and her training as a neuroscientist, yet the science here is general, drawing on widely misunderstood tropes about the left and right brain and reliant on somewhat blunt computer metaphors. In contrast, her description of the experience itself draws from a recognizably spiritual or even psychedelic rhetorical repertoire. Even if Taylor’s scientific understanding is more elaborate and nuanced than she presents there, one gets the sense that these nuances would be less important; after all, this studying from the “inside out” is actually about the experienceof these differences in brain configuration. The brain structure itself—especially the brain as a nonscalar object displayed on the stage—is less precise here than the description of the experience.

Taylor’s account highlights the much-obscured scalar shift between experience (the scale of here) and the scalar views we often permit to stand in for this here. It also highlights an essential difficulty that is exacerbated by Taylor’s inability to bridge the scientific with the part-contemplative, part-self-help rhetoric she deploys. This slippage from the contemplative to the self-help emerges precisely where Taylor reasserts familiar humanist tropes of freedom and choice: “And I pictured a world filled with beautiful, peaceful, compassionate, loving people who knew that they could come to this space at any time. And that they could purposely choose to step to the right of their left hemispheres—and find this peace.” The basic sentiment here is fine enough. Yet in asserting that this operation is something “they could purposely choose,” Taylor throws us into an inherently difficult contradiction, which we can use to divide self-help rhetoric from the more difficult contemplative discourses: if the transformation requires the eradication of the egoic self, then how can this be self-help, as a choice by a self kept intact? After all, Taylor’s experience was not deliberately chosen in this manner but was induced by a stroke. This puts Taylor’s experience in the same rhetorical dilemma as the psychedelic experience of ego death.2Both the stroke and psychedelic experiences may, in certain configurations, induce a productive and healthy experience of unity and ego death. But as Taylor’s account reiterates, this experience does not convey what the nature of the transformation entailed, what the experience is, or, most important, the conditions for finding, navigating, and working with this shift not as a function of a brain obstruction but as a transformation expressed at the scale of experience.

The difficulty can be described as a scalar shift from noticing a physical change in the brain—or inducing it forcibly via chemical alterations—to observing and reacting to a change in your configuration of experience. The idea that one could study the brain from the inside out identifies an information disparity between the scale of the neuron and the scale of experience. An image of the 100 trillion neuronal connections would provide a picture of a physical object that is already information-poor in that it does not tell us what that configuration is an experience of.Likewise, inducing the experience via a stroke or drug might create a momentary neuronal configuration (such as an experience of wholeness or ego death or cosmic consciousness), but this momentary experience does not necessarily reorient the brain—these 100 trillion neuronal connections—to this experience that is about its configuration. The chemicals clear away or the brain heals from the stroke, the moment of insight ends, and the previous brain configuration may resume. Meanwhile, those who would prefer not to have a stroke or enter the mired landscape of post-drug-war psychedelic culture are left wondering about the real value and nature of this experience.

There is thus something of a cross-scalar dilemma that is poorly navigated by this “choose to step to the right of their left hemispheres,” as if the operation is simply a matter of switching brain halves like a scripted move in a line dance. Although we can experiment here with what neuroscientific data might tell us—how it might help us understand this reconfiguration—something more appropriately scalar is needed to comprehend such transformations of experience. This scalar situation brings into view a fundamental difficulty with our conclusion in chapter 8: ego death, the death of the humanist subject, and the scalar reconfiguration of the Homo sapiensas a function of the Cosmos requires an incredible transformation of thought and self-conception. But the very conditions of this transformation cannot be placed back within this framework of humanistic self-choice, but rather must equally take into account the scalar dynamics of the transformation: “you” are not reorienting just “yourself” but also reorganizing a complex and not-divided system to attune itself to its indivisibility.

This is the task presented by the contemplative who, upon experiencing a glimpse of this undivided, non-egoic view, must nonetheless struggle to reorient to this new view. As Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo notes, “Even when we have arrived at some glimpse of this idea” of the scalar relationship between the individual and the Whole “or succeeded in fixing it in our consciousness  .  .  . it is difficult for us in our outward parts and active nature to square accounts between this universal standpoint and the claims of our personal opinion, our personal will, our personal emotion and desire.”3The revision of reality implied by even the simplest of scalar shifts demands such a radical transformation that additional work must be undertaken to reorient “ourselves”—this complex conceptual-perceptual unit consisting of some 100 trillion neuronal connections, some 40 trillion cells, a host of ecological delimitations and patterns formed from billions of years of evolutionary alterations, and an engrained social and linguistic orientation—somehow this experiential coming-together must be reoriented into this new interpretive and responsive configuration presented by scale. But the momentum of this normalized Homo sapiensego-centered view is naturally immense; “The hold of this ego-consciousness upon our whole habit of existence is difficult to shake off.”4It is this task that leads the mystic to the contemplative, to practices that are designed to redesign and reorient one’s whole being to a new vantage point beyond and exceeding egoic forms of consciousness.
