
The articulation here does not fit neatly into the discursive domains of the religious, ethical, or scientific. Rather, continuing our discussion of rhetoric and mysticism in chapter 10, this scalar dilemma provides one site for thinking through a kind of involutionary rhetoric: practices geared toward transforming one’s mental structure from the inside out.5While the rhetorical tradition has primarily focused on convincing other people, this rhetorical task is a matter of persuading oneself—or what one thinks one is—of a radically different configuration toward existence. Taylor’s account is problematic not because her experience was not empirically valid or scientifically rigorous but because it lacks rhetorical sensibility; it does not attend to the conditions under which the experience was found, the structure of the reflection she is performing, or how this communication might induce the same experience in others. Thus, we can look here at more coherent articulations that synthesize such empirical and scientific language with a more careful attending to the structure of the experience and the conditions for the transformation.

The task of this chapter is to consider the rhetorical difficulty inherent in this scalar reconfiguration as it manifests at the intersection of contemplative writing and this contemporary scalar encounter with the brain. Doing so will also permit us to describe a theory of reflection on scalar grounds so that we can articulate why scale requires this kind of practice, what scalar reflection is, how contemplative practices provide directions for this scalar reflection, and how the scalar discourses of science develop a more nuanced account of this involutionary maneuver. At the same time, we will have to handle certain objections to this whole operation, keeping in mind that these objections usually emerge from forms of humanist reflectionof the sort targeted by Cary Wolfe’s posthumanism, which attempts to distinguish itself “from the reflection and introspection associated with the critical subject of humanism.”6As discussed in chapter 8, the critical subject of humanism cannot exist in the usual way in a scalar account, but this does not mean that there are no forms of reflection not based on humanistic grounds. Likewise, the whole possibility of reflection hinges on a critique of a persistent difficulty in philosophy and critical theory: whether or not one can overcome, remove, or even escape prejudice, language, or culture. Our scalar account will show how a form of scalar reflection can resituate our relationship to both physical and socio-cultural-linguistic scalar correlates to experience. Doing so will also provide new avenues for a theory of rhetorical transformation based not on humanistic grounds of choice but rather definitively posthumanist or even transhumanist (in Franklin Merrell-Wolff’s sense discussed in chapter 8) practices of self-transformation according to self-transcendence.

This Is the Brain Looking at Itself
While Taylor brings a human brain onto the stage, the more likely evidence from neuroscience today would be the image of the PET scan or the fMRI. The rhetorical weight of such images has led to a noticeable increase in both popular writing and transdisciplinary academic collaboration using this neuroscientific data and vivid images to make extensive claims about human behavior and experience. This has led to what Mellissa Littlefield and Jenell Johnson characterize as the “neuroscientific turn” in academic research, as the evidence from neuroscience becomes invoked in more and more contexts. Littlefield and Johnson describe three such uses of neuroscience: using neuroscience to comment on subjects “traditionally under the purview of the social science and humanities” (e.g., religious experience), using laboratory evidence to bolster humanistic studies (e.g., taking brain scans of people reading a novel), and using neuroscience as theory.7A scalar account of the brain encountering itself could do all three, noting how this scalar experience has neurological effects, studying scalar experiences (such as cosmic consciousness) with an fMRI, or invoking these neurological changes as evidence for theoretical shifts. However, all three tasks first run into a prior and primary question: how do we understand this scalar bridge being performed by the Homo sapienslooking at the brain?
When the neuroethicist Judy Illes notes that, with neuroscience, “the flow of information has become multidimensional, multidirectional, and  .  .  . multimeaningful,” we can offer one reason it has done so: it has become distinctively scalar.8In doing neuroscience, the brain—insofar as we want to characterize or localize experience in the brain—is looking back on itself as an object, aiming to understand a new scale (the neuronal) as it relates to experience and cognition. In doing so, the brain finds itself in a strange situation about how to interpret the encounter. In a brain scan, the brain is producing a new reference point for experiential formations. By now we should recognize this scalar formation as the dislocation into (at least) two places (1.14, 2.8): a cognitive activity is encountered as brain scan and as experiential cognition. As became apparent in Taylor’s account, switching scales is not a replacement of one scale for the other. For this reason, neurological studies usually rely on some correlation between a particular experiential element withthe neurological configuration found in the scan. However, a few elements of this scalar loop make the situation more nuanced than some kind of direct peering into the brain structure.

First, much of what we might consider part of our experience is not within our direct awareness. Neuroscience may permit us to dissect forms of cognition not easily discernible in the field of self-referential awareness, discerning cognitive operations going on within our seemingly coherent and whole cognitive operations. Rather than simply using the blunt label “unconscious,” such cognitive operations may be delineated through experimental formations designed to tease out otherwise implicit operations. The results are often hard to understand, partially because these nuances already encounter the narratives or interpretive habits built aboutour experience. For example, the infamous 1985 Libet experiment, which has recently been bolstered by multiple more-nuanced experiments, showed that decisions are “made” in some way by the brain a half second prior to the recognition that the decision is made.9These experiments imply that what we call “decisions” do not coincide with a particular kind of intentional action as we usually conceive it. We should be more precise in understanding what this shows than, for example, Brian Massumi’s declaration that Libet shows how “thought lags behind itself” or that “the half-second of thought-forming is forever lost in darkness.”10More precisely, it demonstrates a scalar incongruity in the experiential interpretationof something like decision making. That is, just as there are trillions of complex cellular interactions going on withinthe experience and function of the body, there are already complex cognitive formations going on withinsomething like thought or decision making. The implication is that our narrative about (or introspective awareness of) “our” decisions is the thing that lags behind.

This nuance points to how there remains, even in this dive into the nonnarrative cognitive processes, a correlate or relationship that can be observed within our experience. Such observing requires a more careful attending to the aspects of cognition and experience. With careful methods of observation, contemplatives often make similar claims, noting the nonlocality of thought and decisions by observing that these thoughts seem to emerge on their own. One can observe within experience how thoughts, memories, and decisions seem to just show up—where did they come from? Whose are they? Did “I” produce them? These questions require looking carefully, slowly, and honestly at how thoughts and decisions emerge within experience. I would argue the Libet experiments can only be understood with these kinds of observations; if we fail to observe how such an experiment is evident within normal experience, then we will go on operating under the presumption that decisions are wholly and uniquely made by something called “me.” Yet on what grounds is this claim made?
In observing these differences, the brain of the neuroscientist—or your brain—is not usually the brain put in the fMRI. As Taylor’s account makes clear, brain scientists are not usually studying both scales at once, since they are studying an experience as localized in another brain. Furthermore, the need to aggregate such data means that any given brain, including the neuroscientist’s, will always be to some degree disassociated from the specificity of what is discovered. The results will thus not fully capture the nuances of the experiential field but rather patterns or tendencies of cognitive formations. Given this limit, one must interpret such neuroscience in terms more general than your particular experience. Even more broadly, the brain itself cannot be said to be the sole location of cognition or many of the other attributes we ascribe to the brain.11While undoubtedly enormous amounts of processing occur in these estimated 100 trillion neuronal connections, these already bear a relation to the 40 trillion cells distributed through the body and the orders of magnitude more complex number of molecules and chemical interactions churning through the body. Likewise, the distributed cognition that occurs through linguistic and cultural forms, writing and technological reference, and projected media (light, sound, molecules for scent, tactile gradients) that permit senses to function all contribute to the cognitive formation that then expresses not only as experience but as the culmination of a cognitive, affective, or physical response.12Within these limits, one can resituate somewhat the significance of the Libet studies. As one more recent study examining Libet’s results notes, such studies show “that the outcome of a decision can be encoded in brain activity of prefrontal and parietal cortex.”13These studies do not find the source of decisions or any particular explanation of decision; they simply identify that a decision had been “encoded” in the brain and that this decision did not correspond to the self-referential recognition of a decision being made.

Understanding this complex situation of the brain looking at itself permits us to address the rather glamorous claims that a neuronal change causessomething like Taylor’s experience or the psychedelic experience of ego-death. Of course, the aneurism and the chemical clearly relate to an experiential shift in both of these cases. But the idea that the neuronal and chemical reconfiguration is thebasis for conscious states is a clear case of mistaking a scalar shift for a causal relation (see 6.27). Taylor’s experience does not prove that, for example, nirvanais merely a physical phenomenon; it only shows that a change in the configuration of neurons likewise creates a shift in experience. At the same time, the fact that such states can be forcibly induced points to their possible validity, but only if we more precisely describe the nature of the brain-experience transformation and then carefully map what it means to navigate the transformation involved.

You Probably Think This Brain Structure Is about You
With these nuances in view, a full sense of the contingency involved, and an acknowledgment that future studies may change this picture, let us look at some of the recent neuroscience to see how one can describe this ego-death transformation. There has been a surprising confluence of findings in neuroscience that bear on this question of self-identification. The approach here thus does not have to be concerned with specifically religious experiences, nor do we need to start with the growing literature on contemplative practices and the brain. Instead, we can start with what happens when you have people do nothing at all.

Through extensive brain imaging, neuroscientists have isolated what they call the default mode network (DMN, sometimes default network [see Figure 17]).14It is “default” because it tends to activate when people stop doing tasks. This is how the DMN was first identified: it activated when brain-scan subjects were not doing anything.15Once it was identified, researchers began to study what caused the DMN to activate, finding that it activated under activities that contain a self-referential content: “tasks that encourage subjects toward internal mentation, including autobiographical memory, thinking about one’s future, theory of mind, self-referential and affective decision making.”16These kinds of thought are said to be self-referential because they are about what you think you are, including a narrative about what you need to do or have done and a rehearsal of plans and memories. One study, which reviews thirty years of imaging, notes that “the default network is a specific, anatomically defined brain system preferentially active when individuals are not focused on the external environment.”17
Figure 17:An image of the default mode currently in vogue among Homo sapiens.The irregular spheres here make up what neuroscientists have called the default mode network. The lines indicate connectivity between these nodes of activity. Default Mode Network Connectivity by Andreashorm is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Many of these studies treat this DMN as an important part of an individual’s cognitive well-being.18But, more recently, studies on meditation have independently demonstrated a correlation between meditative states and a decrease in DMN activity. One study scanned participants before and after several months of mindfulness meditation and found reduction in activity in self-referential parts of the brain.19Another scanned experienced meditators and found structural changes in the DMN that “supports the view that mindfulness training induces brain function changes that are accompanied by a reduction of self-referential thoughts during rest.”20Similarly, Judson Brewer and colleagues scanned highly experienced meditators (over five thousand hours of meditation) and found decreases in DMN activity while meditating.21These studies suggest that meditative practices can work directly on this self-referential, self-narrative part of the brain, in line with experiential accounts of a withering of the self found in contemplative traditions.22
To add to this picture, studies unrelated to meditation found an anti-correlated relationship between the DMN and the parts of the brain primarily involved in high-level tasks, known as the task-positive network (TPN): when the TPN is activated, activity in the DMN tends to decrease.23These seem to suggest that the less the brain is taken up with self-referential thoughts, the better you are at doing high-level tasks. Brewer has recently applied this finding to his research on meditation, arguing that the relationship between the DMN and the TPN produces evidence for the need to release the hold one has on one’s thoughts.24
Brewer and others have pointed out that a simple training can be done outside of any kind of meditative or spiritual practice in a cross-scalar encounter: if hooked up to an MRI, you could receive feedback about when the DMN is activated and attempt to adjust yourself accordingly.25Doing so could allow you to attend to this DMN activity, increasing focused attention over mind-wandering. But of course this loop only has more authority because we already struggle to attend to our own capacity to observe how we divide up the world. Indeed, meditation and other contemplative practices are already performing this loop as one observes the very processes of the mind as they emerge in experience.
