
This account may be tentative, and this interpretation has and will be contested. However, the wealth of experiential evidence, both in abnormal experiences such as Taylor’s and in the accounts of contemplatives, already suggests that the basic conclusions are likely to be confirmed upon further research. This prediction might seem spurious or a means of generating self-validating conclusions (a significant problem for the science of meditation), but, much like the recent confirmation of the Libet study, the fact that so many people already attest to these experiential effects suggests that some neuronal reconfiguration is likely to be discerned within brain functions as the scalar correlate of these experiences.26
The suggestion here is notthat the DMN is the I itself; that is, neuroscientists have not found your “self” in a part of the brain; they have merely identified a part of the brain that seems to pretend, that is, narrate to itself, that it is a self. The ego structure (see 2.24) is not an actual thing but rather a narrative told about what we are that gathers together a diversity of experiences and, in an act of scalar synecdoche (see chapter 9), calls them mine. In the end, the meaningful conclusion that can be derived from this increasingly specific scalar loop is this: the neurological shutting down of the sense of self implies that this sense of ego is a particular brain function, not some kind of deep-rooted identity. If “being separate” and “being an individual” manifests as a particular brain structure, then by implication that separateness and individuality are secondary distinctions created by a brain trying to understand its own experience. Suddenly, the materialist position through which one suggests that such experiences are simply bodily responses has been undone by this very locating of the self-referential, divisive narrative.

But proof is not what we’re after; even if this declaration of the inessentiality of the self comes from a scientist rather than a Zen monk, it does not necessarily produce the transformation here in this brain. The brain looking at the neuroscience easily forgets that this is data about its own brain structure. The image it is looking at appears only to be an objective configuration; it can thus avoid the subjective, experiential configuration implied. In fact, we have to keep the subject-object distinction here precisely because of the way the results can be externalized. The problem is: in looking outward at these objects, the difference could only be induced by an invasive reconfigurationof the neuronal pattern—by something like a stroke or a drug. But then the experience appears to be caused by or require such an intervention. In recognizing the scalar loop, however, this brain examining itself can now turn away from the image and consider the structure of its own experience. Am I a coherent self? Who is this “I”?
Whose Prejudice Is This Anyway?
Before we describe the extracting of the habits of a divisive ego structure, we can revisit the opposite scalar correlate common within critical theory since the linguistic turn—the move to prejudice, language, or culture—as an additional means of externalizing the structure of cognition. One of the easiest means of dismissing contemplative experiences is to think of these effects in terms of prejudices, culturally bound interpretation, or psychological predispositions. Perhaps Edgar Mitchell was already predisposed toward the esoteric. Perhaps Philip K. Dick finally lost it. Perhaps, if Richard Maurice Bucke has been a bit more skeptical  .  .  .

The academic argument around mysticism provides a site where this tension has played out, beginning in a debate between the philosophers W. T. Stace and Steven T. Katz.27Stace sought a basis for mysticism by defining features of what Robert K. C. Forman later called the “pure consciousness event.” Stace claims that this experience is shared by all mystics but is articulated differently depending on the cultural and linguistic tools available.28In response, Katz argued, in a move recognizable after the linguistic turn, that all mystical experience must be inseparable from language and therefore reliant on the historical and cultural milieu.29Grace Jantzen later combined Katz’s position with the articulation we saw from Haraway in chapter 8, arguing that “there are no views from nowhere, and there are no views from everywhere. There are only views from somewhere, and the particular place will have an inescapable effect on what can be seen.”30Similarly, Richard King, invoking Hans-Georg Gadamer’s argument that interpretation is foundational to being and that prejudice in interpretation is inevitable, claims that “there is no possibility of a universally applicable metanarrative or bird’s-eye view of reality.”31Further, King states that “the process of interpreting a text, then  .  .  . inevitably involves the projections of one’s own values, interest, and agenda onto the text.”32
Our discussion of scalar experience presents three problems for this critique. First, scalar experience suggests a potential explanation for a pure consciousness event: it is a moment of moving past what one thinks one is and one’s exclusive reliance on the reality of human-bound concepts. It is the brain realizing that it solidifies its own divisions—especially this division called the “self.” As we saw throughout Part II, this reorientation is the arrival at the open position beyond a given set of divisions and values, the position from which new positions, judgments, and scales might emerge. To deny this possible state and to insist on the inevitable hold of language is to bind ourselves in the shadowy, ill-defined domain of the “human.” But even scientific descriptions of scale indicate that this is not our situation. Second, this attempt to indelibly tie language or culture to experience is another example of a social counterpart to the physical claim that neuronal configurations cause experience. Third, and most importantly, if contemplative practice is already about examining structures of judgment—and pure consciousness events only manifest in or as this movement—then how can we ascribe the experience to these very things being looked at, given up, and transformed? We are thus led not to prejudice (in the sense of pre-given judgments) but to the resistance to examining prejudicethat prevents us from rescaling our linguistic and social reference points. When we insist that linguistic and cultural aspects are inevitable and inescapable, we impose a content of the brain, a human conceptual framework, and a scalar delimitation of objects and identity back onto the experience that is about the undermining of these very contents. Content and prejudices are not left out of the account; they themselves are transformed in the process. Is this not the transformation needed as we recognize engrained structures of prejudice?
This maneuver of looking back at one’s judgments is a persistent trope in contemplative rhetoric. For example, Augustine’s transformation is described in terms of a scalar reflection with the major obstacle being his preexisting cognitive preferences. The whole operation required that he take into account his own mind: “Because I could not perceive them in the mind, I thought that I could not perceive my mind itself.”33The problem is that Augustine does not know what his own psychical prejudices are: “I had no clear idea,” he states again and again, “even of my own self” (119). The shape of this breaking down required a turning back upon his desires and thoughts. This turn back upon oneself is an essential trope—the Greek tropositself meaning “turn”—by which the experience or realization is made possible. Thus, Augustine, upon hearing a story of another’s conversion, states:
As he spoke, you, O Lord, turned me back upon myself. You took me from behind my own back, where I had placed myself because I did not wish to look upon myself.  .  .  . I looked, and I was filled with horror, but there was no place for me to flee to away from myself. If I tried to turn my gaze from myself  .  .  . once again you placed me in front of myself, and thrust me before my own eyes. (156)
Augustine actively resists looking back at the aspects of himself that would become implicated in the conversion being demanded. Rather than a result of his prejudice or predisposition, this prejudice has to come into view as the very thing to be transformed.

The same applies with the scalar visions we have seen throughout this work. Because the vision is about what I think I am, I must allow this prejudice to come into view and have it reworked by this new perspective. Undoubtedly, it is difficult to implicate oneself into the scalar loop, to place one’s prized conceptions, preferences, and prejudices within this extended measure. Given this difficulty, we can say that excessive skepticism tends to prevent individuals from allowing their attention to dwell on the scalar relationship long enough to process their own place in it. Augustine himself was, prior to conversion, one such skeptic. The difference hinges not on how critical or objective a person is but rather what one is critical and objective about: the structures of thought and habit within oneself. Augustine resists this whole operation: “I knew what it was, but I pretended not to; I refused to look at it and put it out of my memory” (156). This is a failure of being critical that masquerades as a criticism: the unwillingness to face his own structure of mind leads him to push it away, to suspect the apparent shift before him.

From this perspective, contemplative rhetoric often describes the operation of looking back at calcified cognitive structures as a surrender or realignment of will. Augustine, for instance, uses the language of linking formed by the investments of this body: “For in truth lust is made out of a perverse will, and when lust is served, it becomes habit, and when habit is not resisted, it becomes necessity. But such links, joined one to another, as it were—for this reason I have called it a chain—a harsh bondage held me fast” (151). We can read “lusts” here as the psychical investment in the things around us, the normal objects of value and importance, and the bodily needs that demand attention and addressing. Their importance becomes engrained in the scalar configuration of neurons, social mores, and conceptions of need that leads us to persistently reaffirm their structure and power in our everyday engagement with them. A different scale view contradicts, reworks, or reorients these linkages. Thus, Augustine is able to discern these two kinds of belief and emotional investment: those derived from the normalized human-confined structure and the larger, transformed values. Yet in this inward looking the conflict is only perpetuated by associating the difference with an ego structure: “It was by methat this habit had been made so warlike against me, since I had come willingly to this point where I now willed not” (151). When this war between the wills is released, the links themselves can be dissolved of their power. It was, however, not the belief that did so, but the surrender of it: “This was the sum of it: not to will what I willed and to will what you willed” (167).34The persistent surrender and transformation of one’s beliefs, will, and prejudice are thus necessary to create a sustained transformation. An event of the sort exemplified by Taylor may start this process but be insufficient for a complete and ongoing reconfiguration of such engrained linkages.

Apart from this question about mystical experience, this account of prejudice is a way of rethinking the function of cultural theory more generally. Outside of the critical attitude diagnosed by Bruno Latour (see chapter 10), cultural critique can be seen as one means of tracing out the possibilities of humans configuring themselves in relation to reality. The purpose of such critique cannot be simply diagnostic but must become transformative: we must grapple with these remnants of erroneous and harmful ideas and confusions such as those called prejudice. To simply find these linkages in others, to identify them in our cultural narratives, or to say that we are bound by them risks voiding the whole operation from the start. Crucially, this is the whole terrain already mapped by contemplative rhetoric: contemplative rhetoric begins with the assumption that examining and transforming one’s structure of mind is not some trivial endeavor but rather a difficult yet worthwhile process.

Looping through the Möbius Strip
Our encounter with the brain above implies that the mechanism for this self-examination is already built into the structure of the brain itself. What is the capacity of the brain to consider itself? Because some of the confusion arises from mistaking the scale on which this view of prejudice occurs, I want to provide one diagram for this reflective process.

We can examine how this reflection works in a more rigorous way by once again using the language of cybernetics, specifically Gregory Bateson’s short and provocative essay “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication.”35This essay approaches reflection from the perspective of learning more generally. Using the notion of logical types (see 3.6), Bateson is able to distinguish forms of learning by considering how a system refers back to itself (Figure 18). He begins by defining a base state where no learning is occurring. This Learning 0 (L0) might be considered the base activity of matter itself, which is what physics characterizes as action and reaction. Bateson suggests that the basic signals in information processing, such as sending a signal over a telephone wire, operate at this level because this communication does not loop back on itself and therefore no “learning” occurs. Learning 1 (L1) is learning about L0. In L1 the organism provides basic “context markers” that signal an action to occur. Thus, in the iconic example of Pavlovian conditioning a dog learns to respond to a bell when it becomes a marker for food. We might say that L1 is the base activity of living structures since, in order to respond to its environment and maintain itself, any organism must organize its systemic responses in regular patterns.

