Logical Types of Learning
Learning 0 (L0)
Action/reaction
The base activity of matter itself (e.g., basic signals in information processing)
Learning 1 (L1)
(learning about L0)
Stimulus/response
The base activity of living structures (e.g., Pavlovian conditioning)—provides basic “context markers” that signal an action to occur
Learning 2 (L2)
(learning about L1)
Habit according to pattern of contexts
The organizational activity of complex living structures using models that organize contexts for responses (e.g., responses to people according to “character”). Reinforces itself according to self-validating demands of identity.

Learning 3 (L3)
(learning about L2)
Control over or release from habitual necessity
Taking into account one’s own context-making process without merely making it another context. To move beyond organizational contexts of habit (e.g., to reflect on one’s prejudices in such a way that they are altered in the act of reflection).

Figure 18:Bateson’s logical types of learning. Derived from Bateson, “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication.”
Learning 2 (L2) is then the learning about L1. It occurs when a system uses models to organize markers for responses. For example, a bell might trigger salivation in the context of a restaurant but not in the context of a school. In this example, “restaurant” and “school” describe patterns of contexts markers. L2 includes most organizational activity of complex living structures. For instance, “airport” designates certain L1 responses as appropriate and others as not; if cued to stand on my head at the airport, I might not respond as I would at a yoga practice. Most human responses exist within linkages formed by L2, since we work according to organizations of contexts—complex forms of meaning, expectation, social situations, and abstract transactions. Something like prejudice begins on the level of L1, as simple stimulus-response, but becomes more manifest and embedded in L2, in which basic characteristics (he’s black) become associated within an organization of contexts, such as capacities (he’s not appropriate for this job), leading to particular responses according to that organization (he doesn’t get hired). Most importantly, L2 is self-validating, since it tends to produce and reinforce the contexts under which it functions. Thus we replicate in our social, technological, or economic apparatuses the organization of contexts from which we function. As a result, “the self-validating characteristic of the content of L2 has the effect that such learning is almost ineradicable” (301).

Almost. Learning 3 (L3) is the learning by which we reflect on our means of making contexts and thereby learn to alter that structure. Such a structure, notes Bateson, is “likely to be difficult and rare even in human beings,” and “it will also be difficult for scientists, who are only human, to imagine or describe this process” (301). The difficulty is that L3 requires one to take into account one’s own context-making process without simply making this another kind of context. L3 cannot just be a change in contexts; this is the purview of L2. For example, to motivate yourself to exercise by setting a schedule, joining a running team, or getting a better pair of shoes is not a learning about your context-setting capacity but is merely an externalized changing of contexts in order to get your body to respond differently. Similarly, L2 is not to find an ethical discourse to regulate your contexts according to some kind of derived principles or rules (303). Instead, the whole orientation toward this structure has to change: “Learning III (i.e.learning aboutLearning II) may lead either to an increase in Learning II or to a limitation or perhaps a reduction of that phenomenon. Certainly it must lead to a greater flexibility in the premises acquired by the process of Learning II—a freedomfrom their bondage” (304). In L3 one does not entirely avoid building and acting according to contexts, since such things are undoubtedly useful (maybe new shoes would help me finally get into running; it’s probably best if I do not do a headstand in the airport), just as L2 does not eradicate L1. But in learning about this process of forming contexts we can start to see these linkages, as Augustine called them, and open them up for examination and transformation.

Crucially, identity is essential to the whole operation. L3 requires the release of your sense of limited self:
But any freedom from the bondage of habit must also denote a profound redefinition of the self. If I stop at the level of Learning II, “I” am the aggregate of those characteristics which I call my “character.” “I” am my habits of acting in context and shaping and perceiving the contexts in which I act. Selfhood is a product or aggregate of Learning II. To the degree that a man achieves Learning III, and learns to perceive and act in terms of the contexts of contexts, his “self” will take on a sort of irrelevance. The concept of “self” will no longer function as a nodal argument in the punctuation of experience. (304)
