The entirety of L3 hinges on the possibility of bringing into view the artificiality of one’s self-identity. To learn on this level requires that this identity be open for question and moderation, or even rendered irrelevant. This relationship between L3 and identity becomes particularly important for our mode of speaking of ideologies and prejudice, particularly since the currently dominant modes of discourses tend to reinforce identity structures according to particular categories. From the perspective of these learning levels it ought to be clear that the widespread biopolitical regulation of identity is an efficient means for political structures to direct power.36As long as we continue to function primarily in terms of identity, structures of power will be able to tune those identities in order to reorganize economic and power flows in ways that can be partial and parasitic. However much we attempt to change the organization of those contexts and identities, people will always find themselves falling into harmful modes of categorization and holding to their acquired preferences (L2). Without some attempt at L3, prejudices will always appear as indomitable structures that we fail to locate because we cannot see them within our own identity structures.

Bateson notes that L3 is ultimately difficult to achieve and potentially dangerous, since when it is only performed partially it can lead to an instability. This makes sense even in our basic example of racial prejudice: one notices the prejudicial contexts within oneself and, unless performed thoroughly through the release of identity, one immediately places them within the context of L2: “Oh no, I’m (not) a racist!” Such partial means of noticing one’s contextual and identification structures surely contribute to the cycles of guilt, frustration, anger, annoyance, and avoidance that we perpetually move between within discussions of identity politics. In many ways, this accounts for the “I am sinful and corrupt” tone of much of religion as we already see in Augustine’s Confessions.The sense of self-corruption is the birthing pain of a consciousness beginning to arrive at the capacity for L3. In turn, social structures, such as organized religions, can take advantage of this beginning by tying such observations back into a system of self-identification that prevents full L3 from occurring.

However, if fully consummated, L3 induces a noticeably scalar experience that Bateson describes in contemplative terms:
The resolution of contraries reveals a world in which personal identity merges into all the processes of relationship in some vast ecology or aesthetics of cosmic interaction. That any of these can survive seems almost miraculous, but some are perhaps saved from being swept away on oceanic feeling by their ability to focus in on the minutiae of life. Every detail of the universe is seen as proposing a view of the whole. (306)
Here we find another articulation of the tat tvam asirelationship by which we realize ourselves as a localization of the Cosmos, but now clarifying how this new state of consciousness transforms habits, prejudices, and beliefs.

This structure of learning helps us understand Michel Foucault’s observation that “know thyself” is given priority over the “care of the self” in Plato and Platonic traditions.37This priority is also mirrored in Advaita Vedanta and many forms of Buddhism precisely because the capacity to take care of one’s “self” hinges on the deconstruction of the ego. Otherwise, “caring for oneself” will always be based on a conception of oneself, in the secondary self-narration of the DMN, and trapped in L2. This egoic caring of oneself will always be out of step with the dynamic and shifting realities around (ecologically) and within (in cells, atoms, and flows of energy) “you” as this ego attempts to act according to the narrative simplification built out of human-based experience. There is thus a disparity between the “self” implied by the two phrases: “care of the self” risks keeping intact what one thinks one is if in such care practices the “self” becomes the discernible body, the socially affirmed identity, the politically recognized subject, and so on (the options of identification posed in chapter 8). “Know thyself,” on the other hand suggests that, in conjunction with any taking-care, one must inquire into this sense of self itself.

Surgical Technologies for Cognitive-Experiential Identity Extraction
We can now clarify how contemplative techniques might and might not be considered technologies of the self, which, in Foucault’s description, “permit individuals to effect by their own means or with the help of others a certain number of operations on their own bodies and souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality.”38The problem, again, lies in what one considers one’s “own means,” “their own bodies,” and “transform themselves.” What is this “self” on which these technologies are operating? Clearly, many such technologies tend toward self-help rhetoric and the neoliberal discourses of subjectivity that Foucault took such pains to diagnose. To the contrary, technologies of the self are better designated contemplative technologies, since they are about a direction of attention rather than the changing of an entity called “self.” To target this notion of “self,” such technologies must contain a reflective activity encountering what one thinks one is and what cognitive content is manifest within experience.

In such reflection, a split becomes apparent: when do we consider contemplative practices as a mode of improvement versus an inquiry into the nature of the self? The former requires a standard—some sense of a good and a bad—and therefore a judgment built out of a model of the world. Whether such standards are built from social mores, personal expectations, or scientific data, the situation is displaced from the scalar configuration from which experience emerges. Such standards risk imposing on this experiential configuration descriptions derived from out of its scale. Remember, experience has already become overwritten even as it is already delimited in certain ways. Thus, you think you are the body, with a certain name, attributes, tendencies, needs, obligations, memories, and abilities. Yet these linkages were already built on a reality that exceeds this parsing; within your experience are already cells and ecologies and atoms and stardust. Can we sit in this tuning that both acknowledges this experience here while also transforming it, but not merely as another imposition of an external narrative (an L2, DMN activity)? The great risk is that these new scalar objects become another imposition and overwriting as we trace DNA ties, ecological impacts, toxic molecules, heat deaths, hormone traces, risk probabilities, autoimmune effects, pandemic statistics, and evolutionary factors. We thus overload our “selves,” attaching more and more of this scalar configuration to this supposition that we are in control, that we must fix it, that we must know what to do next, how to improve our lives, the planet, our society, in order to adequately connect up to and account for these scalar objects we are continually uncovering. To the contrary, if we recognize that these connections and levels already are us, then we can calm down and examine the problem a bit more carefully. Where is the disorientation? How do we perform the reconfiguration?
The primary process must therefore be an examination of our sense of self so that we can understand what we have attached our notions, priorities, fears, and obligations to. This revision of contemplative inquiry is exemplified in Ramana Maharshi’s distilling of meditation to self-inquiry, ātma vichāra.39This basic practice is to simply pose the simple question “who am I?” Of course, this is nearly the same as “know thyself” but engaged as a question rather than a command. Most importantly, this question is not conceptual. That is, one is not to produce any contentor narrative about what one is. Rather, it is a mode of looking, a directing the attention back onto itself. Ātma vichāracalls you to observe within consciousness when content arises and look—“to whom does this arise?” The answer, undoubtedly, will be “me.” But if you look again—who is this “me”?—one finds a blank, a nonanswer, an unknowing. The reason for this should be clear: this “self” is already an idea, a division, and an interpretation of the structure of experience. Looking for the self is to return the structure of thought to the continual flow of existence.

A similar version of self-inquiry is found in Plato’s Alcibiades,structured as an inquiry into the division between tool and user, beginning with tools, then the hand, then the body, at each juncture noting the separation between that which is being used and the user. The problem is that Plato leaves us with the ambiguous term “soul” (psukhē), noting that “either man is nothing at all, or if something, he turns out to be nothing else than soul” (130c). The difficulty here, as in all of Plato, is the extent to which the dialogues appear to be satisfied with anything short of a full emptying out of the ego function (man being, in an important sense, “nothing at all”). Thus, Foucault suggests in his reading of this passage that “it is not at all the soul-substance he discovers, but rather the soul-subject.”40In Vedanta, Shankara’s Ātmashatakam (Song of the Self) is nearly the same experiment, but it more carefully targets content that one might identify oneself with.41More importantly, it does so as a negation—I am not the mind, the body, the intellect, and so on. This negation serves as a movement away from this content or narrative. The positive statement, repeated at the end of each stanza, is then a direct identification with substance: citānandarupah śivo’ham—I am the form (rupa) of consciousness (cit)felt as bliss (ānanda); I am Śiva (the Whole). This more clearly positions the “doer” of the Alcibiadesexperiment in the scalar configuration that refuses any subject less than the Whole itself.

The American philosopher and mystic Franklin Merrell-Wolff further clarifies the essential distinction as two kinds of reflection. He distinguishes this “finding content” as introspection: “Introspection remains far too objective (oriented to objects) to lead to the discovery of the self, with the result that many psychologists never find the true self. They do find something that they call the ‘subject,’ but they  .  .  . have found only a subtle object.”42This is the operation we identified earlier as self-help, the identification of some content within cognition or experience to identify as oneself to be cared for. Introspection of this sort needs to be distinguished precisely because it indulges the egoic, DMN narration operating at L2. In contrast, Merrell-Wolff provides the term introceptionto distinguish the “process whereby consciousness turns upon itself and moves towards its source” (104). Introception and introspection are two different operations with very different results. Literally, what they are looking at is different:
The difference may be suggested by the figure of a lamp with a light within it. The subject [found in introspection] is only the lamp, while the self  .  .  . is the light itself. Introspection, in the usual sense, can go no further than the lamp, insofar as it is the light that illumines and makes possible the subtle observation of introspection.  .  .  . In introspection consciousness has not really turned upon itself, but merely establishes a kind of short circuit in the psyche. (103)
This is the “short circuit” already noted by Bateson as the manipulating L2 to masquerade as L3. In introception, by contrast, one directs one’s attention to the flow of experience itself, “abstracting the subjective moment” apart from any content.43Merrell-Wolff’s basic experiment is to look at an object and then, without withdrawing the perception of the object, draw the attention away from the object to the awareness itself (145–46).

The brain seems to have feedback mechanisms for identifying when self-inquiry or introception has occurred. Thus there are a surprising number of resonances between terms that describe an element of this scalar operation but then come to mean bliss or realization. An epiphany is the unveiling or manifestation of a larger entity—epimeaning “above” and the Greek phaniameaning “to appear.” Similarly, ecstasy is felt when one is literally “beside oneself” in the moment of egoic dislocation. In Sanskrit the term samādhiis likewise translated as “bliss” but literally means “to bind together.” The common element here—a feeling of overwhelming bliss—is clarified by the Sanskrit term ānanda.The Ribhu Gita suggests that ānandais a kind of feedback via the mantra ānandam paramam mānam idam drśyam na kiñcana(bliss is the ultimate measure, this which is visible is nothing at all).44Within the reorientation to the non-egoic consciousness, bliss is a natural feedback of the brain resituating itself in accordance with its nondivided reality. Love or the Greek agapēserves the same function within Christian contemplative practices, as can be seen in the Cloud of Unknowing:“Then perhaps he may touch you with a ray of his divine light which will pierce the cloud of unknowingbetween you and him. He will let you glimpse something of the ineffable secrets of his divine wisdom and your affection will seem on fire with his love.”45Like ānanda,the love itself both serves as a sign of the transformation and further develops it. In short, it is what it feels like to retrain oneself in the non-dual, non-egoic consciousness: “The work of love will eventually heal them totally.”46The final result is best described as a metanoia,meaning a change or alteration of mind. This term, which is cited by both Aldous Huxley and Edgar Mitchell to describe their experiences, is usually translated as “repentance” or “conversion,” but is more properly the transformation induced by the persistent reorientation that brings one beyond the limited mind constructs of egoic narration.47
From this perspective, we can understand Augustine’s description of his conversion, which is written in noticeably scalar terms:
Being thus admonished to return to myself  .  .  . I entered into my inmost being.  .  .  . I entered there, and by my soul’s eye.  .  .  . I saw above that same eye of my soul, above my mind, an unchangeable light.  .  .  . [This light was not] above my mind, as oil is above water, or sky above earth. It was above my mind, because it made me, and I was beneath it, because I was made by it. He who knows the truth, knows that light, and he who knows it knows eternity. Love knows it. (132)
