Augustine’s conversion here is a metanoiain which he experienced that-which-is-behind the part of consciousness incorrectly identified as “his.” This moment of reflection, introception, and self-inquiry is then reinforced by the feedback of love and awe, which leads him on to the final subsumption of his will to the unfolding of the One-Whole-All.

While self-inquiry is the basic operation and necessary element, fully retraining the brain might require additional techniques and adjustments that handle the particular contents of identification as they arise. Inevitably, introception is difficult because it operates on what arises as “me”: the content built most strongly into the structure of the brain. Such content must be persistently extracted by any means until the cognitive apparatus has been completely reoriented. However, the techniques needed are particular to any given cognitive-experiential structure; there is no one universally applicable technique or practice for performing the extraction. Thus, Merrell-Wolff notes that, while many methods and techniques provided by contemplative traditions will likely prove helpful, “the successful method always had to be in some measure an original creation.”48Similarly, the Cloud of Unknowingnotes that “techniques for controlling your thoughts are better learned from God through experience than from any man in this life.”49Since the loop is within the cognitive structures manifested here, where the egoic construct has taken hold and divided itself off, there is nowhere else to look to refine, experiment with, and perform this extraction.

I, Ending in This Ecological Resignation
In Evelyn Underhill’s foundational account of the mystic way, she speaks of a kind of initial awakening that must then be developed and integrated.50With scale we repeatedly find ourselves brought into contact with powers smaller and larger than our human limits, entities that awaken us to a world beyond but already within the limited lifeworld present in everyday experience. To some degree, then, we already find ourselves halfway to such an awakening; what is needed is not a new realization but a turning toward and a recognition—it’s already here, in your face, in your cells: you are not contained; all of this is connected. You have felt some glimpse of it already, but this insight has been redirected in a thousand ways (to the apparatus of the state, which claims this status of higher power; to the reification of a monetary system whose abstract structure of value seems to provide a sense of order; to the claim of a religious structure that will fit this realization into a set of prescribed beliefs; to the intellectual posturing of critical analysis without self-transformation).

Writing at the beginning of the great acceleration called the Anthropocene, Søren Kierkegaard provides a glimpse of this situation in his insistence that we not move on so quickly past the basic points. In his dwelling with the paradox of Abraham’s near-sacrifice of Isaac, he describes this most difficult attitude that permits you to move forward even when YHWH, the being that is, forces you to face a situation beyond the rational. Situated between the this-scale multiplicity (the finite) and the scale of the One-Whole-All (the infinite), “with infinite resignation he has drained the cup of life’s profound sadness, he knows the bliss of the infinite, he senses the pain of renouncing everything, the dearest things he possesses in the world, and yet finiteness tastes to him just as good as to one who never knew anything higher.”51Is this attitude possible, as we struggle to face this vast Cosmos and find a way to love whatever is, however it unfolds itself?
Ecological crisis—not just global warming but all of the effects of our ongoing capitalist expansion and general unawareness of our collective accumulations—is a kind of collective Abraham moment. We are now within the three days where we walk to the mountain with our most prized Isaac—the enormous technological-economic-geopolitical edifice we find ourselves within—to be sacrificed on the altar of our own planet. In contemplating this situation, we find ourselves, like Kierkegaard, stuck in the absurdity, unable to act as Abraham, who still resolutely lives and loves this present even in the impending task. Since it is not any one of us humans who will learn to make the adjustment to something called “sustainability,” the collective tide of these human-bound systems will determine whether the knife will be withheld. Facing this scalar loop, we tremble and ask: will it be so if we remain despairing at the approach? Will we remain paralyzed here by our own angst? Or will the adjustment only be made within a new kind of faith, one that peers into the infinite variety of existence and does not reel in horror or jump forth in conquest or get lost in the reconfiguration but learns to dwell with this cosmic vision?
Such faith is a dwelling in the involution. Without it, I risk intellectually knowing that I belong to this larger structure without losing myself in it. How can we tune our ability to respond to this world in this skewed stance? Logically, I can speak of how we are all part of the same planet and therefore have some kind of obligation to it. Yet in this very assertion I can fail to see the power in the view itself and fail to allow the scalar relation to rework how I live and view my existence. We are speaking here not only of those who do not comprehend their role in a larger environment but also those who proclaim to care about the environment and invoke such concern socially, habitually, insistently, without taking on the possibility of scaling all the way, placing oneself on the line, and experiencing the self itself as ecological.

Today, this cosmic inoculation—being exposed to this scalar configuration just enough to either ignore it, trivialize it, or simply proclaim it—is the major obstacle to our ability to see and feel our place in the Cosmos. We do not simply need to see more or better, but in a qualitatively different fashion. We need to learn to spend time contemplating these scalar relations, but doing so requires that we each take on the difficult task of looking at and facing the fundamentally false sense of egoic identification that lies at the core of our interpretation of the world. Once we take seriously that these relationships have to be, in some way, performed on oneself—that a mere glimpse is not enough, even if the experience manifests as a cosmic glimpse—then perhaps we can open ourselves to experimenting with the scalar movement. To do so, the personal reference point must for one moment, and then another, and then another, be allowed to disappear, to permit the scalar situation to come into view and reorient the structure of cognition around this new information. Only then will these Homo sapiensalign themselves to this complex reality that they are already a part of. Only then will we find our collective systems drifting—colossally, meteorologically, Whitman would say—toward a world, as Taylor so hopefully describes, filled with beautiful, peaceful, compassionate, loving people who, rather than trapping themselves in a limited and failing fragmented mentality, recognize that they operate as and within the Whole.Acknowledgments
The retrospective appraisal of any pathway through this-scale experience always appears both improbable and fortuitous. To the many people (not to mention plants, animals, bacteria, and energy gradients) who went out of their way (literally altering their pattern of existence) to generate the context for this textual unfolding, I can only respond with gratitude and awe.

This book is dedicated to Richard Doyle, who provided a baffling amount of energy, wisdom, confidence, and always unfolding insight not just for this project but for the whole locality called “me.” The project would not exist without his generous attention, his unwillingness to let me compromise the integrity of the project, and his insistence that I go more slowly. His influence can be felt on every page.

As an even more lost and youthful wanderer, I also owe much to Pat Gehkre, who took me under his wing and showed me that this was possible, and to Kevin Eliot, Shevaun Watson, Laura Walls, Jill Frank, Alfred Nordmann, Erik Doxtader, and Ann Johnson for putting up with my enthusiasm while introducing me to the life of the mind. Along the way other interlocutors and teachers appeared, especially Jeffrey Nealon, Mark Morrison, John Jasso, Susan Squier, Jack Selzer, Jeremy Engels, Jason Maxwell, Robert Birdwell, Curt Tigges, Michelle Huang, Ralph Cintron, Zach Horton, Derek Woods, Peter C. van Wyck, Anushka Peres, Kenny Easwaren, Keith Lloyd, and, in different capacities, Gary Weber and Erica Kaufman. Andrew Pilsch has been a particularly essential friend, colleague, and supporter. Special thanks to those in the sciences who provided thoughts relevant to this work, including Mark Shriver, Katie Barlow, Joseph Johnson, David Saint John, Dan Sykes, Sadhat Walusimbi, Tianyanxin Sun, and Joy Pate. A special thanks to my students, especially my undergraduate assistants Mutafa Al-Nomani and Hannah Mailhos, for helping with the manuscript, as well as Anna Rogers, Jackson Bell, Hannah Green, and Jackson Greer, who took on research projects related to my own. A great deal of insight was developed with the graduate students in my “Rhetoric after Information” course: Tyler Champine, Kristian Cantens, Jessie Cortez, Savannah Foreman, and Erika Rodriquez. Thank you to Cary Wolfe for assisting at a crucial juncture in the publication process. This book would have not made it to the current form without the support of my editor, Doug Armato, his assistant Zen Miller, and the two rounds of insightful reviews from Phillip Thurtle as well as an anonymous first-round reviewer.

I want to acknowledge my department at Texas A&M, which has generously supported my work and been not only willing to entertain but excited by my disciplinary wandering. Parts of the research for this project were supported by the Penn State Center for Humanities and Information. Although no archival materials are cited here, I want to acknowledge Philip Guddemi, the Bateson Idea Group, and the UC Santa Cruz Special Collections for an enlightening visit to the Gregory Bateson archive. Thanks to Ron Leonard and Dorothy Leonard for making available the work of Franklin Merrell-Wolff, whose conceptual clarity was essential to the shaping of this book. Thank you to those involved in Zebrapedia and the transcription of Philip K. Dick’s Exegesis,including Rich Doyle, Max Spiegel, and the Estate of Philip K. Dick, who made the work available. Thanks to Anil Mundra for your patience as a Sanskrit instructor and for taking the time to read a draft. I should also acknowledge the Perseus Digital Library, hosted by Tufts University, which was an essential tool for carefully examining Plato’s texts for someone whose education has not yet afforded the opportunity for lessons in Greek.

Finally, thank you to Sara DiCaglio for your tremendous support and patience, academic and otherwise, for putting up with years of musings about scale, and for enduring the Texas heat so that this can continue to happen. And to my children, Milo and Penelope: thank you for making the past few years as fun as they were intellectually stimulating. May we all learn to feel as much wonder at the scales of existence as you both expressed in first experiencing the Powers of Ten.

