Good day, I'm Norman Wabiger and today is a very exciting video for me because it's
a combination of quite some years of interrupted thought.
So it's a point of view towards arithmetic and in fact algebra, which is based firmly
on a data structure point of view.
But it's not sets, it's rather multisets.
So what I'm proposing to do here today is to create a new framework for arithmetic with
natural numbers, first of all, and then with polynomials, and then we'll see that we'll
be able to extend this arithmetic beyond to more complicated things.
And so we're going to end up with a vision of arithmetic in algebra, which is perhaps
somewhat unfamiliar to you and seems to extend in vast new directions.
So it's really interesting and if you're interested in exploring, this is a great topic
for thinking about and exploring.
It turns out that this point of view that I'm giving you is actually quite parallel
in many ways to what happened in the early days of set theory, when set theory was being
used to try to create a structure for the foundations of mathematics.
And the empty set played a very important role then, as it does for us now.
But the critical difference is that we are moving away from sets to a more general approach
to data structures.
So I talk a lot about the LOMS system, representing lists, ordered sets, multisets and sets.
So for me, sets are just one of these four basic types of data structures.
And while a computer scientist is going to be leaning towards lists as fundamental objects
and that's fine, for us we're going to be thinking about the multisets as an unappreciated
kind of framework for thinking about mathematics, which has a lot of potential and a lot of
power.
And in some ways it's sort of unfortunate that the history of mathematics circumvented multisets
and focused all the attention on sets.
So in case you haven't watched a lot of my videos, the idea that mathematics is based
on set theory is, in my view, a complete distortion of what's really happening.
So we need to have a much more broader point of view and along with that we need to be
much more solid and we need to be much more explicit.
We need to focus on what we can actually write down.
So forget about philosophical pronouncements about what happens when you go to infinity
or do an infinite number of things which you can't actually do.
So we're going to be always looking to avoiding that kind of talking, which is essentially
a kind of a vacuous talking, not supported by explicit computation.
So real number arithmetic is a fantasy as far as I'm concerned.
Fundamental theorem of algebra is just wishful dreaming, you could evidence it yourself,
by factoring x to the 7 plus x minus 3 into quadratic and linear factors.
Just do it or admit that you can't do it and you'll see that the fundamental theorem
of algebra is not really true.
So there's all kinds of really serious problems with the foundations of mathematics, as I of
course talk about very often in this series.
But today I want to make a start at another kind of approach, which is in some sense parallel
to things that I've done already, I've talked a lot about marks, even from the early days
of this series, marks and anti-marks and so on.
So this is another point of view that's sort of parallel, sort of competing, has a lot
of overlap, but is a little bit different.
I would like to say also, first of all, a big thank you to my Patreon supporters.
And in particular, I benefited by having some reactions to a previous video that I posted
in this direction.
My Patreon supporters, especially Lucas Lufaro, gave some interesting suggestions and encouragement.
So big shout out to all of my Patreon supporters.
Okay, so what we're going to do is we're going to use this data structure point of
view to get a new framework for arithmetic and then ultimately algebra and everything's
based on multisets.
And what is a multiset?
It's a way of collecting things in an unordered fashion where repetitions are allowed.
And I like to think of this as like boxes.
This is really box theory.
So here is a multiset, okay, it's a container, okay?
I can open up the container, see what has in it, okay?
Oh, look, there's a few things in it.
There's this plug, there's a couple of markers.
These two markers are pretty well the same, these two red ones.
So duplicates are allowed, okay?
And then there's this other thing.
What is this?
Well, actually, this is another container, okay?
Here's another little container.
It's a little plastic container that has a sand disk drive inside.
So it's actually, this is like a little box inside this bigger box.
And that's a key point, right, that we can think about boxes or collections or multisets
of multisets, of multisets, et cetera, okay?
And the containment relations between these boxes or multisets becomes really interesting.
Okay, so we start off at a very simple level by considering not something complicated like
this, but something rather simpler like this.
An empty box, okay?
An empty box or an empty multiset has the potential to put lots of stuff in there, but
currently there's nothing in it.
This is going to be our fundamental mathematical object.
It's the starting point of our mathematics, okay?
So we're going to denote it by a pair of brackets with nothing inside.
So that's the empty set, or for us better, the empty M set because it has the potential
of putting lots of things inside it.
We'll give it a name, we'll call it zero.
And sometimes in diagrams, we'll represent it by a box, a square like this or a rectangle
with the possibility of putting various stuff in there.
So this object just by itself is already a type.
We can say we have a type of object, zero type.
There's only one object that has this type, the empty set or the empty M set or zero.
So this is going to be our starting point.
And in some sense, we're just going to use this thing over and over again and put boxes
inside other boxes to create arithmetic and algebra.
And we'll be able to go quite far just in this one lecture as you will see.
So even if you're very used to arithmetic and algebra, you're going to be introduced
to some exciting new things in this video.
Okay, so the next step up, natural numbers.
So a natural number is an M set of zeros.
The type of natural number denoted NAT, that's the type.
Here's some examples.
Here's an M set of zeros.
Does it have any zeros in it?
Well, it has no zeros in it.
But we still consider an empty set of zeros to be an M set of zeros.
That's an important point.
Let me just talk a little bit about that.
Okay, so here is our, as an M set, okay, currently it has some M set of markers, okay, an M set
of markers.
If I take one of these markers out, it's still an M set of markers.
If I take another marker out, well, it's still an M set of markers.
It happens to be the empty M set of markers.
So the empty M set is actually, or zero, is actually a very flexible object.
But in particular, it is also a natural number for us.
So this new type of object includes the former type zero.
Okay, then we give these things some names, the obvious ones.
So the set or M set with just a single zero in it will be called one, the M set consisting
of zero and zero will be called two, and here is three, and so on and so forth.
And in diagrams, if we wanted to represent this another way, maybe simpler for primary
school kids, we could maybe use some other symbol, maybe like small circles to represent
zero.
So what we usually call 13 then could be illustrated to a primary school student by a box, or in
this case, a rectangle with 13 little circles.
So these little circles are sort of playing the same role as the marks, the sort of elementary
marks that I've talked about earlier.
But there is a distinction because now these basic marks are not sort of elemental things.
They are actually empty M sets.
So we have a definition of what a natural number is, it's an M set of zeros.
So those of you who have watched a lot of my videos will know that I like to approach
polynomials and polynomial algebra in terms of what I call poly numbers, which are sort
of more data theoretic.
And I use these extensively even in the algebraic calculus course, these are workhorses for
doing algebra.
So here we're going to introduce them in a slightly different way, but it's really
the same thing as we've already been talking about, but just from a slightly different
point of view.
So what is a poly number in this context?
A poly number is an M set of natural numbers.
So we're going one step up further, starting with zero, the natural numbers, now poly numbers.
And the type, poly.
Okay, so here is a poly number.
Why?
Well, it's an M set.
And what does it have in it?
One, one, two.
Those are all numbers.
So this is a multi-set of natural numbers.
It is therefore a poly number.
Here is another poly number.
And okay, admittedly, there could be a little bit of confusion depending on how much space
you think there is here.
This is meant to be 13.
Okay, these are sort of like the adjacent.
So this is a multi-set with just a single number in it, but in particular, it's a multi-set
of natural numbers.
So it's a poly number.
Here's another poly number because it's an M set of natural numbers because remember,
zero is a natural number.
The type of natural number included the former type of zero.
So zero is a natural number.
And in fact, this thing here is also a poly number because it's an M set of natural numbers.
How many natural numbers are in here?
Well, there aren't any, but it's still an empty M set of natural numbers.
So in particular, this thing, which is, of course, zero, is also a poly number.
Okay, so we have zero, the type zero contained in the type, not contained in the type of
poly.
And now something, one level further, which is a little bit fancier, okay?
And it will take some getting used to what this actually means, but it's sort of a natural
thing to do.
We sort of have this natural hierarchy now, we can just sort of keep on going.
So a multi-number is, by definition, an M set of poly numbers, an M set of poly numbers.
And there's the type, multi.
Okay, so look at this thing here, there's an M set.
What's this comma doing here?
Oh, no, so here's the M set, okay, here's the M set, yes, brackets here.
And what's inside this M set?
Well, it has this object.
What is this thing?
This is an M set with numbers in it, one, one, so an M set of natural numbers.
So this is a poly number.
Here's another poly number, these two happen to be equal.
So this whole thing is an M set of poly numbers, so this is a multi-number.
Here's another multi-number.
It's an M set which happens to have one poly number in it, the poly number consisting of
the multi-set 3, 5, and 11.
How about this thing?
Is this an M set of poly numbers?
Well is zero a poly number?
Well, yes, we just said it was, so this thing is zero, and this we said is a poly number.
So this is a poly number, so this is an M set of poly numbers, in particular, it's
a multi-number.
What about the empty set?
Well it's also an M set of poly numbers, the empty M set of poly numbers, so it also
includes, so again, multi includes poly, which includes net, which includes zero.
So we have this inclusion, inclusion of types, zero, net, poly, multi, each included in the
other in the following sense, in the sense that if you have an object of this type, then
it is automatically an object also of this type, therefore also an object of this type,
therefore also an object of this type.
And I hope that it's sort of obvious that the way we're going from one step here to
another is directly generalizable, okay, we could easily imagine just keeping on going.
Once we've defined multi numbers, we could define some higher objects, which are M sets
of multi numbers, okay, and later on we're going to be thinking about that kind of thing.
But already here we have a very rich framework for arithmetic and algebra, alright, but if
we want to have arithmetic, we need operations as well as numbers or objects.
So there is a fundamental operation in this world of multi sets, which is very very general
and it's addition, okay, so this is the beauty of the multi set framework, which distinguishes
it from the set theory world, in the set theory there is no such thing as addition of sets,
but in the multi set world there is, okay, it's crucial to understand and to appreciate
the importance of this operation, this very general operation.
So how do you add M sets?
You just combine their contents into a single M set.
Let me show you physically, okay, so here are two M sets, they're boxes, it is a little
box that has a sand disk in it, okay, and here, this one here, what does it have in
it?
Oh, it has two markers in it, okay, shall we add these two M sets?
Add this M set and this M set, I'm going to show you how to do that, okay, we need another
box, okay, hey, here's a box, okay, so what am I going to do?
I'm going to take this box and this box here, these two boxes, and I'm going to combine
their contents, I have to do this one at a time because I only have two hands, okay,
and there's the sand disk, that's also going in there, okay, there are the original boxes,
I don't need them, because I've put everything, because I've put everything in this new box,
and so there, I hope you can see, there's our new box, it's got the sand disk in it,
there it is there, and it has our two markers, okay, that's how you add M sets.
Let's have a look at some examples with the kinds of objects we've been talking about,
okay, so here we have some objects, okay, and notice that in this case I actually have three
things, okay, and what are these things, well these are, these things are what, well this is a,
this is a poly number because it's a multi set of natural numbers, here's another poly number,
so this is here, this thing here is a multi number, here's another multi number, here's
another multi number, but in particular these are M sets, so we don't require that we just
have two M sets, we could do this with more than two M sets, we could have several M sets and add
them at the same time just by dumping all their contents into a box, happily things are unordered
and repetitions are allowed, so there's no need to fuss around and remove duplicates as you would
if you were working with set theory, it's just absolutely simple-minded, you just dump them
on the box and there you go, but in particular it's not intrinsically a binary operation,
so how do you, how do you add these things, well you just get a bigger box represented by those
brackets there and you put the set three in, the M set four, the M set one, one, two, the M set four,
zero, okay, that's also a, that's a natural number, okay, so in particular it's a poly
number, so there's the zero and there four is there and the one, two, one is there, so we just
dumping the contents of these three M sets into a single M set, that's how you add them, okay,
the operations name will be the usual addition, so if we have, you know, if this is a, b and c then
the sum is denoted a plus b plus c and note again that it's not intrinsically a binary operation,
it applies to all M sets, it's not just that we can add numbers, right, we can have M sets of
anything in principle and we're still able to perform this addition operation, it's really
important that you digest the, the fundamental aspect of this operation, okay, this is something
that is so elementary but maybe has slipped by your consciousness because you're not used to
thinking about M sets as being fundamental, but it's a crucial erythmetical structure that's
actually working in the entire world of M sets, okay, so it's now easy observation that the natural
numbers are closed under addition, in fact one step below that the zero, the zero type is also
closed under addition, let me show you that, okay, so here is now an empty M set, I've dumped everything
previously out and here's another empty M set, okay, so suppose I wanted to add these two M sets,
well, I'm going to get myself another box, okay, and I'm going to dump the contents of this one
here and also dump the contents of this one here, okay, there I've done it, I've dumped all the
contents of the two boxes and you can see it's still empty, okay, so empty set plus empty set
equals empty set, so zero plus zero equals zero, so somewhat less obvious but still pretty obvious
is that if you have two natural numbers, so three plus four say, okay, there's a picture of three,
it's an M set which has three zeros in it, zero zero zero represented by these little circles
because it's a picture for primary school students, and here's a box representing four,
you dump them out into another box, well obviously you're going to get there's the first three and
there's the next four and you're going to get what we call seven, in terms of the more familiar
notation that we've been talking about, three is actually officially this thing here, okay,
the M set zero zero zero, four is the M set zero zero zero zero, we put them all in an M set,
so these guys go here and these guys say go here and then we can check that that's actually seven,
note that poly is also closed under addition, okay, here's a poly number because it's an M set
of natural numbers, here's another poly number, here's another poly number, here's another poly
number, if we add all four of them, dump the contents, dump the contents, dump the contents,
dump the contents, you get three, three, three, four, zero, seven, and this empty set doesn't
contribute, and this is another multi set of natural numbers, so it's another poly number,
so if we go up one level to multi numbers, we see that also it's closed under addition,
for example, here's a multi number, it's an M set of poly numbers, that's a poly number,
poly number, here's another M set of poly numbers, that's a poly number, that's a poly number,
that's a poly number, we add them, well obviously we get that one, that one, that one, that one,
that one, we get another M set of poly numbers, in other words, another multi number,
okay, so we have addition, now we want to go up a step, okay, and this really important step,
we're going to go from addition to multiplication, okay, and it's really important to watch carefully
what I do, it's like magic, okay, a very simple kind of magic, okay, we're going to create
multiplication out of addition, so how are we going to do that, so multiplication of M sets of M
sets, so strictly speaking in the M set world, you need M sets of M sets to make this work, okay,
as it turns out, all the things that we've been talking about are in fact M sets of M sets, so
strictly speaking, this is not really necessary, I just point this out that if you were working with
M sets with other kinds of objects, you really want to restrict yourself to M sets of M sets,
but this is not really a restriction in the world that we set up so far, okay, so to multiply
M sets, what you do is you form the M set of sums of elements, one from each M set,
so we're going to use addition to define multiplication, okay, so look carefully,
here is an M set, and we're going to assume that the contents A and B are themselves M sets,
and let me remind you that that is a condition that's automatically satisfied for all the
objects that we've been considering, here's another M set, all of its elements are also M sets,
so we're assuming that, okay, how are we going to multiply this M set with this M set, we're going
to take pairs in this case, because there's two of them that we're multiplying, pairs of elements
from this one with elements from this one, we're going to take this pair and we're going to add them,
in this case A plus X, we're going to form A plus X, this is an M set, that's an M set,
so A plus X makes sense, that's addition of M sets, this is another M set,
then we're going to take A and Y, we're going to add them, A plus Y, take A and Z, add them,
get A plus Z, take B and X, add them, get B plus X, take B and Y, add them, you get B plus Y,
take B and Z, add them, you get B plus Z, so we're getting another M set, which has
new M sets in it, these new M sets are created from the original two M sets by taking sums of
elements, one from each, that's how you multiply M sets, all right, let me illustrate
this multiplication at each of the levels, so at the zero level, zero times zero, what do we get?
Well we have to form an M set, which consists of what? Which consists of the sum of all entries
of this thing with entries of this thing, well there are no entries of this thing, there are no
entries of this thing, so there are no possible sums that we can make, so the result is empty,
fine, that's telling us that zero times zero equals zero, now let's go to natural numbers,
okay, which are M sets of zeros, so there's an M set of zeros, there's an M set of zeros,
so how are we going to multiply these two things? Well we're going to take all possible
combinations, entry here, entry here, or element here, element here, okay, and we're going to add
them, we can add them because the guys inside here are M sets, and so they can be added using M
set addition, okay so let's do that, so this, zero plus this zero, there it is there, this zero
plus this zero, there it is there, this zero plus this zero, there it is there, this zero plus this
zero. There it is there. This zero plus this zero. There it is there. This zero plus this zero.
There it is there. Have I done all the pairs? Yes, I've done all the pairs. Now we have to
evaluate these things. What is zero plus zero? Well, it's zero. So each of these is zero. So we
get zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero. And in ordinary Hindu-Arabic notation, we've computed
that two times three is six. Okay, let's go to poly. Let's multiply poly numbers. So here's a
poly number. Here's another poly number. These are poly numbers because they're m sets of numbers.
That's a number. That's a number. Natural numbers. Here's another m set of natural numbers. So to
multiply them, we have to take pairs, combinations, and add them. So how do you add the number two
and the number one first pair? Well, you get three. And then two plus one is three. Two plus zero is
two. And then three plus one is four. Three plus one is four. Three plus zero is three. So we get
the m set three, three, two, four, four, three. It's another m set of natural numbers. So that's
another poly number. Poly number times poly number equals poly number. And let me show you that this
is not restricted to having two. We can multiply, in principle, a number of different m sets. So
now I'm going to multiply three m sets together sort of at the same time. So the m set zero, three,
the m set one, four, the m set two, seven. These are all poly numbers because they're m sets of
natural numbers. So what do we need to do? Well, we need to take combinations where we're taking
one element of each one of these. So let's start with the zero, one, and two. What do I have to
do with those things? I have to add them. They're m sets. So the addition of m sets of these three
is well defined. I don't have to specify which order we're doing it in. There's three things,
we're just dumping them out. So zero plus one plus two is three. Zero plus one plus seven is eight.
Zero plus four plus two is six. Zero plus four plus seven is 11. Okay, I have to keep track. I'm
going to pick all possible combinations. How about three plus one plus two? That's six. Three plus one
plus seven, that's 11. Three plus four plus two is nine, and three plus four plus seven is a 14.
So we've multiplied these three poly numbers to get this poly number. Okay, now one more step up to
the multi numbers. So let's do this. Okay, so here's a multi number. Why is this a multi number?
Well, because this thing inside it is a poly number, and here's another poly number.
It's a multi set of natural numbers, therefore a poly number. Here's another m set of natural
numbers, therefore a poly number. So this is an m set of poly numbers. Here's another m set of
poly numbers. Note that two is indeed a poly number, because we've seen that natural numbers are
included in the type of poly numbers. So what do we have to do? Well, we have to take all possible
pairs, elements here, elements here, and we have to add them. Okay, so let's take this element here,
and this element here. These are m sets. There's an m set. There's an m set. How do you add them?
Well, we just dump the contents into a box. So we get zero, zero, two, one, one. There,
that's the result of adding this m set and this m set. How about this m set with two? Okay, well,
we get zero, zero, two. What is this thing as an m set? Well, two is really the m set zero, zero,
if we want it right that way. So we could put another two zeros there. Now we've added two.
How about this thing and this thing? Well, then we're going to get, I better write smaller,
zero, zero, two, nine. Okay, and now this one plus this one, that's three, eight, one, one.
And we also need down here, okay, three, eight, we're adding two. So we have to add two zeros.
And finally, this one here, three, eight, nine. Okay, and that's the end. Oh, so there's the big
bracket at the end. So we're getting one, two, three, four, five, six, just to check, okay,
six different constituents or elements, that makes sense because this one has two elements,
this one has three elements, so we should end up getting six elements. So we can do multiplication
in each one of these types. Okay, so a little bit of thought and just doing some calculations
along the lines I've showed you reveals that each one of these type domains, zero inside
NAT, inside poly, inside multi, is closed under both addition and multiplication.
And moreover, the usual arithmetic laws that we're familiar with hold.
Namely, we have commutative law, A plus B equals B plus A. A times B equals B times A.
A plus B plus C equals A plus B plus C, that's an associate of law for addition,
and here's an associate of law for multiplication. And distributive laws, A times B plus C equals A
times B plus A times C, where we use the usual convention that the multiplication takes precedence
over the addition. That means you have to do this product first and do this product also
before you add them together. And over here, A plus B times C is A times C plus B times C.
Okay, so it's a great exercise to check these and sort of convince yourself that these are
valid. And you see that it's a very general kind of arithmetic. It's not just arithmetic with numbers
that we're doing here. We're doing arithmetic in a broader context. All right, so I want to finish
the lecture by clarifying the meaning of poly. And since that's a term that I've already used
quite extensively, I want to connect with the former usage and convince you that these are
pretty well the same things, although there is a slight difference. So we can do that by
concentrating on the sort of simplest object when we're going from natural numbers to poly
numbers, which is not itself a natural number. So if we take the set consisting of zero,
that's a poly number, but it's also a natural number, that's one. Okay, so the simplest poly
number, which is not a natural number is this one. It's the M set consisting of a single one.
Let's call it alpha. Okay, let's do a bit of arithmetic with this alpha. Suppose we look
at alpha plus alpha, okay, which we could call two alpha. What is that? Well, you have to take
this thing and you have to add it with itself. So you have to get a box and you dump one one in
and then you dump another one in. Well, you're going to have two ones in the box. So it's going to
look like this. Okay, what about three alphas? Well, dump one in, dump another one in, dump
another one in, you're going to get this thing here and so on. So multiples of alpha, it's clear
sort of what they correspond to. How about multiplication? Suppose we take alpha times alpha.
So there's alpha, there's alpha. How do you multiply them? Well, you have to take the sums
of corresponding elements, one from each one of these. Well, there's only one element here and
one element here. So you have to take one plus one and one plus one addition natural numbers,
that's two. So you're going to get the M set consisting of a single two. And if you take alpha
cubed, that means you're going to multiply this thing by another one of these, then you're going
to have to compute one plus two, which is three. So you can get the M set consisting of three.
So powers of alpha are sort of naturally corresponding to those sort of singleton
M sets that just contain a single natural number. And so that allows us to interpret
some more complicated poly like this. Okay, so here's a more complicated poly number. It's an M set
of natural numbers, 0011123333. So to make sense of this, to organize it a little bit,
we can write it as a sum. So this is the sum of the M set 00 and the M set 111 and the M set 2
and the M set 333333. Okay, what is this thing? This is the number two. What is this thing? Well,
this is what we've said is three alpha. What is this thing? That's what we've said is alpha squared.
And what is this thing? Well, alpha cubed was three. So two alpha cubed will be this plus itself
will be the M set 33. And having four of them, that'll be four alpha cubed. So this is a representation
of what in ordinary algebra, we would write as the polynomial two plus three alpha plus alpha
squared plus four alpha cubed. And in my preferred poly number language that I've talked a lot about
in other videos, I would represent this with a list, a vertical list like this, okay,
with the coefficients two, three, one, four. So we're seeing that this sort of former definition
of a poly agrees with this sort of new definition of a poly. They're really the same. But what's
the difference? The difference is that this is a list. Okay, this is a list. And this thing here
is of course an M set. And there's a crucial distinction between these two things. That's
really useful to appreciate. So remember when we were looking at polynomials or poly numbers like
this, there was a certain amount of ambiguity, because we could add a zero below here and we
agreed that that was going to be the same thing that did not change the poly number, we could add
in fact any number of zeros below, and that's not going to change the poly number, even though
officially as a list, it's kind of changing. There's a little bit of ambiguity there.
It's a general rule that when you have that kind of ambiguity, it's because it's because the list
that you're considering is really more fundamentally to be thought of as a, as a multiplicity list for
an M set. Okay, so this is an M set of zeros, ones, twos, and threes. And since the natural numbers
are naturally ordered, zero, one, two, three, we can represent such an M set or maybe make it more
concise by just counting how many each we have. We have two zeros, we have three ones, we have one,
two, and we have four threes. So this is a list that is the multiplicity list of this M set.
But I would like to suggest to you that actually, formally, officially, the M set is actually
more fundamental. It's at the heart of things. And now we see that this, this list object is really
just a secondary object that sort of makes it easier for us to represent this M set. But,
but a poly really is, is an M set of natural numbers.
Great, so we've accomplished a lot. Of course, a question that will be on your mind is, okay,
but what about these multi numbers? What's their significance? So I'm going to tell you about that
in the next video. And we're also moving towards an alternate view of this thing, which is even more
in spirit for computer scientists. So this topic is going to move really, really closely
to alignment with modern computer science, as we'll see.
Maybe mathematics will end up being a topic in computer science.
I'm Norman Wabaker. Thanks for listening.
