Okay, welcome to the last session of the day.
The next talk is in charge of Angelo Platino from the National University of La Plata, with the talk of Pauli Príncipe and Inflation.
Good afternoon everybody.
There is no doubt that Pauli principle is one important piece of the foundations of quantum mechanics.
On the other hand, cosmic inflation is one phenomenon associated to the big bang that helps to explain
the large features of our universe that would be quite a mystery without cosmic inflation.
Cosmic inflation has been invented 40 years ago, exactly in 1991 by Alan Goose.
Okay, so this talk will try to connect the Pauli principle with cosmic inflation.
This work has two co-authors, which are Mario Roca from my University of La Plata and Gustavo Ferri from the University of La Pampa, which is also in Argentina, some 800 kilometers from La Plata.
And it was published in the middle of the pandemics in July of last year.
Here is the reference.
Okay, let's first of all try to briefly say what all this is about.
We are trying to connect a basic concept of quantum mechanics that is the Pauli principle with a cosmic phenomenon which is cosmic inflation and with elementary statistical mechanics, very elementary statistical mechanics.
And we begin with the number of microstates.
And the assertion that because of the Pauli principles, a given number of fermions cannot be accommodated into arbitrarily small volumes V.
So a minimum volume is needed to accommodate and fermions.
That doesn't happen with motions, you can accommodate and motions in several volume, but this cannot happen with fermions, why because of the Pauli principle.
And in this talk, I will try to connect what I just said about volumes with cosmic inflation.
So the idea, the central idea is that to accommodate and fermions into a slightly determinant.
That's the way one word fermions with slightly determinants, we need a minimum radius, which is a consequence of the Pauli principle, and we will extrapolate this ordinary simple statistical feature.
We will extrapolate it to a cosmological setting.
And we will be able to predict a special temperature value for the end of inflation, which agrees with the current estimates.
Again, cosmic inflation is a widely accepted phenomenon, we need it.
We slowly needed to understand the large features of the universe, but the details that particle physics mechanism responsible for inflation is unknown.
So the basic paradigm accepted by most people in physics is that there was an exponential expansion of the universe very shortly after the singularity generated in the big bang.
10 to the minus 36 seconds to 10 to the minus 32 seconds.
And we will appeal now to micro canonical statistical mechanics to link the Pauli principle with the inflation, the cosmic inflation process.
So in all this talk, I will be using the micro canonical.
For example, of Gibbs, you know, there are three big ones, so three important ones, the canonical, the grand canonical, micro canonical.
Most books deal with the canonical and the grand canonical ensembles but our arguments here belong to the micro canonical treatment of statistical statistical mechanics.
And you can find the data relating more important data or most important data related to the big bang in this reference at the end of the page from 2014.
Okay.
So let's start now with the most important relation of this paper which is the number of cells for the cell multiplicity for an n particle mono atomic ideal gas with energy e and volume V in face space.
The number is equation one, the number of cells is a function of the volume, the energy and the number of fermions and some very well known constants.
As I told you, you probably won't find this equation and ordinary textbook like one.
The whole textbook, which is devoted only to the micro canonical ensemble is given here from 2014.
And the authors is called lemons as student guide to end from different garbage university press. In this book you find all the whole of a statistical, the whole of elementary statistical mechanics.
So this is our question one is our fundamental equation, which I repeat again as a question to
we deal with the number of particles the volume and the energy because those are the thermal variables of the micro canonical ensemble so we are forced to use the man and no other ones for example not the temperature.
The temperature belongs to the canonical ensemble, for example, but not to the micro canonical.
Okay, again, equation three is the same equation, the number of cells.
For and fermions.
And now we give the volume, the standard form in terms of a field of a given radius and this radius will be important for our big bank considerations.
This is the radius we need to accommodate and firm.
Now, in a statistical mechanics.
Since the multiplicity allows us to express the entropy remember that the Boltzmann entropy is equal to the Boltzmann constant times the multiplicity omega.
To accommodate in n small cells, capital N fermions, you have the multiplicity of equation four, which is simple combinatorial expression that does not deserve much consideration.
So here we are dealing with very large numbers of course so we can use stealing principle or stealing formula or stealing site and approximate the gamma function according to equation five.
And then of the express the multiplicity that we need isn't the essential quantity in in a micro canonical description of anything, the main statistical mechanics quantity is the multiplicity.
Equation six as you see is an awful very awful expression, because has it has our number of cells.
Small n in the non exponential we have it in a logarithm.
It's an awful expression.
So to simplify this awful expression six, we change the scale of the, of the variable are the radius in the, in terms of a new variable is that it's a lot of our variables.
So they will allow us for a more.
For the multiplicity omega which is our equation eight, which follows below, in which now you see clearly that at least we see, we can present where the distance indicator is, is no longer the radius are insist it is the variable.
It's small. Now we see it in appearing in exponentials and logarithms, but at least it is there.
Okay.
Of course the multiplicity is a number which is larger than one which entails that it's lowering is larger than zero.
Now we can take the logarithm of omega in equation eight to simplify things.
And go to equation 10, which is the expression office blogging is still an awful equation but at least one gets an idea of what we are dealing with.
And now comes our central point.
The universe began or shortly after it began, it consisted of radiation and a gluon word plasma.
Short time after the singularity variance begin begin to emerge.
And these variants that emerge shortly after the big bang out to work glue and plasma are the protagonists of our tale of our story here.
And we happen in equation 10 in an awful expression.
But we will have this discussion.
Well, variance just emerged. There were no variants. And suddenly, variance start emerging at the very beginning there will be just once later the term intent on the multiplicity omega will be equal to one.
So, which is the solution for the variable in the radius indicator is to get that logarithm of omega is equal to one.
That that is the essential point of the dog the whole talk revolves around the moment at which the first variants emerge.
Form a slight determinant. There is no other way. And the multiplicity must be one because there is just one slight determinant.
And what is the radius indicator is that gets the logarithm of omega equal to unit, which is that special value of s. So we have here I an equation equal to zero.
This equation or 11.
And the question 11 has just two solutions.
The radius indicator is can be zero, or the radius indicator is can be one.
That solves the equation for getting multiplicity unity.
But it cannot be zero.
Because then the multiplicity omega would be negative, which is absurd.
So the only possible solution to equation 11 is that the indicator of the radius indicator is the equal to one.
And so suddenly, our first slight determinant within variance has a radius, which is not necessarily small.
And the face transition is not just zero point something is one. There is a jump from s equals zero to s equal one instantaneously at as soon as any variance emerge.
So let's go to a question seven remembers that is equal one implies a sign that the value for the radius of our in variance.
And here we say okay.
This jump in radius.
Needed to accommodate the first and variance that emerges from the quarter one plasma.
This jump of radius from zero to one constitutes inflation.
Okay, so we are here and making the report hypothesis that the mechanism behind cosmic inflation is just a simple quantum statistical mechanics argument regarding multiplicity.
And we have numbers because if it is equal to one.
We can then, for example, try to estimate how many fermions, how many variants emerge at the beginning.
This is the
Of course, we need to know what is at the end of the inflationary period but that is a known number, the, the, the radius of the universe.
The end of the inflationary period is 17 centimeters. So if we take our equal zero equal 17 centimeters we get a number of variants emerging
from
the big bang from from the quarter blue and plasma excuse me, which is a large number.
They all appear at the very beginning, and they are of the order of 10 to the 48.
When variance emerge, it doesn't.
They emerge as a whole bunch of or variance 10 to the 48, but you suddenly emerge out of the work blue and plasma.
And they occupy a reasonable large radius of 17 centimeters.
Note, however, that this number which is big 10 to the 48 is a small compared to the number of variants that we have today at the universe today at the universe we have of the order of 10 to the 79
variant so 10 to the 48 is just a very, very, very tiny small fraction of the number of variants that we have today.
And now comes a very strong point we believe a strong point for us for for our argument is not for us but for our.
Okay.
We use the celebrated equation for entropy.
Invented by boatsman that we find at the histone by the cemetery of Vienna, that the entropy is the ballman constant times the logarithm of the multiplicity omega.
And we know that the temperature obeys the equation one over temperature is equal to the derivative of the entropy with respect to the energy.
Of course taken at the end is equal one.
It's a simple equation 14 is what we have.
And if you put the corresponding value, the corresponding numbers that we find that the temperature at the end of the inflationary period is a temperature of the order of 10 to 18 Kelvin degrees.
And agrees with what people know about the inflationary period.
They know a lot of things which are in a reference that I put at the very beginning of this talk.
And one of the things that you will find is this kind of number that the temperate the inflation ended at the temperature of 10 to the 18 Kelvin degrees.
And we obtain this value out of the micro canonical ensemble.
So, I reached here the conclusions.
So what we have done here is just a very, very envelope calculation using a simple micro canonical and statistical argument.
And that shows that because of poly principle and fermions in our case and variants need a finite volume to exist.
When they are all out of the world blue and plasma.
They needed a volume of about the point 17 centimeters.
And the micro canonical considerations tell you immediately that the temperature has to be
of the order of 10 to the 18 degrees, which is what is needed to describe inflation.
To end this short talk.
What I have tried to show is that
based on the poly principle that without any doubt is an important piece of the foundation of quantum mechanics is
half of quantum mechanics is the poly principle.
That is starting with the poly principle and with the micro canonical ensemble of gifts.
You can immediately do a very simple calculation that gives you a number that agrees with what people that work on the singularity on the big bang on inflation.
That the temperature at the end of inflation is of the order of 10 to the 18 Kelvin degrees.
What we see and this is then that the extremely simple micro canonical statistical argument can say is able to predict something about the universe of large from a very small piece of a statistical mechanics, we can say something about the whole universe at its beginning.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thank you for your talk.
Now we have some minutes for questions or comments.
Thanks, Angel for this interesting talk.
The Pauli exclusion principle is puzzling for me because any other quantum characteristic like entanglement or coherence in general will be destroyed by
high temperatures that occur in cosmological events, but it seems that the Pauli
destroyed I mean the coherence the coherence will destroy any any quantum quantum
property but but it seems to me that the Pauli exclusion principle is still valid even even in in a in a very heated but surrounding the quantum system so do you have a word on that or a clue to understand better what's going on there.
Well, I have done it in other context I have done calculations, the statistical mechanical relations.
For example, with nuclear matter.
You know when you have heavy ion collisions, which are done every day today, the temperature get very high but the Pauli session principle works fine.
I mean, it's, that's why I was emphasizing that it is a very basic piece of the foundations of a statistical mechanics, although it is you are right, it is not clear why other quantum mechanical features seem to vanish.
If you go to high temperatures because you go to the classical limit in the at high temperatures, but it seems that not the Pauli principle, even with the high temperatures that people get and in accelerators today in heavy ion collisions the Pauli principle is respected
is no way of violating.
So it's something very strong that you are right from the philosophical point of view or epistemological point of view is not clear why, why it holds always.
It's really, really puzzling I think it's a, it's a very an open problem and open problem I haven't found any explanation of that.
From epistemology there is a big question.
Yeah, because there is no classical limit.
Yeah, if the classical limit would affect the Pauli principle, all matter will collapse, right?
Exactly, so thanks to the Pauli principle we exist and we are in this beautiful meeting.
Thanks, thank you.
Well, we are in time, so thanks.
If we have some minutes, if there is another question.
No.
No, yes, we thanks to Angela for the talk and the people who participate with questions.
