So we are glad to have now Professor Elias Okon from the Institute for Philosophical Research of Unam, Mexico.
He will speak about on the objectivity of measurement outcomes. Please, Elias, go on.
Okay, hi. Hi everybody. Thanks for being here. Thanks to the organizers.
So, yeah, I guess let's start because I don't have much time. So the starting point of my talk is as follows.
There are a number of recent arguments, which by the way are becoming very popular, which seeks to challenge the objectivity of measurements.
So what are these arguments where they involve so-called extended Wigner's friend scenarios, which are scenarios in which entangled systems are shared by sets of Wigner's friend's arrangements.
These Wigner's friend's arrangements, as you probably know, are settings in which somebody measures a system inside a closed lab and then a Wigner or a so-called super observer comes and measures the whole system after the.
The friend measures the thing inside. And these arguments claim to show that the assumption that the experiments performed by the friends inside of the labs
yield definite outcomes that that assumption leads to a contradiction. So from that, it is concluded that the results of at least some measurements, measurements performed by
macroscopic observers cannot be thought of as being actual or objective.
Well, these new arguments, as I said, are these extended Wigner's friend's scenarios. They are also called the Wigner, I'm sorry, Bell Wigner mashups.
Because they basically employ settings that have been used to arrive Bell type results, such as Bell's setting or hardies or GHZs.
But they place in each wing of these experiments a Wigner's friend arrangement, as I said. And this procedure allows to employ
in opposition to Bell's standard setting, they allow to employ on each run of the experiment measurement settings that in standard Bell type experiments would correspond to different possibilities, right?
So in one setting, you can measure like all different options that you could measure.
Because of that, these arguments are touted as being formulated in terms of actual results of measurements and not in terms of dubious theoretical constructs such as counterfactual statements or Bell's lambdas or ontic states or stuff like that.
One such argument is given by Posse and Masanes. I will call this argument the PM argument.
It involves a Bell type setting in which the particles of a set of a singlet are sent to two different labs with, as I said, Wigner friend's arrangements in each wing of the experiment.
By assuming that the friends obtain definite outcomes and inconsistency is claimed to arise.
Another such argument is offered by Sukhovsky and Markiewicz, I'll call this argument the PM argument, and they also use an extended Wigner's friend scenario but this time they, instead of using Bell's setting, they use the GHZs arrangement, which is a
variant of a Bell type argument. And similarly to PM, they conclude that any attempt to introduce an actual outcome for the friends measurements leads to a contradiction, a logical contradiction.
These two arguments are, in fact, motivated by a more famous result by Frau Sugar and Renner, and I'll call this the FRA argument, and FRA considers an extended Wigner's friend scenario again.
This time modeled by another variant of Bell's theorem, namely Hardis paradox, and the conflict in this case is argued to arise from the assumption that quantum mechanics can in fact be applied to macroscopic systems.
And from that they conclude that quantum theory cannot consistently consistently describe the use of itself, whatever that means, I'm not sure if I understand what they mean by that, but we will come back to this.
So what am I going to do in this work? I will offer a detailed examination of these arguments. I will first show that the first two, the PM and ZM arguments, depend on a mistaken assumption, which leads to invalid predictions.
Therefore, it is not that the assumption of definite outcomes leads to trouble, but that such an assumption coupled with this unwarranted assumption leads to inconsistent results.
And regarding the FRA argument, I will show that even though it is written in a language which seems very different from the PM and ZM arguments,
it also depends on the same mistaken assumption, so the theory does not really show what it tries to do.
Okay, all right, so given that introduction, this is the plan for the talk, I will explain or present the PM and ZM arguments, then I will show that they depend on this mistaken assumption,
and some assumption about certain correlations, I'll talk about that in detail. Then I'll talk a little bit about the FRA arguments, and then I will end with my conclusions.
Okay, so let's start with this PM argument, and the experimental setting considered is as follows.
We take a singlet, and then the two particles of the singlet are sent to two labs, A and B, where observers A1 and A and B1 measure their particles along directions in lowercase A1 and B1.
And this first step, and we involve two more observers, A2 and B2, who are supposed to be outside of the labs of A1 and B1, and what A2 and B2 do is to come and undo the measurements performed by A1 and B1.
The idea behind this undoing of the measurements is that since A1, I'm sorry, A2 and B2 are outside of the labs of A1 and B1, they basically can describe whatever happens inside the labs of A1 and B1 as a very complicated, but after all just some unitary evolution.
Basically they can, at least in principle, come and apply the inverse of that unitary, which would undo the measurements of A1 and B1.
And after A2 and B2 undo these measurements, they take the particles and measure them along A2 and B2 in lowercase.
Okay, so that's the experimental setting, and how is the actual argument constructed? Well, the PM assumes that all observers involved in the experiment obtain actual objective results when they measure.
And as a result of that, there must exist a joint probability distribution for all the results, namely this probability P of A1, B1, A2, B2, and given that there is such a probability distribution, then one can calculate the marginal probabilities for a pair of results.
And with those marginal probabilities, one can calculate the expectation values of products of results, which are what I call E sub A1, B1, etc.
And there's this well-known theorem by Fine, which shows that if one takes a joint probability distribution and from that one computes these expectation values, then such expectation values must satisfy the CHSH inequality.
Okay, so the assumption of deriving a joint probability distribution leads to the CHSH inequality.
Okay, so that's one part of the argument, but then one employs one-two mechanics to make predictions for these expectation values, and well, we start with the simple ones, and that is the expectation values of the product of results between say A1 and B1 or A2 and B2.
One notices that those expectation values simply correspond to a standard birth scenario, which, for example, between A1 and B1, they receive a singlet, they make their measurements.
So, and the same for A2 and B2.
And one concludes that the quantum prediction for these expectation values are simply given by a standard quantum prediction.
For the mixed correlations, that is the correlations between say A1 and B2 or B1 and A2, one can reason as follows. For example, A1 measures its particle and updates the state according to the result it
obtained. And then to calculate the correlation between that result and the result of B2, she simply evolves the state on the other side, but of course that evolution is simply an identity, right, because B1 measures, but then B2 endures that evolution.
So, the state is the same it was for the state of A1 relative to B2 is the same as it was for B1, so A1 concludes that the correlation between her measurement and B2's measurement also goes as minus the cosine of the difference of the angles, and the same of course for B1 and A2.
The problem of course is that we know that these quantum predictions violate the CHSH inequality. Therefore, we have a contradiction in concrete terms.
What we arrive at is that the assumption that all measurements performed in the experiment yield definite objective outcomes is found to be incompatible with the quantum predictions.
And from all this, it is concluded that quantum measurements or quantum measurement outcomes cannot be taken to be actual or objective.
Okay, the ZM argument is very similar and the difference is that instead of using Bell's arrangement, they use this DGHZ setting, which as I said is a variant of Bell's argument, which uses three particles instead of two.
And the idea is the same and we have this extended beginners friend scenario but with the GHSZ state.
And what they note is that the results of, so they consider this experiment in which first the friends measure then the beginners common measure, and they note that in the results of the friend, the friends in each of the wings, most
of the friends will decide with what the beginners would have gotten in case the friends were removed, right? So if one particular is sent to one lab and instead of the friend measuring, beginner comes and measures, then they know that
beginner would obtain the same result that the friend would have gotten. And from that, they conclude that things like this are the case.
And what this means is that if, for example, we consider a case in which everybody measures that is the three friends measure and then the three beginners common measure, then the results of the probability for the results of, say, one beginner and two friends
must be exactly the same as the probabilities for the results of all the beginners.
And, but of course, it is well known from the GHC original argument that this assumption leads to trouble, leads to an inconsistency.
So, from this they conclude that any attempt to introduce an actual outcome for the friends measurements leads to a contradiction. Okay, so basically the same conclusion as the PM argument.
Okay, so let's start to actually analyze this experiment in more detail. So we first know that they all depend on a key assumption, which is an assumption that I will call the mixed correlation assumption, which, for example, in the case of the PM argument amounts to,
I'm sorry, amounts to this correlation. So it's a correlation between the measurement of one friend and one beginner. So in this case, between, say, a one and B two. And as I said, this correlation is taken to be given by basically the quantum prediction.
And analogously in the ZMA argument, one assumes that, again, this mixed correlation that the correlation between measurements of, for example, two friends and one beginner are exactly the same than the correlations between all the beginners by themselves.
Right, so these two arguments, crucially depend on assuming these mixed correlations that the mixed correlations are given by the quantum predictions.
And I think there are like two key questions to evaluate this assumption is correct or not. First of not the first of all, and the question is whether these mixed correlations are in fact the correct one to predictions.
And the second question is if there is or if there could be empirical evidence for these mixed correlations if any of two of these two questions is answered with a yes, then one would be
the one getting into trouble by using this assumption in a theory.
Okay, so before trying to answer those two questions, let me just make an observation.
Another observation is that these arguments have two key premises. Number one, and the arguments need to assume a purely unitary evolution, even during measurements, otherwise, of course, one would not be able to undo the experiments as I explained how one assumes
that one can do in the PMM argument. And then the second premise, which is the key behind these arguments is that one stipulates that all measurements actually yield definite objective outcomes.
And the third premise is that by modeling's trial Emma one knows that these two premises are incompatible with a third premise, namely, the claim that a quantum mechanics is a complete or a quantum state is complete.
And so, by modeling's trial Emma, and if one wants to assume one and two, then one has to recognize that that implies the existence of a hidden variables in the system when one is considering.
And of course, and we know through Bell's theorem and the Speckers the theorem that hidden variables must be non local and contextual.
So with this information, and at hand we can go back and explore these two key questions behind the mixed correlations. And the first one was whether these mixed correlations are or not the correct quantum predictions.
So what are the arguments to arrive at this conclusion, given by PM and GM. Well, in PM, what we argued basically was that, because the state and relative to the state of a one relative to be one was the same as the state relative to be to then the prediction
consigned. And then for in the GM case the argument for these mixed correlations was this counterfactual that if F does not measure then W must obtain whatever would have obtained in case and
we can use whom measures right. However, and we just as we just saw one is implicitly presupposing these arguments hidden variables and of course, as I said, hidden variables are contextual and non local.
So, and with this in mind, we can see that these two arguments are in fact not valid. And, for example, against the first argument, we know that given that in hidden variables are present that predictions arise, not simply from the
state but from the state plus the hidden variables and the context even a remote context. So in this straightforward argument simply fails. And against to the second argument we know that the counterfactual seems true, but the point is that
by contextuality, and if F indeed does measure, then that could change the result of W. So the fact that if F would not measure then FW would obtain the same result that as F is irrelevant to the right conclusions in the case in which F does measure.
So, and we conclude that these two arguments indeed fail. And then in fact the force behind these objections against these arguments is the observation that in truth quantum mechanics or standard quantum mechanics cannot really make predictions for these mixed
predictions. And the idea is that we can come back to this in the questions if you want. The idea is that the basically the ambiguities or vague vagueness of the standard measurement of the standard framework regarding measurements and forbids precise and concrete predictions for these
measurements using the standard frame.
The other key questions was whether these mixed correlations are empirically required and my claim is that by construction the mixed correlations cannot be empirically accessed and then the point is that by doing the measurements one
can really erase all records so one cannot really compare the results of say A1 and B2. And more generally it can be shown that any time order of the operations of say the PM experiment implies that at least one of the expectation values cannot be measured.
And therefore not satisfying these mixed correlations does not imply a clash with experiments. So, in some we conclude that not satisfying the mixed correlations does not does not lead to trouble, which was a key
part of this argument so we conclude that these arguments are not really valid. It's useful to illustrate all my claims without a concrete example so what I did is to take a pilot wave theory and compute with that the invariable theory, the
prediction for the PM arrangement and well here are the results and just a few observations. First of all we know that as expected these mixed correlations the A1, B2 and B2, B1, A2 are not given by the quantum predictions they're given by something else.
So of course one can show which was a key part of the argument that these predictions do satisfy the CHSH inequality but of course doing so, since one cannot experimentally violated with these sorts of experiments does not lead to trouble.
And then the other observation I want to make is that as I said the hidden variable theories are explicitly non-local and contextual so one could worry that one would be able to use them to do signaling to send signals faster than that.
In particular for example I can one can compute the correlations between say the measurement of A1 and A2 which are given by a term that has to do with a difference between the angle between A1 and A2 as one would expect but know that this correlation depends also on the angle employed by B2.
So it seems that A1 and B2 could communicate, could construct a protocol to communicate for example B2 can choose an angle such that it fully erases the correlation between the measurements between A1 and A2 so this could seem problematic.
However we remember that by traction observers don't have access to correlations between their first and second measurements for example A1 and A2 cannot compare the results because A2 fully erased the records of A1.
So basically the conclusion is that even though it seems that one could use these things to send signals faster than light one in fact cannot do so.
Okay let's now I say a few words about the FR arguments as I said the FR argument is what motivated these other two experiments.
It also involves an extended Wigner's friend scenario this time based on how this arrangement which is another variant of Bell's theorem.
And this theorem is cast in terms of a no go theorem which are used for the mutual incompatibility of three premises number one C which stipulates the consistency between the observations of different.
Observers S which stipulates that measurements have single outcomes and Q with stipulates the universal validity of quantum mechanics that is that that is valid at all scales.
This argument is cast in terms of a systemic notions such as for example agents expressing certainty on such and such beliefs or agents changing their beliefs and hearing the results of others etc.
And then the point is that even though it is written in a very different language can be shown that it also depends exactly on the same mistaken and mixed correlations assumptions that before for example, in the theorem one uses claims such as if F finds X then she
knows that W will find Y with certainty which again can be seen as a mixed correlation and the upshot of all this is that the theorem is not valid.
So, to conclude, as I said recent arguments try to challenge the objectivity of measurements, however they depend on a mistake mistaken assumption regarding mixed correlations.
It is not then that the assumption of definite outcomes leads to trouble but that's such an assumption coupled with this on what assumption regarding mixed correlations leads to inconsistent results.
And then, moreover, I show that these mistaken assumption can be tracked, I'm sorry trace to a lack of recognition that hidden variables with their inevitable contextual and non contextual and local nature are being postulated.
We conclude from all these that these arguments fully fail in challenging the objectivity of measurements.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thanks Elias for this very interesting talk.
Now, we have some time for questions. Please, if someone has a question, write it down in the chat.
Dennis, please go on.
Yes, yeah.
Yes, thank you for your talk.
So you, you speak a lot about objectivity like all the authors, all the other authors who are involved in this discussion do.
But very often it's not so clear what objective actually means or what the authors intent. So you also use the term definite instead of objective.
But I think that all the authors acknowledge that if someone makes a measurement, he or she will find a definite result so there will be one result of which he or she will become aware.
But what is at issue in this so called objectivity question is whether other observers looking at this system of the first observation will see or observe or measure the same result.
And what these inequalities seem to show is that that's not guaranteed. But that comes close to contextuality.
So, so I think that the contextuality which you emphasize actually is very close to this non objectivity between quotation marks.
That's a signal to my many of the authors.
I'm not quite sure whether I make my question clear.
I think I think I do understand your point, but I'm not sure I would agree. I think that the objectivity and these authors have in mind and it's also what I have in mind is something like and stipulating that
after say, I don't know Alice measures then the world is such that Alice obtained a result and all observers agree on what that result was.
I think that that is independent from the measurement of Alice being or not contextual which has to do with which actual results she obtained and depending on the details of how she she performed the experiment so contextuality has to do with
the result depending or not on the method to arrive at the result and objectivity on the result being the same for everybody.
And what I think I showed is that and while these arguments argue that one cannot assume the sort of objectivity that I was describing that these results are mistaken and they do not challenge at all.
Any theory or at least theories that do hold objectivity in the in the sense that I described. I don't know if I, I don't know if I understood your question if and if I was clear.
I understood my question. It's a difficult question. So, can I ask one other thing. So I remember from the description given by Healy, I think in a 2018 paper of the experiment proposed by Pussy and the other guy that it was a bit more complicated than what you showed because they also involve different frames of reference
time orders.
Yeah, I think that Pussy and Masane did not as far as I remember they did not involve different frame of references. Some other people did.
I think that I mentioned at some point that one can show that regardless of the order of operations that is regardless of which frame of reference one, one employees, one can conclude for example that one cannot experimentally probe the inequalities.
There's much more detail than what I was able to say in this 20 minutes talk, but I have this longish paper where I do mention what happens if one explores the issue from different points of view, etc. And I think that that does not change at all my conclusion.
Okay, thank you. I will look at the paper.
Sure, sure. Thank you. Thanks for your questions.
Okay.
We are almost on time, but we have two more questions. One more question. I think that Jorge wanted to do a question. Please, Jorge, go on.
Very short. Okay.
Yes, actually a very interesting talk. One question. I think the quantum ratio is well known. You can measure in one direction and then erase the result based on a different basis.
It seems to me that the main difference in this more sophisticated experiment from Froschinger and Renner is because they put people there and you are kind of erasing what they saw.
And they have been some articles saying that it is very hard for a person to be in a Hadamard operator. Have you seen that? What do you think about that?
Let me just make a quick general comment. I don't think that in the same way that I don't think that these arguments have something really interesting to show about quantum foundations.
I don't think that the quantum eraser has something interesting to show. I think it's just the weird conclusions that are derived are only derived because one employs a non-self-consistent theory such as the standard arguments,
the standard framework. So if one analyzes those settings with a theory that resolves the measurement problem, then one notices that there's nothing really strange going on.
Yeah, and about this one having to have people inside, etc., the point behind these arguments is that even though one cannot do that in practice, that if one assumes quantum mechanics to be like a complete theory and valid at all scales,
then one can at least in principle consider these alternatives and see what they imply.
Yeah, I'm sorry, my answer was a quick, maybe we can talk about this later.
Okay, okay, people, I have to cut you off.
