Perfecto.
Welcome, everyone, to the third, to the fourth day
of the 10 Conference of Quantum Foundations.
We are glad to start this morning's session with Professor
Marta Reboido from the Department of Physics
of the University of La Plata and the Institute of Physics
of La Plata-Ponisette.
She will speak about exceptional points
from a hybrid physical system.
Please, go on, Marta.
OK, good morning to everybody.
First of all, I want to thank the organizers
for letting us share our work in this nice and interesting
conference on Quantum Foundations.
This work has been done in collaboration
with Romina Ramírez and Diego Tielas
from the University of La Plata.
The focus of my talk is the existence
of a sectional point in hybrid physical systems.
I shall highlight some connections
to the time evolution of the given initial prepared state
and, in particular, its behavior at long intervals of time.
Hybrid models are a system consisting
of two or more components intended
to harness the advantages and strengths of each of these
components.
As an example, we can think of the model proposed
10 years ago by Sue et al.
Consistent of a superconductive flux
COVID coupled to a system of MBs, a nitrogen vacancy
in diamon, this is interesting because the superconductive
flux COVID can be used to model the two-level systems
and to make COVID operations and due to the long time
coherence time of the MBs, the MBs can be used
as a memory of the system.
Here is the experimental device.
This is the diamon sample.
And here on the top is the superconductive circuit.
From the theoretical point of view,
this hybrid model can be represented
by Hamiltonian consisting of three terms, a COVID term,
a term associated with the nitrogen vacancy system
and interaction term.
The superconductive flux COVID consists
of an aluminum superconductive loop
with three chasps on junctions and a magnetic field.
And when the magnetic field is applied through the loop,
the system can be modeled by a two-level Hamiltonian,
where E is the energy bias, delta is the tunneling splitting,
X, the operator S are related.
Here should be, et cetera, the operator S
is related to the half-poly matrices.
And through a suitable transformation,
it can be mapped to, it can be generalized.
And the energies of the system are given in terms
of the energy bias and the gap tunnel split.
The nitrogen vacancy center is defect in the lattice,
in the diamon, in the lattice of the diamon,
where a carbon atom is replaced by a nitrogen atom,
and its neighbor is a vacancy.
This system can be modeled by the ground state of the system,
is a triplet.
When there is no external magnetic field applied,
the two excited states of the template are degenerate
and separated from the ground state
an energy of 2.88 GHz.
This separation energy makes this system adequate to be
coupled to the superconductive class COVID.
The interaction time is usually taken
as the component set of the spin of the COVID
times the x component of the spin of the MVs.
We have modified the x component of the spins
to take into account the effect of other impurities
in the diamon.
The more relevant are neutral nitrogen vacancy centers
called P1 centers, which are responsible for the loss
of coherence of the MVs.
So we have introduced this term that is non-admission.
If the interaction is not present
and we take a system of two MVs, we
have the two levels of the COVIDs and three levels
for the quality coupling of the two MVs.
When the interaction term is turned on,
there is a splitting of the levels.
And due to the fact that this term is non-admission,
sign of the level can acquire a wheel.
That is, the eigenvalues of the system can be complex.
To understand the spectrum of the system,
we can see that the adjoined Hamiltonian
is the transpose of H. That means
that this both Hamiltonian and this spectral operators
and, in consequence, the eigenvalues are
other real or complex conflict pairs.
The basis can be leveled by the states of the COVIDs
and the collective states of the MVs.
If we let us first describe what happens
with the system of one superconductive blue cube,
COVID coupled to two MVs.
These are the typical constants of the sector
of the MVs and we shall assume that the tunneling
splitting of the superconductive blue cube
can be set at the value of 2D.
And this a dimensional coupling is
the strength of the interaction in terms of the coupling E.
If we plot the eigenvalues in terms
of this a dimensional coupling and in terms
of the asymmetric parameter, we realize that there is a sector
in the parameter model space where the eigenvalues
are complex configurations.
This limiting curve is the curve where
exceptional points occurs.
An essential point is a point in the parameter model
space where the eigenvalues are coalescent
and also the eigenfunctions.
That is, the matrix of the system is no longer
the diagonalizable.
This pattern that I have plot before for the case of delta
equal 2D, this small d equals 0, is this line up here.
And if we now vary the value of delta over d,
we found that there is a regular pattern
for exceptional points in the system.
To look at the time evolution of the system,
we shall use the formalities of the green function.
If we have the Hamiltonian, the green matter
is related to the Hamiltonian in this way.
And the time evolution of the system
can be expressed in terms of the Fourier transform
of the green matrix.
The transition matrix shall be defined in terms
of the Fourier transform in this way
and give us the information of the transition
between these states as a function of time.
Here I have fixed the value of g to 0.02 GHz.
And then this is the typical plot for an exceptional point
in this region.
The energy is real.
In this region and this region, the energy is complicated.
If we look at the transition probability,
that is the entries of the matrix that I have defined before,
for a long interval of time, in terms of alpha,
we see that the transition probabilities of sun
states tend to value different from 0
at the time for long interval times.
This is of diagonal terms and this is the diagonal terms.
And in this region where the spectrum is real,
here we have performed a promedius.
We have promedied on two period times the results.
This is where the spectrum is complex.
This is the steady value of the probability.
Well, what is interesting is what happened at this point
where the eigenvalue of coalesce.
As I have said before, for these points,
we observe non-exponential k because the matrix related
to the transform of the dream function
has a block which corresponds to a Schoeman form
because the Hamiltonian at this point
is no longer diagonalizable.
And then the consequence of this is that the decay is no longer
exponential but we have some potential of t in the spectrum.
If we study the survival probability for a coherent state,
for an initial state, prepare as a coherent state
with azimuthal axis p over 4 times the system of the qubits
in the ground state, we see that the probability,
survival probability, can be written in an analytical form
this way.
We observe that we have a factor t square in the numerator
and denominator so that, as a function of time,
this will evolve to a constant.
For a given initial state, prepare as an initial state
of the qubits and initial state of the mbis,
the evolved state is given in this way.
And as I have said before, the probability,
survival probability has this expression as usual.
And here we show four different values of alpha,
not the exceptional point.
The exceptional point is this and this.
How the probability behaves for a long interval of time
as a function of time.
We see that depending on theta, this corresponds to theta
equals 0, p over 2, p over 4, and p,
the survival probability of the initial state
is close to 1 near the exceptional point or goes to 0.
And the opposed behavior in the other exceptional point.
In this branch of parameters where the values are real,
these are the promedio in two periods of time.
What we learn from this is that depending
on the initial state, the survival probability in terms
of the coupling of the asymmetric parameter
is better or not.
Well, let us look at the squeezing parameter.
The squeezing parameter is defined
as if we have a system of spins, that is, then this,
for instance, and we look at the mean value of the spin
and define this as the set up prime direction.
Then we look in the perpendicular plane to this direction
where for the small component of the deviation of x prime,
that define the parameter of the squeezing of the system.
And if this is reduced in the direction of x prime,
sorry, this is because in the perpendicular direction,
it is increased.
When we look at this parameter, we
observe that for the real regime of the spectrum,
when the spectrum is real, the system can be squeezed.
But for the points where the spectrum is complex,
the system is anti-squix.
In particular, there is a point here
where the mean value of the spins adopt the value 0.
And for this point here, of course,
this parameter diverge.
And perhaps it is not well defined at this point.
But for this particular point, we observe the following thing.
We observe that if we have an initial state prepared
as a coherent state for instance with theta equal p over 2,
it evolves in time to this particular state, which
is composed of the superposition of two coherent states.
This state was identified as a reading
at the state by other workers sometime ago.
So what happened is that if we prepare an initial state,
in this particular cap and I will be particular asymmetry
in the state, the capital interaction,
will end with a reading circuit.
These are the plot obtained by computing the beginner
discrete function for the ease U2 model.
Then we can think what happens is we compute this
for a larger number of nb's.
For two nb's, we have, for instance,
if we value delta equal 2 times d,
this curve will correspond to the appearance
of the sectional point.
And this curve will correspond to the appearance of cad
states as steady states of the system.
When we increase the number of nb's in the system
and we redefine the parameter alpha as alpha over
square root of m, this is a collective model.
That's why the alpha should be rewritten
as alpha over square root of m.
We also found a regular pattern of exceptional points
and a regular pattern of a reading curve
cad states as steady states.
Well, in conclusion, we have shown
that in this type of hybrid systems,
we can show the appearance of exceptional points.
This is an aspect related to the non-hormitian
dynamic of the system.
Non-exceptional, at non, at exceptional points,
we love the exponential decay.
The states, which are no, the matrix,
which is no longer diagonalizable,
admit a normal short-term form,
and then the survivor probability related
to an initially even state at this point
will show a polynomial behavior.
The order of the polynomial corresponds to the
order of the pole in the green matrix
at the exceptional point.
And we also show that in this type of systems,
we can create as steady states a reading curve.
If we now couple the system of m best
to more superconducting COVID,
we can expect that the structure
or the coexistence of exceptional points
will show a more rich behavior,
and perhaps we have exceptional points
of not only one pair of state coalescing
to the same eigenstate,
but more eigenstate coalescing to the same states.
And what is an open question,
there is some people working on this,
is what happened with non-ormition systems
at finite temperature.
We have recently begun to work on this work,
but I hope next year we can give some insight on this.
Well, thank you very much for your attention.
Thanks.
Thanks Marta, thanks for this great talk.
Now, if there are some questions,
please write them down in the chat
and I will pick them up.
Sebastian, please go ahead.
You can open your mic if you want.
Hello Marta, thank you for your talk.
I think that I know what you think,
but I want to hear from you.
Do you have some interpretation
or conceptual interpretation
of the meaning of the imaginary part of the energy?
And the second part of the question is,
in this formalism,
change the interpretation of the energy
that we know even in the real part of the energy
or not is the same.
What I have learned till now is that
in generally the parameters
leading to real spectrum,
when you have real spectrum,
generally you can make a similarly transformation
to an Hermitian Hamiltonian,
which is at a system with finite number of degrees,
with finite dimension.
So the part of real spectrum,
I think that is almost the same
as the Hermitian Hamiltonian
through a similar transformation.
The other sector of the model,
is complex energies.
Well, in finite systems,
I will think of the usual concept of loss and gain,
and you say, well,
the eigenvalues have a negative part of the energy,
of the complex energy,
you are modeling a loss system,
and if you in some way can add things to the system,
then you have to have the positive part of the energy,
of the complex energy.
That is for finite systems.
And this was nice.
There are a lot of experiments,
particularly in optical physics.
I can give you some recent results,
by mail, the reference.
Now, the problem is with infinite dimensional systems.
There we have worked out the model,
I don't know if you are familiar,
the model of Swanson,
the simple model that has is a quadratic model of Bosons,
and once after interaction,
it has an stress different than the other.
And it has a broken symmetric space
that has complex parent values.
And we have learned that with proper choice
of the parameters and with adequate transformation,
we can also make
some relation between the Hamiltonian is a joint.
But now the eigenvalues, the eigenfunctions,
does not belong to the Hilbert space,
because they are not square integrals.
So you have to use the formalings of the Elphan template.
And then, when you look at the time evolution in this case,
you have to be carefully,
you have to do it carefully,
because it is not a resonant and anti-resonant state
as stated the other day, Manuel Gadella.
They are, the time rebels are one of the other,
and then you have to make the evolution with the resonant states
for T greater than zero
and with the anti-resonant state with T less than zero.
And it is, as Manuel said,
it is tricky because you have to deal with,
sometimes with metric operation that with similar operators
that are not definitely positive define,
and so you have to look at the metric and so on.
There is still too much to do.
A lot of things to do.
Okay. Thank you, Martin.
Okay. We are on time.
So we thank Marta for this great talk.
So we put some internet claps.
