So good morning in this second day of the conference of Quantum Foundations.
So we have today the pleasure of the first talk by Omar Asenda,
who is from Universidad Nacional de Córdoba in Argentina.
He will speak about the use of optimization methods for quantum mechanics problems.
So for one, please, Omar.
Okay, thank you. Mariela, welcome. Congratulations to all the organizers for, well, finally,
that the 10th edition of this conference finally has, well, it's taking place.
And thank you for the opportunity to address some colleagues in these times.
Actually, I usually prepare too much material for the talk.
So I have planned this talk in two parts.
I don't know how I will use exactly the time, but depending on how much time
how fast I can go, well, I will cover the transmission of quantum states and maybe
something about field body problems, but mainly the talk is about the transmission of
quantum states. Usually what this work is actually is not published yet.
You can find it in the archive, but it's an ongoing collaboration with Paulo Serra and
Alessandro Ferron. And well, we can start thinking what is exactly a quantum state
transfer, what we can think a quantum channel is made of.
15 years ago, talking about a change of quantum systems, replicas of
a quantum system that are interacting between them and, well, that can be used as
a wire to transmit information. Well, 15 years ago, this was a major dream. It was the
realm of theoretical physics. Today, there are a lot of technical advances that made
the transmission of quantum state possible in solar state implementation, that is
the setting that many people think about. In quantum state implementations, for example,
the wire that will transmit the quantum state will be, for example, a chain of quantum dots or
a chain of superconducting qubits, etc. Ideally, the wire is used to
transmit quantum information from a sender to a receiver. The sender ideally will
prepare some quantum state, the information that they want to send. The channel
should be initialized to a simple state, and the receiver will perform some
measurements to retrieve the information that the sender sent to him. Obviously, this is
a quite complicated problem if the Hamiltonian of the system is a many-bodied Hamiltonian,
and the interactions are, well, long-range, etc. Most people think, usually, in very simple systems,
in particular, many times the problem is not solved in the whole human space, so
usually, the Hamiltonian has some symmetries that allow to restrict the dynamic of the problem
to use a sub-space of the whole human space. There are many protocols. A protocol is
a recipe to prepare the state, how the system evolves in time, and finally, how the information is
retrieved at the other stream of the chain. Many people is familiarized with the X-axis Hamiltonian,
that is a spin Hamiltonian that has only interaction, for example, in the plane,
is an isotropic Hamiltonian. To fix the idea, many people think that the initial state is prepared
in the first site of the channel. The rest of the chain is initialized in a simple state
that, depending on the physics of the problem, is maybe the ground state of the system.
The time evolution, obviously, is produced with some unitary time evolution operator,
because, at least in principle, the simplest way to analyze these problems is using unitary
time evolution. Obviously, it is possible to consider an open chain, an open quantum system,
but the problem becomes almost intractable. At least if the length of the chain
will be around the 10 spins or things like that. This is just to fix ideas. There are many forms,
many protocols, but this is the simplest. An initial state, and in the simplest protocol,
the time evolution is given by the autonomous Hamiltonian of the chain. There is no external
forcing, so, actually, the time evolution is the simplest time evolution operator,
is the exponential of the Hamiltonian. It is possible to use the spectral decomposition
of the operator. A lot of things are easy to calculate. Even more, if this is the initial
state and the Hamiltonian is for magnetic and the zero state is the random state,
this Hamiltonian commutes with the total magnetization, so the dynamics keeps,
is restricted to the one excitation subspace, so the dimension of the actual
hillar space is basically the size of the chain. If the chain has n spins, then the dimension of
the hillar space in the one excitation subspace, the dimension of the hillar space,
the subspace is just n. Many times, the quantity that is used to quantify how good, how successful
is the protocol, is called the fidelity, the transmission fidelity, that can be calculated
regularly using the amplitude probability that an excitation is
transferred from the first side of the chain to the last side of the chain. This quantity is
quite easy to calculate in the sense that it's just an expectation value of the
time evolution operator. This particular formula can be deduced because to
quantify the channel, usually what is used is an average over all the initial state that can be
prepared. Just to fix some ideas, many times, well, it is interesting to consider that the chain
could be in a disorder state. The couplings maybe cannot be fixed to some desired value.
Maybe there are defects in the fabrication process, or just like every
non-standard system, it is quite difficult to fix all the couplings, etc. And this
is, for example, how it is possible, for example, to control the time evolution of the problem.
Sometimes it is useful just to consider that the transmission process is forced or controlled
by applying some external control fractions. Why? Because many times, the natural time evolution,
the autonomous time evolution is not sufficient to achieve a good transmission. Obviously,
the idea is that if the fidelity reaches the unity, well, the transmission is perfect,
all values of FT superior to 0.999 are considered interesting, but obviously,
depending on the Hamiltonian, how these chain coupling coefficients are chosen, etc., this
fidelity could be a fiber that is lower rather lower than the unit. So, it is useful sometimes to
consider a forced evolution. But the problem of the forced evolution is obviously controlling
a nanoscopic, a microscopic quantum system is quite difficult. Many times, it is impossible
to control the system with smooth functions. There are a lot of considerations that can be
made, advising against using a control evolution. Many times, it is the only option, because the
interactions cannot be chosen, but are fixed for some fundamental interaction. But the force
or the control evolution of a quantum system is quite difficult. In particular, if the system
doesn't have a lot of symmetries or the dynamics cannot be kept in a sub-space,
it is quite difficult to calculate this control evolution, because obviously,
the control functions shall be obtained using an optimization method. So,
anyway, for the excess Hamiltonian, people have been working in this area for many years.
So, there are a lot of interesting results, like perfect quantum state transmission is achievable,
choosing particular values for the quantities j, ji, or these quantities, choosing some very
particular values. It is possible to achieve using autonomous time evolution. It is possible to
achieve perfect quantum state transmission, basically for any initial state. Even more,
it can be proved that the dynamics behaves like a specular inversion in the quantum chain. So,
the thing that you prepare in the half of the chain will be reflected at some time in the other
half of the chain. It is very interesting. There are regimes where a most perfect quantum state
transmission can be achieved just using an almost homogeneous quantum state. All the coefficients,
all the strange coefficients are equal, except a pair or maybe four exchange coupling coefficients
will be chosen different, and a very good quantum state transmission can be achieved.
So, why the XX Hamiltonian was studied so intensely? Why there are so many
results? Basically, because of this fundamental fact, it's quite easy to go in the XX Hamiltonian
from a given, I can choose the couplings and, well, I can calculate the, it is possible to
calculate the spectrum of the system, or it is possible to prescribe the spectrum that I want
to have for some Hamiltonian, and there is an unique way to calculate the exchange coupling
distribution. All the exchange coupling distribution is, in this case, always in the case where
we are dealing with the one excitation, some space, it's a one-to-one relationship, okay?
I can provide, for example, a very simple spectrum, for example, I can choose that the
spectrum of the system consists in eigenvalues that can be chosen, they are equal spaces between them,
okay? That sounds like a system that is quite possible that the whole contribution from the
eigenvalues cannot be constructed at some time, so I can choose this spectrum and the
coefficients can be calculated one by one in a unique way.
Obviously, most quantum spinchase doesn't have this property, in particular, the
case in the Hamiltonian doesn't have this property. It is impossible to prescribe a spectrum,
and in that way, obtain the coefficients that produce that spectrum, okay?
Well, as anybody that has found sometimes the better answer to the relationship between the
spectrum in the case in the Hamiltonian is, right, the obscure. Any way, well, or more precisely,
because of this, many words focus in the control transmission in the case in the Hamiltonian,
because, well, a lot of people thought that it was
easier to control a quantum chain, a homogeneous quantum chain obeying the case in the Hamiltonian,
and, well, controlling, designing very sophisticated control courses can be found that maybe the
transmission time, the transmission in the time in which the receiver can retrieve the
information sent by the sender, well, that time is around, obviously, if j is equal to 1,
there are most no energy units, so it is natural to measure the transmission time in
units of the length of the chain. That is the only, okay, if j is exactly equal to 1,
this is a very good unit to measure the time. I didn't say it, but another interesting quantity
or another interesting feature of the change with the excess Hamiltonian is that here,
it is very easy to show that the transmission time, the transmission time that the receiver
should weigh to measure and obtain a very good fidelity of transmission, that time is bounded,
but by the time that is consistent with the quantum speed limit, so
it is very easy to think that this Hamiltonian has a sound velocity for the spin waves and that
spin and that velocity is related to the quantum speed limit. In the case in the Hamiltonian,
there is no simple way to assess which is the time scale with convenience to measure or to
try to produce a very good transmission. So, what can be done with all this? Well,
actually, we said that this quantity, the probability that an excitation can be transmitted
from the first side to the last side is a quantity that depends on the spectrum and on the sound
coefficients of the eigenvalue, sorry, of the eigenvector, so this quantity can be optimized.
I can think that this is a complicated function that depends, obviously, on all the coefficients
that determine the Hamiltonian, so maybe I can choose somehow the exchange couplings and
using that exchange coupling, I can calculate the spectrum, the eigenvalues and calculate this.
So, if I can devise a method to explore
all the large number of values of the z-coefficient, maybe I can find the largest value
for this quantity, for some time that I can choose somehow. So, it is obvious that
this function, the amplitude of probability that an excitation goes from the first side to the
last side is a quantity that depends on all the coefficients. In a general change, there will be
nj coefficients, n exchange coefficients, so for a change, for example, of 50 spins,
it is a rather large space, a parameter space to explore. So, it is hopeless to try to
investigate the whole space in a completely random way, a space of 50 dimensions is to be to explore,
so maybe the exploration can be done using some kind of random walk, but it must be a
directed random walk in the parameter space. Well, fortunately, there are a lot of
methods, but the people in the statistical mechanics area have devised a lot of
methods to explore a rather large parameter space, and one of these methods is the
pivot methods that are used for global optimization. So, pivot methods are basically a good way to
generate a random walk that explores, in an intelligent way, a given parameter space. Obviously,
this is an example, an after-example of a search conducted over a two-dimensional parameter space.
This is a typical chart flow that can be found in all the papers in pivot methods are paper from
the 90s, so instead of using some colorful cartoons, it is most common to find chart flows like this,
because chart flows are the way to express an algorithm. I don't want to enter, but I mean,
any pivot method, any method can be used that is useful to search in a large
parameter space, it can be used to perform exactly the same that we did. So, for example,
you have 10 more minutes, so to finish everything. Thank you, thank you. Well,
this is, for example, how can a search for the coefficient can be done. This is a short
chain, but it is useful because the chains that are used are termed centrosymmetric because
there are symmetry between the first exchange coefficient and the last, and the optimization
method proceeds, the pivot method proceeds like by looking in a particular hyper queue
that contains all the possible values of the exchange coefficients. The problem with the
Heisenberg Hamiltonian has, there is not a simple way to bound the values of the
exchange coefficient that I need to use to achieve the transmission for some time, because, again,
the spectrum is quite complicated. We proceeded by looking at the best possible values of J that
provided a very good, or the best, the best fidelity of transmission in a small hyper queue,
but then we will, we proceed to enlarge the hyper queue and we go from some exchange
capital distributions that are obtained using some particular transmission time,
and this is what we found after a lot of numerical effort, but, effectively, we found
very good, near-perfect quantum state transmission for spin chains of, basically,
the length that we wanted, and for the arrival times of our chosen.
So the pivot method is able to find the necessary exchange couplings to produce
very good or near-perfect quantum state transmission in the Heisenberg Hamiltonian.
That is a result that was not known previously, but obviously the way to look for this exchange
coupling is clearly the result of a random walk that is performed, it's a direct random walk,
but maybe we can think that, well, the probability of transmission is quite high,
it's quite interesting, if you look at in this inset, all the transmission probabilities can be
made, well, basically, are bigger than 0.999 if we want to
that kind, that quality of transmission, but, obviously, once we get the exchange
coupling distribution, we wanted to understand if the solutions, this solution, have some physics
or are just results that the only thing that can be said about them is that they provide
a very good quantum state transmission. So we looked for the probability of having a good
transmission, this is a typical time evolution, near the transmission time, these are the peaks
of the probability for different settings, we can design or use different arrival times,
so, for example, these are very short arrival times, the black curves, the red curves correspond to a
larger arrival time, the blue one a more larger arrival time, but
each one of these was calculated with a different exchange coupling distribution, but, well,
some of us have a strong background in scaling and that kind of property, so we scale the time
evolution of the probability and we found that, basically, it doesn't matter what is the time,
the arrival time, basically, the behavior around the arrival time is basically the same,
which is a quite neat result because the exchange coefficients that are used to
calculate the probability of arrival probability for a given time has nothing to do with
the another exchange coupling distribution, so, for example, it is possible to,
after some numerical experiments are done, it is possible to study what is the minimum size of
their per queue necessary to find where this exchange coupling can be found, this is that size,
for example, we can say that if we choose a larger arrival times, the strength of the
exchange coupling distribution, the maximum value of the exchange coupling distribution,
basically, decays in an exponential way, so, in a sense, we can say that for very large exchange,
sorry, for very large arrival time, basically, the chain will be, well, basically almost
homogeneous, but not exactly homogeneous, there is no need to have very different values
between the exchange coupling distribution, and, well, another way to qualify how good
are these exchange coupling distributions, for example, consider what the set of exchange
couplings have been obtained, well, what about adding some disorder if, well, looking at this
fiber is quite obvious that the probability, the transmission, the transfer,
the probability that is related to fidelity can be made as large as close to the unity as wanted,
but these values are stable if some disorder is produced, everything, maybe this transmission
under some disorder is completely destroyed or not, well, we consider some static disorder
applied to the chain, and we found that, well, the chain was able to sustain some disorder, so,
the, in some sense, the maximum found by the pyramid is rated well, because applying some disorder
can be thought like, well, making another stochastic search, another stochastic search around the
values that the people met found, but basically, we can say that the spin distribution are, well,
produced a very good, very, very good transmission, and that they are quite stable against
this disorder, so, as I said, I prepare a lot of material, but the conclusion of this part is,
we are almost in time, yeah, yeah, the conclusion, well, this, the physics near this new configuration,
this new change, is quite inspired, we want to study the physics, how the transmission is produced
in this change that has, that have the couplings, Tyler is specifically to produce a large,
a large fidelity of transmission, well, as a stochastic search, everything works fine, but we
don't know why, at least, well, in that moment, when we wrote the manuscript, we didn't have
clues why everything works so fine, I think that we now have some clues that we are exploring them,
this procedure will be successfully translated to another Hamiltonian, we are looking for that,
maybe there are other procedures to determine these couplings in another way, maybe there are,
because looking at the exchange couplings that are calculated, it is not obvious that they can be
translated in a, in a, in a simple formula, we are discussing also if some experimental implementation
can be made, well, and that's it, well, half a minute, okay, one minute and a half,
thank you very much, thank you Omar, so if someone has a, just a short question,
we can put it here,
so you mean the, the, of elements in mind, you studied the, the left, the chain,
and you did a search, sorry, you touched with the left, the chain, dependent on n?
Sorry, the communication was interrupted, but I couldn't hear the question, can you repeat, sorry,
if you did a search with the left, length of the chain, depending on the number n,
just to short something, but you mean small, the size of the system, you're,
no, we, we can study the chains from, from 10, 10 spins, 10 spins to 100, there is not an actual
limit, we stopped in 100 because, well, we didn't want to, to, to wait for the, for the results,
but there is not a practical limit, anyway, a chain of 100 sites is beyond, clearly it's beyond
any practical implementation at least for, for a few next years, but there is no an upper bound,
we stopped around 100, but we, for some new experiments, for some new results, we're
maybe looking at 120, yeah. Thank you. So we don't have, we don't have any comments,
so we thank again Nomar with a, with a clap, so we can change the vertical, thank you.
Thank you organizers, I want to thank you again, congratulations to achieve the 10th
conference and, and, and well, for a, for a very good acronym.
