Okay, the next speaker is Tim Mowlin from New York University, who is going to talk about the emergence of Euclidean and Minkowski structure from this great space time.
This team, when you want, you can start.
Okay, everybody can, everybody can see that.
Yes, thank you, Tim.
Okay, well, I don't have much time.
This is all results that I figured out in the last month, and this is the first time I'm presenting them.
So I don't know quite how long this is going to take.
I'll try and go quickly.
Everything is conceptually kind of really trivial.
The results, to me, were a little bit astonishing.
Okay, so I've been playing around with, for some years, trying to think about how to do space time geometry with a discrete foundation rather than a continuum.
And so this is, this is
some recent results.
So here, here are some things just to kind of
contextualize this or motivate it a bit.
So we start, of course, when we learn physics, we start with classical physics, Newtonian mechanics, I'm including special and general relativity as, you know, the kind of
ultimate flourishing of a classical picture.
But we know that all of that is wrong at some level.
All of Newtonian mechanics, right, Newtonian mechanics is not on the correct
physical foundations.
Maxwellian electrodynamics is not on correct physical foundations.
General relativity, it's a little bit harder to know exactly what has to give.
We know that something's going to have to give in putting together a theory of gravity with the rest of quantum mechanics.
I, you know, the failure in a certain sense of classical physics is kind of radical, the stability, you know, that matter is stable, can't be obviously recovered from Maxwellian picture of electromagnetic interactions.
But right now I just want to point to two actual physical phenomena that we know we need to account for.
And one is the Aronov-Bohm effect, which doesn't have any natural understanding in terms of a classical picture of electromagnetics.
It somehow has been taken to suggest, and I think this is correct, although you have to be careful about what it means, that the fields, the electric or magnetic fields are not really physically fundamental, something else is.
And then the big one, of course, is violations of Bell's inequality for experiments done at space like separation.
We know that you can't get that out of classical electromagnetic theory or general relativity or special relativity, because they're local theories, and they just won't allow for those phenomena.
So we have to do something.
Now, how do we deal with the non-locality, and this is actually also having to do with Aronov-Bohm, although I won't go into that now.
How do we deal with that? How do we actually make that tractable in a mathematically clear way?
Well, there's an obvious way to do it, a kind of very simple-minded way to do it, which is just to add a preferred foliation to the spacetime.
That would give us the resources to define various sorts of instantaneous physical connections between space-like separated events where instantaneous is defined in terms of this preferred foliation.
And if we do that, then we, of course, you know, we just have this preferred foliation and we do the fundamental dynamics in terms of things succeeding states, succeeding states in this foliation.
Then we have no problems about causal loops or temporal paradoxes or anything like that, right?
Because everything, all the temporal structure is going to be kept straight and straightforward by this foliation.
Now, one way that you can do this, which is you could say the cheap way, is just to add the foliation in.
That is, you start with a Lorentz, standard Lorentzian kind of metric that you'd get out of general relativity and throw a metric on, throw a foliation on top of it and use that foliation in the course of formulating your
general laws. They're kind of easy to do a Bohmian kind of theory. In that setting, it's kind of easy to do a GRW-like theory in that setting where you make use of the foliation in a very straightforward way.
But just throwing a foliation down on otherwise arbitrary Lorentzian structure seems kind of brute force and a bit unmotivated.
So one thing I've been looking at is something that is much more radical, but much less arbitrary. That is, I'm going to start from a new foundation where this foliation is naturally going to be there from the beginning.
Okay.
And so what's the conceptual basis? Well, the other thing that I wanted to do is to reject the relatives to kind of space-time at the very first step. That is, you do not start with a four-dimensional differentiable manifold.
You don't start with a continuum.
You start with a discrete structure, right? You start with a discrete geometry. Now, if you do that, and again, I could argue this, but kind of easy to see that it's actually now going to be very hard to avoid there being a preferred foliation.
Certainly, if you have a discrete underpinning like this, you can't have anything like a continuous symmetry like symmetry under Lorentz boosts.
And more or less, because each geometrical object has immediately neighboring adjacent objects, those adjacency relations are going to tend to pick out a preferred foliation automatically.
Okay.
So, where do we hope might come from this? Well, obviously, you know, I'm rejecting any kind of classical or relativistic picture of space-time at a foundational level, but the tremendous empirical success of classical physics and the tremendous
empirical success of relativity, both special and general, means that you would need to explain why theories based on a continuum or based on a four-dimensional manifold with a Lorentz metric, why do they do so well, right?
Why are they so empirically successful, given that I'm saying at a fundamental level, they're wrong.
Now, we've done this before, right?
It means somehow showing that something like the relativistic structure that we use emerges in a natural way from this quite different foundation.
And emerges usually by some kind of statistical considerations, considerations of coarse graining or something like that, right?
Now, you know, we know that this kind of thing can happen.
You might say, isn't it surprising that an emergent physics can be so very different in its character from the underlying physics from which it emerges, but we know that happens, right?
We know that in some sense Newtonian mechanics approximately emerges from quantum mechanics.
We know that Newtonian gravitational theory in some sense approximately emerges from the general theory of relativity.
And in each of those cases, the underlying theory is of quite a different character than the one that emerges, but you think you have a perfectly good understanding at the end of the day from the perspective of the underlying theory,
and why these other theories that were actually quite wrong.
Nonetheless, we're very empirically successful.
Okay, so that's the kind of prologue. Let me just get down into the nitty gritty details because that's what most of this talk is.
So I'm going to start, let me just start with space, spatial structure.
We're going to put in time a little later, but the point is that both of these starting points are pretty much as non relativistic as you can possibly imagine.
Okay.
That is, there's, there's, I guarantee there's no attempt to make this look relativistic at a foundational level and just you might say just the opposite.
What was the motivation well the motivation was, let's see if we can do discrete geometry, and do that in a kind of the simplest most natural way and see what happens.
And I can only give you my word that when I started developing this whole thing I was not even vaguely considering what might emerge from it I was just trying to write some stuff down that seemed to make sense.
There are choice points when you do this when you say alright, what kind of discrete geometry am I going to use, I'll indicate some of those choice points.
But the choices that I made are, again, pretty simple and pretty straightforward they don't, they don't look arbitrary they don't look, you know, artificial, because they really not.
And from this foundation that is as it were completely non relativistic in almost every in almost every sense, surprisingly to me, something very relativistic emerges naturally at a mathematical level.
So, how do we do discrete geometry again all of this is just the way I do it I didn't get this from anybody I made all the stuff up it'll all be completely unfamiliar to you, but it's very simple and straightforward.
So if I have an n dimensional space, and I want to think of it as fundamentally made of as it were geometrically atomic objects, I'm going to have different dimensional atomic objects and so I just indicate these as n elements where n is the dimensionality.
There are elements which you can think of as points, one elements which are one dimensional atomic objects you can think of them as little lines.
Two elements which are surfaces, right atomic surfaces, three elements which are atomic volumes you could continue up we have no need to go beyond three spatial dimensions.
These elements are related to one another as bounded to boundary to bounded every one element has a pair of zero elements as their boundary.
For example, okay, so you just would would indicate the whole thing by incidence matrices that tells you which n elements bound which n plus one elements.
The whole structure.
So the zero elements bound the one elements, the one element, and every one element is bounded by a pair of zero elements that's just the relation between points and lines.
Once you get up to two dimensions this the surface elements the two dimensional ones, you have a choice, you have an infinite number of choices.
So essentially you're asking what's the shape of an atomic surface.
Now the standard, there's a standard choice here made which is to make them triangles, right because that's the simplest two dimensional polygon.
And when you go up to three dimensions to make the three dimensional things tetrahedra because those are the simplest polyhedra.
And that route that particular choice of a path leads you to the theory of simplexes which is probably pretty well known.
My guess is, many people have heard about simplexes one way or another.
That's not the way I went that's not the way we're going to go. If you go that other way as far as I can tell, and I haven't looked in this great detail, you won't get any of the results anything like the results I'm going to show you.
So I think this is actually quite an important decision, right, I'm not going to go points lines triangles tetrahedra. Okay.
Now, what's the obvious thing other thing to do.
Well make the two elements quadrilaterals, or if you will squares that have not three but for bounding one elements and make the volume elements prisms or if you will cubes that have six bounding two elements.
And the, the, the, the scare quotes are there because of course I haven't done anything to introduce any notion of angle or distance here this is all as it were to purely topological level.
So I can't literally say their cubes or their squares, but they are quadrilaterals or volume elements that have four, six quadrilaterals as their bounding surfaces.
Good. So we're going to build it up that way but just, you know, a small historical note, that's the way you could does it right so he says you start with a point.
If you move a point you get a line right that's your one dimensional elements. If you move a line in an orthogonal direction, you get a rectangle that's your two dimensional element if you move a rectangle in an orthogonal direction.
You know, you get a you get you get a prism, that's your three dimensional element so we're doing that instead of simplexes.
And I'm going to depict them just using squares and cubic grids, because that's the easy thing to think about but obviously the, the actual angle relations and so on, are not there.
So here's a proto, you know, a prototypical two space, discrete two space each of the squares would be a two element.
They're bounded each one is bounded by four, one elements and each one element is bounded by a pair of, of zero elements which you can think of as the, you know, the corners of the squares.
And here's a, a prototypical discrete three space we now have the, the three, three elements which are the cubes and they're bounded by the two elements and so on.
So I, you know, I take it everybody's following this, it's kind of trivial.
It's not the only thing you could do but it's a pretty straightforward trivial thing to do.
Good.
This is not Euclidean.
If you treat these elements as atomic, which we're doing so we don't think of the, of the one elements as composed out of an infinite number of points they're not.
Right, they're bounded by a pair of points but they don't have any points inside them.
This is just not any kind of Euclidean geometry.
So if we wanted, there's a kind of metric that naturally comes along because it's discrete and we can count things there's a kind of counting metric that comes along.
And if you use that to define lengths and distances then you get in the two dimensional case you get what's commonly referred to as taxicab geometry, right so you just count.
How far is it from, from, from this point to this point, well, you have all of these continuous paths that can take you from here to here, which go via connecting one elements, and you take the shortest such path, and, and call that the distance, right.
And then, if you do that.
Then the circles, I mean the things you would define as circles just don't look circular, right, they look, they, they look like squares. So, the point C, what I've indicated on on there are all of the points that are three units away from C in the taxicab geometry.
You can go straight up or straight to the side, three units, or you can go over two and up one or up one and over two or, you know, and you get this thing that looks like a square.
And, and if you did the same thing centered it at point D, you would get another square. And the, the thing to notice is that those two squares meet each other and overlap along an entire side.
And they don't meet each other at a point, whereas in Euclidean geometry if we were drawing circles.
The first point where a circle centered at C could meet a circle centered at D they would meet at a point. Right. And then, as they got larger they would share a pair of points.
This is a non Euclidean kind of structure, even at a topological level, even without bringing in metrical information in a certain way.
This is very non Euclidean, obviously, it has preferred directionality in it, which a Euclidean two space does not have right you have kind of the vertical direction and the horizontal direction.
And these are in a way completely different. Every one element is as a word either oriented this way or oriented this way and you could define that in a perfectly rigorous way.
Good. So, I don't know of any sense if you just looked at this discrete structure and it's taxicab geometry, I don't know of any sense in which you would be inclined to say that anything Euclidean emerges.
Even if you go to very high scale, right, even if you imagine kind of zooming out and having one of these grids with billions and billions of elements in it.
The intrinsic geometry would still be non Euclidean the things you know even at large scale the things that you would define as circles would still be as it were quadrilaterals, and they would meet along edges and things like that.
So, just going to larger scale or just taking in in any straightforward way statistical considerations whatever that might mean.
I at least don't see anything Euclidean emerging from this.
Good.
The preferred directionality also at large scale, even if you were far away and you as it were couldn't see the microscopic details. Still, it seems like the these two directions would be preferred geometrically and that that maintains even at very high scale it doesn't
wash out.
Good. So that's this that's the spatial structure. So that's for two dimensions for three dimensions we would use a cubic grid.
We want to make a space time so we want to add in some temporal structure we want to add in time.
And the whole point of a discrete geometry is that there is an adjacency relation right you can you can ask of any point what are the immediately neighboring points, meaning points that are the other boundary of a single line right
it's single one element those are the near the nearest ones and then the next nearest ones and so on.
Similarly, you can say that to two elements to these these surface elements are adjacent to each other if they have a common one element as a boundary, right.
So there's a kind of adjacency relation which just doesn't exist in a continuum and a continuum. No point is next to another point no surfaces is, you know, I mean, certainly no point is next to another point you could have two surfaces that share a boundary.
So we're going to do the same thing with time we're going to make it discrete, which means for any event.
There will be the immediately preceding ones and the meat immediately succeeding ones in time.
And following that model. Okay, we're going to introduce arrows and the arrows are arrows and they have a directionality because time has a directionality.
Connecting different layers of the spatial structure.
So that by following the arrows, they'll take you from any end element to its immediate successors in time.
And therefore, it's already easy to see what we're building before we've done anything else there's going to be an intrinsic foliage, right, because we're going to build up the space time in these layers we're going to take a spatial layer,
put another spatial layer above it, and draw arrows, one way or another, from the one below to the next one and then from that one to the next one and from that one to the next one and so on.
So, again, at a foundational level, this is as non relativistic as you could imagine, it has a foliation built into it from the beginning, not added arbitrarily to something else.
All right.
So the question really left to us if we've if we've settled on the spatial structure of these of each of these layers is how do we run these connections, these temporal connections between one layer and the next one.
And here, again, there are different choices you could make I'm going to talk about three of them.
And I'm going to do this for the two spaces because they're easier to draw but everything sort of goes through the same way for the three spaces.
Okay.
All right, so you can, you can sort of think take a layer, put another layer directly above it and draw arrows up only up to the immediate ones above and you get something that would correspond to absolute Newtonian discrete space time.
Why, because Newton thought of absolute spaces persisting through time so each spatial point, identically remains through time and can be re identified at later times.
So the peak relation would be indicated by having only a single arrow here from each point to the succeeding point to the succeeding point to the succeeding point.
Now that, however, that structure would be a complete disaster physically if we want to use this the way I want to use it. What do I mean I mean first of all this would support a notion of absolute rest as it as there is in Newtonian absolute space,
the object would remain at absolute rest if it always stays in the same, as it were the same persisting point of space. Yeah.
But the problem is, what I want to do is use these arrows to give me continuous paths through space time continuous temporal paths, that is, the past that say a particle could follow.
And if I only have these vertical paths it means nothing can move right the points of space can't move but also particles couldn't move either the only, the only place they could go at the next temporal moment would be directly above and everything would be frozen.
Okay, so everything would have you not only have a notion of absolute rest but everything would have to remain at absolute rest so that would be a disaster.
All right, so that's one thing we could do bad idea. Here's, we could go the other direction and say look let's connect up every an element on one layer with every an element on the next one right so there's no preferred relation at all between the the spatial
elements at one moment in the spatial elements and another that of course gets extremely messy I didn't even draw them all in, but you get the idea.
This would be sort of corresponding to a gal what we think of as a Galilean space time where there is no preferred relationship between an event at one time and any event in the other time.
But that's equally a disaster because now there's no restriction on these what you count as a continuous temporal path sort of any selection of any an element, you know, say, say point from every one of the layers will count as a continuous path because
there's an arrow that goes from this one to that one to then to this one then to that one. Okay, so you kind of lose any interesting space time structure at all. That's a bad idea.
So what's the solution, while one doesn't work and infinitely many don't work so. So let's just look at finitely many.
And there are different ways that you could do that and instead of trying to walk you through them I'm just going to go to the one that turns out to give you really nice results.
So this is what I call a simple discrete three dimensional space time.
I'm not going to have any absolute rest at the fundamental level because each zero element right for example or two element has for immediate temporal successor so from from this point I can immediately go at the next layer to four
different points, none of which counts any more than any of the others as staying in the same place. Right.
So the key to this is, you don't stack the layers vertically above each other but you just place them so that, as it were in this diagram directly above a point in this layer will be the center of a square on the next layer.
Okay, so you displace them from each other in that way. And, and then you go back and above the above that you're then back to the original so the, the, and then you put arrows from each point to the four corners of the, of the square above it.
Yeah, it's easier to understand by seeing it so there's what this thing looks like.
And maybe it's even easier to see it from above if you kind of look down on it, you would see that the, we have this one square grid.
And then the second square grid with the solid points is displaced from it so that the, the points in the original grid fall at the centers of the squares of the next layer up.
And then you put four arrows going out as it were Northeast Northwest Southeast and Southwest. So there, there are four ways you can go.
Good.
Now, there will now be, you obviously do not have, if particles could follow these arrows, they're not now stuck the way they were originally and can only go up.
And there's a kind of light cone structure so there's something that looks a little bit relativistic here, because from this point there are only four points I can get to in the next layer and then a limited number I can get to in the next.
And I mean the thing becomes larger as you go up so there's something that kind of looks like a light cone.
There's no state of absolute rest because it, you know, one way to think about this is like the fundamental connections are all light like.
They're all no. And from any point there are four ways you can go. And so that you can't stay at rest right if a particle had to do that.
If a particle wanted to, as it were, try to go straight up this diagram, it could only do it by something we might think of as it is the vagal right it's got to be kind of oscillating around as it goes up.
There is a kind of emergent notion of absolute rest here because if I take not this layer and the one right above it but the one above that, then a point here will be preferentially related to a particular point two layers up.
By there being the maximum number of connections to it. Right. So if I go from here to the one as it were straight above it there are four ways I can get there I can go this way, that way that way that way.
I can get to other points up here but they're, they're fewer roots. Right. So if I look at, if I ask, what is, which point above this one is maximally connected to it by continuous paths.
That does pick out something like an emergent state that you could call absolute rest so again you might say extremely non relativistic.
And the other thing that's very still non relativistic here is if we call the light cone.
If I take any event, any, any zero element and I just follow the arrows and see where could you get from there. I get this growing structure, but it's, it's a square base pyramid right it's not, it doesn't look like a cone.
Right, it's, it just looks like a bigger and bigger pyramid.
And if I, if I take a horizontal cross section through it those will be those will be squares. So just as with the taxi cab geometry.
I don't seem to have anything that looks at all relativistic. Okay, so again, it's seen from above. I mean, so if I started at some point, you can go out to the next four points.
And then I get a square. And then if you think of all the places I could go from those four points those are going to make a bigger square and a bigger square and a bigger.
Good. So where are we now I'm sorry I'm rushing so fast but I know I don't have much time. So we have a discrete space time has a light cone structure otherwise has a completely different character than Menkowski space time.
There are different ways there's a preferred affiliation spatial geometry has preferred directions in it. There's an emergent state of absolute rest. None of this occurs in menkowski space time, and they retain at arbitrary large scales they don't in any obvious
sense wash out just because you go to you know you go to high skills.
However, and this is kind of a shock.
Something very close to him and cost the structure naturally emerges.
How is that.
Well, let's think about degrees of temporal connectivity I already did that when I talked about this emergent state of absolute rest I said, from this point, what point above it can I has the most distinct paths that lead to it right.
So I can count because this is all discrete. I can just count these paths. And so between any pair of these one elements, I can count the number of distinct continuous temporal paths that will take you from there from from from there to there, could be zero
space like separated.
That count is directly connected mathematically to Pascal's triangle and the binomial distribution in ways that are probably familiar if you think about it.
But the key here is that you don't actually use Pascal's triangle but you use this thing Pascal square based pyramid, which is something I only learned about in the last couple months, but it's very simple.
It's like Pascal's triangle except taken up to three dimensions.
So, here's Pascal's square based pyramid imagine stacking cubes up like this in a kind of ziggurat.
And then, again, just like with Pascal's triangle, put a one in the top, and then, and every lower layer just add the numbers that connect to it so the next ones down I'll get a one.
You know, you get one layer down, you know, you get ones in the corners and then twos and then a four in the middle that's again, the middle one there has the most connections.
And it's easy to see your again just counting distinct paths that you could take through this structure from the top down to any of these parts.
Okay, so that's Pascal square based pyramid, there's a Pascal's triangle based pyramid, which does different things we're not using that we're using this stuff.
If we cut through this and say the fifth level here are the numbers that you would get.
And so these would be again the number of distinct continuous paths from that top down to any of these cells.
And you notice two things there's that well they're really three important features that this set of numbers have I'll just mention what they are and then you can go back and look and see that they're there.
The first feature is that if we look along each edge, we just get the numbers from Pascal's triangle that is we get the normal binomial distribution so you're 14641 along the edges.
The second really important fact is that in the, in the interim, you have already reached the 30 minutes, you can continue using the time for question if you want.
Yeah, I have to, I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm just getting to the payoff.
Sorry, but I've never done this before. Okay, the interior you get by a multiplication table. Okay, so you'll notice all the numbers in the middle are just this the product of the corresponding numbers along the edges.
Yeah, and that you can prove is always true. And then the third fact we're going to use is that as these numbers get large, we know that binomial distribution is well approximated by the Gaussian, which we have there.
Now that's just an approximation, it only kicks in when the numbers get large and you have to stay away from the tails and stuff like that. It's a good approximation.
So let's use those three facts. So, since if we introduce coordinates along the edges so that the center of the edge is zero of the x axis right the center of the edges is the zero the y axis.
Then we get the interior numbers by multiplying together these two Gaussians this is going to be a good approximation.
And if you just look at the final result there, it means the degree of connectivity, you'll notice goes as e to the minus two over Sigma squared x squared plus y squared.
That means any cells, if we now number these cells by integers which is what we're doing any pair of cells on a given layer where x squared plus y squared are about about the same number, have the same degree of connectivity.
Right. They have about the same degree of temporal connectivity to the top.
In a very strict sense, a circular kind of structure emerges as low side of equal temporal connectivity to the top.
Right, and that emerges in a pretty strict sense, although you do have to stay away from the tails you don't get too close to the edges and emerges in in those conditions where the Gaussian is a good approximation to the binomial distribution.
So that's part of what we wanted to do. Alright, those are my caveats.
Here's some actual numbers right if we go up to the 1000th level, and we compare the connectivity of these two points 200 zero and 141 141 you'll see the connect abilities are almost exactly the same.
And if we square those and add them those numbers are almost exactly the same.
Right. So if we just look at low side of almost the same connectivity, they look more and more like serves.
What if we cut vertically and look over time to low side of equal of vertical cross sections well we know in Minkowski geometry.
If we take a cross section like that and we look for points of equal proper time from the origin, that'll be a hyperbola, right.
So the thing would be delta T squared minus delta x squared equals a constant. What if we cut through Pascal's pyramid.
Well, the solid line that's our hyperbola. That's what we're aiming at. And these are lines at the top are approximate are regions of approximately the same connectivity through time.
And this is using Sterling's formula for an approximation. So if you just look at that hyperbola and you look at these things above. That looks really, really close.
Let me just give you an exact calculation.
Let's suppose we know that a hyperbola is fixed, once we have the symmetry it's fixed by two data points. So I'm going to give you two data points and then, and then.
I'm going to go up to the 800 level I'm sorry doing this so quickly but this is the last thing I'm doing, go up to the 800th level. Right, and look at the central point, we can exactly calculate the degree of connectivity it's this three 3.5 times 10 to the 478.
Okay, that's at the center.
Now go up 10 levels, go up to the 810th layer, and look for the point that has the nearest degree of connectivity that turns along along what we can think of as the x axis.
That turns out to be 75 cells along off to the side. And there's the calculation you'll see it's almost exactly the same connectivity.
So we have two points. Now I'm going to fit those to a hyperbola, which, you know, the best fit is this number here that I'm giving you.
And I'm going to use that hyperbola to make a prediction for 1000 layers, right to go up another 190 layers.
So if I use the hyperbola, the prediction would be 354.60 which we need to round it to an integer. So we'll round it to 355. And now let's do the exact calculation. Again, something times 10 to the 478.
So this hyperbola is a really good approximation that's giving you equal degrees of temporal connectivity in this discrete structure.
Now in a four dimensional space time we do the same thing we just used cubes and now I'm at my conclusion. So what's the conclusion.
Even though the foundation is profoundly non relativistic in every possible way, right, within restricted bounds where these approximations like the Gaussian or good, we get something very close to a Minkowski and structure as a purely mathematical fact.
In order for that to have physical significance, we would need the physical laws to be sensitive to degrees of temporal connectivity, which is just counting the number of different paths through this structure.
And my last comment is one approached understanding quantum theory is some over paths, right, which was pushed by Feynman, which at least gives you a suggestion that looking at temporal connectivity via paths is not a physically
relevant thing to be looking at.
And now I'm done.
Well, thanks team for the talk, we have time for a question.
Anyone have a question.
Okay.
Yes, you can ask.
Thanks for for the dogs really, really nice. Yeah, actually, my question was, it's related to the last things that you mentioned about this connectivity.
I mean, what one would have thought that that you would need to relate a proper time like in the analogy proper time to the length of the path, right, like, like how many steps you need to take.
I think you need to use this connectivity which is related to the number of ways you can. That's right. So, I don't know if there's anything else you can say about it and I mean, I think it is counterintuitive.
Hey, look, I agree it's, I mean, you know, there are two points here there's a purely mathematical fact that that the connectivity does what you want it to do.
You're absolutely right. What I need is now a physics where degree of connectivity matters.
Yeah, right, where now, of course, counting is not a particularly good idea because we know that as it were proper time acts, oppositely than the way a Rumanian distance does right we know as we go out to the light cone it goes to zero.
We know it does the anti, you know, if you if you do counting then you would expect the triangle inequality and we get an anti triangle inequality.
So, you know, the counting idea never was right.
But whether connect you know how to how to bring connectivity in, you're absolutely right this is the this is the remaining piece.
My only point is that in a sum overs paths kind of approach you might imagine that points with equal degrees of connectivity have physically interesting shared characteristics, depending upon the rules of how things propagate here.
I mean the basic picture is that it is of course nothing naturally wants to go as I said it's something going straight up is going to be jiggling a lot.
Right. It's like Zitterbewegel.
And it's sort of as it goes off to the side it kind of jiggles us. I mean, so you need to think you might think in a kind of Bohmian setting where what you're doing is doing a kind of pilot wave.
And, and all of these paths are interfering with each other that equal degrees of connectivity would give you equal sorts of interference phenomena or something like that.
That's very vague, but you're right. That's exactly what what would be left.
Yeah, no no it's it's suggestive I agree.
Very nice. Thanks.
We thank team for your talk.
And now we have finished the first part of the session. We are going to have a 10 minutes break.
And we return at 1530.
Thanks all for the participations.
Well, team, are you still there.
Yeah, I'm here. Yeah, I just want to ask you a question, because it's, I know it's because have you tried on obtaining some curvature in space time like some approximation to share our relativity or something like that.
Yeah, I mean, the interesting thing about this is that is that if you if you think about what I was saying emerge when I said these circles kind of circular things emerge. Yeah.
They only emerge away from the away from the edges as you get, you know, you the sort of actual light cone structure has this square based pyramidal structure.
And as you approach those edges, the connectivity doesn't do what you want at all and that's exactly where these Gaussian this Gaussian approximation breaks down.
So the circles kind of emerge in toward the center. So this, the story here would be that say light, if you want light to really do produce something that looks like light cones.
They're somehow out along the edges there's somehow in the interior. Now if they're in the interior, then even if the bounding light cone is fixed.
You could imagine effects that would that would shift, you know, narrow or widen or distort the effective light cone staying within those bounds.
And, and that could give you similar effects to curvature.
Right. So it would, it would amount to an approach like when they approach general relativity by having a flat background and then and then and then doing deviations off the flat background.
Yeah.
I think it's probably more the way you would go than literally trying to get curvature into the geometry, you'd kind of get the curvature, you'd have this fixed geometry, which is really only defined at a kind of topological level.
And that doesn't change at all. What changes is how things propagate through it.
And then again what you'd like to do is show that that approximately gives you the same results in terms of changing light cones and narrowing them and whatever that you would get out of general relativity.
I see, I see. Thanks. Thanks. Thanks. Very interesting.
Can I ask something else related to this question.
Sure.
And what about changing the rules for combining three elements to to form these three structures who couldn't dare you introduce some sort of of of curvature or something related.
You know, you're welcome to try.
Yeah, I can see that like an infinite number of options.
Of course, that I mean one thing is they're an infinite number of ways to do this.
And I, you know, I, it took me a long time to settle between triangles and squares to tell you the truth. Right. I did that a long time ago but I had to struggle with that.
Obviously, and when it comes to adding these arrows in there are other things you could do right you could you could add in fewer you could add in more.
You know, you know, all power to you if you want to explore the possibilities. What I kind of tried to do I think is do pretty much the simplest thing that didn't immediately collapse into nonsense.
And amazingly out of that falls into my lap something I'd not even been aiming at. Right.
Yeah, which is something that looks very menkowski and I'm just kind of astounded by it now. You know, maybe it's just a coincidence, but
maybe it's a kind of pregnant thing right.
This is astonishing the result. My question is this if you are thinking about defining the points, the very bottom, at the very bottom level.
In terms of something like events and interactions in at the quantum level. Perhaps this may be the normal relativistic quantum level. I mean, very, very normal relativistic framework, but it's something to give some
content to points from the very, very bottom, perhaps it can be interesting. I don't know if you are thinking about that.
I mean what what I'm doing right now. I mean there are two things to say here one is as I say, kind of
an obvious way to bring quantum theory into this is is a kind of Bohmian picture where this is the underlying space time geometry you point particles that are traveling along continuous trajectories in it.
The quantum part comes in in the guiding equation. Right. And you need that and the dynamics of the wave function is related to this connectivity stuff which is exactly what this kind of Feynman integral path integral formalism, at least suggests.
Right. So then the, you know, the real physical stuff is just kind of point particles, moving around in a discrete space time.
Another thing you can try to do which I'm working on now is to is to put something like Maxwellian electrodynamics which turns out to be really interesting.
It turns out the natural kind of natural way to do that. And this is connected to this are on of bone stuff is for it's not even that what's really physically real or the vector and scalar potentials but what's physically real is something that lies underneath even those.
And there's this this, it's a, what I call a two field you single two field.
And it gives rise to the vector potential necessarily in cool on gauge.
And of course in cool on gauge, the vector potential changes instantaneously. Right. So again, you get resources for non locality. And this is just looking at Maxwellian electrodynamics.
You know how you quantize all that I have no idea.
Thanks.
