I'm an astrobiologist and I study life.
I'm interested in life here on Earth and I'm also interested in life out there among
the stars if we can find it.
And that's really cool, except the problem is we don't really understand what life is.
Hey everybody, you're going to love this interview with Professor Sarah Walker of the Arizona
State University.
Sarah is a friend that I met virtually and she is anything but virtual.
She's an incredible thinker in the real world and a scientific communication space and you're
going to hear an exclusive from Sarah today into the impossible exclusive that Sarah's
writing a book about her travails and travels in the world of the origins of life.
So look for that coming later on in your life and her life and she'll be back on the show.
She assures me when that is out.
Today you're going to learn a massive amount of cool, interesting stuff.
Sarah is one of my favorite, favorite thinkers of all time.
We talked about so much today and just a smidgen of the topics we're going to cover today
involve the question of what is life?
Is that even a good question?
What is time?
Is that a good question?
We even got into things such as the origin of biological systems as relating to the laws
of physics, even cosmology.
Of course, we had a touch upon intelligent design.
I asked her some tough questions about that subject as well as her theory that she's
developed along with past guest Lee Cronin, so-called assembly theory.
You learn about that.
What is that?
How can we detect the imprimatur of life perhaps here on earth, perhaps in distant solar systems,
perhaps if they come and visit us through Omuomua, which we also discussed Abilob and
the efforts to ascertain whether or not the existence of techno signatures in the form
of objects that visit us should be pursued further.
We talked about that.
Charles Darwin, his warm little pond, so much more, her expertise is unbounded.
It's really a great way to continue our mission into the Impossible Podcast.
I'm so pleased to reveal that we've been ranked number one in all of natural sciences
on iTunes and the Apple Podcast ecosystem.
Number nine in all of science.
It's just incredible.
I never thought when I started doing this just a couple of years ago that it would lead
to such great success, and you, my listeners, viewers, are all part of this success equation
I can't do without you.
So please do share the podcast with your friends, share the audio, share the video.
Please subscribe to the video as well because I put in some great B-roll production by Super
Producer Stuart Volkow, member of the PGA, not the Professional Golfers Association,
but Producers Guild, just adds in a magic pixie dust to each and every video and audio
episode.
So that's Dr. Brian Keating on YouTube.
And so today's episode is not one to be missed.
I'll talk to you at the end and give you some homework assignments.
Stay tuned and now enjoy this episode with Dr. Sarah Walker of the Arizona State University.
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
All right, everybody, you are in for a treat on today's episode of the Into the Impossible
podcast with a phenomenal thinker, a brainiac, a deep thinker, a astrobiologist, professor,
theoretical physicist.
She does it all and she does it all incredibly well.
I've been a huge fan of hers for a long time, and I'm just so happy that Professor Sarah
Walker is joining us on the podcast today.
Sarah, how are you today, all the way in Arizona?
I'm great.
How are you?
I'm doing well.
So a quick intro, Professor Sarah Walker is an astrobiologist and theoretical physicist
interested in the origin of life and how to find life on other worlds.
And she is the deputy director of the Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts and Science,
associate director of the ASU Santa Fe Institute Center for Biosocial Complex Systems and assistant
professor in the School of Earth and Space Exploration.
And that is CC, although I see some conflicting things that you're associate professor, someplace
I see your assistant professor.
It doesn't really matter once you get tenure, and if you don't have tenure, you will get
it and we would, you know, snatch you up in a second if we had a chance here in San Diego.
She does a lot of outreach, especially as I met her at Clubhouse where I've met a lot
of people in virtual space, but not in real space.
And she's prolific, um, uh, engager of the public with scientific concepts, never dumbing
things down, having multiple appearances at the World Science Festival through the worm
hall, NPR Science Friday, she does it all.
And Sarah, I'm so glad to have you here.
Great to be here.
I'm looking forward to it.
Yeah.
So we have a lot of, um, interesting feedback from my audience and we'll get to those later.
I always take the host prerogative when my guests are prolific authors and I ask them,
you know, explain the title and origin and judgment of your cover.
So I had that with Paul Davies and the interview we put out recently, judging books by their
covers.
You don't have a book yet, although I'm sure there'll be many publishers dying, uh, to
get your scrivenings and into the public's hand in a book.
And if not, let me be your agent.
I will only charge 55%, um, but I want to judge your paper, the paper that caught my
attention, uh, so long ago now for almost four years ago, origins of life, a problem
for physics.
I had the question, Sarah, what was the, uh, what is the relevance of the origin of life
to physics?
I mean, I can see for biophysics, but why is it a problem for physics as a whole?
Yeah.
So well, I think people confuse physics with the problems that studied in the past rather
than a way of thinking about the world.
So the, the issue I see there is that because we've come to kind of a deep fundamental understanding
about parts of reality, those are confused with physics as a discipline rather than thinking
about this idea that physics is really predicated on trying to look for deeper abstract principles
that are really explanatory and have a large breadth of explanation.
And so with the origins of life, I think that's really critically important because I find
it hard to believe that life doesn't have some deep fundamental explanation.
Um, and in particular in the field of astrobiology, when we're talking about whether there's
other life out there in the universe, we really need universal principles.
And therefore when you cast it in that kind of framing, it becomes a problem for the mindset
of a physicist as far as how do I abstract this problem to its essence and then how do
I develop a mathematical understanding that allows me to predict features of examples of
the system that I've never encountered.
Um, and I think that's actually really the program for astrobiology is we don't want
to just, you know, have aliens hit us in the head or something, we want to actually go
out in the universe and look for them and predict where we should find them.
And the, some of the research I've seen you involved in particular in the paper is kind
of straddling the interface between information and complexity, as well as, uh, life proper,
you know, life, quality, life.
And I wonder, you know, I don't want to have this, I don't want to ask you this question,
even though people like Lee Cronin told me to ask you this question.
Um, I kind of get sick of, uh, of, of me asking it, although I'd love to hear your response
if you like, but it's the famous question posed, but not answered by Schrodinger.
What is life?
And I just find it, um, a little bit, you know, it's like Wonder Bread or something
like that.
Uh, you know, it's, it's, yes, it's technically a question, but is it a good question?
Maybe we can ask that instead of you defining for the nth time as you've done so skillfully.
Um, is it, is it a proper question or is it sort of like these why questions, you know,
why is their life, you know, is it, is it a different question than what is life?
So what do you make of it?
Well, so first off, I'm not, I'm a physicist that's not afraid of asking why questions,
which is maybe why I ask a traditionally non, or a non-traditional question in physics.
Um, is that I don't think that we should be scared of those questions because I think
by the practice of asking a why question, you ask things differently than if you didn't
consider the why, which means your what questions are better informed, um, because they have
some deeper principles underlying them.
The what is life question I think is ill posed because it makes some assumptions about, um,
as we understand it, being a natural kind or being actually a category in nature.
And usually when, at least if you look at the history of physics, it's not like we were
asking what is gravity before we came up with the idea of gravity, we were asking other
questions like why do the planets have regular motion in the night sky or why does this apple
fall from the tree the way it does or why does this, you know, ball roll down this inclined
plane.
Um, and then we came up with this kind of unifying explanation that we call the laws
of motion and the laws of gravitation.
And I think when we're approaching the life question, there's a lot of assumptions that
because we are life, uh, we know what life is.
Um, and therefore we can just go in and define it and what is life actually makes sense as
a question.
But I think as you dig down deeper into that question, it starts to make less sense to
pose it that way.
So the way that I like to think about the question is what are the laws of physics that
would have features associated to them that explain the phenomena that we call life?
And that's a little bit of a mouthful, but I think what the simple way of saying it is
there's something underneath the phenomena we call life that's probably a pretty deep
explanation.
Um, and we should really be trying to derive the properties of life, not define them.
Right.
And I think maybe we could, we couldn't even start there by, um, you know, recapitulating
some of the notions of, of emergence, which, which you've spoken about before, but I think
my audience would, would get a kick out of hearing it from you.
I always say, you know, life is kind of like the, uh, Supreme Court's, you know, 1950 something
definition of, of pornography.
It's like, we know, we see it and we, but maybe we know it when we don't, or we know
what it is when we don't see it, you know, more likely, but, but I wonder the confluence
of information and life as an emergent phenomena and the concomitant, you know, question of
how does consciousness emerge?
A lot of people may be conflate, maybe erroneously, I don't know, I'm not an expert like you
are, but consciousness as being a prerequisite to understand life.
In other words, can you have life without consciousness?
Certainly there wasn't maybe conscious life, uh, before, you know, human beings maybe or
something like human beings.
Um, and yet there was life.
So can you talk about this emergence and as Morrison said, you know, more is different.
And so, uh, first of all, what is emergence and why is it, why is it relevant potentially
to the origin of life?
Yeah.
So, um, emergence is this idea that you can get new properties at new scales of organization.
So like, if you think about, you know, reality being separated out in scales, which is really
not just that we do that because we have to build models of things, um, you know, there's
the atomic scale and then atoms come together to make molecules.
And then maybe when you're talking about living things, you get cells and cells come together
to make multicellular organisms or people come together to make societies.
And when we're looking at each of those different spatial scales, uh, we see, um, fundamentally
new rules emerging.
And so this is one of the reasons that Anderson said more is different.
It's not the same at every scale.
We actually see new properties.
And one of the things that's probably the most mysterious about emergence is it seems
to be the case that you can describe these scales independently of having to refer back
down to the lower level scales.
So a lot of, so, for example, we can talk about social dynamics without having to appeal
to say QCD or something, right?
So we don't need to have those theories of like how the very basic component parts work
to understand something at a high level like that.
And so, uh, in sort of our traditional concepts of science, that seems kind of deeply mysterious
because people think, or well, there seems to be some conflict, um, as far as, well,
are these genuinely new properties?
Um, or is it the case that if we really had a giant supercomputer and we could run, say
the, um, interactions of all the elementary particles in a social system, we'd actually
really recover those high level dynamics.
Um, and of course this gets into more issues of, um, like, let's say maybe, um, something
like metabolism, you know, like I'm eating, is there a particle description of what it
is for me to be eating?
Um, but then there's also the question, is there a particle description of what it is
for me to feel hungry?
Um, because feeling hungry seems much more subjective and intrinsic to the scale organization
that I operate on.
So there's some questions in biology that seem much more apparent, that some kind of
emergent, um, description is actually necessary.
You can't really reduce it to the particle description.
And it's interesting because in this paper, you talk about, you know, kind of the emergence
of life, but the first example that you give and, you know, and the history of life's,
uh, of life's emergent properties of life is a colony, are these stromatolites, which,
um, you know, seem to be these mysterious things in Australia, um, that, uh, or collectives.
It's not like we found some isolated, you know, protozoa somewhere by itself, at least
as the earliest form of life, if I'm not mistaken.
And so it seems, yeah, again, even kind of cut it, you know, breaking the egg even more
than chicken or the egg.
Now it's like, which comes first, the collective or the, you know, individual in order to have
a definition of life and, you know,
Yeah, well, I think, I think again, that's not the right framing of the question because
the issue is that you're looking at it as two scales, but really the phenomena itself is a
multi-scale phenomena.
So people think, you know, life emerged at like a cell scale or something and cells,
you know, reproduced and then radiated out across the planet.
But really, um, you know, there's other theories of the origin of life that it was,
you know, like biochemistry emerged from geochemical cycles.
And then you start thinking about it more in terms of ecosystem scale or planetary scale.
And so I think this idea, this very, it's a very reductionist idea that we think life is
about individuals.
And it's not actually about individuals at all.
It's about information propagating along lineages.
So a cell, even if you think about a cell as a structure as an individual,
a cell has to constantly rebuild itself.
And it's using the information imprinted in the matter that it is to reconstruct itself.
And then if you think about that extended over time, the structure that you call life is actually
the structure that's extended out over time, basically the pattern that keeps reproducing
itself in the material substrate.
So a lot of the discussions I have with colleagues, and in particular this idea comes from Michael
Lachman at Santa Fe Institute, is really to think about the fundamental unit of life as a lineage
of information.
And we're all just these kind of bundles of intersecting information if you think about
evolution.
And I think this is really related to the problems associated to emergent.
So just to, because I think people have removed time from consideration in the way we talk about
both physics, because time is supposed to be an emergent property, right?
Time doesn't exist at the fundamental scale.
It has to emerge based on some properties of the second law or, you know, there's all these
arrows of time we talked about, like the cosmological arrow of time, the second law,
the biological arrow of time-wise biology increasing.
And they all tend to point in the same direction.
And that's some big mystery in current physics, because there's no fundamental concept of time.
But in biology, if you put time as being more primary, I think it actually takes care of
some of the issues of emergence.
Because when you're talking about an object that has emergent properties, what you're really saying
is that object has more time in it, where time is actually a physical attribute of the object.
And this is something that we're trying to do in assembly theory, because you think about,
like, a molecule as being all the ways of assembling a molecule, which is basically
looking at the structure across time.
And so then you can stack, you know, that whole hierarchy I did of, you know, going from atoms
to molecules to cells to multicellular things to societies as actually being about how much
time exists in an object.
And that brings in sort of the idea that evolution, sorry, my leg went out,
actually is sort of fundamental to the way that we talk about what life is,
in the sense that time actually has to be a part of the way you construct theories,
that you actually think things exist across time, they're not just an individual instance
that exists at that moment you're observing them.
Yeah, one other question I have about assembly theory is that it could imply if there's some,
you know, end of the historical deviations from a previous state,
you know, let's say we get to the ultimate evolution of society, you know, we become
university professors and, you know, that's the pinnacle of evolution.
Yeah, you know what the proof is, by the way, that we have the best job in the world,
Sarah, you know what the proof of that is?
What?
What did the man who achieved the highest heights literally in history, namely Neil Armstrong,
walking on the moon, what did he do after he retired from walking on the moon?
He became a professor.
So let's stipulate that's the highest form of evolution.
If you then reach kind of a stasis, you know, I can agree that there's more complexity
in Darwin's A Warm Little Pond, which we'll get to,
then there is in just water molecules by themselves.
So assembly theory would say there's more information, more stored memories, etc.
But, you know, eventually that comes to some stasis, but time doesn't cease.
So how can you reconcile those two facts?
In other words, without knowing what comes next after societies,
you know, then our collectives, that time can then continue to progress in a way that
the biological, psychological, cosmological, all the different hours of time would agree
that, yes, time is progressing if you reach some maximum stasis.
So I think part of the, this is a really interesting question.
So one of the things I've been doing a lot of thought experiments on is what does a clock
look like in assembly theory, but I don't have like, and me and I have been debating about that,
but I think one of the key points is if you think that there's an ordering of events,
like I can't spontaneously fluctuate out of the vacuum, which current theories of physics
might say could happen, and I think is actually a logical impossibility.
So sometimes, so where it gets interesting talking about life is where we have had a
tendency in the past to take theories of physics and draw them to like their logical end state,
and then accept that that's actually a real possibility in our universe,
even though it's ludicrous. And then you come at it looking at from the perspective of life,
and you really see why it's ludicrous. So there's like this idea of Boltzmann brains,
or anything is possible to spontaneously fluctuate into existence.
And part of the sort of argument that we would make in assembly theory is no,
that's not possible because you actually need the specific sequence events to make that object.
There had to be causal structure in place, things that you might call constructors,
or however, whatever language you want to use, information in the system to actually
assemble that specific object. So you can't just get a Sarah for free, you have to go through
the four billion years of evolution to get to an object like me. So even if I was static,
and I never changed in the future, you would still have that four billion year time point.
But the part of the point is also, I have to constantly reassemble myself to exist.
So I'm not a static object. I'm a thing that is constantly reconstructing myself,
you're constantly reconstructing yourself right now. So even if you're just sitting there,
and you're not doing anything, your body is metabolizing.
I'm like Madonna. I'm always reinventing myself.
That's right. Material girl.
I'm also a material girl, but Roger Penrose's perspective that he doesn't know what the material
is, and I think that's probably pretty accurate. So I think when you think about it from that
perspective, I don't think that the traditional notion that things can be static in time actually
even make sense. And so part of the way we're playing with ideas is this causal structure,
if you want to call it ordering in time, is the fundamental thing, and that universe is constantly
assembling itself into the next quote unquote state. Although I don't really, I think states are
kind of a weird thing that we talk about in physics for various reasons, but the next thing that exists.
So the universe is constantly moving forward in time, but it exists in the current moment.
So it's that assembled moment. So there's not really, for things to persist,
why does something exist across time actually becomes an active process, not a static one.
So I have a question from an audience member named Lee Cronin and says,
is Lee right about time? Now, I don't want to make this about Lee. Lee gets enough attention.
He's very shy, so it's hard for us.
Yes, we have a question about Lee. He's very shy, yes.
But I'm curious because we are talking about time. When we had a conversation a week or two ago,
he and I on Kurt Jaimungals channel, Theory of Everything, which folks should check out.
He basically says that time doesn't exist and because only chemists have a true proper understanding
of entropy and time is fundamentally a chemical process or entropic process, which relates to
the second law. Now, given that there, and I said there's so many different definitions of entropy
and my friend and maybe you know, Nicole Younger-Halpern as well, his great book coming out,
she'll be at West next month on the podcast for Quantum Steampark. She talks about the advice
that Van Neumann was given, I think, to Sillard or somebody said, when you don't know how to
define something, just call it entropy because nobody knows what entropy is. So I like the fact
that so far we haven't really preferred to entropy or the second law, but I think it is
appropriate to get into that. And maybe, you know, my ratings really depend on drama and battles.
So, Lee, you and I have to speak on behalf of physics, okay? So these chemists are doing too much.
I call them chemists by the way. But is it a fundamental physical concept? You know,
Nicole talks about the elemental fundamental clock, and that you could have a two-state system
that's a clock, and we use, you know, atomic clocks that are, you know, not strictly two-state
systems, but could such a model in your theory have a truly set to be complex, you know,
if you make the simplest instantiation of an object, namely a two-state quantum clock,
and that exhibits and it can do certain things and has certain properties associated with it.
In what sense could we say that that will continue to exhibit, you know, the features of
assembly theory that would lead one in your rubric to account that it has sufficient complexity to be
warranted amongst the pantheon of different discussions of entropy, etc.?
Yeah, so this is very much a work in progress. I don't actually know exactly what you're asking,
because I feel like there were like 10 questions in your question.
There were probably more than that. I guess imagine just a simple two-state clock, you know,
is that sufficient to account for time? And people say that time is emerging,
and, you know, but we all know it again, like pornography, we all know, only say it.
So, you know, a simple clock, how does that fit in in the, just in assembly?
Right, so I think this is one of the places that maybe Lee and I disagree, but I'm not entirely
sure. It's good, yeah, because it is like something that we're trying to develop, right, so you don't,
and part of the reason that you want to work with multiple people on developing a theory is where
you find congruence in your ideas, or when you convince another person, then you start to see
that there's some really interesting stuff going on. So I think one of the, so the one thing I
think that we do agree on is that time is moving forward, whatever that is, and that there's,
and that it's a generative mechanism for the universe. So time is actually the thing that
generates the universe. And then I guess when I think about time in an object, I don't think about
that linearly though, right? So when we think about a molecule existing as a, you know, a certain
amount of time or causation exists in the molecule, maybe causation is the better word than time,
you can think about all the ways of assembling the molecule, which means that
that molecule actually has a very complex structure in time. It's not one way that time,
that causation could have a sequence of events to produce that molecule. It's all the ways.
And so a simple example that I like to do as a thought experiment is just to think of a stack
of Legos. So imagine, you know, I was holding a stack of 10 Legos and maybe like five were yellow
and five were blue, and they were arranged in a particular pattern. In order to understand the
assembly structure of that stack of Legos, I actually have to take the Legos apart into the
five blue and five yellow and then build up the pathways. So the argument I would make is
all of those ways of assembling that object are features of that object. But to resolve those
features, you actually have to observe them across time because they're not features that exist in
any one instant of time. And so, and then if you want to see them in a linear sequence of time,
you have to do that over and over again, but they're all features of what could have happened
if you wanted to assemble that. So time doesn't necessarily have a single strand to it. It's
this very complicated causal structure embedded in an object, but the universe as a whole is
constantly chugging forward in time. So a clock is kind of an interesting object because you want
to ask, well, how much complex time is in a clock? Or is the clock actually tracking the
motion of the universe forward in time? And I think those are two different ways of asking
questions about the nature of time in a clock. Very good. So I guess we'd say maybe Lee is not
quite right, or maybe it's not quite complete. So that'll stimulate him. It depends on what it's
on, right? So some text is clearly wrong. So I wonder if we can, some of the classics,
and walk me through the current thinking of it. As a cosmologist, I'm not nearly as in touch with
the underlying kind of state of play of things, although it's quite fascinating to me. And yet,
I feel like there hasn't been much progress in some of the actual origin of life. In certain
sects there have been extremophiles and so forth, but one of my proofs that there's been
some stagnation in things like string theory is that string theory is like the best theory
ever invented to describe string theory. It has a lot of promise to describe string theory,
but can it describe other things? And I think that's what gives something predictive about
value. Now, if you go back to Darwin's paper, I think it was to Huxley. It might have been a
letter to Huxley or something. He said, like, if life could begin in some warm little pond with
mineral salts and so forth and this thing and that thing and proteins and whatever, then it
could evolve. In other words, that life could sort of kick off in this warm little pond, which
in my simple-minded way of looking at it is not too dissimilar from an experiment done by
the namesake of our chemistry department, Harold Urie, and his student Stanley Miller here at
UC San Diego. They did it in Chicago, but they were later professors here. And that was this
Miller Urie experiment. And in my mind, we haven't made much progress since those initial
kinds of experiments, which were at least intellectually the error of the warm little
pond thought experiment of Darwin. So can you take us to where do things stand in the kind of
replication of life? Not the classification. We moved away from that, but the origin of life,
for ab initio, and then perhaps since you said nothing's off limits, we could talk about some
of the criticisms, even from the intelligent design community, if you're willing to go there.
I think they have some legitimate arguments, but I don't agree with the
answer they provide to the argument. So what about with Miller Urie-type experiments?
Yeah, so actually, so I made a crack that Lee is sometimes wrong, but we all are. But I think the
thing that he's really good about is pushing the boundaries. And I think something he's really
right about is how much intelligent design goes into current
original life experiments or historically. And what what he means by that is when you're designing
experiment, you purify the reagents, put them in a test tube, you know, exactly what's in there,
you you crank a knob for like if you want to, you know, put the change the pH or you do,
you know, add a mineral, but it's all very controlled and very methodical. And so basically,
the way I think about it is you're putting agency into the system, you're constraining all the
boundary conditions. So when you get a complex molecule out, like say you, you do produce
a molecule that is implicated in life. Is it because that actually is a spontaneous
process? Or is it because you as an agent that already evolved in the universe controlled the
boundary conditions so tightly that you basically predispose the system to generating that complex
structure? Not that we actually make complex things pre-radically, because we make really
simple biomolecules. But this is this is sort of one of the problems. So if you buy if you buy
sort of the set of arguments that life is more about the lineage, and we're all just kind of these
packets of information, or these features of assembly space that are propagating and generating
more structure, then anything you do is basically becoming part of that living structure, because
you're a cause for those kind of things. And so the real challenge of original life experiments
is to remove our biological lineage and all the agency that we've accumulated over four
billion years from the design of experiments. And so this is something that is one of the reasons
that I really wanted to start working with Lee when we first started talking is because
he was the only person that I felt recognized this issue, and the only person that was really
trying to design original life experiments that could do this. And one of the ways he's doing that
is through this automation, this digitization of chemistry to basically build experiments that
are agnostic, they're not designers like we are. And they don't have any predisposition to what the
chemistry of life needs to look like. And you basically want to start from a messy soup of
things and try to evolve it under all kinds of different simulated planetary conditions. I think
of it if we could scale this up, it would be like a planet simulator. And we and I are working on
ideas about how would you actually generate an experiment at scale, like you would do in particle
physics. So my favorite sort of experiment to compare this to is Super Kamiakande, which is
one of my favorite experiments in Japan looking for proton decay. So proton decay has been predicted
by theories never observed in our universe. And every time we don't observe that event,
we can bound the probability. The problem with the origin of life is it's a chemical search
problem. Chemical space is huge. It's exponentially huge. It's beyond exponentially huge. The
combinatorial possibilities of molecules you can get, even for small number of elements,
is just it's larger than you can possibly fathom. So the question is how would you build
experiment large enough to simulate planetary chemistry and explore enough of the volume of
the space that you would expect a high likelihood for the origin of life to pop out. And that's
the kind of way we need to think not as designers of the origin of life, but asking how is this
a process that happens in the universe and how can we bound the likelihood of it? The longer we
don't observe it, the lower probability it is, just like proton decay. And we need a theory to
search it, which is what we're trying to do with assembly theories. So if you put those kind of
experiments together with something like assembly theory, then you have this kind of way of doing
original life science like the way that we explore the early universe in cosmology or the way we
think about particle physics. So one of the things that the characteristic of Super K is, A, it uses
super pure reagents, a huge volume. Sometimes they explode the photo multipliers, and then grad
students have to go on a canoe. We'll put a background footage of Super Kamiakanda here.
But I wonder, when you think about this challenge, it's kind of going the opposite way of Miller
Urie. They literally did it with stuff you got at the chemistry stock room in Urie Hall here at UC
San Diego. You could do it. And of course, now we know that it wasn't like fraudulent data, but
it was far off from what we now know about the origins. And yet, it's still, if you look at many,
many kind of proposals, at least in secular books, et cetera, and even popularizations,
it's always pointed to as, oh, you got Miller Urie and some version of it. Well, it didn't
exactly do it, but we're confident some of it. But no, it's not like we're saying, oh, well,
Super Kamiakanda hasn't seen it, and therefore, but we'll have some version of Super K. No,
all we can do is run it longer, as you say, with a larger fiducial volume, and then you make up for
time by having more opportunities for decay and then the properties of half-life then work in
your favor. But this is kind of going the opposite way of Miller Urie, which is to go, instead of
looking at one proton decay, you're looking now, how big an experiment would you need? And would it
be imposing this purity upon it, or would you even be using physical chemicals at all, or would it
be purely simulated? No, it has to be physical, right? Because we don't know, we don't understand
what physics governs original life. It's not like you can't simulate life in a computer because you
don't understand the causal structure of what life is. If we had the right physics, we could
simulate life in a computer. We can simulate some projections of features of life, like
evolutionary processes and things in a computer. But I think the original life, we can't simulate
because we don't know the principles. But just on the point about Miller Urie and comparing to the
way the particle physics community works, say, and the way the original life community works,
when you look at original life experiments globally, it's always the case that it's like a single lab,
you know, has their favorite molecule that's implicated in life, and they want to understand
if they can synthesize that under quote-unquote prebiotic conditions, where prebiotic conditions
is, again, some kind of pure reagents, not necessarily a mix of soup that would be present on
the early earth, but some purified chemical compounds that they mixed together in precise ratios.
And then they subject it to whatever kinds of conditions that they want to study, the
particular synthesis pathway. And of course, that's an okay mentality for doing science
if you're an organic chemist and you've been trained to synthesize a purified reagent.
But a molecule is not life, and producing a single molecule associated with life under
those kind of conditions is not solving the original life. And then you'll get one, you know,
lab, you know, maybe making amino acids over here under some kind of condition that might be
presumably prebiotic, and another lab over here making a nucleobase, and another lab over here
talking about the energy pumps necessary in early membranes. And there is this sort of rampant
assumption in the field that some people will really precisely articulate. So, Nick Lane is
one of these people that if we know enough of those steps, we'll be able to just string them
together, and then we'll be able to understand the mechanisms of the origin of life. But I think
what that view is missing is that each step is precisely tailored to the particular outcome that
you want for that step, which means that we are putting so much agency into those experiments.
I like to equate it a little bit to like verifying a number as prime. If you want to find the next
prime, that's a really hard search algorithm because you don't know what you're looking for.
But if you already know it's prime, it's pretty easy to develop algorithms to verify its prime.
And so what prebiotic chemists are doing right now is verifying primes by looking for known
molecules and doing it under very controlled conditions. And they happen to be small primes
because they're not very complicated or hard to get to. And what we really want to do is try to
find what's the largest prime and how can we predict that out of priority? It's a much harder
problem for origins of life than as far as it's not even the same class of search problem that
we're doing right now as it should be. Right. And then getting back to this kind of controversy,
which Lee said in his interview with me, although I've heard him take multiple sides of it. It's
like Stephen Hawking. Penrose says, you know, you always want to make a bet with Stephen Hawking
because no matter what side you take, he'll capitulate and you'll always be right because he
always changes mind. Now, I've heard Lee debate intelligent designers and have some very harsh
upgrading and then gentle, gentlemanly Scottish way that he has. But I've also heard him say that
literally chemistry has an intelligent design problem or biochemistry has an intelligent design
problem. You mentioned that you're not afraid. What do you say to somebody by past guest,
Stephen C. Meyer, or perhaps future guest, I've spoken to James Tour, who stipulate that, yeah,
there are these problems of purity of very carefully controlled initial conditions, as you
know from physics training. This is an incredibly important and vital aspect of characterizing
any physical system, let alone a biological system. So is this destined to always have this
ambiguity which drives human beings crazy, not being black or white? But you know, is there a
point, if you had a steel man or steel woman, the points of the ID, the intelligent designers,
the Stephen C. Meyers, what would you say? And then we can look at, you know, countering it,
for example. What are the biggest criticisms in this field of origin of life?
I think, well, I mean, I think there's a lot of them, but I guess the main one is just because
we don't have a mechanistic understanding doesn't mean that we need to appeal to something outside
of the universe. And I'm agnostic on sort of all issues. And I think what I always try to do is
maintain an open mind that any possible explanation is possible. But I see so many roots to actually
having an understanding of the origins of life being something that we can understand from
physical principles within the universe. I think the problem is that we're not asking the questions
the right way. And even the way we ask the questions is actually loaded the dye for intelligent
design to be the explanation because the way we talk about the origins of life is wrong.
And I think we have too many preconceptions about the problem and the nature of what we are
and the assumptions that we understand what we are that make it really hard to work in this area.
And this is one of the reasons that, I mean, I started in when I was a PhD student as a cosmologist,
but one of the reasons I really wanted to work on origins of life is because the conceptual
foundations were so poorly defined. And on some level, I don't even care if the way that I'm
trying to pose the question is right. But what I do with the problem, and what I do with every
problem that I try to look at is look at how people are talking about it, and then just try to turn
it slightly and be like, there's another logically consistent narrative with all the evidence we
have over here that nobody's actually looked at yet. So why don't we explore that one and try
to see where the possibility space is for that one. And then that opens up subsequent pathways.
And I just think that people haven't really been poking at the original life things from the right
angles yet. And we've seen that through the history of human thought that we've had major
breakthroughs as soon as somebody came up with some fresh idea to something. So I think any time
that you want to prematurely say a problem is unsolvable is really limiting the potential of
what humans can do in the future. Because I also, this is sort of a bias of how I think about
constructing theories. And maybe it's a very David Deutchian kind of view, but I really think that
explanations are pretty fundamental. I mean, they're fundamental to the physics of what life is.
My favorite kind of physics is the physics of theoretical physicists.
Talk about going back to like the pinnacle of like, you know, that's like a really egotistical way
to study life. But of course, it's the example of life I'm most intimately familiar with. And also
like cognitively, when I do thought experiments about life, it's the one that I have the most
playroom with. But it's also like a carefully constructed set of experiments because
mathematical physics has done so well, this idea of taking abstractions, mathematical objects,
and using them to describe reality, and then doing incredible things with those descriptions of
reality, like launching satellites into space based on the laws of gravitation or building
experiments like supercondiacondae to look for the decayed proton, or discovering gravitational
waves, which have been passing through the earth as long as life has been on this planet. But we've
never made contact with that phenomenon in the universe before. We actually knew to go look for
it. So I think the idea that we won't have a theory that explains us is, to me, incredibly
limiting about the future potential of our planet and where we're going. Because if we do understand
what we are, then we have control over that phenomenon in the same way that we have an
understanding of gravity and can control motion and understand how to launch rockets and things.
Imagine what it would be like if we understood what life was.
Right. I would say two things. One, these natures under no obligation to make things understandable
to you on the time scale of a PhD thesis, or a 10-year case. But also, I say to my,
I'm a practicing Jew. I attend temples, and I do practice in that sense, and I do read the Torah
every day. But on the other hand, I tell my religiously, much more predisposed colleagues
and friends, if you really believe in God, you should approach it through a scientific lens,
because it might be the only clue. It might be that Yang-Mills theory or Maxwell's equations
or whatever are the only hints that we can ever hope to get of God talking in our language.
But moreover, if you tell your children that life started purely because of a miracle,
then I think it limits their ability to at least search for going back even further to
primary, the primary source material, if you will. You just say everything is done by God,
and every single thing is controlled by some agent that you have no access to, because God
is not revealing himself to us in our modern age. So I think that's incredibly stunting of my
religious friends and the intelligent designers beyond other challenges that I've posed to them.
But I think you had a... Oh, go ahead. No, you just wanted to pick something really interesting
your point, because one of the things that I've always found at conflict that I don't understand
how to resolve is that intelligent design seems to me to be a principle that limits creativity
in the universe. Like, it means that creativity is not a physical thing. And the way I approach the
problem, even when you said, you know, it's not necessarily the case that we should be able to
learn the laws of nature on a university education timescale, right? But we can. So I use that as
observational evidence for the kind of physics I want to understand. And so then you have to
construct the problem. But why is it we can comprehend reality? And what is that as a physical
process? And I think intelligent design misses the ability to even ask that question, because they
assume all of that just came for free. And so it's trying to explain us, but ultimately it really
doesn't explain us. It sweeps any explanation for what we are as special in the universe or different
in the universe under the rug. And I think the one thing that I think is really deeply intriguing
is as far as we know, there aren't any other physical systems like our modern technosphere
and our participation in it as thinking agents that are conscious, right? And in an ability to
explain that, it has got to be pretty profound and really interesting, as far as how we understand
ourselves and our relationships with the cosmos, but also what else might be out there. And so
so I think your point about limiting, potentially limiting imagination is really
the part that I would want to push back on. I'm open to alternative explanations.
Yeah, right. I see you as a very, you know, non dogmatic, very, you know, ecumenical thinker
in that you're you're not going to have an open mind so open as Carl Sagan said, your brains
fall out. But on the other hand, you're willing to strengthen your position by taking an opposing
perspective, which I find, you know, quite quite the hallmark of the best scientists on earth.
I think you had a beautiful statement. I forget where it was originally. But you said you talked
about what's called the Luca, the last universal common ancestor. And you said that it is akin to
my field, the last scattering surface of the cosmic microwave. I thought that was one of the
coolest analogies I've ever heard. Explain to people, what is Luca? Who is Luca? And why is it
so important to study the oldest, most primitive things as we do with CMB photons? But why is it
so important in the field that you've chosen to dedicate so much of your intellectual effort to?
Yeah. So, so I think the actual equation between Luca and the CMB came from Nigel
Goldenthal, and I picked it up from him. Oh, I think he's my new colleague here.
Yeah. Okay. Well, that's cool. Yeah. So, you know, condensed matter physicists working on
origins of life would come up with those kind of analogies. But but I love that. I think it's
another hallmark for you young people. I have to say sorry to interrupt you,
Sarah. Yeah. So interesting. But what Sarah just did is the hallmark of a true scientist.
She gave proper attribution. And it's actually in Judaism is considered a sin. It's called stealing
thought. Like when I hear somebody say, oh, I'm going to steal that joke. That's actually like
a pretty big sin. Because people are going to attribute to you the credit that's owed to other
people in academia. We don't get away with that in our papers, but you could have easily gotten
away with that with me. I wouldn't have known. But it's a sign of an expert scientist to do what
Sarah did. So for my young audience, I have a huge, very rabid young audience. That's a lot
of edu addresses in my mailing list, which you should all subscribe to. But I just want to point
that out. Keep going, everybody. Keep going. Yeah, to go ahead. So what is this analogy?
I love it. So Luca, what is it? Luca is an abbreviation of last universal common ancestor.
So the first sort of problem with that name is it's singular and most and really we should be
thinking about it as a population of cells on early earth. And I think one of the people that
spoke about this most eloquently was Carl Woes, who discovered, co-discovered the third domain
of life with George Fox. But he made a lot of arguments about collective evolution in early life
and this idea. So Luca comes from tracing phylogenetic trees. So if you look at all life on earth,
it has shared biochemical component parts. And if we trace those histories back in time,
it kind of converges in what we call the last universal common ancestor. And I guess my point
of bringing up Carl Woes' ideas is a lot of people think that convergence means we're talking about
a single cell that lived on early earth and everything radiated out of it. But what he really
pushed was this idea that Luca might have been itself a collective phenomena. And this is actually
really how I think about it. I don't think that when some collective feature, just as if we like
kind of zoomed out and looked at life today, there would be common biochemical component parts
in every organism on earth today. And that's a phenomena that exists across all known life.
So the reason for equating it to the CMB is that because we're using genomic information
to reconstruct the last universal common ancestor, it's kind of like the last surface of information
that we can look at. And so going past it requires different tools in the sense that
the genomic tools are not adequate. It's like the photons give us information from the CMB,
but not earlier because they were scattering too much. And so we have this kind of boundary
if we want to do these phylogenetic reconstructions. So one of the things I'm really interested in
scientifically, and this is something that I spent a lot of time working on with my students
in postdocs, is trying to not look at genomic reconstructions of life, but look at patterns
in biochemistry, like statistical patterns. So just like in statistical mechanics developed in the
1800s, we realized we could predict more features of engines and things by talking about temperature
and pressure and work and these kind of macro scale variables that coarse grain, you know,
the exact position and momentum of every particle in a gas. So far in biochemistry,
we've been talking about the exact component parts. Luca had to have DNA. Luca had to have,
well, we don't know if I have DNA, but like how to have ribosomes, how to have certain
metabolism, and people are trying to reconstruct the specific component parts.
What we're trying to do is say Luca was a statistical pattern in print on early biochemistry,
and let's reconstruct what that pattern was and try to predict chemistries and environments
associated to that pattern. And we do that by using scaling laws and all kinds of other things,
but we don't have to get into technical details. But then the idea is to try to understand
when life became universal in the sense that there's these shared biochemical component parts,
how do we understand the patterns in those chemistries that we can actually extrapolate
further back than Luca just based on those patterns, which don't require genomic information.
Excellent. So now moving out from our vantage point on earth, I do want to talk to you about
more controversial topics like aliens, extraterrestrial intelligence, UFOs. But before we
get there, I understand that one of your, I think it was your PhD thesis, as a matter of fact,
involved what's called homochirality and the existence, and I'm going to probably get this
wrong. Here's how I remember it, Sarah, and I'm looking for you to the world's expert perhaps on
this, but I always remember that DNA is right-handed, is a right-handed helix?
I don't know actually.
Well, because it has sugars that are dextrose, right? The sugars are right-handed. I know that.
So like I was working at the level of like small molecule symmetry, right? The sugars are right-handed,
and for amino acids, it's left-handed. You know why I get confused on DNA? It was wrong in some
textbook, and I never remember which orientation was right because it was like, it wasn't that one,
but now I have in my mind, anytime I hear which one it is, it wasn't that one.
I'm going to teach you a mnemonic to remember it. So DNA is right-handed because life finds a
way to be right. Oh, I see. Okay, that's the way I remember it. But neutrinos are left-handed,
ordinary neutrinos. So that's how I, so if somebody asks me, is neutrino right-handed,
I think DNA is the opposite of a neutrino, so therefore if DNA is right-handed because life
finds the right way, then neutrinos, okay. Anyway, we'll probably have to edit this out. This is so
boring, but anyway, but imagine you're looking out into space, and somebody tells you that they
just returned, and they got some ancient stromatolites from planets that orbits around
Proxima Centauri B or whatever, right? You test it, and it has equal amounts. It's hetero
chiral, I guess. Do you say this guy's a fraud? This is nonsense. In other words, what is essential
about the chirality to the nature of life, if anything? Yeah, so there are some arguments that
only homo chiral, so one chirality biopolymer, so like when you take those right-handed sugar
genes that link them together, or amino acids, only those would be functional, but it's actually
really hard to test that experimentally because synthesizing, you know, populations of hetero
chiral polymers is hard because all of our enzymes for synthesizing polymers were derived from biology,
which has a particular orientation to it as far as, so it's easy to make like a left-handed
protein, you know, left-handed amino acids. You could maybe make a right-handed one because
you could imagine reversing everything, but doing something in between is actually quite hard.
So there's kind of this implicit assumption that functionality in life requires homo chirality.
I'm actually really interested in a kind of different feature of chirality more recently,
so when I was a PhD student, I was working on symmetry breaking, so physicists love symmetry
breaking problems, right? So if you have two things, they're left-handed or right-handed,
and you only deserve the left-handed one, and otherwise equivalent, that's, you know,
a symmetry breaking problem, and it turns out you can make that problem kind of equivalent to like
an icing phase transition, like when you have an up and down spin, and so I was working on models
of how you get that symmetry breaking prebiotically, but the thing that I've gotten more interested
in recently is actually thinking about chirality as a system-level property, so if you think of
like a biochemical network, like the small molecule chemistry that biochemistry catalyzes,
all of those molecules are either achiral or they have some chiral orientation to them,
and one of these things that we've been doing with this kind of statistical mechanics of biochemistry
is looking at patterns in life's use of chiral molecules versus achiral molecules, and it turns
out there's very statistically rigorous scaling laws, like if you look at a biochemical system
and you look at the size increase, its increase in size, the number of molecules that that organism
uses in its biochemistry, there's a scaling law of how many of those are chiral versus achiral,
and the reason to me that's really interesting is one, it doesn't require appealing to these large
macromolecules to talk about chirality as an interesting feature, because this is small molecule
chemistry, so this is getting at the original life scale, that somehow chirality is actually playing
a role in the structure of networks that become living, and if I want to get to the deeper physics
of that, I think that's actually deeply associated to what we're doing in assembly theory and also
thinking about time, like we were talking about earlier, because if you think about a chiral molecule
and you have these two handednesses, basically it's like a symmetry breaking in time if you
choose one over the other, because now you're talking about not just that molecule, but all
the assembly pathways for making that molecule and all the ways that it interacts with things in
the future, so chirality I think is playing this really interesting way about funneling
biological systems down specific kinds of trajectories in assembly spaces or in time,
and that's some theory I'm trying to work on that's motivated, right now we're working,
we have these patterns in biochemistry that we've elucidated and we're writing a paper on that now,
but in the long term I'd really like to think about a more fundamental theory for chirality,
sort of like how chirality was brought into like QFT and all these other things at some point,
like you know chirality always comes up as interesting in physics and I think about it more
like a physicist, because I'm more interested in like in those kind of questions and I don't
think we've gotten to the point where we can ask those yet, but I can see hints of where there's
really really interesting physics happening with chirality. Right, yeah exactly, so and I think
yeah that maybe connects back to where we were in the very beginning, but in at least in the
context of cosmic analogies what we want to do is look out and see gravity, see the forces of
nature when they were you know what's called a linear regime, and you know my my simple
mind way of thinking about it is like what's the analog of the biological linear regime you know
about which we could do perturbation, but maybe that's not the right way to think about it.
Yeah, that's interesting, I like that, I will dwell on it.
Okay, don't steal it. I won't steal it, I'll catch you right handed, sir.
So you spoke in this paper very passionately, also the original Life Problem for Physics,
about the James Webb Space Telescope which recently not only launched but made it to the L2 orbit
and also assembled itself like origami or some living you know structure. You talk about that
in the paper and what we could see and and and so forth with with planets you know maybe going
in front of these stars and I wonder you know could we really see you know evidence, you're
probably familiar of this of this discovery, this announcement you know touted so highly
recently by past Sarah guest on the podcast Sarah Seeger and other colleagues Jane Greaves and others
the phosphine on Venus you know I don't know how pertinent that is to your particular research
but at least the James Webb Space Telescope prospects for detecting life on other skies.
You linked that in sort of a Bayesian framework, I wonder could you could you talk about what
excites you about the Webb Telescope and what do you think we're likely to learn and how much
could we really shrink the Bayesian confidence intervals by discovery from Webb alone?
Yeah these are great questions so I have thought a lot about exoplanet biosignature science
and in particular using Bayesian approaches where and part of the the whole set of arguments there
is if you're assessing the significance of a biosignature so biosignatures are you know things
that we can associate to life but they tend to be for exoplanets really simple molecules like
phosphine is an example on Venus but phosphine was developed as a biosignature for exoplanets
because they're remotely detectable so other examples are things like oxygen and methane
and this becomes very problematic as it did in the case of Venus because there's a lot of
possibilities of false positives we can't exhaustively get rid of all the possible
abiotic explanations for those kind of biosignatures so this kind of bothers me on a few levels
one of them is that I really am interested in trying to encourage the astrobiology community to
move more toward having motivating theory we're not looking for a biosignature we're looking for life
and if you can't connect that signature of life to a fundamental understanding of what life is
and you're not learning something new about life by testing some hypothesis about what life is on
an alien world and getting you know some feedback about that phenomena that you're looking at I don't
think that it's quite the kind of science astrobiology should be doing yet so I think I think the way
we're doing biosignature science right now is by analogy to life on earth so we're taking molecules
that metabolism produce on earth and looking for those in exoplanets and we don't know the
mechanisms of how they could be produced abiotically or biologically on those planets and it's a
little analogy I like to make is like we don't take geological maps from Mars and expect them to
you know apply to earth or vice versa right so we don't take you know the Grand Canyon and expect
it to explain the morphology of of ballast marinara however how is that pronounced mar mar mar
okay so there's this implicit assumption we could take the chemical map from earth for biochemistry
and apply it to a different planet and I think that's really a mistake but if you want to do that
there are rigorous ways of thinking about it and you can ask well what is the likelihood of an
abiotic mechanism generating that versus a biological mechanism and the problem is that we don't
and then you could kind of plug those likelihoods into a Bayesian framework and if you had a prior
you know model for the original life on that planet you could actually you know get some
probability of assigning that as a biosignature and so it gives kind of a framework for asking
questions about you know am I really detecting life or not that's quantitative and statistically
rigorous the challenge we have is we don't know what the abiotic probabilities are or the biological
ones or the prior for most biosignatures so I think James Webb will help a lot because it's
going to give us a lot more of a baseline of what planets are like beyond our solar system and give
more detailed um detailed observations but I think the kind of thing that I'm more excited about is
like you know there's this whole proposal for a little boar have x and they're doing these more
statistical types of surveys of planets and I think that's really what we need to do we need to have
a better baseline of what exoplanet properties are and we need to build better theories and this
is one of the reasons I do this for predicting non-ambiguous biosignatures because if you look
at like Bayes equation for detecting life and you have like some probability that the signature
you're looking at is actually attributed to life there's a couple terms that matter one is is it
possible to be produced abiotically if it is you have a false positive scenario and then you need
a really strong mechanism for the original like you need a really really big prior you really have
to be really confident that it's actually produced by life or you have to have a really strong biosignature
that's not subject to false positives and so that's the reason that I think assembly theory is very
promising because if you have a high assembly object there you know the structure of that is
such that we don't expect there to be false positives um and so if you don't know the prior
for the original life and you want to go survey the universe for life without knowing that prior
then you have to have some kind of signature for life that has that structure it doesn't
have to be assembly but right now I think that's the only candidate we have and is it is assembly
you know going to potentially be the drake equation of biochemistry and alien you know
biochemistry the drake equation is a way of organizing ignorance right so the drake equation
is supposed to be filled in by other science right and so a lot of people still want to use it to
make estimates because we have a lot you know that was proposed in what 1963 by Frank Drake
so if you think about um you know how many discoveries we've made since then we know the
likelihood of planet formation we kind of have some bounds on the likelihood of birth like planets
but that probability for the original life term is completely unconstrained because we don't know
the mechanism for the original life um so uh I think what assembly will give us is if we could go
say if you could go and survey a bunch of planets and say did the original life happen on this planet
then you could bound that as a bell right um and and that's the way astrobiologists should be
thinking about it I think is how do we actually infer the likelihood of life from the data sets
we're given not having an aha moment where we're going to immediately see some signatures and and
it's going to just be like right not how science works yeah I often point that out you know just
riffing on what you just said you know science is not about like getting the answer and then just
submitting the answer you know there's uh there's uh you know 2000 planets in our in our you know
galactic spiral arm no I want to know the uncertainty on it and the problem with the Drake equation is
that it's always presented as here's the number and there's never error analysis associated with it
so is that true of assembly theory too is it just going to give you a number you know probability
or is it going to give you some bounded error bars and some Bayesian interval confidence oh no so
yeah so one of the things with the whole like Bayesian approach to biosignature science is it
allows you to invent new kinds of biosignatures that fit in that formalism and assembly theory
is structured that way because it's a it's a theory that naturally accommodates probabilistic
assessment so the whole idea is like with this so empirically um you know Lee's lab identified
that if you have more than 15 steps to produce a molecule in the shortest assembly pathway
then it's exponentially unlikely to be produced and if we see it then it becomes a signature of life
and that was like empirically validated against experiments and right now we have some theory
that corroborates why there's a threshold value um that we're working on now in the current paper
so the theory would predict there should be a crossover point where you where you wouldn't
expect this um by by um a non biological process basically or a process that didn't undergo selection
um or didn't have any kind of information or causation in the system um so so if you you buy
that sort of argument basically what it's saying is above 15 it's exponentially unlikely to ever
observe those molecules and there's a two-part argument to it it's not just it's 15 steps but
when you see a molecule and you observe it with your instrument like a mass spec you have to have
multiple copies of it um and so you might argue say based on the Boltzmann brain argument and
people do this they're like well geochemistry can make anything and i'm always like well geochemistry
can't make a cell phone where you draw the line but i mean the line has to be somewhere otherwise
you're arguing for intelligent design and i think people really don't understand this it's either
biological agents or the designers or the universe has some kind of intrinsic design based laws um
and since i i i'm looking for the situation where we can explain that physics internal to the universe
and don't have to appeal external then it's not that you can get certain objects for free it's
that there has to be specific pathways constructed to make those objects um and so with that argument
means that when you find one cell phone you don't find just one cell phone you find that everybody
on the planet has a cell phone it's not an isolated occurrence like people you know you never expect
a single person to appear in the universe you would expect a population of people um you would
never expect a single copy of a molecule to appear in the universe it needs to be in a population
of molecules if it's part of a process that's reliable to produce that molecule and it's not
a statistical fluke and it's actually part of an evolutionary product now there might be some
smearing of the distribution not all people are identical not all molecules need to buy
identical but they need to be somewhere related in the assembly space um and we have ways of
accounting for that so then um then the idea is if you find these molecules that are past that
threshold then you've found evidence that there had to be some kind of causal mechanisms producing
them or some kind of selection or what or information or what all these words emergence
complexity you know whatever word you want to associate to life but it's evidence of life so
it's agnostic as to you know what what um type of chemistry could produce it you know could you
have silicon based life could you have you know in other words are you are are there biases or
you know confirmation errors that might be imposed there are so one of the things that I I think
is of interest is trying to understand the assembly structure of different kinds of physical
systems so it might be that silicon doesn't you would never expect to see high assembly things
in silicon just because of the way the assembly looks in silicon chemistry um but my anticipation
is that probably yes you would still expect it now one thing is that depending on the structure
of the system that you're looking at you might expect the threshold value to be different
so we can predict features based on the causal structure of the assembly space of where that
transition should be where it's necessary to have some kind of informational system produce that
object but we expect that transition to happen in any kind of assembly space and that transition
happens just because we're talking about a system that is combinatorially huge so the number of
ways of making that object um grows exponentially with the the the size of the object um and so
there's this kind of transition where the path the number of pathways for assembling it is too large
for you to expect it to form by chance um and that's a fundamental feature of any combinatorial
system where you impose a causal structure on it um so so that's sort of the the underlying
premise of assembly theory is basically saying when you see things pass that boundary for that
particular assembly that particular kind of causal structure combinatorial space that's
evidence of life or that's evidence of the physics underlying life. I see um and then
one one thing that we've talked about um maybe on clubhouse a you know longer time ago uh you know
it's kind of this this notion that I again was brought up with Lee and and and I and Kurt which
was you know that are the properties of life encoded in the big bang in some sense and before
I get to that I want to ask you know can assembly theory discard like irrelevant or low value
information for example people talk about water you know oh we found water you know uh and and on
mars and there's evidence of what I'm like of course you know hydrogen's the most common element
oxygen's like the fourth most common of course you're going to find a lot of water um you know
so in other words is that you know finding water is that is that this positive is that in any way
or is it can you just exclude it because it's so abundant it's it's it's almost like a nuisance
parameter yeah so um so assembly theory is falsifiable like if you found a high assembly
thing you couldn't associate to life you can falsify the theory but I think one of the things
is it's trying to get rid of all those kind of details um and the water argument is more of one
of habitability than life right so so there has been traditionally also in astrobiology this confusion
between talking about the components of life as life right so that's like you know these single
molecules become reference like oxygen oxygen is not life oxygen could be a signature of life with
a whole set of other assumptions and DNA is not life either DNA is evidence of life because it's
high assembly object it requires a lot of design and evolution oxygen is kind of so you can see
where those fall on and sort of an assembly structure but things like water are preconditions
for life right assumed preconditions based on what we know of life on earth so life on earth requires
water therefore we go look for environments with water because we assume that life couldn't exist
in the environments that don't have water so it's kind of like we're trying to screen out the search
space um and focus it in but um but assembly theory is kind of agnostic to that because it just says
you need to have an environment that life could emerge whatever environment that is and and that um
and life could build complex things and then you would look for those complex things now it might
do that some environments life doesn't build complex things and they're globally assembly threshold
um but there are also ways that we can detect features of selection or light of information
processing below that that we're still developing so interesting um and then what did we make of this
this conjecture by uh by avi lobe that you know the universe was once you know at that age you
know at the red at a redshift of 100 the universe was approximately room temperature
meaning that you could have a liquid water um and actually a wide variety of timescales
and uh so liquid water was was perhaps abundant in the you know just ambient universe uh does this
does that play a role you know cosmic connect i'm trying to push back the last what i want to do is
push the last common luca back to the last scattering surface so i want to get it quiet and um
i just don't see the utility i mean what what does that give you it just it gives you an interesting
thing to say i think it's curious i think there could be something there but do i follow the
chain of logic to say oh i have observational signatures of life living in the period of
the universe and i haven't seen anybody actually go that far so i mean i can spend all day making
wild conjectures about what life what could be life and where it could be in the universe i have
a million ideas a day about it but i think the thing is like if you really want to discover aliens
and some of us really do i mean a lot of us do avi included right like then we have to sit down
and we have to really think rigorously about the problem and develop theories that we can test
and things that we can do in the lab observations we can make with telescopes and theory that we
can build and those three things have to work together just like they do in in physics but
astrobiology hasn't transitioned because it's not a mature science yet it's a really new field
and it's bringing together a lot of areas of science that haven't worked together before
we don't know how to ask the question of life we we make a lot of assumptions that we know what we
are and um and you know the we i'll know it when i see it is so pervasive i'm glad that you brought
that up earlier it's funny but it's true because people assume we're life we know it when we see
it but yeah so so i think i think yes it's fun yeah yeah so i think it's fun to talk about
the water in the early universe and and could it have been the case that life could have emerged
really early in the universe but i don't think it's helpful to any discussion about actually
solving any of the problems that we're dealing with well remaining on the avilobe uh bandwagon
for a second uh so he's had uh you know kind of a lot of um maybe dissonant conflicts with the
astro astronomy community but primarily you know what he's advocating for is that we spend all this
money on on you know kind of wasteful science string theory and and you know bigger and bigger
accelerators and so forth but we really should be studying is not even spending it on sedi which is
like information um looking for uh techno signatures in the radio wave or light waves
and as i mentioned before they've really pivoted from you know the pure core mission that they had
from drake's time and told you know and morrison till today which is looking for extremophiles and
all sorts of other you know life on earth at redshift zero um but what do you make of his
claims that sort of you know we should be looking for physical you know techno signatures like like
this little chunk of a mua mua that i captured uh not too long ago going across my my uh but but
tell me what are your thoughts about this i have been actually i did get approached by somebody
who does is making nft meteorites and i'm just like all right well don't look down don't look
tell me what do you think about a mua mua you don't think i've got to see this before
yeah so i think some of the features of being open-minded and realizing that aliens could be
right in front of us and and it might just pass us by are really um good about the way that avi
is approaching some of these questions um but i think in the case of i'm i'm i can never pronounce
this one either i'm a mua mua mua it's not i thought marinara i was gonna this is one like you
could run the whole bayesian thing we just talked about and there are really good models actually
including developed by one of my colleagues here steve dasha asu that explain a mua mua in terms of
completely natural um explanation including some of the anomalies that avi talked about in his book
like they've been basically like all of these sort of features um so i think there's a lot of
evidence that you know suggests it could have a natural origin and it's not an anomaly um now
the real issue i think is not a mua mua mua and the debate around that but the whole issue of our
anomalies adequate to assign alien as the explanation when we do this everywhere we do it in ufo
science we can't explain it as aliens a mua mua we can't explain it as aliens uh biosignature science
phosphine on venus we can't explain it abiotically it's aliens saucers yeah saucers yeah so i i think
culturally culturally and this is ubiquitous a kind of scientist members of the public everyone
aliens right now are the other they're the explanation for things we can't explain
and i just don't feel like that's adequate i don't i think if we don't understand what something is
we should say it's an anomaly if we have a mechanism and we can explain it and that mechanism happens
to be associated to the phenomena we call life and we can see this is an example of life that's not us
then we use the alien hypothesis right it's not science if i'm just saying everything that i don't
understand is alien uh what about by your former colleague and uh you know paul davies and current
colleague also uh you know talks about the shadow biosphere and the other side of that right yeah i
could knock on the door yeah um the shadow biosphere and these lurkers in our solar system and as he
wrote about i pointed out to him you know we've done multiple interviews one was on the eerie silence
on the on the 10th anniversary of its publication which was itself on the 50th anniversary of the
steady program kicking off yeah the silence has only grown more deafening in that realm so his
his theory of you know shadow biospheres and so forth what do you make of that isn't that just kind
of saucers by another by another name um other by another name um well i think the shadow biosphere
was intended to be a hypothesis to be tested right so the idea was um if life is not a singular event
in the universe and it's common um and it's common on earth like planets the most earth
like planet is earth and we know the old life happened once here so maybe it happened twice
and we just haven't actually recognized that yet um and actually there's a lot of historical precedent
for this because we have discovered alien life on earth that we didn't know about just happened
that we found out later it was related to us so for example you know for most of human history
we didn't know microbes existed we had to develop the technology of microscopes to actually literally
see that there were these organisms basically living in our bread and you know on the tabletop
and pretty much everywhere around us but that was a completely hidden quote unquote shadow biosphere
for most of human history and so the argument is um if it's not dna based life and we're only
combing the seas like in craig ventures things you know going through the ocean combing up life and
detecting it based on the dna sequences what are we missing um so so paul's very adamant that you
know it's cheaper to look for life on earth than it is to go look for life on mars so why don't we
just have a concerted effort to look for an alien example of life on earth that isn't actually alien
to earth it's just alien to us because it's also originating on earth um and my personal perspective
on it is that's a well posed scientific question and we should be doing that i think from the
philosophical side of how i approach the science and what's consistent with the kind of theories i
do and the kind of work that my group has been doing uh thinking about the global organization
of biochemistry and patterns in biochemistry i don't think that you can have more than one example
of life for planet um and um because i think life becomes a globally integrated system pretty quickly
and it's actually like a planetary scale process and you can think about that even with modern
technology and the global internet and how we're all increasingly connected i just i don't see you
think about life as is information propagating and the kind of structure of it i don't see the
possibility of having more than one life on the planet but from the perspective of is it a well
posed scientific question yes it absolutely is and it's and and i and just i didn't mean to imply
that like the whole set of biosignatures from UFOs to phosphine are not well posed i just don't
want like you need to have a conjecture there like about why is this life and actual like a
theoretical support um otherwise like i i just i don't understand the mentality and maybe i'm
just missing something but i i feel like there's more rigorous ways of approaching the problem
that people have just shied away from historically because the life problem is so hard yeah absolutely
so if you'll indulge me for another 10 minutes maybe we have some audience questions that can
work okay good so first question um comes from uh dylan graham a husband on my youtube channel
comment community section it's dr brian keating on youtube uh dylan asked given the non-urgotic
nature of life and the vastness of genetic search space do you think mutation and thus evolution is
purely random or do you think there's a set of principles that constrain the space of mutations
to places more likely to produce adaptive change so is this kind of uh evolution being
pre-pattern for certain adaptations yeah is it purely random or is it or is it you know traceable
to some sort of you know set goals maybe design um yeah i mean i i don't know where i stand on that
like so some days i think that there's some intrinsic randomness in the universe and other
days i think it's totally deterministic um so so i'm personally deeply intrigued by this i think
that there definitely is some contingency in um you know what mutations happen in which and the
ways they're adaptive and certainly there's been experiments done to show certain features of that
kind of contingency so it doesn't seem that they're all totally random like certain parts of the
genome are more biased toward mutation than others is a simple example um and then you can ask questions
about why and there's tons of people that are way more qualified to talk about those kind of you
know specific genomic questions than i i am but i think i think the question of whether um whether
the universe requires some kind of underlying stochasticity or randomness or for life to exist
is a really deeply intriguing one um yeah uh next question comes from a guest audience member named
rustin peace which was coincidentally the name for my first daughter not um which was good um
and he or she asked could it be uh that a living organism doesn't require a cell wall or you know
some kind of container um i think there's certainly so i don't i don't think life has boundaries in the
traditional sense um i do think that you need bounded uh bounded structures but i don't think
like you know the container is the thing that's important so as i mentioned before like a cell
reconstructs itself and is part of a lineage and the lineage is really what we need to think about
with life so the boundary plays a role in terms of saying this is a packet of information that's
reproducing itself in a in a particular structure but then you know organisms can exchange genes
with each other or even now like we're exchanging knowledge so the boundaries are not as important
as sort of the flow of information in the system so i think it's kind of a secondary feature
and in fact there's some things that you know individuality the idea of like bounded individuals
might have emerged late in the original life and that you might have just had much more
collective or like system level properties early on and i i i resonate with those kind of ideas i
think they're they're really intriguing so maybe you know really primitive life is not bounded but
maybe once you get into this kind of Darwinian well-defined information a lineage as it becomes
bounded uh next question from vorador what is your opinion regarding the chances to find life on
let's say he or she asks about Europa specifically but what about other places in our solar system
i think it's possible for for life to be a lot of places in our solar system and that we just
really haven't figured out how to identify it yeah i think your rope is hard mission wise because
you have to drill through the ice shell um and so getting a sample is really challenging but i so
for that reason i'm much more on team enceladus so to say like i'm very enthusiastic about sending
missions to enceladus because enceladus is very similar to Europa another icy moon um you know
has a liquid ocean under its shell but it actually has active jets of um material being spewed into
space you can imagine flying a you know a robot through the plume and taking samples um so you
don't have to worry about the drilling problem and from a habitability perspective of like you know
are the ingredients for life present on these icy moons i think enceladus is just as strong a
candidate as Europa so that just becomes an accessibility issue great uh another frequent
guest on my channel the means of destruction our audience member that's another good name yeah
these are all great band names i know there's another one chimbrazo we'll get to that uh he
asked our stars alive i'm gonna change that to um you know what's the minimum you know kind of
astrophysical entity that you could say uh is alive or or features life uh could you have a
dark cloud like arthur c clark or uh you know what what's the minimum uh common ancestor you know
stellar astrophysical uh prerequisite yeah so so this is not the way i would ask that question um so
i'm gonna answer yeah so because it's kind of like the what is life question and then what are
other examples of life this is what we would canonically think and i just don't think that's
the right way of framing it what i i would think is clearly we exist in the universe as life which
means that the laws of physics are structured for life to exist and i'm interested in those laws that
specifically explain life which my claim is are not the laws of physics as we know them now they're
different kind of law of physics and they have very different the laws of physics that explain
life have very different properties for example they're not cast in this kind of initial state
fixed law of motion kind of framework uh which we need to talk about but like that's an aside but
anyway just imagine you know there there is some structure to the universe causal structure the
universe is a causal graph so to speak and assemble the space um then everything has that property
just like everything um it has the property of existing in space and time in in gravity right
like there's a space time manifold that defines the properties of the universe and then some
physical systems like us are very high assembly and you can think of them like in the gravitational
analogy as being objects that have very strong gravitational potential wells like planetary
systems galaxies or black holes are good examples to study gravitational physics things that are
good examples to study causal structure in the universe or this kind of feature of information
being causal or whatever you want to call it or living things now is that apparent and in other
examples like stars or other kinds of systems we could study of course it should be because it's a
sure of our universe but the question is to what degree and so I wouldn't really call things alive
unless they're very high assembly objects like the kind that we talk about in terms of molecular
assembly theory but assembly is supposed to be general applied anything um and so I don't think
stars have crossed that threshold but I think that stars have uh you know like you can think
about the contingency in stellar generations and the kind of elemental distributions they have they
do have a clear this population of stars had to come before this population of stars otherwise
there's no reason for this elemental distribution so they have a causal structure associated to them
right okay next question comes uh from chim brazo he has a bunch of questions one is about humans
and aliens interacting how would we communicate with them you could ask answer that question he
also asked why does a grand unified theory have to be beautiful I guess my question to you would be
you know what what about these um you know that your love of physics your love of cosmology your
your kind of og historical legacy what interests you most and what do you find most interesting
about um the searches that are kind of layered upon them as this question of beauty and and
propriety if you will in the laws of nature we talked about symmetry earlier what do you make
of that is that is a baggage is that a shibboleth what's going on with that now um so so on the
question of beauty I think um you know a lot of people think that's problematic for physics and I
think it can because I think you know there are obvious areas where maybe we get romanticized by
certain ideas and then we lose track of you know where's where's the scientific rigor but I also
think um that our attraction to beauty and the way we explain the world is probably a signature
also of the physics of what we are and is not just like an ad hoc feature added onto it um but I
think um I think it just depends on what your aesthetic is um and for me I think the aesthetic
is is it explanatory I don't I don't um and how much does it explain and I'm also deeply interested
in and I in theories that are empowering so I think um and what I mean by that is because I
think theories actually are causal and they matter to how the world we live in locally on our planet
works because the theories become the reality we live in um it is important to try to pick
ones that maximize kind of potential for humanity so it's not like an aesthetic choice but it's more
of a well it is an aesthetic choice but it's an aesthetic choice informed by thinking about
theories as physical objects and like what they do so um so I guess I don't have any problem with
people choosing aesthetic choices but I think that I guess my point is we need to be very cognizant
about why we're making those choices how it's related to the physics that we're developing
and where the biases are coming in and so one thing I always try to do is is try to understand
what my own biases are and my my biggest biases I'm trained as a theoretical physicist so I tend
to think like one and we have a lot of baggage that we go with um and I'm okay with that but it
might not be the right way of even asking the life problem right it could be like you know if
this is completely irrelevant but I don't think that's true but but it's entirely possible good so
now move to Twitter to the Twitter space where you maybe have seen some of the questions posed to
you the first one uh we'll choose from Caitlin McShay um Santa Fe McShay and by the way you
should all follow uh Sarah at uh Sarah underscore and Mari I am follow Caitlyn too she's amazing
follow Caitlyn you just gotta shout out Caitlyn hope you're watching listening
yeah I see you what's your favorite philosophical textbook or book uh that's a hard one I think um
I should have looked at these ahead it would have um I think um I think it's always nice to kind of
know like the like early like ideas of how people think so I'm not a philosopher by training I took
one philosophy class and it happened to be when I was at community college um and I've always had
an interest in philosophy but it's kind of like one of these things that now that I'm a middle
aged physicist I'm starting to read more philosophy because I need help um but um but when I was a
student um I think I really like was I was so struck by two things one was in my physics class the
fact that we could predict magnetic monopoles and we we couldn't know we could look for them
sorry I don't know where my lights went and they're not coming but out there they are and the other
one was um uh Thomas Aquinas's arguments for the existence of God which I thought were so clever
um and so I really enjoyed reading that I don't I don't know really I think um I think both of
those together really gave me some insight into the power of human thought and how far we could push
it and since I became a physicist that was always the thing I was romanticized by is the fact
again it goes back to like why is reality comprehensible and why are brain structure to
even reason about these kind of problems and look how far we can actually push that reasoning both
in the sort of abstract philosophical arguments um that we might want to run through or in the sense
that we can predict future of the universe and actually go and look and verify if they're true
or not um and I think those those two things are are are just really important futures and so
so I guess that's kind of a half-assed answer but an answer I like it very much uh next question
also coming from Twitter there's about 50 from uh one person uh Sandy Pichaldi uh but I'll just ask
one of it he says basically what does it even mean that time can flow in any other direction
than before to after i.e. what we call forward I don't know because I think time only flows forward
I don't know why people think I could go backward um so so I'm with you on that question please
someone explain to me why it could go backward yeah all right well you could uh yeah I I I think
sort of just like I I think you know yeah never mind we'll just leave it at that that's good
and uh Bryant Woe times asks what does fine-tuning of initial conditions have to do with free will
okay um I think I might have made this argument on Twitter at one point um
which you should all follow because she's hilarious prolific philosophical brilliant on Twitter
masterful um so what uh what so the so there's this whole sort of conception in current physics
that in order to explain the complexity now like you know the fact that we're sitting here on this
podcast talking and you guys are listening um was a feature then like like can be traced back
deterministically to like the initial state of the universe so so then this becomes a fine-tuning
argument because in order to explain all the variation and all the structure we have in the
universe it had to be some minor fluctuations in the initial condition of the universe and the
initial condition had to be fairly ordered to explain why disorder hasn't ranged so there's all
these kind of criteria on the initial state of the universe um that are imposed by the features
that we observe now um and if you trace that chain of logic um basically it means that it sort of
every action that you're doing now was already pre imprinted in the initial state of the universe
so there's sort of a conflict between current physics and free will at a cosmological scale
because it's not really it goes back to the intelligent design versus creativity discussion
we were having earlier um that these questions are actually deeply buried in the logic of how we
talk about physics um and it goes back to this idea that sort of the laws exist outside the universe
and and the only thing you need to specify what happens in the universe is basically the initial
condition so once you set that in motion everything is is predetermined um and i don't think that's
the right paradigm for talking about life mind free will or any of the problems that you know
you hit up against when you're talking about what happens in biology versus what happens
in physics and it's not that physics as we know it is wrong it's just that the kind of structure of
the equations that we study in physics are not the right kind of structure of the equations for those
kind of problems i got it and then the last question before we wrap up with closing arguments uh is
from stir devant who asks how often are my cells created in origins experiments and in nature um
how important is a lipid bilayer to first life uh it's interesting that my cell is used to protect
plasmids in gmo's as well as m r and a vaccines uh is that essential uh do you know what these
my cells are can you define them um i so a lot of people talk in origins of life about um forming
vesicles so like if you have fatty acids they basically self-organize into spherical spherical
structures so you can have so there's some hypotheses about cells before life that you had
you know these my cells are vesicles forming and then some molecules got in them and they
they learned to co replicate and then that was sort of the way you jump started life so those
are usually considered to be proto cell models um i don't know how frequently they occur my
understanding is you just have some fatty acids they just self-assemble this way so then the question
becomes how do you synthesize enough fatty acids to be able to do this um and uh and i'm i'm by no
means a a membrane expert um or knowing those things um so i would not be the person to ask
about sort of the details of the chemistry on that but i always find those things deeply intriguing too
well sarah is there anything that we haven't covered today that you'd be interested in
touching on in this uh we've had a nice over two hour and a half conversation but is there
anything else that i forgot or didn't i neglected to ask you i i don't think so what's next for you
do you have any big cocks coming any any thoughts of a book anything fun well i am actually writing a
book yeah a popular book or text yeah yeah it's a popular book and it's on it's on life and what
life is um yeah it's an exclusive and into the impossible exclusive yeah i haven't talked about
it much because i'm like it's mostly written but i something to do and also it's it's hard to write
a book about a theory that's a work in progress so there's a lot of like what is it i'm not
don't ask the strength theorist that they would disagree with that yeah i know right but but i i
think part of the thing that i'm interested in is um is how hard it is to work at the frontier
and and the fact that we're not doing that alone right you you can't especially nowadays you can't
really work on the frontier of knowledge without interacting with other people and i think the
alien conversation is particularly interesting because it's one that i since all of us are the
phenomenon of life all of us should be able to engage in in this problem right like all of us
have an intimate connection to the physics we're trying to understand and everyone has a clue
it's just like how do we stitch all those clues together to figure out what we are right right
exactly well sarah this has been uh so much fun i can't wait for that book to come out you'll have
to come back on the show when it is out this has been just a fascinating conversation with a deep
thinker and i'm so glad that you share your ideas with with not only with me but with the
universe the multiverse of minds that you've connected to and especially with me and my
audience today thank you sarah so much yeah thanks thanks for having me any sufficiently
advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic
you
