You burn something and you send the smoke up, God gets a crack at determining the quality of your offering, the quality of your sacrifice.
Well, let's be perfectly clear about this.
If your sacrifices aren't first rate, the nature of your relationship with the infinite is going to suffer dreadfully.
And that's exactly what the story of Cain and Abel reveals.
Now, Abel, he's a trusting character.
He believes in the nature of experience and the nature of existence.
When he's called on to make a sacrifice, he sacrifices the best that he has to offer.
And that makes God happy and has a consequence.
Everything that Abel touches turns to gold.
Everyone likes him, they respect him.
His crops multiply, he's successful with women.
Plus, he's a wonderful guy.
So you could hardly imagine a more annoying creature if you possibly attempted to do it.
Whereas Cain has reacted to his self-consciousness by withdrawing from the infinite.
And there's a tremendous danger in that because it starts to mean that he relies purely on his own devious devices to sail his ship through the shoals of life.
He believes as his arrogance develops, as a consequence of his withdrawal from the infinite,
a contact that he can't tolerate because he can't tolerate his own vulnerability,
that he's able to deceive the structure of reality itself to offer second rate sacrifices to God himself,
who can see absolutely everything, because the infinite is absolutely everything,
and to prevail nonetheless.
Well, needless to say, this does not work.
And it doesn't work in an obvious way if you talk to people and they reveal to you their unnecessary suffering.
It's very straightforward to look behind what it is that they have to say.
They'll tell you the poor decisions they made in their lives and the opportunities that they didn't take
and the chances that they didn't have enough courage to grasp and the sacrifices they failed to make.
There's nothing mysterious about it.
And their own experiences teach them full well that they pathologized the relationship they have with the nature of reality.
Well, that's a terrible thing.
Well, and Cain is dreadfully unhappy.
He's unhappy because nothing he ever wants happens, and that's partly because he doesn't really want it,
because if he really wanted it, he'd make the right sacrifices.
The salt is rubbed into his wounds by the existence of his brother, for whom everything seems simple,
but of course really isn't.
Cain goes to complain to God.
And I had to read three or four different translations of these particular verses to figure out what this meant.
And he says,
What in the world is going on here?
I'm marking myself to the bone.
I'm sacrificing things left, right, and center.
Everything I touch turns to dirt.
Everything turns against me.
Like, what's up with the nature of reality?
Cain's essential vulnerability is revealed and exacerbated by his pathological attitude towards his own actions.
God says to him, essentially,
Sin is a predatory cat that croaches at your doorway and leaps on you at will.
But if you only wanted to, you could master it.
And that is absolutely the last thing that Cain wants to hear.
Because if things are going from bad to worse for you and you're playing a causal role in it,
there's nothing more horrible than something that someone can do to you,
but reveal to you in a way that you can't deny that you're entirely complicit in your own demise.
And that's exactly what God does to Cain.
And so what does Cain do?
Well, the logical thing would be listen, because if the structure of reality itself tells you something,
it's best to listen since there's no way out of it, but that's not what Cain does.
He's so incensed by his essential vulnerability,
compromised and exacerbated by his failure to make the appropriate sacrifices
and to conduct himself appropriately that he decides then and there.
Number one, to destroy his ideal, to reduce the tension that he feels when that ideal exists as a contrast point.
And number two, to destroy the favored son of God.
And so he goes out into the field and kills Abel.
And God comes along and says, where's my favorite son?
Cain says, I killed him.
And it's so interesting to me that that story is placed really, it's the third story in the Old Testament.
It's with the archaic stories.
And it's a story that reveals, as far as I can tell, that there are two essential patterns of reaction
to the self-conscious, vulnerable conditions of existence.
And one is a humble approach to infinity with determined attempts to make the appropriate sacrifices.
And the other is arrogance, resentment, the keeping of everything good for oneself
and the degeneration of the soul into something that's homicidally murderous.
Well, the story doesn't stop there and it gets really compressed in this part
and that's perhaps because some of it's been lost with the passages of time.
But the next thing that happens is that, well, God doesn't punish Cain.
And you think, that's kind of strange.
I mean, Old Testament God, he's punishing people left, right and center.
Not Cain.
And you think, well, he marks Cain and he says to the people who are around that they should leave him alone
because he's been marked by God as to be left alone.
And the reason for that, I think, and this is something that's reflected on our legal system,
is that murder promotes revenge and revenge destroys societies.
And so God puts an end to the situation right there and then by telling people that
despite the fact that Cain has committed a terrible crime,
that there will be no retribution.
Cain goes off and gets married and he has a number of generations of offspring.
If you insult a member of the first generation of Cain's offspring,
he doesn't kill you, he kills seven of you.
And if you insult a member of the second generation of Cain's offspring,
he doesn't kill seven of you, he kills seven times seven of you.
And then on down the road of the offspring of Cain is Tubal Cain.
And Tubal Cain is the artificer of weapons of war.
And this stunningly brilliant story says in its incredibly compressed fashion
that the motivation that drives the commission of the worst human atrocities
is an inevitable social consequence of the refusal of the self-conscious individual
to make the sacrifices appropriate to establishing a harmonious life
and their consequent degeneration into a kind of murderous and resentment filled rage,
propagating endlessly through its variations in society until everything comes to an end.
And the next story is the flood and it's not surprising
because if things go from bad to worse long enough, everything falls.
And it's a terrifying story and I didn't understand that story.
I didn't understand that story for years.
It wasn't really until I read Alexander Solzhenitsyn that I developed,
I think, the cognitive capacity to even understand what the story meant
because Solzhenitsyn said it is no bell prize accepting speech.
A single person who stops lying can bring down a tyranny,
which is a stunning thing to say,
but I would also say something that's been amply demonstrated in the 20th century
because we have historical examples of people who did precisely that.
Gandhi did it, Vaclav Havel did it, Nelson Mandela did it.
Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago was definitely one of the axe blows
that brought down the Soviet Union,
a stunning achievement for a person who started writing that book
by memorizing it when he was a concentration camp victim this far away from starvation.
It shows you as clearly as anything possibly can how powerful the human spirit can be
if it's willing to take on the obligation of its relationship with the divine
and also how terrible things can become if the responsibility of that burden is not shouldered.
This is not shouldered.
