Chapter 5 is called Message Passing and Neurobiology. What is your overview thought on Chapter 5?
Okay, I mean, it's a kind of, I don't know, I have mixed feelings about this chapter because
on one hand, you see, as far as I understand active inference, although it originated as
quote-unquote a unified theory of the brain, I don't think it's a neurobiological theory,
per se. Of course, there can be some correlations between neurobiological components or concepts
with active inference concepts, but I mean, it's not an essential premise
of active inference theory to provide a comprehensive theory about how the neurobiology
of human brain or other organisms brain behave at a detailed and neuroanatomical
level. But then again, it's nice to have these kinds of empirical correlations between the
findings of neurobiology and the active inference theory. But I don't think it's one of active inference
central assertions, at least to my understanding.
Well said, very interesting framing. Well, Chapter 5 definitely takes a very specific
system of interest approach by highlighting one of the most studied areas, also one of the most
relevant areas, which is mammalian neuroscience. And the chapter is going to introduce a few different
motifs in the nervous system and essentially build up towards figure 5.5, which is at the end
of the chapter, and 5.5 wires together three specific neural systems that the chapter is
going to focus on work in that area from. So Ali said it very well. Active inference was built up to
in Chapter 4. Here is another level or type of science with assertions or with representations
or mappings to any specific system. But this is the kind of modeling that has been built up and
done by Friston, Par, Pizzolo, and others over the decades with a focus coming from a human neuro
imaging laboratory setting, a lot of focus and study and attention and funding and everything
on the mammalian nervous system. But claims about the nervous system
are not the basis of what active inference claims or how it's derived. But this is like an example
case study in neurobiology, connecting back to some of the formalisms that we've just seen
introduced in Chapter 4. And to add a minor point to what you just said, I think it's important to
draw attention to the last sentence of the last paragraph of the first page.
It is important to draw a distinction between a principle, i.e. the minimization of free energy
and a process theory about how this principle may be implemented in a certain kind of system. So
I think this sentence here frames this chapter in relation to all the other technical chapters of
this book. So if every other chapter is about developing, or at least up to now, was about
developing the principled formalism of active inference, now Chapter 5 provides a kind of
preliminary sketch for the process theory of active inference, which is obviously far from
an extensive theory, it's just a single chapter. But then again, it can provide some important
signposts for anyone who wants to further investigate this area.
Awesome. Free energy principle, Bayesian mechanics, all things in that area are on this principle,
not responsive to empirical data. And then the process theory is about how the principle is
implemented. So the specific generative models that are made, and how well they map, or how well
they do in a portfolio of models that can have very different goals and assumptions and all of
this. But the process theory implementation lets us develop hypotheses that are answerable to empirical
data, like what is the kind of information or relationship between photons hitting the retina
and changes in activity in neural systems. And that's an informational question or can
be abstracted in a way to an informational question that it turns out does have empirical support
and results in unique explanations and predictions. That doesn't mean that it always
results in unique explanations and predictions, but a lot of citations are provided here.
That's what we can explore in Chapter 5.
The last paragraph of the first section describes that they're going to
look at the three different neural systems. Okay, Section 5.2, microcircuits and messages.
What do you think, Oli?
All right. So, I mean, this chapter begins from how message passing happens in neurobiological
terms and compare it to the way active inference frames this message passing mechanism. And
specifically, if we look at Figure 5.1 and compare this figure to the ones we've seen
before in chapters one through four, I think it was in chapter four, we can see some clear
parallels between how this kind of cortical message passing happens in the brain versus
how it is framed in active inference literature. And as we can see, it's
clearly inspired by the neurobiology of the brain. But then it's important to keep in mind
that it's not a direct one-to-one mapping between these two models. This is just a kind of, I don't
know, an interesting or illuminating, if you like, parallel to keep in mind to somehow be
a bit more confident about the viability of the theory we want to use for message passing
and active inference, which is to say it's not some haphazard theory that's just been developed
for practical reasons. It has some basis in neurobiology, although it's not necessarily
fully congruent with every detail of neurobiology.
Great. The specific example is going to involve this one region of mammalian cortex tissue
that has these six layers. And there's a ton of neurobiology.
The big takeaway for figure 5.1 is that it's possible to graphically lay out
nodes and variables and find some empirical correspondences, again, some unique explanations
and predictions in certain cases. And that's one kind of modeling where it's really trying to
understand and improve the ability to do correlation and intervention and counterfactual
causal type analysis with the real system of interest. Or in a more pedagogical setting or
in a research shedding or an industrial setting, you might sweep across large families of structures
of models and there's no need to be grounded to any biological structure at all. So this is just
describing the specific neuroanatomical research that really arose out of the imaging work at UCL
and the SPM package. So that's where a lot of this comes from. 5.2? Yeah, good.
And sorry, just as a side note, I think watching one of Thomas Parr's lectures on neurobiology of
active inference, which is available on YouTube, would really help to understand the materials of
this chapter better. So I highly recommend watching that one. Thanks. Figure 5.2 gives a
re-rendering of a kind of classical view of a hierarchical predictive coding system works.
So here, abstracting a layer from the tissue 6 layer to just two layers here, computational layers
now, and then showing how there's hierarchical communication within a layer, but also others,
they're signaling within a layer and there's a hierarchy in Bayesian modeling with variables
that are higher order predictions about other variables. And that's the basis of the predictive
coding architecture. So 5.2 looks at some ways that the something that resonates with the cerebral
cortical architecture enables what might computationally look like or have some really strong and
explanatory values in actually relating to computationally a hierarchical Bayesian model,
which could do various general tasks. All right, 5.3 is motor commands, leaving the
prefrontal cortex going down to the butterfly looking cross section here. What is 5.3?
Okay, so 5.3 moves to the other half of active inference framework, which is I mean how it can
model the decision making and ultimately the movement of the agent in order to minimize the
expected free energy as opposed to variational free energy that we saw in perceptual half of active
inference. So it again provides a kind of correlation or analogy between the structural
neural anatomy, particularly related to I mean the motor commands and how it can relate to active
inference and particularly the continuous time active inference. So we can see that for I mean
for the external event or I'm sorry for the external state, we can take for example the
proprioceptive afferent and then this proprioceptive afferent acts as a kind of why for the
continuous time active inference which needs to be I mean processed in a way to optimize the
expected free energy and how it relates to both attention and precision. We will see a bit more
detail about those terms and the relation between them in chapter 8 but I think here section 5.3
provides a good summary about the general paths through the motor command systems of neurobiology.
Great. I'd say while the previous case study focused on how the connectivity within and between
the cortical columns could have a computational relationship with a Bayesian hierarchical
predictive coding architecture, the argument of the second case study is that a continuous input,
continuous output kind of set point seeking reflexive motor behavior with a moving set point
with a descending moving set point enabling motion by changing ultimately the set point
and enabling variation in the strategies to reach that set point through different mechanisms.
This is also describable in a compatible way.
That's a shorter section. Now section 5.4, subcortical structures.
What would you say about this section?
Okay. So subcortical structures are very important in the decision making and I mean the planning
of the agents. So obviously here we need another kind of analogy between
the way that these plannings and decision makings happen neuroanatomically with the way that
it's framed in active inference but again we can see it's clearly based on,
I mean at least some of the important elements we've seen from the previous chapters.
So for example we saw how policy is described or how it relates to outcomes and preference and so
on. We can see those elements are directly inspired by neuroanatomical structures. So
I guess that's at least in my opinion this section here 5.4 seems a bit more
sketchy in the meaning that it doesn't go into quite the extensive details about how
those structures can be compared but for anyone who wants to further investigate these topics
there are some useful references put on here on pages 93 and 94. So yeah.
Thanks. Yeah it's really abbreviated and
over viewed but we get an interlude from table 5.1 with putative roles of neurotransmitters. So
same perspective that we took before on neuroanatomical functionalism here directly translates to
neurotransmitter reductionism or essentialism or something like that. So certainly all neurotransmitters
and molecules they play variable roles in different settings and this is the neat and scruffy
manifold all over again. One person might say well we need a theory for every acetylcholine
molecule in the world. They're all in a unique context and someone else says all neurotransmitters
are described by one parameter in this model. I'm getting value from it so to me that's an
account and somewhere in between is the work in this space which is making an attempt to have
a principled and falsifiable approach to model the computational aspects of specific
regions and contexts and settings and so acetylcholine, noradrenaline, dopamine and serotonin
are given a little mini review here and so it's not an exhaustive or an exclusive claim. It's kind
of a provocation from computational and molecular neuroscience and people can look into the papers
and also ones that probably have been published since. 5.6 goes to continuous and discrete
hierarchies which is graphically over viewed in figure 5.5 so what would you say about this?
One interesting thing about this section is the observation that our lower level
engagement with the environment can be most successfully characterized with continuous
time formulations but as we go up on the level of cognitive concepts or at the level of cognitive
hierarchies and we come to concepts such as I don't know decisions or even beliefs and so on
we can reach the area that the discrete time situations would probably be more efficient to
characterize the behavior of the agent so this multi-scale structure of active inference modeling
is quite evident in the way that our message passing happens in our brain in terms of our
lower level data processing and often to consolidating the higher level cognitive
concepts and ontologies. Awesome thank you.
To me figure 5.5 demonstrates the kind of whole-of-body approach that you could imagine there's so
many organs and systems and phenomena for which there aren't specific generative models so little
can be said about situations where no generative model has been articulated and here's one where
it has so it gives you also it's kind of like reading a Drosophila melanogaster review paper
relatively it's like this is how much work it takes to get to this state of knowledge
in an insect so then in another insect do we know less about that insect empirically and
genetically so consider this to be what's known to be a lot however also about one of the most
sophisticated or specific cognitive systems at least we know so there's that additional kind
of like self-reflexive aspect to this chapter that is not a cornerstone of active inference
but here it's just presented in a synthetic case study.
Anything else do you want to say about 5?
Nothing particular comes to mind.
