This is the first of 24 lectures on the United States in the Middle East covering the period 1914 to 2001.
We begin in 1914 because that year marked the start of World War I,
the conflict that resulted in the collapse of the Turkish Ottoman Empire and thus in the emergence of many of the present-day states in the Middle East.
World War I also was the event that drew the United States for the first time into great power deliberations over the political fate of Middle Eastern countries.
To be sure, the United States soon returned to its previous position of aloofness from Middle Eastern affairs,
but in the 1940s it again became vitally interested in the political life of the Middle East, a posture it has maintained ever since.
We end in 2001 because it was on September 11 of that year that the territory of the United States came under devastating attack by a band of shadowy terrorists,
most of them Saudis, presuming to act on behalf of an aggrieved Muslim world.
This attack put an end to the sense of physical security and impregnability that Americans had experienced for most of the nation's history.
The eight and a half decades lying between these two milestones represent a remarkable transformation in America's role in the Middle East.
From a rising power with enormous potential for world leadership, but with little official interest in the political fate of the Middle East,
to a world colossus so prominent in the political, economic and cultural life of the Middle East that it was the unquestioned target of those bent on attacking the West for its perceived offenses against Islam.
How we got from there to here and what that evolution tells us about American politics and society will be among the central questions of this lecture series.
There are, of course, no easy answers to such questions, and I certainly won't attempt any glib answers here.
Instead, I'll be presenting a narrative history of U.S. political involvement in the Middle East in the eight plus decades following 1914,
hoping to do so within a framework that allows you to seek answers of your own to these questions and to others like them.
Although the structure of the course is mainly chronological, four central themes recur throughout the lectures.
So what I'm going to do in this lecture is discuss those four themes and then turn to the historical background for U.S. Middle Eastern relations after 1914,
looking mainly at the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The first theme of the course is the growing involvement of the United States in the affairs of the Middle East, a consequence of America's increasing global power.
In the first four decades of the 20th century, U.S. interests in the Middle East were almost entirely missionary, philanthropic, educational and commercial.
A brief exception to this rule was the flurry of activity immediately after World War I, when President Woodrow Wilson did become involved in the post-war political settlement in the Middle East.
But Wilson's vision was quickly rejected by the American body politic, and in the 1920s and 1930s, the United States reverted to a position of political aloofness from the affairs of most foreign countries,
including those of the Middle East.
All this started to change with America's entry into World War II, which caused U.S. officials for the first time to see the geopolitical orientation of the Middle East as vital to American national security.
During the war, U.S. military forces occupied large portions of the Middle East, turning Iran into a corridor for supplying the Soviet Union and turning North Africa into a staging area for invading fascist Italy.
After 1945, the Middle East remained vital to U.S. security, both as a staging area for a possible war against the Soviet Union, America's new adversary, and as a source of oil for Western Europe and Japan, America's new Cold War allies.
The United States did not, however, begin the post-war period as the preeminent Western power in the Middle East. That distinction belonged to Great Britain, which had long been an imperial power in the region.
For the first decade of the Cold War era, the United States generally supported Britain's position as the Western standard bearer in the Middle East.
But following the Suez Crisis of 1956, which demonstrated that Britain was no longer up to the job, Washington stepped in to take London's place.
A far more hostile contender for Middle Eastern influence, at least as far as the United States was concerned, was the Soviet Union, whose territory was adjacent to that of several Middle Eastern states.
For another couple decades following the Suez Crisis, the United States and the Soviet Union vied for political and strategic advantage in the Middle East.
In the mid-1970s, however, the Soviet position in the region began to decline, foreshadowing, and in a small way contributing to the demise of the Soviet system in the early 1990s.
With the end of the Cold War, the United States has emerged as the sole remaining superpower, wielding unparalleled power and influence over Middle Eastern affairs.
