The second theme of the course is Middle Easterners' ongoing quest for political independence
and self-mastery.
In the early decades of the 20th century, Turks, Arabs, Jews, Iranians, and Kurds all
sought to gain political control over portions of the region, often in opposition to the
imperial agendas of European powers.
By mid-century, most of these groups, with some important exceptions, had succeeded in
establishing formal national independence, but Middle Easterners remained preoccupied
with combating external domination, real and perceived.
After 1945, as the United States grew more involved in the region's affairs, it increasingly
became the object of indigenous resentment.
In Iran and the Arab world in the 1950s and 1960s, secular nationalists resisted American
pressure to side with the West against the Soviet Union, insisting on their right to
enjoy profitable relations with both Cold War blocks.
Arab nationalists in particular tried to defeat or contain Israel, which they saw as an instrument
of Western power.
By the 1970s, secular nationalism was a declining force in Arab and Iranian affairs, increasingly
giving way to political Islam, whose rejection of Western influence was far more profound.
In the decades since, Islamists have been generally unsuccessful at seizing state power.
The Iranian Revolution is a major exception to this rule, but they have posed a formidable
challenge both to the United States and to existing regimes in the region.
Of all the Middle Eastern nations, Israel and Turkey have enjoyed the closest relations
with the United States.
Israel has long had a special relationship with the United States, a friendship born
of sentiment, cultural affinity, domestic politics, and strategic calculation.
Turkey is the only Middle Eastern member of NATO, an alliance it joined in the early 1950s.
Yet these countries too have sometimes chafed under Washington's restraints on their freedom
of action.
Israel's military operations against neighboring Arab countries and its occupation of Arab
lands taken in the Six-Day War of 1967 have frequently aroused Washington's ire, though
such criticism has grown milder in recent years.
Turkey's attempts to put down internal Kurdish rebellions or to limit the activities of Kurds
in neighboring countries like Iraq have also elicited occasional American criticism.
The third theme is the difficulty the United States has experienced in balancing among
diverse and sometimes conflicting interests and objectives in the Middle East.
During World War I, Woodrow Wilson championed the principle of national self-determination,
showing little sympathy for Britain's and France's imperial ambitions in the Middle
East.
Once the war ended, however, Wilson found that he needed British and French cooperation on
other matters, so he allowed those two countries to continue to dominate the Middle East under
the guise of League of Nations mandates.
During World War II, U.S. officials had genuine sympathy for the nationalist aspirations of
colonial peoples throughout the world, but in the Middle East, as elsewhere, Washington
invariably suppressed that sympathy when it conflicted with the successful prosecution
of the war.
After 1945, America's primary objectives in the region were securing Western access to
Middle Eastern oil, preventing the Soviet Union from reaping political or strategic advantage
in the area, and ensuring Israel's security.
Pursuing the last of these objectives often complicated the pursuit of the other two.
Western's close relations with Israel generated anti-American sentiment in the Arab world,
providing the Soviet Union with opportunities to increase its political influence in the
region.
A similar conflict of objectives occurred during the Arab-Israeli War of 1973, when President
Richard M. Nixon airlifted military supplies to Israel to keep it from suffering a military
defeat at the hands of Syria and Egypt.
Nixon's airlift deeply angered the Arab world, and a number of oil-producing Arab states
retaliated by imposing an embargo on oil shipments to the United States, causing major dislocations
in the global economy.
As the Cold War drew to an end, the imperative of containing the Soviet Union gave way to
two new objectives, combating international terrorism and preventing rogue states like
Libya, Iran and Iraq from challenging U.S. policies in the region.
Both of these objectives acquired fresh urgency following the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001, but Americans disagreed over whether the two goals could or should be pursued simultaneously.
