While President George W. Bush argued that the necessity of disarming Iraq and perhaps
overthrowing its government as well could not be separated from the effort to defeat
Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda network, others insisted that Bush's preoccupation with Iraq
was diverting precious energy and resources away from the war against al-Qaeda.
So as in previous decades, Washington could find no easy formulas for pursuing its diverse
objectives in the Middle East.
The fourth and final theme is the ever-growing antagonism between Americans and Middle Easterners,
one of the most striking and tragic transformations to have occurred in U.S.-Middle East relations
over the last century.
In the first four decades of the 20th century, the United States had a relatively benign
reputation among Middle Easterners, who appreciated that the United States had no imperial ambitions
in the Middle East and who were grateful for the educational, philanthropic and humanitarian
services Americans provided in the region.
At mid-century, however, as the United States emerged as a global superpower, much of that
goodwill began turning into resentment.
The United States played a key role in bringing the state of Israel into being, a development
that infuriated the Arab world, especially as it resulted in the uprooting of an existing
Palestinian Arab society.
America never regained the Arab goodwill it had enjoyed prior to Israel's creation.
In more recent decades, as Washington has enclosed Israel in an ever-tighter embrace,
essentially underwriting its continuing occupation of Arab lands, Arab anger has turned increasingly
bitter in occasionally finding outlet in terrorist violence.
Over to the East, U.S. support for the authoritarian Shah of Iran antagonized two generations of
Iranians, fueling anti-Western and anti-American revolution that would challenge and complicate
U.S. policy for decades.
The attacks of September 11th served as a wake-up call, of course, first by alerting
ordinary Americans to the existence of a shadowy network of terrorists, transnational but largely
emanating from the Middle East, committed to the destruction of the United States and
its allies, and second by calling attention to a dramatic rise in anti-American sentiment
throughout the Arab and Muslim world, as documented by numerous public opinion surveys conducted
in those regions in the months following 9-11.
In explaining their negative views of the United States, respondents cited America's
alliance with Israel, its support for authoritarian regimes in the Middle East, and its increasing
willingness to use military force in the region.
On the American side, one can also detect a rising tide of suspicion and anger directed
at the dominant cultures of the Middle East.
Oriental hysteria types of Arabs and Muslims have long proliferated in American culture,
but in the early years of the 20th century, those images were often benign, romanticizing
Middle Easterners and their way of life as often as they vilified them.
It was only in later years, as the substance of U.S.-Middle Eastern relations grew angrier
and more violent that popular images of Middle Easterners became uniformly threatening.
For a quarter century prior to September 11th, the figure of the Arab or Muslim terrorist
bent on attacking American society at its most vulnerable points was a stock character
in American popular culture.
One of the many secondary tragedies of September 11th was that the attacks so vividly confirmed
this frightening image, making it harder for Americans to see Middle Easterners in anything
but the most threatening light.
There are, of course, some important exceptions to the general rule of growing mutual antagonism
between Americans and Middle Easterners.
The state of Israel has always been popular with Americans, not just with American Jews
who see Israel as a haven and homeland for their co-religionists the world over, but
with many non-Jews as well who see in the founding of the Jewish state a heroic reenactment
of America's own pioneer origins.
It's also true that Washington enjoys close and cooperative relations with numerous other
Middle Eastern governments, though increasingly, in many cases, that cooperation has flown
in the face of popular opinion in the region.
There are numerous other ways, of course, in which Americans and Middle Easterners have
moved closer to each other, achieving a level of mutual understanding that would have been
impossible a few decades earlier.
Tens of thousands of Americans have lived and worked in the Middle East, and hundreds
of thousands of Middle Easterners have emigrated to the United States, altering the texture
of American cultural life.
Islam has become one of the major religions in the United States, and is routinely recognized
as such in official functions and ceremonies.
In Middle Eastern countries, American popular culture is widely consumed, admired, and emulated.
So perhaps it would be more accurate to say that Americans and Middle Easterners have
drawn ever closer to each other in recent years, and that their increasing proximity
has led to simultaneous increases in both conflict and cooperation, in both enmity
and understanding.
Yet, it's hard to avoid the conclusion that in the aftermath of September 11th, the negative
impressions significantly outweigh the positive ones.
