So those are the main themes that will be recurring throughout the lectures of this course.
By way of further background, let me now make some brief remarks on the historical background
of U.S. involvement in the Middle East after 1914.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, two simultaneous developments,
the accelerating decline of the Ottoman Empire and the emergence of the United States as a world power,
created conditions for increased U.S. involvement in the Middle East.
For several centuries, almost all of the societies of the Middle East and some societies in southeastern Europe as well
were under the control of the Ottoman Empire based in Turkey.
For the last two or three centuries, the power of the Ottoman Empire had begun to decline relative to that of the European powers.
And in the 19th century, a number of those powers, especially Britain and France, had started to encroach on portions of the empire,
even though in many cases Ottoman authority remained formally intact.
Much of North Africa came under French domination and France's cultural influence spread into Syria and Lebanon.
Britain placed Egypt under military occupation and turned a number of sheikdoms on the Arabian peninsula into military protectorates.
Also in the 19th century, a handful of nations in southeast Europe, like Greece, Bulgaria and Serbia,
won their independence from the weakening empire.
Further to the east, the ancient nation of Persia, or Iran, enjoyed nominal independence,
but was heavily dominated by two European empires, Russia and Britain.
As I indicated, at the start of the 20th century, the U.S. government had no real interest in the politics of the Middle East.
The government did, however, have an obligation to protect the lives and property of American citizens who traveled or lived in that region,
be they tourists, businessmen, philanthropists or missionaries.
Of these Americans, Protestant missionaries comprised the largest and most prominent single group.
They lived and worked throughout the lands of the Ottoman Empire and, to a lesser extent, in Iran.
From the mid-19th century until the early 20th century, most of the attention the U.S. government devoted to the Middle East
was aimed at ensuring that local governments did not trample on the rights of these American missionaries.
Sometimes, much to the irritation of U.S. officials, missionaries would get into serious trouble, forcing their government to intervene.
In the mid-1890s, for example, the Ottoman government sponsored a series of pogroms against Turkey's Armenian population,
a smaller-scale version of the anti-Armenian massacres that were to occur during World War I.
Many fleeing Armenians took refuge in the homes and schools of American missionaries,
and in the course of the rampages, some missionary property was destroyed.
The missionaries were outraged, and they began pressuring the U.S. government to force the Turkish government to pay them compensation for their damaged property.
The U.S. government obliged and got the Turks to agree to pay the missionaries a $100,000 indemnity.
But then the Turkish government, already in debt to a number of European countries, began dragging its feet,
using its labyrinthine bureaucracy to frustrate the missionaries in their attempt to collect.
So once again, the missionaries descended on their own government, demanding that it force the Turkish government to pay the indemnity.
Washington would have liked to forget the whole matter, but the missionaries were incredibly persistent and refused to let the matter die.
Finally, in 1900, five years after the initial destruction of missionary property,
the U.S. government succumbed to the pressure and sent a U.S. naval vessel to the port of Smyrna on Turkey's western coast.
Officially, the ship was paying a friendly visit, but its presence in Turkish waters was meant to be vaguely threatening,
a polite form of gunboat diplomacy, if you will.
The Turks got the message and finally coughed up the $100,000.
Another missionary embryo occurred in Iran in 1904, when an American missionary was murdered by Kurdish tribesmen,
some of whom fled across the border into Turkey.
The missionary community was incensed by the killing and demanded that the American consul in Iran take action.
So the consul convinced the Iranian government to send an expeditionary force into Turkey to capture the culprits.
Indeed, the consul was so zealous that he himself accompanied the search party.
The Turkish government responded to the Iranian invasion by launching a counter invasion of Iran.
So now the Iranian government complained to the U.S. government, saying in effect, this is all your fault.
If the American consul hadn't pressured us to go after the Kurdish tribesmen, Turkey never would have attacked us.
The Iranians demanded that the Americans pay them $100,000 in compensation, which the Americans refused to do.
Eventually the crisis died down, but it was an indication of how burdensome the missionary community could be on the U.S. government.
In these episodes and in numerous other ones, the U.S. government became embroiled in Middle Eastern controversies,
but it did so solely to protect American citizens, not because it had any interest in Middle Eastern politics.
This aloofness started to diminish in the early years of the 20th century,
as the U.S. government began to involve itself in political questions in the Mediterranean region.
