In the Spanish-American War of 1898, the United States had made its debut as a major power on the world stage,
stripping Spain of its imperial holdings in the Caribbean and the Philippines.
The United States grew even more assertive during the administration of Theodore Roosevelt, who served from 1901 to 1909.
Roosevelt asserted American power in ways that would have been unimaginable just a few years earlier.
A case in point was the Moroccan crisis of 1905 to 1906.
Morocco had been under French domination since the mid-19th century.
In 1905, Kaiser William II of Germany tried to encroach on France's position in Morocco
by pledging to support the Moroccan Sultan in his struggle against the French.
France condemned Germany's move and Europe was thrown into an uproar.
In early 1906, Roosevelt convened an international conference in Al-Jasiris, Spain.
The conference resulted in a general affirmation of France's dominant position in Morocco.
For Roosevelt, however, the substance of the dispute was far less important than the opportunity for the United States
to signal its growing willingness to take part in great power deliberations,
even in an area as peripheral to American concerns as the Mediterranean region.
In the following decade, the United States would thrust itself into great power diplomacy over the Middle East itself.
The occasion for this involvement would be the political disruptions from the First World War.
To a considerable degree, World War I has its origins in the Near East,
in particular in the political crises resulting from the decline of the Ottoman Empire.
You've probably heard it said that World War I was sparked by a crisis in the Balkans.
This is certainly true, and that Balkan crisis was intimately connected to the simultaneous unraveling of two major empires,
the Ottoman Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
For centuries, the Balkan countries had been under Ottoman domination.
As Ottoman control began loosening in the late 19th century, the subject peoples of the Balkans began agitating for political independence.
This posed a serious problem for Austria-Hungary because many of its own subject peoples were Slavs
who wanted to gain independence from the Austro-Hungarian Empire and unite with the Slavic peoples of the Balkans.
Austria-Hungary was unwilling to grant independence to the Slavs for fear of encouraging other subject peoples in the Empire to begin demanding independence as well.
It was the combination of this growing instability in the Balkans with the existence of a rigid European alliance system that eventually sparked the First World War.
For Serbia, which had gained its independence from the Ottoman Empire in the late 19th century, had an alliance with Russia, which in turn had alliances with France and Britain.
Austria-Hungary, Serbia's enemy, had an alliance with Germany.
So whenever Serbia and Austria came into conflict with each other, a frequent occurrence in the early years of the 20th century,
they risked drawing in the major powers of Europe.
And that's exactly what happened in the summer of 1914.
After the Austrian Archduke Francis Ferdinand and his wife were assassinated in Sarajevo by a Serbian militant with informal links to the Serbian government,
Austria declared war on Serbia.
Russia came to Serbia's aid and began mobilizing for war against Austria, prompting Germany, Austria's ally, to declare war on Russia.
When France showed signs of supporting Russia, Germany declared war on France, and shortly thereafter Britain declared war on Germany.
So now all of Europe was at war.
In late 1914, Turkey, which had developed close ties to Germany, joined the war on the side of Germany and Austria, causing the conflagration to spread to the Middle East.
World War I would have a devastating effect on Middle Eastern societies, less from the battlefield carnage itself than from the immense demographic and economic dislocations brought about by the war.
Hundreds of thousands of people would be uprooted from their homes, forced into exile or, in the case of the Armenians of Turkey, subject to mass murder.
Millions more would fall victim to poverty, famine, and disease because the war disrupted trade, transportation, and sanitation systems throughout the Ottoman Empire.
A situation exacerbated by the economic blockade that the allies imposed on the Empire.
These dislocations would, by war's end, contribute to the collapse of the Ottoman Empire as a whole.
And as we'll see in the next lecture, that collapse, in turn, would bring Washington into the center of great power deliberations over the political fate of the Middle East.
Thank you.
