Lecture 2 – Wilson and the Breakup of the Ottoman Empire
In this lecture, we will examine American policy toward the Middle East in the late
1910s. Generally speaking, it was not until World War II that the United States began
following systematic and sustained policies toward the Middle East. But there was an important
exception to this rule – the American experience during and immediately following World War
I. In the late 1910s, President Wilson did become deeply interested in the political
disposition of the countries of the Middle East, and he made a brief but intensive effort
to influence the post-war settlement that the victorious powers of Europe imposed on
the region. Unfortunately for Wilson, key segments of the American body politic rejected his
ambitious agenda, and by the early 1920s, the United States had all but foresworn political
involvement in the Middle East, a position it would maintain for the next two decades.
The United States did not enter World War I until 1917, and even then it confined itself
to declarations of war against Germany and Austria. It never declared war against Turkey.
This decision was partly a response to lobbying efforts by American Protestant missionaries,
who feared that war with Turkey would bring an end to their activities within the Ottoman
Empire, and perhaps even endanger the lives of American missionaries. The absence of formal
war between the United States and Turkey did make it easier for American missionaries to
function inside the Empire, and throughout the war they provided invaluable relief services
to thousands of Middle Easterners afflicted by the war and its effects.
Occasionally, American missionaries were granted privileges denied to citizens of countries
with which Turkey was at war. When the Turkish government banned all use of the English language,
because this was the language of Turkey's enemy, Great Britain, the U.S. Ambassador intervened,
pointing out that banning English would also affect citizens of the United States, with
which Turkey was not at war. So the Turkish government issued a special edict, saying
that while the ban on English remained in effect, use of the American language was still permissible.
From Washington's perspective, events in the Middle East were a sideshow to the main
action in Europe. But there were three main issues that forced the United States to pay
close attention to the region. These were the Armenian issue, the Zionist issue, and
the issue of European imperialism. Each of these three issues would occupy the United
States in the immediate post-war period as well.
Let's look at the Armenian question first. The Armenians were a Christian people whose
ancient homeland had been swallowed up by Turkey and Russia. In 1914, about two million
Armenians lived in Turkey, mostly in the East. The Turkish government's attack on its Armenian
population was at least at first a byproduct of warfare on the Turkish Russian front. After
entering the war in late 1914, Turkey attempted to invade the Russian-controlled Caucasus.
The offensive was a fiasco. The Russians not only repelled the advance, but launched an
invasion of their own into Eastern Turkey. The Russian counteroffensive was aided by
some of the Armenians living in Eastern Turkey. The Turkish government responded to this last
development by launching a brutal campaign against the Armenians. In the areas of Eastern
Turkey still under government control, Turkish authorities rounded up all the Armenians they
could find and forced them to march into the interior, where they could no longer assist
the Russian invaders. In numerous instances, Turkish soldiers and police summarily executed
all Armenian males over 15 years of age. Women and girls were raped and sometimes murdered
as well. Many others perished on the month-long trek into the interior, falling victim to
disease, starvation, exposure, or attacks by roaming bandits. Reliable figures are elusive,
but apparently over 1 million Armenians died as a result of Turkey's anti-Armenian campaign.
