American missionaries in Turkey played a key role in addressing this humanitarian catastrophe,
establishing temporary hospitals and shelters, and distributing food among the starving refugees.
In the United States, missionary organizations conducted a massive campaign to call attention
to the Armenian's plight and solicit donations for their relief.
From 1915 to 1919, the campaign raised over $30 million, a huge sum in those days.
For the most part, missionaries focused on the plight of the suffering Armenians, rather
than on the depravity of their Turkish tormentors.
Inevitably, however, the Armenian issue stirred up deep anti-Turkish and anti-Muslim hostility
in the United States, perpetuating long-standing stereotypes about Oriental despotism.
All too often, Americans viewed the situation as a simple case of Muslim persecution of
Christians, ignoring the political dimensions of the Armenian crisis, as well as the fact
that the war had made victims of many Ottoman Muslims as well.
The second issue that drew the United States into Middle Eastern affairs was Zionism.
Since the late 19th century, European Jews had been settling in Palestine, pursuing the
Zionist dream of building a homeland for the scattered Jews of the world.
Zionism was fueled by the bitter experiences of European Jews, who for centuries had endured
brutal persecution, especially in Russia and Eastern Europe.
At this time, most Jews in Europe hoped to assimilate into the larger societies in which
they found themselves, but a determined minority believed that anti-Semitism was so pervasive
that true assimilation was impossible.
Jews could never be secure, they argued, until they had acquired a homeland of their own.
Although some early Zionists favored establishing a Jewish state in Uganda, which was then a
British colony, most Zionists wished to establish their state in Palestine, the site of the
ancient Kingdom of Israel, and the spiritual and cultural homeland for much of the Jewish
diaspora.
So starting in the late 19th century, European Jews began emigrating to Palestine, buying
up land and laying the basis for an exclusively Jewish society.
These efforts were strongly opposed by Palestinian Arabs, who feared that the creation of such
a society would result in their own dispossession.
They protested to the Ottoman authorities, who placed intermittent and largely ineffectual
restrictions on Jewish land purchases in Palestine.
This was where things stood before the First World War began in 1914.
Turkey's entry into the war presented political opportunities to both Arabs and Zionists.
In their effort to defeat the Ottoman Empire, the British forged an alliance with Hussain,
the Sharif, or governor of Mecca in Western Arabia.
Britain urged Hussain to lead an Arab uprising against the Ottoman Empire.
In return, Britain pledged to support the creation of an independent Arab state, encompassing
much of present-day Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Jordan, and Syria.
Hussain accepted the deal and in 1916 launched an Arab revolt against the Ottoman Empire.
Hussain's uprising was a minor development, but it did succeed in tying down Turkish troops,
making it easier for Britain to defeat the Ottoman forces and occupy key positions in
Palestine and Iraq.
After the war, a dispute would arise over precisely what the British had promised Hussain.
Hussain insisted that Palestine was definitely included in the promised Arab state.
The British maintained that a close reading of the correspondence indicated that Palestine
was to be excluded.
One reason the British took this position after the war was because they had, in the
interim, made a separate pledge to the Zionist movement.
In 1917, a Zionist leader named Chaim Weitzman lobbied the British government to make a public
statement supporting the Zionist project in Palestine.
Such a statement, Weitzman said, could greatly aid the British war effort.
Not only would it give German Jews an incentive to abandon their support for the German government,
it might cause Russian Jews to pressure the Russian government, which seemed in danger
of making a separate peace with Germany, to stay in the war on the side of Britain and
France.
