The British government accepted Weizmann's argument that supporting the Zionist program
would aid the Allied war effort.
The British also calculated that sponsoring a Jewish homeland would serve their strategic
interests in the post-war period.
A friendly Jewish state would provide the British with a foothold in the Middle East,
helping them gain control over the communication and transportation lines between British-occupied
Egypt and British-occupied India.
Accordingly, in November 1917, British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour issued a public statement
declaring that the British government viewed with favor the establishment in Palestine
of a national home for the Jewish people.
This so-called Balfour Declaration did not give the Zionists everything they wanted.
Instead of a Jewish state, it called for a national home, and precisely what that meant
was unclear.
The declaration also indicated that this national home would be in Palestine rather than comprising
the whole of it.
Still, getting a power of Britain's stature to issue such a statement was a major achievement,
and the Zionists were overjoyed.
The U.S. government played a small role in the issuing of the Balfour Declaration.
America entered the First World War in the spring of 1917, just about the time that Chaim
Weitzman started lobbying the British government to issue a pro-Zionist statement.
Now that the United States was a belligerent, Weitzman wanted an American endorsement of
Zionism as well.
He enlisted the help of the American lawyer Lewis Brandeis, a past president of the Zionist
Organization of America, who had recently become the first Jewish justice to sit on
the U.S. Supreme Court.
Brandeis, a friend and advisor to Woodrow Wilson, lobbied the president to give his
support to the pro-Zionist statement that Balfour was preparing to deliver.
Wilson had plenty of other matters on his plate at the time, and he never gave the fate
of Palestine a great deal of attention.
To the extent that Wilson did pay attention to Palestine, he was favorably inclined toward
the Zionist cause.
Wilson was a devout Christian who saw the Jews return to ancient Israel as an essential
part of biblical prophecy.
So in October 1917, Wilson gave his blessing to the declaration, which Balfour issued the
following month.
In endorsing the Balfour Declaration, Wilson apparently gave little consideration to the
possibility that establishing a national home for the Jewish people in Palestine might
conflict with the concept of national self-determination, the principle that Wilson would soon present
to the world as an indispensable ingredient in a just and stable world order.
At that time, Jews accounted for only about 10% of the population of Palestine.
And if the non-Jewish majority were given the right to determine their political future,
they would presumably opt for something other than a Jewish national home.
So how could the United States support self-determination and Zionism simultaneously?
This dilemma would resurface in the immediate aftermath of the war.
The third issue that drew the Wilson administration into Middle Eastern affairs was that of European
imperialism.
In the very same month that Balfour issued his declaration, November 1917, the Bolsheviks
seized power in Moscow.
Upon taking power, the Bolsheviks called for unconditional negotiations to bring an end
to the war, which they denounced as an imperialist conflict.
They also proceeded to raid the Tsarist archives and publish a large number of secret documents
that supported their characterization of the war.
One of the most notorious of these documents was a secret 1916 agreement between Britain
and France, to which the Tsarist government had been privy, known as the Sykes-Picot agreement,
named after the British and French diplomats who had negotiated it.
According to this agreement, after the war, Britain and France would carve up the territory
of the Ottoman Empire and add it to their own empires.
The revelation of Sykes-Picot posed a problem for Wilson, who, since taking America into
the war, had been trying to portray the conflict as a struggle for democracy.
So in January 1918, Wilson made a speech to Congress in which he outlined his own terms
for ending the war.
These terms were known collectively as the 14 points.
Wilson unveiled the 14 points partly to answer the Bolshevik critique.
He hoped to convince the nations and peoples of the world that the war was about something
other than imperialist spoils and had a higher political and moral purpose.
