In the 14 points, Wilson presented a vision of a post-war order characterized by open
trading systems, national self-determination, and the settlement of international disputes
through transparent diplomacy, not secret treaties and aggression.
Of particular concern to us is point 12, which called for the breakup of the Ottoman Empire.
Turkey proper should remain a sovereign state, Wilson said, but the Empire's non-Turkish
components should be assured an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous development.
In this way, Wilson served notice on the Allies that he would not support the carving up of
Ottoman lands by victorious imperial powers.
He also sought to reassure the Ottoman Empire's Arab subjects that the Sykes-Picot Treaty was
not the last word on the Empire's post-war disposition.
If the Arabs kept fighting alongside Britain, Wilson implied, they would still be rewarded
by something approaching political independence.
By the fall of 1918, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Ottoman Turkey were defeated.
Indeed, the strain of war had been so great that the Ottoman Empire, like the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, disintegrated.
Turkey survived as an individual nation, but its subject nations were stripped away from
it, and placed under the control of the victorious allies.
What should become of those subject nations was one of the major questions that Wilson
had to consider, as he sailed off to Europe in December 1918 to take part in the post-war
conference that the victorious powers held in Paris.
The issues Wilson now faced were essentially the same ones that had confronted him during
the war itself, European imperialism, Zionism, and the Armenian question.
The powers that gathered in Paris were confronted with a welter of conflicting claims with respect
to the Middle East.
Britain and France still hoped to divide up the Ottoman Empire's Arab lands on the
basis of the Sykes-Picot agreement.
Sharif Hussain and his supporters demanded that those lands become an independent Arab
state.
The Zionists insisted that Britain fulfill its pledges in the Balfour Declaration and
facilitate the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
The Armenians were calling for an independent state on portions of Turkish and Russian territory.
Initially, Wilson hoped to arrive at a Middle Eastern settlement that honored the principle
of autonomy outlined in .12 of his 14 points.
But it was difficult to reconcile this hope with Britain's and France's imperialist
ambitions.
Eventually, the powers reached a compromise.
Instead of being granted autonomy, the Ottoman Empire's non-Turkish areas would be temporary
administered by the victorious powers until they were ready for independence.
Precisely, who would administer which area would take a couple years to work out?
By then, the United States had withdrawn from active participation in world affairs and
had little involvement in the resulting arrangements.
Throughout much of 1919, however, Wilson still expected the United States to be an important
player in the Middle East settlement.
And in the spring of that year, he sent an American commission headed by Henry C. King,
the president of Oberlin College, and Charles R. Crane, a businessman and philanthropist,
to travel to the region to ascertain the wishes of its native inhabitants.
Theoretically, the findings of the King Crane Commission would help determine what sort
of mandate system would be placed over the region, but things didn't quite work out that
way.
The King Crane Commission spent several weeks in the Middle East, mostly in Syria and Palestine,
meeting with representatives of the various ethnic, religious, and national communities.
By the summer of 1919, the Commission had arrived at two fundamental conclusions.
The first conclusion concerned Syria, which just about everyone assumed would be placed
under a French mandate.
The King Crane Commission discovered that the Syrians hated the French and were totally
opposed to a French mandate over Syria.
Over the last several decades, despite the fact that Syria had remained under Ottoman
political administration, French cultural and religious institutions had proliferated
in Syria, and Syrians had chafed under this influence.
The King Crane Commission reported that while the Syrians' first choice was immediate independence,
if there had to be a mandate, the Syrians would want it to be an American one, with
a British mandate coming in as a distant third choice.
A French mandate, however, was out of the question.
