The Commission's second finding concerned the fate of Palestine.
The Commission concluded that the Zionist program could not be implemented without causing
the complete dispossession of the present non-Jewish inhabitants of Palestine.
This would be a gross violation of the principle of national self-determination, which President
Wilson had publicly embraced.
The Commission urged that the Zionist program be abandoned and that Palestine, along with
Transjordan, a large swath of territory east of the Jordan River, be joined to the Syrian
mandate.
The findings of the King Crane Commission, which were submitted to the U.S. government
in August 1919, had no influence on U.S. policy and thus no impact on the deliberations over
the Middle East mandates.
The report itself was buried in the State Department Archives, not to be made public
until 1922, by which time the mandates had already been assigned.
For years thereafter, historians sympathetic to the Arab cause would look back with great
wistfulness on the King Crane Commission and especially on its findings concerning Palestine.
If only those findings had been implemented, they would say, just think how much bloodshed
and violence could have been avoided.
Zionist scholars countered that King and Crane, far from being disinterested and open-minded
observers, were committed opponents of the Zionist movement and that Crane in particular
was a notorious anti-Semite, which was true.
In one sense, however, the whole question is moot since the recommendations of the King
Crane Commission had no real chance of being implemented.
By the time King and Crane submitted their report in August 1919, Wilson's whole program
of active involvement in old world affairs had come under severe attack at home.
Wilson's opponents in the U.S. Senate were threatening to reject ratification of the
Treaty of Versailles, which had resulted from the Paris Peace Conference.
American acceptance of the Treaty of Versailles was the foundation on which the entire edifice
of Wilson's foreign policy rested.
With much more urgent concerns on his plate, Wilson had little time for Middle Eastern affairs
and he probably never even read the King Crane report.
A month after the report was submitted, Wilson suffered a massive stroke that paralyzed half
his body and for the remainder of his presidency he holed up in the White House virtually in
Communicado with his wife Edith serving as the sole conduit of information between him
and the outside world.
So Wilson was ill-equipped to say the least to exert his personal influence on behalf
of the King Crane report.
Even if Wilson had remained healthy, it is extremely doubtful that he would have pressured
the Allies to implement a policy that not only denied the French a mandate in the Middle
East but repudiated a public commitment that the British government had made and that Wilson
himself had endorsed to support the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
Indeed, once the U.S. Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles in the fall of 1919, the
United States was in a poor position to exert its influence in any direction.
The United States did not even formally participate in the conference at which the final allocations
of mandates were made, the San Remo Conference held in Italy in the spring of 1920.
At San Remo, the victorious European powers decided to give France a single mandate over
Syria and Lebanon and to give Britain separate mandates over Iraq, Transjordan and Palestine.
What was needed in the British mandate was the obligation to implement the Balfour Declaration.
These mandates would operate under the auspices of the League of Nations, the international
organization created by the Treaty of Versailles.
Of all the Arab nations lying, east of Egypt, only Saudi Arabia was to receive immediate
independence.
The decisions made at San Remo caused shock and dismay throughout the Arab Middle East.
To most politically conscious Arabs, San Remo represented a disgraceful reneging on previous
Western pledges of support for Arab independence, be they Britain's promises to Sharif Hussain
or Woodrow Wilson's soaring rhetoric of national self-determination.
The Palestinians and the Syrians had clearly communicated their opposition to the Balfour
Declaration and to a French mandate over Syria, and yet both projects were being imposed
on them anyway.
Not for the last time, the Western powers were accused of thwarting the basic political
aspirations of the Arab people.
