Syria was not the only area over which the United States had been urged to acquire a mandate.
Shortly after the mandate system was first proposed, Britain and France began pressuring the United States to assume two mandates in Turkish territory.
The first, over Constantinople and the Turkish Straits, which served as a passageway from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean.
The second, over a separate Armenian Republic to the East, which had declared its independence during the war.
Both Britain and France were afraid that Russia, now under Bolshevik leadership, might take advantage of Turkey's weakened state and start encroaching on the Middle East.
Allied control over Armenia and the Straits would help prevent such expansion.
But Britain and France were also deeply suspicious of each other.
Neither country wanted to permit the other an opportunity to expand its power and influence in the Middle East.
Giving the mandates to the United States, which was assumed to be free of imperial ambition in this region, seemed to be the best way around the problem.
Once the Senate rejected the Versailles Treaty in late 1919, it was clear that the United States could not assume responsibility for the Turkish Straits.
But the idea of establishing a U.S. mandate over Armenia persisted, largely because American missionary groups strongly supported the proposal.
In May 1920, an ailing Wilson acceded to missionary pressure and asked the Senate to approve a mandate over Armenia.
The Senate promptly rejected the idea.
With the United States refusing to assume the Turkish mandates, the burden reverted to Britain and France.
Yet neither Britain nor France had the stomach for the task, which could not be accomplished without an indefinite and draining commitment of forces.
For although Turkey had accepted the loss of its empire, it was determined at all costs to resist any encroachments on Turkey proper.
The Allies abandoned the proposed Turkish mandates and in late 1920 quietly stood by as Turkey defeated the forces of the Armenian Republic, whose territory was absorbed by Turkey and the Soviet Union.
Britain and France continued to occupy Constantinople and the Turkish Straits for another couple years, but their presence was strongly resisted by an uprising within the Turkish military led by a dynamic young officer named Mustafa Kamal.
In 1923, the Allies signed a new treaty with Turkey, the Treaty of Lausanne, which finally freed Turkey of Allied occupation.
By now, Mustafa Kamal had become Turkey's de facto leader.
In late 1922, a national assembly loyal to Kamal convened and formally abolished the Ottoman Sultanate and declared Turkey a republic.
Kamal later became President of Turkey, a position he would hold until his death in 1938.
Also in 1922, the British and French mandates were formally established in the Middle East under the auspices of the newly created League of Nations.
As previously agreed, Britain got mandates over Iraq, Palestine and Transjordan, while France was entrusted with Syria and Lebanon.
In Palestine, the British began preparing the ground for an eventual Jewish homeland, facilitating the creation of Zionist state building institutions and allowing a regular influx of European Jews to immigrate to the country.
The post-war settlement that emerged in 1922 is of crucial importance since it established territorial boundaries that with few exceptions would become permanent frontiers.
The European imperial powers would eventually relinquish their control over the Middle East, but the lines they drew remain with us today.
In all of these developments, the U.S. government had no official involvement and not even much interest.
For by the start of the 1920s, the American body politic had rejected Wilson's vision of active U.S. involvement in international politics, returning to a posture of political aloofness.
But as we shall see in the next lecture, this isolationist stance extended only to political matters in an economic sense, and to some extent a cultural one, Americans would find themselves bound up as never before in the affairs of the Middle East.
