Lecture 3, The Enter War Period
Today I'm going to talk about the two decades separating World War I and World War II.
A period in which official U.S. involvement in the Middle East was minimal, but in which
images and ideas about the Middle East were widely circulated in American popular culture.
I won't have a great deal to say about events in the Middle East itself, but rather will
focus on what was going on within the United States.
But before I talk about that, let me briefly sketch in the political situation in each
of the major areas of the Middle East during the interwar period.
As we saw last time, World War I brought about the collapse of the Ottoman Empire.
The Empire's non-Turkish holdings were stripped away from it, and Turkey emerged as a modern
republic under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal, who served as president until his death in
1938.
Some years after taking office, Kemal was given the surname Ataturk, which means father
of the Turks.
In the 1920s and 1930s, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk launched a remarkably ambitious campaign to
recast Turkey as a modern, westernized nation.
He undertook social and educational programs aimed at de-emphasizing Turkey's Middle Eastern
and Islamic heritage in favor of secularism and Turkish nationalism.
As for the Arab nations, newly freed from Ottoman control, they now found themselves
under the authority of the League of Nations mandates.
France got a single mandate over Syria and Lebanon, while Britain got separate mandates
over Iraq, Transjordan and Palestine.
The French mandates remained in place until World War II.
Of the British mandates, Iraq was granted formal independence in 1932, but only after
it signed a defense treaty with Britain allowing it to maintain air bases in the country and
to enjoy de facto control over Iraqi decision-making.
A similar sort of independence would be arranged for Transjordan, though that wouldn't come
to pass until 1946, a year after World War II ended.
In Palestine, Britain set about the task of implementing the Balfour Declaration, assisting
with the establishment of Jewish state-building institutions and permitting a regular flow
of European Jews to enter the country.
Egypt had not been placed under a formal mandate, but it remained subject to military
occupation by Britain.
The British officially recognized Egypt as an independent nation, but continued to exert
de facto control over its government.
On the other side of the former Ottoman Empire lay Iran, which was formally independent but
had long been dominated by Russia and Britain.
In the early 1920s, an army officer named Reza Khan took power in a coup and shortly
thereafter crowned himself monarch of Iran, taking the name Reza Shah Pahlavi.
Reza Shah convinced Britain and Russia to withdraw the troops they had stationed in
Iran during the war, and throughout the interwar period he was able to play the two powers
off against each other such that Iran enjoyed a modicum of genuine independence.
Somewhat like Ataturk, though on a less ambitious scale, Reza Shah sought to modernize, westernize,
and secularize Iranian society.
So with that background out of the way, let's look at the United States during the interwar
period and how events and images from the Middle East helped shape American society
and culture.
As we saw last time, in the immediate aftermath of World War I, the U.S. Senate defeated Woodrow
Wilson's internationalist agenda.
It refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles and kept America from joining the newly formed
League of Nations.
In the 1920 presidential election, the American people voted for Warren Harding, an amiable
but unimaginative politician who promised the country a return to normalcy.
He meant to say normality, but language was never Harding's strong point.
Harding's election ushered in a dozen years of Republican control of the White House.
The next two presidents, Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover, were also Republicans, a period
in which the U.S. government kept a low profile in world affairs.
