Out of this uprising grew the romantic myth of Lawrence of Arabia.
Colonel T.E. Lawrence was a British Army intelligence officer sent by his government
to the Arabian desert to help train and advise the Arab tribes taking part in the revolt.
Lawrence did make a real contribution to the Allied war effort, mainly by helping the Arab
tribesmen dynamite Turkish railway lines.
Even in the grand scheme of things, his role was fairly minor.
Lawrence's relative insignificance did not, however, prevent him from being transformed
into a romantic hero.
Toward the end of the war, Lawrence was discovered by an American publicist named Lowell Thomas.
In 1917, the Wilson administration had sent Thomas to Europe to find dramatic stories
that would generate public support for the war back home.
Thomas spent a few months covering the trench warfare of Europe, but not surprisingly was
unable to come up with any appealing stories.
So he moved on to the Middle East, where Britain's attempts to capture the Holy Land from the
Turks seemed to promise better copy.
In the Middle East, Lowell Thomas learned about Colonel Lawrence and the desert uprising
against the Turks, and he moved out to the Arabian desert, spent a few months with Lawrence,
and compiled some colorful stories about his exploits.
The war ended before the U.S. government could make propaganda use of Thomas' material,
but in the early post-war years, Thomas returned to the United States and struck out on his
own, putting together a multimedia presentation about Lawrence that was shown in theaters
and concert halls across America, and eventually throughout the English-speaking world.
Combining lecture, film, music and slides, Thomas' presentation depicted Lawrence as
a dashing hero who had championed the cause of Arab independence and had almost single-handedly
defeated the Ottoman armies.
Lawrence of Arabia became a huge celebrity in the United States, his fame rivaling that
of Charles Lindbergh.
Lawrence's celebrity was partly responsible for launching an Arabian craze in the 1920s,
which had hip young Americans affecting Arab-style dress, crooning love ballads like the Sheik
of Arabi, and gyrating to the Huchikuchi, a sexually suggestive dance meant to approximate
Middle Eastern belly-dancing.
But perhaps the most prominent manifestation of the Arabian craze was the spate of sun-and-sand
movies in which swashbuckling heroes rode, fought and romanced their way across the deserts
of Arabia or North Africa.
In the 1920s, nearly 90 movies with Arabian themes were produced in the United States,
a considerable number given the relative infancy of the medium.
The biggest star of this genre was an Italian-American actor named Rudolf Valentino, whose elegant
gestures and smoldering good looks generated a huge devoted following, consisting mainly
of teenage girls and young women.
Valentino's Arabian adventure movies, the most famous of which were the Sheik and Son
of the Sheik, were pretty formulaic.
They typically featured a young European or American woman who, while traveling in the
Arabian desert, was abducted by wicked and lust-filled Arab bandits only to be rescued
in the end by the dashing, nomadic hero with whom she had already fallen in love.
What made these love stories palatable was the fact that the hero, though living the
life of a nomadic Arab, was actually never of Arab blood himself, but was rather a European
who, as an infant, had been separated from his true family and raised in the desert.
So essentially what you had were two Western protagonists celebrating their love against
an exotic background.
To be sure, during the interwar years, America's engagement with Middle Eastern themes was not
entirely frivolous.
It had its serious side as well.
This was especially true in the 1930s, when some of the concerns that would define the
post-World War II period began forcing Americans once again to pay attention to overseas events.
As we'll see in future lectures, after World War II, U.S. policy toward the Middle East
would often center on three major issues, Zionism, oil, and the Cold War.
Two of those issues, Zionism and oil, began to impose themselves on American consciousness
in the 1930s, prompting a re-engagement with international affairs.
