Let's look at Zionism first.
During World War I, the Zionist movement had grown rapidly in the United States.
The main Zionist group in the country, the Zionist Organization of America, acquired
200,000 members.
After the war, however, American Zionism went into decline.
One of the main reasons for the movement's growth during the war, the wartime suffering
of Jewish communities within the Ottoman Empire, was no longer so pressing as life
for Jews in the former empire improved in peacetime.
Moreover, following the issuing of the Balfour Declaration in 1917, many American Zionists
assumed that their work was done.
Now that Britain had given its blessing to a Jewish national home in Palestine, they
believed it was up to European Jews to emigrate to Palestine and build such a homeland.
Few American Jews wished to settle in Palestine themselves.
The onset of the Great Depression in the early 1930s brought about a further decline
in American Zionism.
The economic crisis was so severe that most American Jews, like Americans generally, were
obliged to turn their attention inward and concentrate on the more pressing task of making
ends meet.
Few Jews had the time, energy or resources to devote to Zionist activities at this time.
All this started to change with Hitler's coming to power in Germany in 1933.
Hitler's anti-Semitic campaign forced American Jews to recommit themselves to bettering the
lot of their co-religionists in Europe.
Now initially, Hitler seems not to have intended to exterminate the Jews outright.
His main objective in the 1930s was to make life for German Jews so miserable that they
would flee the country en masse, leaving their money and property behind.
To accomplish this goal, the Nazi regime not only passed discriminatory laws, but launched
a series of public campaigns to harass, intimidate and physically attack German Jews.
The culmination of this initial phase of Nazi anti-Semitism was an event in 1938 known as
Kristallnacht, or the Night of the Broken Glass, when Nazi goons went on a violent
rampage looting Jewish shops, burning down synagogues, assaulting Jews and engaging in
other forms of violence.
As intended, Hitler's anti-Jewish campaign caused a major exodus of Jews out of Germany.
Between 1933 and 1939, about 225,000 Jews or roughly one-third of Germany's Jewish population
fled the country.
In retrospect, of course, that number was tragically small, since the vast majority of
those left behind eventually ended up in the Nazi death camps.
One reason that more Jews did not succeed in leaving Germany was the unwillingness of
other countries to take them in, for the Great Depression was a global phenomenon, and just
about every country to which German Jews might have fled was unwilling to put further strain
on its own resources by permitting an influx of impoverished and jobless refugees.
The United States was no exception to this rule, and throughout the 1930s, the number
of German Jews admitted to this country was pitifully inadequate given the magnitude of
the problem.
As I mentioned, in 1924, Congress had passed the National Origins Act, which imposed strict
limits on the number of immigrants allowed into the country.
According to the Act, total immigration into the United States could not exceed about 150,000
people per year, with each nationality allotted a share of that total based on its percentage
of the population back in 1890.
Now relative to most other nations, Germany had a fairly generous allotment due to the
large number of Germans who were already in the United States by 1890.
Under the Terms of the National Origins Act, about 25,000 Germans could enter the country
each year.
But relative to the number of German Jews who needed a place of refuge, that allotment
was hardly sufficient.
Worse still, for many years in the 1930s, the German immigration quota was not even filled,
because the Act contained a further provision authorizing the U.S. State Department to deny
an entry visa to any prospective immigrant who did not have the means to support himself
in the United States, and was thus, in the words of the legislation, likely to become
a public charge.
