One of the most striking transformations in American life in the 1920s was the growing
reliance on the automobile.
At the start of the decade, 25 percent of American households owned a car.
By decades end, the figure was 60 percent.
This phenomenon, in addition to transforming American social and cultural life, dramatically
increased America's reliance on foreign oil.
To be sure, the vast majority of America's petroleum needs were met by domestic oil drilling,
not until the late 1960s would the United States start getting most of its oil from overseas.
But by the 1920s, the foreign share was growing at a rate that alarmed U.S. government officials
and oil company executives, who began an intensive search for reliable overseas sources of oil.
Two countries known to have extensive oil deposits were Iran and Iraq.
The British already had an unbreakable lock on the oil concessions of Iran, but American
oil companies had better luck breaking in to the oil business of Iraq.
In 1928, after several years of intensive negotiation, a consortium of American oil companies
signed an agreement with three other oil companies, one British, one French, and one
Dutch, whereby all four parties pledged to cooperate with each other in exploring for
oil in the lands of the former Ottoman Empire.
The deal was known as the Red Line Agreement because, according to legend, one of the negotiators
took out a red pencil, drew a line around the former Ottoman Empire, and proposed that
that be the area covered by the agreement.
The Red Line Agreement enabled American oil companies to extract oil from Iraq, at that
time the only country in the former Ottoman Empire with large, proven oil reserves.
But that was soon to change for a neighboring country, Saudi Arabia, would be shown to contain
even larger reserves.
In the early 1930s, Charles Crane, whom we met last time as a member of the King Crane
Commission, got permission from Ibn Saud, the King of Saudi Arabia, to sponsor a geological
survey of Saudi Arabia.
The survey concluded that the country probably contained considerable reserves, and an American
oil company, Standard Oil of California, or SOCAL, put in a bid with the Saudi government
for an oil concession.
Under the terms of the Red Line Agreement, the other oil companies that were party to
the agreement had to be given the opportunity to place bids of their own.
But none of the other governments had much faith that Saudi Arabia contained extensive
oil reserves, and they declined to place serious bids.
So in 1933, SOCAL was awarded the concession.
The gamble paid off in 1938, when geologists working for SOCAL, which had since merged with
a number of other American companies, struck oil in Saudi Arabia.
Once oil was discovered in Saudi Arabia, other countries rushed in to get their own concessions.
These parties included not just the other companies that had signed the Red Line Agreement,
now belatedly realizing their mistake, but the governments of Germany, Italy, and Japan,
the nations that would shortly become the Axis powers in World War II.
But the American oil companies had the favorite position and were able to enjoy a virtual monopoly
on Saudi oil.
Given the magnitude of Saudi reserves and their significance for American economic and
strategic security, it was only a matter of time before the U.S. government stepped
in to actively protect the American oil companies concession.
This would start to happen in a significant way during World War II.
So on the eve of the second great war of the 20th century, two of the major issues that
would define post-war American policy toward the Middle East, Zionism and oil, had already
started to come to the fore.
In our next lecture, we'll look at the events of World War II, which catapulted the United
States into superpower status with profound and lasting implications for U.S. relations
with the Middle East.
