Lecture 4, U.S. and the Middle East during World War II
In this lecture, we're going to look at American involvement in the Middle East during the
Second World War.
It was during that conflict that the pattern we still witness today, whereby the United
States is vitally concerned about the political character and geopolitical orientation of
Middle Eastern states and devises deliberate and elaborate policies accordingly, was first
established.
In the decades leading up to the war, American interests in the region had been almost entirely
missionary, philanthropic, educational, and commercial.
The main concern of the U.S. government was making sure that the individuals and institutions
engaging in such activities were not obstructed or endangered and that they received reasonable
compensation for their efforts.
Apart from the brief flurry of Wilsonian activity in the aftermath of World War I,
the United States had not concerned itself with the political character or geopolitical
orientation of the countries of the Middle East.
As long as the various American interests in the region were allowed to function and
prosper, Washington was satisfied.
Once it entered World War II, however, the U.S. government could no longer ignore the
geopolitical orientation of Middle Eastern countries.
It was essential for the war effort that the Middle East not fall under the control of
Nazi Germany and its allies.
Should that happen, Germany and Japan might be able to link up with each other along Asia's
southern rim, making it impossible for the United States to send war supplies to Russia,
its wartime ally.
Should the Axis powers take over the Middle East, they would also, of course, gain control
of the region's enormous oil reserves.
Further to the West, North Africa assumed vital importance as a staging area for the
United States in Britain to launch their invasion of Fascist Italy, from which they
hoped to move northward to attack German positions in Central Europe.
In these ways, it became, for the first time, essential to the overall security of the United
States that the countries of the Middle East be under the control of friendly forces, whether
indigenous or European.
While U.S. involvement in World War II began, of course, with Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor
in December 1941, to which Washington responded by declaring war on Japan.
A few days later, Nazi Germany declared war on the United States, bringing America into
the European theater of the war as well.
One of the principal advantages the United States enjoyed in waging World War II was
its enormous industrial capacity.
This capacity, combined with the fact that the United States was the only major combatant
to escape physical devastation, allowed America to serve as the great arsenal of democracy,
in the words of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
To make the most of America's industrial potential in the war, Roosevelt devised a policy known
as Lend-Lease, whereby the United States loaned its wartime allies military equipment, planes,
ships, weapons, ammunition, and so on, without worrying too much about the timing or manner
of repayment.
For the duration of the war, the Allies would not have to compensate the United States for
any equipment they received.
Once the war was over, they could either give the equipment back or compensate the United
States in some other way.
The biggest recipient of Lend-Lease aid was Britain, but the Soviet Union also received
a huge amount of aid, about $11 billion worth over the course of the war.
And one of the most important routes by which the United States supplied Russia with aid
was the so-called Persian Corridor.
Materiel would be shipped through the Persian Gulf to Iran and then transported northward
over Iranian territory.
The great advantage of the Persian Corridor was that it could be operated at all times
of year due to the relatively warm climate.
Most of the other corridors for supplying Russia were frozen over during the winter
months.
For the Persian Corridor to remain open, of course, it was essential that Iran remain in
Allied hands.
And to accomplish this, in early 1942, the United States sent its troops to occupy Iran,
which was already under joint Anglo-Soviet occupation.
