Some months earlier, in August 1941, Britain and the Soviet Union had forced Reza Shah,
the ruler of Iran, to abdicate his throne on the grounds that he was too sympathetic
to Germany. Reza Shah was replaced by his son, Muhammad Shah Pahlavi, who was then in
his early twenties and was much more malleable than his father. Muhammad Shah permitted Britain,
the Soviet Union, and later the United States, to occupy Iran for the duration of the war.
A huge American establishment, employing tens of thousands of U.S. troops and Iranian employees,
was built up in Iran. The main functions of this operation were to offload cargoes at
the docks, assemble trucks and planes and specially designed plants, and then ship the
material to the Soviet Union on trains operated by the U.S. Army. Russia received millions
of tons of American equipment in this way, enough to sustain 60 Soviet combat divisions
on the Eastern Front against Germany. Iran itself became a recipient of lend-lease assistance,
although most of the aid it received consisted of grain and other foodstuffs that had become
scarce during the war, rather than military equipment. A U.S. military personnel also
assisted the Iranian government in organizing and training its internal police forces. It
was the start of an extremely intimate relationship between the U.S. and Iranian governments that
would continue right up until the Iranian Revolution of the late 1970s.
But if governmental relations between the two countries were close, social relations
between the two peoples were not without tension. The sudden appearance in Iran of tens of thousands
of American troops made a certain amount of friction inevitable. One of the most serious
problems was the large number of traffic accidents involving military personnel driving through
the narrow streets of Iranian towns. On hundreds of occasions, Iranian civilians were injured
or killed by American drivers, causing the Iranian government to file protests with the
U.S. diplomatic mission in Tehran. Unfortunately, American diplomats were not always as sensitive
about the issue as they could have been. In a cable to Washington, the U.S. minister offered
the following explanation for why Iranians kept getting hit by American cars. The reflexes
of the Iranian, to whom the automobile is still a comparatively recent innovation, are relatively
slow, and by the time the pedestrian endeavors to get out of danger, it is apt to be too
late. Iran was important to the United States not only for its strategic location, but for
its considerable oil reserves as well. Access to cheap and readily available oil was crucial
to the American war effort, especially since the United States was exporting oil to many
of its wartime allies. Moreover, in the early 1940s, it was mistakenly assumed that domestic
American oil reserves were nearly exhausted and that any additional oil required by the
United States would have to come from overseas. Of the three countries that occupied Iran
during World War II, only Britain had been granted the right to extract and market Iranian
oil. The Soviet Union and the United States were eager to gain oil concessions of their
own, and both countries pressured the Iranian government to grant such concessions. Many
Iranian politicians resented this pressure, and in 1944 the Iranian parliament passed
a law forbidding the cabinet from granting any additional oil concessions without parliament's
permission. At least for the time being, Britain was able to retain its monopolistic position
in Iran. Another Middle Eastern country of crucial
interest to the United States was Saudi Arabia. As we saw in the previous lecture, in the 1930s,
American oil companies had acquired an oil concession in Saudi Arabia. For the reasons
I just mentioned, the importance of oil to the war effort and the belief that the United
States was about to run out of oil, Saudi oil assumed much greater significance after
the United States entered World War II.
