In the fall of 1942, the Americans and the British landed their forces on the shores
of Morocco and Algeria, meeting only scattered Vichy resistance.
The Allies were worried, however, that they would encounter stiffer Vichy opposition as
they proceeded eastward toward Tunisia.
So the Allied commander of the North African operation, an American Army general named
Dwight D. Eisenhower, cut a deal with a Vichy French admiral named Jean Darlan, promising
to make him High Commissioner in North Africa if Darlan ensured that local Vichy forces
cooperated with the Allies.
The specter of an American general cutting a deal with a Vichy official, especially
Darlan, who was known to have fascist sympathies, was extremely controversial in the United
States.
Indeed, the public outcry was so intense that Eisenhower's career almost ended there.
But President Roosevelt defended the Darlan deal as a temporary experience and kept Eisenhower
on.
The bottom line, after all, was that Allied forces had gotten a foothold in North Africa
and were now in a position to push on to Tunisia.
In 1943, the Allies defeated the German forces in Tunisia, seized the German-run airfield
and used it as a launching pad for invading Sicily, proceeding from there to the Italian
peninsula.
Fascist Italy was knocked out of the war and the Allies advanced up the peninsula into
Central Europe, an operation that contributed significantly to Germany's ultimate defeat.
Throughout the first half of the 1940s, U.S. diplomacy toward the Middle East was overwhelmingly
geared toward defeating the Axis powers.
Virtually every major decision American leaders made in that region was determined on the basis
of how it would aid the war effort.
But the progress of the war was not necessarily the overriding concern of the political leaders
and peoples of the Middle East, who were primarily interested in gaining or enhancing the political
independence of their own countries.
The more the United States became politically involved with the region, the more it had
to concern itself with these nationalist aspirations.
The default position of the United States was to be sympathetic to the desire of colonized
peoples or emerging nations to achieve full national sovereignty after the war.
This was in keeping not just with the Wilsonian principle of national self-determination but
with an even older American tradition of anti-colonialism, stemming from the fact that the United States
itself had gained its independence by staging a revolt against a colonial power.
Another more pragmatic reason to favor independence for subject peoples was that in many cases
the United States stood to benefit by such support.
The European powers had erected high tariff barriers around their imperial holdings and
had monopolized the industries inside the countries they dominated.
Americans believed that the removal of such protections would benefit American exporters
and investors who, given the enormous strength of the U.S. economy, were bound to perform
very well on a level playing field.
The third reason was the nature of America's enemies in the war.
On the one hand, the United States found itself opposing Nazi Germany, which was committed
to the doctrine of racial supremacy.
It was natural for the United States to try to differentiate itself from that doctrine
as starkly as possible, and one way to do that was to distance itself from the legacy
of European imperialism, which had itself so often relied on supremacist doctrines.
On the other hand, the United States was in a mortal struggle against Japan, which was
explicitly appealing to the non-white and colonized peoples of the world.
Roosevelt feared that these people might indeed rally to Japan's side.
The best way to prevent that, he believed, was to demonstrate that the United States
was not committed to white supremacy or imperialism, but was instead well-disposed toward emerging
peoples and nations.
So paradoxically, both of these conflicts against white supremacist Germany and against
anti-white supremacist Japan pushed the United States to take a stronger anti-imperialist
position than it might have otherwise.
