Lecture 5 Origins of the Cold War in the Middle East
In this lecture, we are going to look at U.S. actions in the Middle East during the early
Cold War years, from 1945 to 1950.
As we saw in the previous lecture, America's entry into World War II fundamentally altered
the way in which the U.S. government thought of the Middle East.
For the first time, U.S. officials became convinced that American security depended
on the political character and geopolitical orientation of Middle Eastern countries.
Accordingly, Washington began devising and implementing comprehensive and deliberate policies
toward the region, something it had never bothered to do in the past, except during
that brief period of Wilsonian activism in the immediate aftermath of World War I.
Once World War II ended, the United States continued to be concerned with the geopolitical
orientation of the Middle East.
For although the Axis powers had been vanquished, the United States faced a new rival in the
form of international communism.
In this struggle, too, the U.S. government was determined to ensure that the Middle East's
resources and strategic positions remained accessible to America and its allies, a position
Washington maintains to this day.
The American president confronting this new post-war world was, of course, Harry S. Truman
who had been suddenly thrust into the presidency following the death of Franklin Roosevelt in
April 1945, just prior to Nazi Germany's surrender in World War II.
Truman had been vice president for only a few months before Roosevelt's death.
And even as vice president, he had been kept largely in the dark about developments in
foreign policy, knowing little more about foreign affairs than what he could read in
the newspapers.
Roosevelt had neglected to tell him, for example, that the United States was developing an atom
bomb.
Truman would have to learn on the job during one of the most complex periods in the history
of American policymaking, in which numerous institutions, alliances, procedures and norms
had to be established for the first time and made to work in a new and unfamiliar international
environment.
On the other hand, the United States emerged from World War II in an extremely advantageous
position.
Unlike most other industrialized nations, which had been weakened and in some cases devastated
by the war, the United States had become much more powerful and prosperous, capable of
setting the post-war agenda in the United Nations and in other international bodies.
The United States was also the sole possessor of the atom bomb, a monopoly it would retain
until 1949.
As I mentioned a moment ago, in the dawning Cold War era, U.S. officials continued to
believe that American security depended on keeping the Middle East in friendly hands.
The region's vast oil reserves were, of course, one of the principal causes of this perception.
The United States was not itself dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
Most of the oil Americans consumed came from the Western Hemisphere, but Western Europe,
which the United States was trying to revive economically, got about 75% of its oil from
the Middle East.
Japan, another nation the United States was trying to rebuild, was also overwhelmingly
dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
The economic revival of Europe and to a lesser extent of Japan was a fundamental objective
of the U.S. government for two main reasons, one reason was economic and the other geopolitical.
From an economic standpoint, U.S. officials understood that American prosperity depended
on the existence of prosperous societies abroad, which could provide markets for American
products and investment opportunities for American capital.
Geopolitically, the U.S. government wanted to prevent Communist parties from making political
inroads into Western Europe.
The best way to do that was to ensure that Western Europe was prosperous.
Indeed, the U.S. government was so eager to achieve European prosperity that in 1947
it launched the Marshall Plan, which pumped billions of dollars from the U.S. Treasury
into the economies of Western Europe.
To the success of the Marshall Plan was the easy availability of Middle Eastern oil.
