The United States also saw the Middle East as possessing great geostrategic value.
Because the Middle East was adjacent to the Soviet Union, its territory could be used
as a staging area for land and air attacks on the Soviet Union in the event the Cold
War turned hot.
Intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBMs, had not yet been developed, and U.S. war plans
relied heavily on the ability to conduct short- and medium-range bombing raids against enemy
targets.
As of 1945, Britain was still the dominant power in the Middle East.
It had mandates in Palestine and Jordan, military bases in Egypt, Libya, Jordan, Iraq, and Yemen,
oil protectorates on the Arabian Peninsula, and major oil concessions in Kuwait and Iran.
France continued to dominate much of North Africa, but its position in the Middle East
had been seriously weakened during the war, as both Britain and the United States had
essentially ganged up on France and forced it to give up its mandates in Syria and Lebanon,
both of which emerged from the war as fully independent nations.
At least for the time being, the United States was happy to see Britain retain its position
of dominance in the Middle East.
One reason for this was that U.S. officials tended to defer to Britain's longer experience
in Middle Eastern political affairs.
Britain, after all, had been a major player in the international politics of the Middle
East since the early 19th century, whereas the United States was a relative newcomer
to the game.
Britain also had a long tradition of scholarly study of Islam and of Middle Eastern culture,
and this too impressed U.S. officials, though they sometimes tweaked the Brits for being
a little pedantic.
To be sure, there was some economic rivalry between the United States and Britain, especially
over the oil riches of Saudi Arabia and Iran, but overall the Americans highly valued Britain's
involvement in the Middle East and wanted it to continue for as long as possible.
A more serious problem, of course, was that continued British domination of the Middle
East ran counter to the nationalist aspirations of most of the region's inhabitants.
America's anti-colonial heritage, as well as ordinary caution, made U.S. officials wary
of giving too much support to Britain's position in the Middle East.
On the other hand, most Middle Eastern countries were governed by monarchs or authoritarian
leaders who believed that their interests lay in maintaining close ties to the West.
So even though public opinion in the region was becoming increasingly antagonistic toward
Western Europe, these views did not necessarily affect the positions taken by Middle Eastern
governments, though in some cases when public sentiment was simply too strong to ignore,
it did have an impact on government behavior.
As long as regional governments remained basically pro-Western and as long as they had the means
to stifle most forms of dissent, the United States could afford to be relatively unconcerned
about the political consequences of following Britain's lead in the Middle East.
The crux of the Cold War lay in Europe, as the United States and the Soviet Union tangled
first over the fate of Eastern Europe and then over the post-war role of Germany.
The importance of the Middle East in American eyes lay primarily in its ability to provide
economic and physical security to America's Western European allies.
Even so, the first major Cold War crises actually erupted in the Middle East as the Soviet Union
began probing at the edges of the region, prompting the United States to increase its
own involvement there.
It was these Middle Eastern crises, in fact, that convinced President Truman that the Soviet
Union was not inclined to cooperate with the United States and Britain, and that vigorous
efforts to counter Soviet ambitions would be necessary.
The first Cold War crisis to hit the Middle East took place in Turkey in 1945 and 1946.
Russia had long wanted guaranteed access to the Dardanelles and the Bosporus, the Turkish
straits that served as an outlet from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean.
