During the war, Winston Churchill had expressed some sympathy for the Soviet position, leading
Joseph Stalin, the Soviet dictator, to believe that Britain would support or acquiesce in
Russia's claims regarding the Straits.
So in the summer of 1945, the Soviets presented a note to the Turks, requesting that Turkey
allow for joint Turkish-Soviet control of the Straits.
Although the note was phrased in polite terms, it was accompanied by Soviet troop concentrations
on the border with Turkey and by harsh anti-Turkish propaganda in the Soviet media, so the overall
impression was quite menacing from Turkey's perspective.
The Turkish government appealed to the United States and Britain for diplomatic support.
The crisis over the Straits occurred against a backdrop of growing U.S. suspicion of Moscow's
motives, and Truman was inclined to interpret the Soviet demand in extremely ominous terms.
There isn't a doubt in my mind, he privately wrote in January 1946, that Russia intends
an invasion of Turkey and the seizure of the Black Sea Straits to the Mediterranean.
Less Russia is faced with an iron fist and strong language, another war is in the making.
Only one language they understand.
How many divisions have you?
Even so, Truman reacted modestly at first, relying on indirect signals rather than direct
threats.
One such signal was issued in the spring of 1946, when the U.S. government sent the body
of the Turkish ambassador to the United States, who had died in Washington during the war,
back to Turkey for burial.
The body was sent home on board the U.S. battleship Missouri, a conspicuous symbol of American
solidarity with Turkey.
But the Soviets continued to put pressure on Turkey, renewing their demand for joint
control of the Turkish Straits.
So in the summer of 1946, the Truman administration joined the British government in sending a
tough note to the Soviet government, forcefully rejecting the Soviet position.
As Truman privately remarked upon approving the note, we might as well find out whether
the Russians are bent on world conquest now, as in five or ten years.
This time, the Soviets backed down.
The second Cold War crisis to occur in the Middle East took place in Iran.
During the war, as we saw, the United States, Britain and Russia had occupied Iran for the
purpose of maintaining a supply route from the Persian Gulf to the Soviet Union.
In early 1946, the Americans and the British withdrew their troops from Iran, but the Russians
refused to withdraw their own troops, at least refused to do so immediately.
The Soviets hoped to use their presence in northern Iran to pressure the Iranian government
to grant them oil drilling rights in the country.
To increase the pressure on the Iranian government, the Soviets had allied themselves with local
communists in Azerbaijan, a province of northern Iran.
In late 1945, these communists had proclaimed a separatist government in Azerbaijan, backed
by occupying Soviet troops.
Indeed, far from withdrawing their troops from Iran, in early 1946, the Soviets began
sending additional forces into Azerbaijan, including over 200 tanks.
Like the Turkish crisis of 1945-46, the Iranian crisis unfolded against the background of
growing east-west tension.
But in this case, the background was especially relevant, since the Iranian crisis occurred
in February and March of 1946, and thus coincided almost exactly with two of the most iconic
moments in early Cold War history.
On February 22nd, 1946, just one day after Stalin informed the Iranian government that
his troops would not be withdrawing from Iranian territory in early March as originally
promised, an American Foreign Service officer named George Kennan, then serving as Chargé
de Ferre at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, sent an 8,000-word cable to Washington, outlining
his thoughts on the emerging rivalry with the Soviet Union.
Kennan's message, which became known as the Long Telegram, presented an alarming picture
of Soviet aggressiveness, and outlined a strategy, later dubbed containment, by which the United
States and its allies could prevent the Soviets from achieving world domination.
