Kennan's long telegram caused a sensation in official Washington.
Its appeal lay in the fact that it offered both a plausible analysis of the Soviet phenomenon
and an apparently realistic approach for dealing with it.
And then, on March 5, 1946, three days after the deadline for the Soviet withdrawal from
Iran came and went without any Soviet withdrawal, former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill
gave a graduation speech at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri.
With President Truman sitting behind him on the stage, Churchill warned that an iron curtain
had descended across the continent of Europe, and that all the areas to the east of that
curtain were now subject to increasing levels of Soviet control.
So in other words, Moscow issued its challenge in Iran just as the full dimensions of the
world crisis were becoming clear, both to U.S. officials and to the American public.
And in this case, too, the U.S. government reacted with alarm, speculating that the Soviet
moves in Azerbaijan were part of a larger attempt to take over the rest of Iran and
perhaps the whole Persian Gulf.
After receiving a briefing on the Soviet's troop buildup in Azerbaijan, Secretary of
State James F. Burns smacked his fist into his palm and said, now we'll give it to them
with both barrels.
Burns then sent a note of protest to the Soviet government, and shortly thereafter, the Soviets
withdrew their forces from Iran.
Although it appeared at the time as if Moscow had backed down under U.S. threats, what really
happened was that the Soviets were outmaneuvered by the Iranian government, especially the
Prime Minister, a shrewd operator named Ahmad Qavam.
In the interim between Burns's note of protest and the Soviet withdrawal, Qavam met with
Soviet officials and promised to grant the Soviets oil drilling rights in Iran, subject
to approval by the Iranian parliament, if they withdrew their troops from the country,
and the Soviets agreed.
Once the Soviets withdrew, the Iranian government crushed the separatist movement in Azerbaijan,
and soon thereafter, the oil concession for the Soviets was presented to the Iranian parliament,
which overwhelmingly rejected it.
The Soviets had apparently assumed, mistakenly, that the Iranian parliament was a rubber stamp
for all cabinet decisions.
Having already withdrawn their troops from northern Iran and having seen their Azerbaijani
allies go down to defeat, the Soviets were in a poor position to reoccupy the country
and they let the matter drop.
The third crisis in the region occurred in 1947, and it led to a crystallization of U.S.
Cold War policy.
World War II had been financially devastating to Britain, and in the immediate postwar years,
the British were forced to drastically scale back their overseas commitments.
In 1947, Britain granted independence to the Indian subcontinent, which split up into the
separate states of India and Pakistan.
Early that same year, Britain announced that it would be abandoning its mandate in Palestine,
a subject we'll discuss in our next lecture.
Also in early 1947, Britain warned the United States that it could no longer keep giving
financial aid to Turkey and Greece.
The Truman administration was extremely worried about Turkey and Greece.
Turkey, as we've just seen, was subject to Soviet diplomatic pressure, and Greece was
in a state of civil war, with a leftist insurgency, including local communists, trying to overthrow
a right-wing government.
So the Truman administration was strongly inclined to assume Britain's role as the financial
backer of Turkey and Greece, and it decided to ask Congress to appropriate $400 million
for this purpose.
The challenge was getting Congress, now under the control of tight-fisted Republicans, to
agree to such an expenditure.
Now one way to try securing congressional support would be to warn that if the United
States didn't bail out Turkey and Greece, both countries would be taken over by the
Soviet Union.
But such a claim was debatable at best in the case of Turkey, and quite implausible in the
case of Greece.
During the war, Stalin had promised Churchill that Britain could have a free hand in Greece,
and after the war, Stalin kept his word.
Although the leftist rebels appealed for Soviet aid, Stalin refused to give them any.
The rebels did get aid in support from Yugoslavia, which had a communist government, but Yugoslavia
was an independent communist state, in no sense a satellite of Russia.
