Truman's solution to this dilemma was to use language that was simultaneously alarmist
and vague.
In his request for the $400 million, which he made in person in a major speech before
the Congress, Truman divided the world into two camps, one based on freedom and the other
on tyranny.
He warned that if the United States failed to help Greece and Turkey, both countries
would succumb to tyranny.
It sounded as if Truman was referring to the Soviet Union, but technically he wasn't.
He was able to scare Congress into appropriating the money without actually accusing the Soviet
Union of anything.
Another way Truman was able to obtain Congress's support was by stressing the regional implications
of a rebel victory in Greece.
It is necessary only to glance at the map, Truman said in his speech to Congress, to
realize that the survival and integrity of the Greek nation are of grave importance in
a much wider situation.
If Greece should fall under the control of an armed minority, the effect upon its neighbor,
Turkey, would be immediate and serious.
Confusion and disorder might well spread throughout the entire Middle East.
Truman did not have to mention how important the resources and strategic positions of this
region were to the United States and its allies.
Over the next three years, the United States supported the Greek government in its civil
war against the leftist rebels.
The Greek government was extremely brutal and authoritarian, jailing and torturing political
activists accused of supporting the leftist rebels.
The U.S. supported war against the rebels was aided by the fact that in 1948 the government
of Yugoslavia, which had been backing the rebels, publicly broke with the Soviet Union
resulting in a major diplomatic crisis.
Worried about possible Soviet retaliation, Yugoslavia no longer had time to help out
the Greek rebels whom the Greek government finally defeated in 1950.
For Truman's 1947 speech to Congress had an impact that transcended the crises in
Greece and Turkey or even in the broader Middle East.
For Truman had couched his request for aid in extremely general terms.
"'It must be the policy of the United States,' he said, "'to support free peoples who are
resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.'"
This statement, which became known as the Truman Doctrine, was a totally open-ended
commitment.
Whenever and wherever free peoples were threatened by Soviet-style revolution or tyranny, the
United States would now have a self-proclaimed obligation to help them.
To be sure, the United States would not always fulfill this obligation, but the obligation
now existed and it added to the growing sense of crisis between the superpowers.
To a considerable degree, it was the general sense of mission fostered by the Truman Doctrine
that eventually propelled the United States into the disastrous military intervention
in Vietnam.
As I mentioned earlier, the success of the Marshall Plan depended on the easy availability
of Middle Eastern oil.
To ensure such availability, the Truman administration worked closely with American oil companies
operating in the region, especially in Saudi Arabia, where U.S. companies enjoyed a favored
position.
In the early postwar years, the Truman administration waived the antitrust laws, permitting American
oil companies in Saudi Arabia to share information and pool resources the better to coordinate
the delivery of oil to Europe.
Washington also used its diplomatic clout to pave the way for the construction of a pipeline
that could carry crude oil from Saudi Arabia to the Mediterranean coast, from which it
could then be shipped to Europe.
The most feasible route for such a pipeline was across Jordanian, Syrian and Lebanese
territory.
The U.S. government had little difficulty getting the Lebanese and Jordanian governments
to agree to the construction of the pipeline across their territory, especially as each
government was guaranteed transit fees.
But Syria's permission was harder to obtain, since Shukri Khawatli, the Syrian president,
was a strident Arab nationalist who was unwilling to be bought off by a few paltry dollars.
So in 1949, the Truman administration quietly encouraged Hosni Zayim, the Syrian Army Chief
of Staff, to depose Khawatli in a coup.
The coup went off smoothly and bloodlessly, and shortly thereafter President Zayim signed
an agreement granting permission for the transit of oil across Syrian territory.
