As the Cold War intensified in the late 1940s, the United States drew closer to the Saudi
government, whose territory was not simply oil-rich but strategically located as well
within striking distance of the Soviet Union.
In 1949, the two countries concluded an agreement whereby the Saudis, in exchange for economic
and military aid from the United States, allowed the U.S. Air Force to use an air base in Saudi
Arabia.
In 1950, President Truman sent a letter to King Ibn Saud, pledging that if Saudi Arabia
was ever attacked by the Soviet Union, the United States would come to its defense.
In that same year, 1950, American oil companies reached a historic agreement with the Saudi
government over the sharing of oil profits.
Interestingly enough, this agreement had its origins in Venezuela, another oil-rich country
in which American oil companies were active.
In the late 1940s, Venezuela's nationalist government began threatening to nationalize
the country's oil facilities.
To head off nationalization, the American oil companies agreed to share their profits
with the Venezuelan government on a 50-50 basis.
The Saudis soon got wind of this arrangement and began demanding similar treatment.
They too threatened to nationalize the oil facilities if their demand wasn't satisfied.
The American oil companies realized that Saudi Arabia would probably have to get a 50-50
deal as well, but they were extremely reluctant to make such a significant financial sacrifice.
So they turned to the US government for relief.
In 1950, in a controversial decision, the US Treasury Department told the oil companies
that if they went ahead and made a 50-50 deal with the Saudi government, they could deduct
the amount of money they turned over to the Saudis from the taxes they paid to the US
government.
This arrangement benefited almost everyone.
The Saudis got a substantially larger share of the oil profits, the oil companies were
able to head off nationalization, and the US government could rest assured that Saudi
oil would remain available for economic recovery in Europe and in Japan.
The big loser in the deal was, of course, the US taxpayer, whose burden would have to
be increased to make up for the taxes that American oil companies would no longer be
sending to Washington.
This clever arrangement came to be called the Golden Gimmick.
So in the second half of the 1940s, the Middle East became thoroughly integrated into America's
strategy for waging the Cold War.
The Middle East was essential not only because its oil was needed to ensure the economic
revival of Western Europe, on which America's own geopolitical security was staked, but
because its bases could be used in a possible war with the Soviet Union.
But there were other reasons for US officials to pay close attention to the Middle East
in the late 1940s.
For it was in those years that the Zionist movement made its bid to establish a Jewish
state in Palestine, an endeavor from which Americans could not hope to remain aloof.
We'll examine US policy toward the creation of Israel in our next lecture.
