Lecture 6, Truman and the Creation of Israel
In this lecture, we are going to look at the circumstances surrounding the creation of
the State of Israel in 1948.
Needless to say, this was a momentous event in Middle Eastern history, one that would influence
virtually every aspect of subsequent U.S. policy in the region down to the present day.
The U.S. government, under President Harry Truman, played a key role in bringing Israel
into being, and it's safe to say that no other single American decision has done more
to embitter the Arab world against the United States.
Better not, that bitterness has become a basic fact of life in U.S. Arab relations, one that
American policymakers cannot afford to ignore.
Much of the historical background for the creation of Israel has already been sketched
out in the previous lectures for this course.
As you know, after World War I, the League of Nations awarded Britain a mandate over
Palestine, and Britain took over that mandate determined to fulfill the Balfour Declaration
of 1917, in which Britain had pledged to support the establishment in Palestine of a national
home for the Jewish people.
In the 1920s and 1930s, with official British support, there was a massive influx of Jewish
immigration into Palestine.
Jewish immigration was especially high after Hitler came to power in 1933 and began persecuting
German Jews, causing a growing number of them to flee the country.
Between 1920 and 1939, Jews went from being about one-tenth of the population of Palestine
to being nearly one-third.
Palestinian Arabs were deeply alarmed by this development.
Their opposition to the Zionist program was so intense that Britain decided to reverse
course by issuing the White Paper of 1939, which placed strict limits on the number of
Jews admitted into Palestine each year, and which announced that Jewish immigration would
end entirely in a few years' time.
It also called for the regulation of land sales to Zionist institutions and individuals.
The Zionists bitterly opposed the White Paper, and began an uprising of their own against
the British in Palestine.
This uprising remained muted during World War II, mainly because the Zionists for obvious
reasons supported the British war effort against Germany, but it would erupt in full fury in
the immediate aftermath of the war.
World War II had a profoundly transforming effect on the Palestine issue.
First and foremost, the Nazi Holocaust of the 1940s gave an enormous impetus to the Zionist
movement.
Prior to Hitler's rise to power, most Jews in the West had been committed to the idea
of assimilating into the larger societies in which they found themselves.
But with the rise of Hitler and the subsequent Holocaust, Jews became increasingly convinced
that anti-Semitism was so powerful that true assimilation was impossible.
Jews could never be truly secure, the argument went, until they had acquired a homeland of
their own.
So by 1945, many Jews who had previously opposed Zionism were taking a more serious look at
the Zionist project in Palestine.
It was also during World War II that the center of gravity of the Zionist movement shifted
from Europe to the United States.
Not only was most of continental Europe now under Axis control, but Britain had alienated
the Zionists by issuing the White Paper.
Increasingly therefore, Zionist activists began seeking the support of American Jews
and the patronage of the American government.
This shift in orientation was both symbolized and accelerated by the Biltmore Conference
of 1942, named for the hotel in New York City where the main components of the international
Zionist movement met to coordinate policy.
At the Biltmore Conference, the Zionist movement united behind a call for unlimited Jewish
immigration into Palestine, leading to the establishment in that territory of a fully
sovereign Jewish state.
