So, these were the circumstances that Harry Truman confronted when he was suddenly thrust
into the presidency in April 1945 following the death of Franklin Roosevelt.
Initially Truman approached the Palestine issue as an extension of the crisis surrounding
displaced persons, or DPs.
In the immediate aftermath of World War II, hundreds of thousands of homeless Europeans
– refugees, concentration camp survivors, former prisoners of war, and others – were
being housed in American military camps in Europe.
Among these DPs were tens of thousands of Jewish Holocaust survivors.
Conditions in the DP camps were often squalid, and in the first year after the war, their
inmates continued to die in the hundreds, succumbing to disease or to the cumulative
effects of years of malnourishment.
What to do about the DPs was a pressing and delicate issue.
The U.S. State Department favored returning them to their countries of origin.
But for most Jewish DPs, this was out of the question, since that would mean going back
to live amid the very societies that had victimized them during the war or had acquiesced in their
victimization.
Immigrating to Britain or the United States was another possibility, which many Jewish
Holocaust survivors would no doubt have welcomed, but both countries had placed strict limits
on the number of Jewish immigrants they would accept.
So Palestine emerged as the logical alternative, and Jews throughout the Western world in DP
camps in Britain and in the United States stepped up their demands that Britain ease
its restrictions on Jewish immigration into Palestine.
Britain however was unwilling to increase its quotas on Jewish immigration into Palestine,
which now admitted 15,000 people per year.
In the early postwar months, Britain was suffering from severe shortages of basic commodities,
including oil, and its government was extremely reluctant to take any action that might destabilize
the Middle East and jeopardize the flow of oil.
Still, something had to be done about the DP camps, whose terrible conditions were becoming
a public scandal in the United States.
In June 1945, President Truman, then only weeks in office, of course, asked Earl G. Harrison,
Dean of the University of Pennsylvania Law School, to go to Europe to investigate the
condition of the camps.
Harrison was shocked by what he found, and he wrote a report in which he recommended
that Britain be pressured to allow 100,000 Jewish DP's to emigrate to Palestine immediately.
Truman accepted this recommendation and officially conveyed it to the British government.
The British were not thrilled by this request, and they put Truman off by proposing instead
that a special Anglo-American commission be formed to study the Palestine problem and
recommend a solution.
And Truman agreed.
The result of this inquiry was the Morrison Grady Plan, named for its British and American
authors, which was submitted in the spring of 1946.
The Morrison Grady Plan called for the division of Palestine into semi-autonomous Arab and
Jewish cantons, which would be loosely linked to each other in a binational state.
The plan also proposed that any further Jewish immigration into Palestine be subject to approval
by both Arabs and Jews.
The Morrison Grady Plan was immediately rejected by Zionists and Arabs alike.
The Zionist position is easy enough to fathom, since Morrison Grady fell far short of their
objectives, unlimited Jewish immigration into Palestine, resulting in the establishment
of an exclusively Jewish state in all or most of that territory.
Morrison Grady didn't satisfy those demands, so the Zionists rejected it.
The Arab rejection of the plan may be a little harder to fathom, since considering how things
would turn out later, the Palestinians probably would have been better off had Morrison Grady
been adopted.
To comprehend the Arab's rejection, it is important to appreciate how things appeared
from their perspective.
As the Arabs sought, Palestine was an integral part of the Arab world, and should either become
an independent Arab state in its own right, or be attached to some other independent Arab
state.
It should not have to be shared with an influx of immigrants from Europe.
