The only reason Jews now made up about a third of the whole population of Palestine was because Britain had taken over the country and opened it up to foreign immigration against the will of its Arab inhabitants.
Most Arab leaders acknowledged that the Nazi Holocaust had been an immense tragedy for the Jewish people, but they insisted that the Arabs should not be made to pay the price for it.
After all, they were not the ones who had tried to exterminate the Jews, so the Arabs too rejected Morrison Grady.
With no solution to the DP problem on the immediate horizon, Zionist activists were increasingly taking matters into their own hands.
The Haganah, the military organization representing the Zionist mainstream in Palestine, smuggled thousands of Jews out of DP camps and shipped them illegally to Palestine in defiance of British restrictions.
Meanwhile, the Irgun, a right-wing Zionist group, launched commando and occasionally terrorist attacks against British targets in Palestine.
The most notorious of these attacks occurred in 1946 when the Irgun set off a bomb in Jerusalem's King David Hotel, which was then serving as Britain's military and diplomatic headquarters.
Eighty-eight people, many of them civilians, died in the blast.
By 1947, the British had had enough.
Early that year, around the same time that they said that they could no longer take responsibility for Greece and Turkey, the British announced that they would be pulling out of Palestine and turning the whole mess over to the newly created United Nations.
So a special UN commission was formed to investigate the Palestine issue and propose a solution.
In the late summer of 1947, the UN commission issued its report, which recommended that Palestine be partitioned into two states, one Arab and one Jewish.
The Zionists accepted this proposal, albeit with some reluctance since they had wanted a larger share of the country than the UN had allotted them.
The Arab countries, along with the Arabs of Palestine, flatly rejected the partition plan.
They did so for much the same reason that they had rejected Morrison Grady.
In their view, Palestine was essentially an Arab country and it should not have to be shared with European Jews, whether that sharing took the form of federation or partition.
The Arabs also objected that even if the partition plan could be justified in principle, its terms were unfair since it allotted 56% of the land to a group that then represented only one third of the population of historic Palestine.
There were then about 600,000 Jews to 1.3 million Arabs.
The final Arab argument was that the partition plan could not be implemented without uprooting thousands of Palestinian Arabs from their ancestral homes since the area set aside for the Jewish state contained many Arab villages.
In the fall of 1947, the partition plan was voted on in the UN General Assembly and President Truman had to decide how the United States would vote.
The U.S. State Department strongly opposed the partition plan, warning that it would sow and rage the Arab states that they might embargo oil shipments to the west or even align with the Soviet Union in the Cold War.
But Truman overruled the State Department and decided to support partition.
Truman's motives in doing so have long been debated by historians. Some stress the moral angle, noting that Truman was deeply moved by the plight of Jewish Holocaust survivors and saw Jewish statehood as a just measure to help rectify the situation.
Other historians have emphasized domestic politics, arguing that Truman supported the Zionist program mostly to gain the support of American Jews and supporters of Zionism generally in the 1948 presidential election.
Scholars making this argument point to the ceaseless activities of Truman's White House advisors, especially Clark Clifford, the special counsel to the president, and David Niles, the president's special advisor for minority affairs.
Unlike the officials at the State Department, Clifford and Niles were deeply concerned with Truman's reelection prospects, as well as being committed Zionists in their own right, and they constantly reminded Truman of the domestic implications of his policy decisions on Palestine.
