Undoubtedly, Truman acted out of both of these motivations.
He thought supporting the establishment of a Jewish state was morally right and politically
wise.
But there was a third factor at work that historians have all too often ignored, the
power of inertia.
By the fall of 1947, partitions seemed to be the least problematic solution, the one
that would cause Truman the fewest headaches, take up the smallest amount of his time, and
get the whole Palestine mess off of his desk at the soonest possible date.
The main alternative to partition, the Morrison-Grady Plan, had been rejected by both Zionists
and Arabs, whereas partition had the support of at least one of the contending parties.
So Truman instructed the American delegation at the UN to vote in favor of partition.
Once Truman decided in favor of partition, Clifford and Niles went to work to ensure
its passage in the UN.
Without Truman's explicit approval, and possibly without his knowledge as well, they
began meeting with the UN delegations of other nations and putting massive pressure on them
to vote for partition.
The government of the Philippines, which until 1946 had been an American colony, initially
planned to vote against partition, but changed its position when Truman's underlings hinted
that USA to the Philippines might be affected by a negative vote.
It was likewise hinted to Latin American delegations that construction of the Pan-American Highway,
on which the economies of many Latin American countries depended, might not go forward if
Latin American countries voted the wrong way on partition.
In November 1947, the General Assembly approved the partition plan by a very narrow margin.
As soon as partition was approved by the UN, fighting broke out between Zionists and Palestinian
Arabs.
The conflict was extremely vicious, with close hand-to-hand combat and high civilian casualties
on both sides.
Although the Palestinians at first seemed to have the advantage, in early 1948 the tide
of battle began turning in the Zionist favor.
As the Palestinians' military position worsened, Palestinian civilians began fleeing from the
area allotted to the Jewish state.
At first, this exodus consisted primarily of wealthy and upper-middle-class Palestinians,
but soon peasants and poorer townspeople were fleeing as well.
As the situation in Palestine deteriorated, officials at the U.S. State Department began
lobbying for reconsideration of the partition plan, arguing that the outbreak of violence
had vindicated their opposition to partition.
The longer that violence continued, they warned, the angrier the Arab world would become with
the United States, with dire consequences for U.S. interests in that oil-rich and strategically
located region.
In January 1948, a State Department policy study warned that, as a result of U.S. sponsorship
of UN action leading to the recommendation to partition Palestine, U.S. prestige in the
Muslim world has suffered a severe blow, and U.S. strategic interests in the Mediterranean
and Near East have been seriously prejudiced.
Our vital interests in those areas will continue to be adversely affected to the extent that
we continue to support partition.
The State Department urged Truman to abandon the partition plan and adopt a new policy
instead.
The alternative approach the State Department favored was for Palestine to be placed under
a UN trusteeship, until a new political solution to the conflict could be found.
This would calm down the situation and reduce the likelihood that the Arab world might be
overtaken by anti-American feeling.
Truman's White House advisers not surprisingly strenuously opposed the idea of abandoning
the partition plan in favor of trusteeship.
Although domestic politics certainly played a role in their thinking, they defended their
position on substantive grounds, arguing that the State Department was vastly overestimating
the ability of the Arab states to punish America for supporting the Zionist movement.
In March 1948, Clark Clifford complained to Truman that the United States appears in the
ridiculous role of trembling before threats of a few nomadic desert tribes.
The Arabs need us more than we need them.
They must have oil royalties, or go bankrupt.
