On this occasion, however, Truman sided with the State Department, authorizing the U.S.
delegation to propose the trusteeship idea to the United Nations.
But trusteeship could not be adopted until two-thirds of the nations in the UN General
Assembly voted in favor of it, and such a supermajority proved impossible to obtain.
Although the outbreak of fighting in Palestine had caused many governments to reconsider
the wisdom of partition, they found it difficult to justify switching over to trusteeship,
which was opposed not just by the Zionists, but by the Arabs as well, because it fell
short of full self-determination for the Palestinians.
So much to the Zionist relief, the UN General Assembly failed to adopt the trusteeship proposal.
Meanwhile, back in Palestine, the Zionists continued to gain the upper hand,
and in May 1948, they decided to declare an independent state of Israel.
Now Truman had to decide whether to recognize the new state.
Once again, the State Department advised against recognition, and once again,
Truman rejected the advice. In addition to the moral and political reasons
I mentioned already, Truman now worried that if he failed to recognize Israel immediately,
and if the Soviet Union recognized it first, then the new state might not be so favorably
inclined toward the United States. For although the Soviets would later side with the Arabs,
in 1948 they supported the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine, seeing it as a
potential vehicle for the extension of Soviet influence in the Middle East.
So to beat Moscow to the punch, Truman recognized Israel just 11 minutes
after it declared its independence. Immediately following Israel's declaration
of independence, the armies of the surrounding Arab states invaded Palestine in an effort to
prevent Israel from coming into being. But the Israeli forces were better armed and better organized,
and even had a numerical advantage over the combined Arab armies, a fact that
Esseldon acknowledged. In June 1948, there were about 36,000 Israeli soldiers to about
30,000 Arab ones, and by summer the disparity was even more heavily in Israel's favor.
Consequently, Israel won a decisive military victory over the Arab states.
By the time armistices were concluded in early 1949, the Israelis had not only successfully
held on to the area allotted to them by the UN, but managed to take over a large part of the
projected Arab state as well. The independent Arab state never came into being, since its territory
was taken over by neighboring Arab states. Jordan annexed the West Bank and the Eastern part of
Jerusalem, while Egypt took over the Gaza Strip. Meanwhile, about 750,000 Palestinian civilians
had either fled or been driven from their homes, and were now living in squalid refugee camps
in neighboring Arab countries. The Arab states insisted that the refugees be allowed to return
to their homes, but the Israelis refused on the grounds that this would alter the Jewish character
of their newly enlarged state. Truman was not happy that the Israelis were taking this position,
and for the next couple years he tried to convince them to repatriate at least some of the refugees.
But the Israelis were adamantly opposed to such a course, and Truman, increasingly preoccupied with
other foreign crises, especially the Korean War, which began in mid-1950, eventually gave up on
trying to change Israel's position. Such passivity was in keeping with Truman's whole approach to
the Palestine crisis. For while Truman's pro-Israel stance was motivated by both humanitarianism
and domestic politics, inertia too played a large role in his attitude. Beyond supporting
partition and extending recognition, Truman was not prepared to take concrete steps to bring a
Jewish state into being. He refused, for example, to take part in any UN effort to enforce partition
militarily, even though many of his advisors had warned that such an effort might be necessary.
When fighting erupted between Zionists and Palestinians after the partition vote,
and when a full-scale war broke out after Israel's declaration of independence,
Truman essentially left the Zionists to fight their own battle.
