Lecture 7, Eisenhower, the Cold War and the Middle East
In this lecture and in the next, we'll look at U.S. Middle East policy during the presidency
of Dwight D. Eisenhower.
In these years, the United States was confronted by the forces of indigenous Middle Eastern
nationalism, first in Iran and then in the Arab world.
These nationalist forces posed a serious challenge to Washington's efforts to enlist the Middle
East in the Cold War.
During the whole time he served in the White House, Eisenhower was widely regarded, especially
by liberal intellectuals, as a daughtering old geezer who cared more about his golf game
than about governing the country.
But years later, when Eisenhower's presidential papers were opened to researchers, it became
clear that he was much more on top of things than he seemed at the time.
In fact, Eisenhower was so supremely self-confident that he was perfectly happy to let everyone
think he was not really in charge.
That way, if any of his policies failed or were controversial, all the criticism would
be directed at the relevant advisors and cabinet members rather than at him.
Another reason Eisenhower was dismissed at the time was that his extemporaneous speaking
style was incredibly artless and convoluted.
His syntax was so tangled up that it was often hard to tell what he was trying to say, strengthening
the impression of a befuddled old man seriously out of his depth.
But here too, Eisenhower knew exactly what he was doing.
Once when the president was preparing for a press conference, his press secretary fretted
over how to handle a particularly sensitive foreign policy issue.
Don't worry, Jim, Eisenhower said, if that question comes up, I'll just confuse them.
In the Middle East, Eisenhower's fundamental objectives were much the same as Truman's
had been, maintaining Western access to the region's oil reserves and strategic positions
while denying them to the Soviet Union.
Yet Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, his secretary of state, also thought that the
previous administration had been excessively partial to Israel, an attitude that had heightened
the Arabs' sense of grievance against the West and given the Soviets an opportunity
to increase their political influence in the area.
While committed to Israel's survival and security, Eisenhower and Dulles resolved to
follow a more even-handed policy.
The Eisenhower administration was ambivalent about the future role of its European allies
in the area.
While committed in principle to full political independence from Middle Eastern countries,
it still hoped that the allies, France and especially Britain, would be able to hold
a line in the Middle East and keep that area oriented toward the West.
The administration feared that too rapid a withdrawal of European power and influence
would leave Middle Eastern states susceptible to Soviet influence.
Ideally, Britain and France themselves would work out an arrangement whereby the countries
of the Middle East, in exchange for a gradual increase in independence, would voluntarily
consent to the continuation of close ties to the West and allow those European countries
to maintain their military bases and other interests in the area.
U.S. actions in Iran in 1953 reveal the Eisenhower administration's determination to keep the
region oriented toward the West.
Back in 1946, as we've seen, the Soviets had been reluctant to withdraw their troops from
the country.
And even after the Soviets did withdraw, the Americans remained concerned about a possible
Soviet takeover of Iran, if not by direct military means, then perhaps by political means, in
particular by exploiting Iranian grievances against the West.
At the time, Iran was under heavy British domination.
And a British company called the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, or AIOC, enjoyed a monopoly over
the drilling, refining and marketing of Iranian oil.
Only about 20% of the profits from that oil stayed in Iran.
Although the AIOC hired thousands of Iranians, the managerial positions were occupied by
British citizens, with Iranians confined to menial jobs.
The company's facilities were strictly segregated and highly unequal.
There were drinking fountains with signs saying not for Iranians.
The behavior of the AIOC was one Iranian grievance against the West.
Another was Britain's strong support for the young Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Shah Bahlavi,
a reactionary ruler out of touch with his own people.
