The Truman administration had been exasperated by Mossadegh, but it did see him as a genuine
nationalist who would serve as a barrier to Soviet domination of Iran.
Eisenhower and his advisors took a much harsher view.
Although they realized that Mossadegh himself was no communist, they thought his radical
policies were destabilizing the country in such a way as to make it vulnerable to an
ultimate Soviet takeover.
Although the Eisenhower administration joined with the British government in plotting Mossadegh's
downfall.
In the summer of 1953, a CIA agent named Kermit Roosevelt, who happened to be the grandson
of President Teddy Roosevelt, was secretly dispatched to Iran, where he began recruiting
officers in the Iranian military to stage a coup against Mossadegh.
In the early phase of the operation, the entire effort almost collapsed when Mossadegh
learned of the plot and had one of the dissident officers arrested, causing the Shah to panic
and flee the country, eventually ending up in Rome.
But Roosevelt pushed ahead with the operation.
With CIA money, he recruited a motley collection of street thugs, off-duty policemen, soldiers
out of uniform, and even of musclemen from a local circus, and got them to stage anti-government
demonstrations on the streets of Tehran, Iran's capital.
With the city in chaos, the pro-U.S. Iranian army officers seized the parliament building
and began rounding up Mossadegh's supporters.
Mossadegh himself tried to escape by jumping over his garden wall, but he too was captured
by the pro-U.S. officers.
The Shah learned of Mossadegh's ouster over breakfast at the Excelsior Hotel in Rome.
I knew they loved me, he said to his wife, and then rushed back to Iran to resume his
royal duties.
It was a crushing defeat for Mossadegh and Iranian nationalism.
Although the nationalization of Iranian oil facilities formally remained in effect, the
Iranian government, now administered by a pro-Shah prime minister, allowed a consortium of foreign
oil companies to control and market Iran's oil, with the AIOC surrendering a large share
of the operation to American oil companies.
Iran became a major recipient of U.S. economic aid, and the Shah himself was now deeply
beholden to the United States.
The British weren't entirely happy about the result, but they accepted it as a price for
America's support in ousting the hated Mossadegh.
At the time, U.S. officials thought they had won a splendid victory in Iran, and to a
considerable degree, they had.
But success came at a heavy price.
Once he was reinstalled in power, the Shah governed much more repressively than before,
using his internal security forces to crush any potential dissent.
Ordinary Iranians would come to loathe the Shah and see him as a puppet of the United
States.
The ultimate consequences of these perceptions would become clear in the Iranian Revolution
of the late 1970s.
But if the full power of Iranian nationalism took a quarter century to assert itself, the
power of Arab nationalism was readily apparent in the 1950s.
The potency of Arab nationalism grew out of the particular circumstances of the Arab
world, especially its experience with Western domination.
By the time World War II ended in 1945, a large number of Arab countries, most of them
lying to the east of the Suez Canal, had achieved or were about to achieve national independence.
Still, there were two major issues that prevented the Arab nations from enjoying the full benefits
of independence and that caused their relations with the West to remain embittered, indeed
to become even more so.
The first issue was the lingering vestiges of European imperialism.
For despite the general trend toward national independence, portions of the Arab world remained
under direct European control.
In North Africa, Morocco and Tunisia would not gain their independence from France until
1956, and Algeria would remain a French colony until 1962, gaining independence only after
a long and bloody struggle.
Britain would hold on to a number of protectorates on the Arabian Peninsula, not granting them
independence until the late 1960s or early 1970s.
And in addition to these vestiges of formal imperial control, a number of other Arab countries
like Egypt, Jordan and Iraq remained under de facto British domination until the middle
or late 1950s.
