Another way to diminish the Arab sense of grievance, and thus prevent them from turning
against the West in the Cold War, would be to hasten the process by which the Arab states
gained true independence.
Again, the administration concentrated on Egypt, whose Suez Canal Zone had been occupied
by British troops since 1882.
If Britain could be convinced to end that occupation, then Egypt, and by extension other
Arab states, might look upon the West in a more positive light.
The Eisenhower administration did achieve a partial success in 1954.
That year, it facilitated an agreement between Egypt and Britain, whereby Britain pledged
to withdraw its troops from the Suez Canal Zone by 1956, on the condition that Britain
could reoccupy the Zone in the event that Egypt or any other Arab state was attacked
by the Soviet Union.
In other ways, however, Washington's Middle East strategy ran into serious difficulties.
In the first place, the British did not fully cooperate with the American approach.
In 1955, against the Eisenhower administration's advice, the British unilaterally established
a Middle East pact consisting of Britain, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and Iraq.
This alliance became known as the Baghdad Pact.
The Eisenhower administration realized that the inclusion of an Arab country like Iraq
in a pro-Western pact would infuriate Nasser.
To minimize Nasser's anger, the administration declined to join the pact itself.
Nasser was indeed infuriated by the Baghdad Pact, and he began vilifying the Iraqi government
as a traitor to the Arab cause.
More generally, the establishment of the Baghdad Pact led to a hardening of Nasser's
international position.
Prior to the Pact's formation, Nasser had made it clear that he opposed participation
by any Arab government in an anti-Soviet pact sponsored by the West.
Still, he had left open the possibility that the Arab states could, in a less formal way,
be basically pro-Western in their political and economic orientation.
The formation of the Baghdad Pact, however, convinced Nasser that the Western powers would
never refrain from pressuring the Arabs, and that even an informal alliance with the West
would be a bad idea.
So in 1955, Nasser took a big step away from the West and began publicly advocating a policy
of non-alignment in the Cold War.
He insisted that Egypt and the other Arab states should not align themselves with either
the United States or the Soviet Union, but should position themselves to receive military
and economic aid from both Cold War blocks.
Egypt was not the only country taking this stance.
By the mid-1950s, several newly independent nations in what we now call the Third World
countries like India and Indonesia had publicly declared themselves to be non-aligned, willing
to do business with both Cold War camps.
In practice, however, these nations tended to be more critical of Western nations than
of the Communist bloc, for the simple reason that most of them had recently been subjected
to Western colonialism.
Nasser's emergence as a forceful advocate of non-alignment posed a serious challenge
to the United States.
It was bad enough from Washington's perspective that such a large and influential Arab country
as Egypt had ruled out an alliance with the West.
But Nasser didn't stop there.
He insisted that the Arab world as a whole be neutral in the Cold War, and began harshly
criticizing Arab states that already did have close ties to the West, not just Iraq, but
countries like Jordan and Lebanon as well.
Even more disturbing from Washington's standpoint was Nasser's decision to move closer to the
Soviet bloc.
The formation of the Baghdad pact, along with the perceived threat posed by Israel, made
Nasser extremely anxious to enhance Egypt's military capabilities.
So in the fall of 1955, he concluded a major agreement with Czechoslovakia, underwritten
by the Soviet Union itself, whereby the Czechs gave Egypt about $80 million worth of sophisticated
weapons in exchange for surplus Egyptian cotton.
The Eisenhower administration was extremely upset by the arms deal, which gave the Soviets
an excellent opportunity to increase their influence in the Middle East.
Still, the Eisenhower administration was not yet ready to give up on Nasser.
And in late 1955 and early 1956, it took two actions aimed at wooing him back to the Western
camp.
The first was to show a more active interest in the so-called Aswan Dam project.
This was an ambitious public works project, planned by the Egyptian government, designed
to regulate the Nile's flow and thus increase agricultural yield and produce hydroelectric
power, thereby raising the living standards of the Egyptian people, the vast majority
of whom lived in grinding poverty.
In late 1955, the United States and Britain offered to help Egypt finance the Aswan Dam
project.
