The second U.S. response was to push harder for an Arab-Israeli settlement.
In January 1956, Eisenhower sent a special envoy named Robert B. Anderson on a secret
mission to the Middle East.
Anderson's task was to meet separately with Nasser and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion
to seek a workable formula for a peace settlement.
Anderson spent several weeks in the Middle East, shuttling back and forth between Egypt
and Israel.
It was clear from the start that Nasser and Ben-Gurion were very far apart on both procedural
and substantive grounds.
Procedurally, Nasser was opposed to direct negotiations with Israel, preferring to communicate
through a mediator instead, whereas Ben-Gurion insisted on face-to-face talks.
Substantively, Nasser demanded that Israel relinquish large portions of southern Israel
to Egypt and Jordan.
He also insisted that Israel give Palestinian refugees the choice of either returning to
their former homes in Israel or receiving compensation if they settled elsewhere.
Ben-Gurion rejected any territorial concessions and refused to take responsibility for the
Palestinian refugees.
Despite these agreements, Anderson believed there was an implicit understanding that should
Nasser and Ben-Gurion find a mutually acceptable formula, Nasser would recommend it to other
Arab leaders.
So there was that slim basis for hope.
By early March, however, Nasser was backing away from this understanding.
Even if Egypt and Israel could agree on an approach, Nasser would not be willing to sell
it to other Arab states.
Instead, Nasser insisted some other party, like the United States or the United Nations,
would have to present the proposal to each of the other Arab countries and they in turn
must be free to propose modifications.
In other words, Nasser would not be putting his imprimatur on such an agreement.
Apparently, this was a significant retreat on Nasser's part.
Apparently, Nasser feared that if he took the lead in advocating peace with Israel, his
rivals in the Arab world, especially the Iraqi government, which was eager to retaliate for
Nasser's own attacks on the Baghdad Pact, would vilify Nasser as a traitor to the Arab
cause.
As Anderson explained in A Cable to Washington, Nasser would like to see war avoided, but
is not willing to assume aggressive leadership to avoid it, as doing so would endanger his
prestige in the Arab world.
Whatever its cause, Nasser's attitude brought an end to Anderson's peace mission.
Eisenhower and Dulles were furious with Nasser.
They said to themselves, look, we've gone out of our way to address Nasser's political
concerns.
We got Britain to agree to withdraw its forces from the Suez Canal Zone.
We refused to join the Baghdad Pact.
We expressed interest in funding the Aswan Dam project, and we tried in good faith to
settle the Arab-Israeli conflict.
And how has Nasser repaid us by buying arms from the Soviet bloc and refusing to make
peace with Israel?
So in the spring of 1956, Eisenhower and Dulles decided to get tough with Nasser.
Instead of trying to placate the Egyptian leader as they had done up until now, they
imposed a whole set of economic and diplomatic pressures on him.
The purpose of these pressures, Dulles outlined in a memo, was to let Nasser realize that
he cannot cooperate as he is doing with the Soviet Union and still enjoy most favored
treatment from the United States.
Accordingly, Eisenhower and Dulles curtailed economic aid to Egypt, made it difficult for
American charitable groups to function in Egypt, and began dragging out the negotiations
over Western financing of the Aswan Dam.
At the same time, they increased economic aid to other Arab countries, especially those
with more pro-US governments.
And while they did not increase US military aid to Israel, they encouraged other Western
governments like France and Canada to sell military aircraft to Israel.
All of these measures, Eisenhower and Dulles hoped, would leave Egypt so impoverished and
isolated that it would have to rethink its defiant position.
And so the stage was set for the Suez Crisis of 1956, one of the most fascinating episodes
of the Cold War period, and an event that clearly illustrates the American dilemma I
mentioned earlier between accommodating Arab political sensibilities on the one hand and
accommodating the needs of Israel and the allies on the other.
We'll look at the Suez Crisis and its aftermath in our next lecture.
