In this lecture, we're going to continue looking at Middle East policy under President Eisenhower,
and in particular, we'll examine the Suez Crisis of 1956 and its aftermath.
The Suez Crisis is a crucial turning point in world history, for it marks Britain's demise
as the preeminent Western power in the Middle East and the assumption of that role by the
United States, a role Washington continues to play to this day.
We left off last time in March 1956, with Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, his Secretary
of State, adopting a much tougher line on Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser than
the one they had followed over the previous couple years.
You will recall that one way Eisenhower and Dulles decided to get tough was by stalling
on negotiations over Western funding for the Aswan Dam project.
The idea was to keep Nasser guessing about the status of the funding in the hopes of
making him more deferential in his dealings with the United States.
Over the next few months, a couple factors convinced Eisenhower and Dulles to withdraw
funding for the project altogether.
First, Egypt established formal diplomatic relations with Communist China, a huge no-no
in American eyes.
Second, Nasser hinted that he might turn to the Soviet Union for funding of the dam if
Western terms were unsatisfactory, a move that infuriated Eisenhower and Dulles.
So in July 1956, the Eisenhower administration formally withdrew its offer to help finance
the dam, prompting Britain to follow suit.
Nasser's response to the funding withdrawal was totally unexpected and quite ingenious.
On July 26, 1956, addressing a huge audience in the Egyptian city of Alexandria, Nasser
announced that Egypt was nationalizing the Suez Canal Company, which was mainly British
owned, and would use the canal's toll revenues to finance the construction of the Aswan Dam.
With this decision, Nasser said, Arab nationalism has been set on fire from the Atlantic Ocean
to the Persian Gulf.
Nasser's declaration was wildly applauded throughout the Arab world.
The nationalization of the Suez Canal Company was legal in that Egypt pledged to compensate
the company's shareholders at prevailing market rates.
Britain, however, saw the act as politically, economically, and strategically intolerable.
Two-thirds of West Europe's oil imports were shipped through the Suez Canal, and Britain
saw itself as the guarantor of those oil shipments.
For Britain to lose control of the canal meant, in Britain's own eyes, that Britain could
no longer be considered a global power, so the British government began advocating a
military intervention to reverse Nasser's action.
The Americans were strongly opposed to military intervention, believing that a British attack
on Egypt would inflame the entire Arab world against the West, and perhaps cause the Arab
nations to align with the Soviet bloc.
Instead, Eisenhower sponsored a series of diplomatic conferences aimed at finding a compromise
solution to the crisis, one that respected Egypt's sovereignty, but also placed some
measure of international control over the canal.
The British, however, were not buying the Eisenhower administration's approach, and
although they paid lip service to finding a diplomatic solution, they began secretly
conspiring with the French and the Israelis to achieve the overthrow of Nasser.
The French government was already angered by Nasser's support for a nationalist rebellion
then taking place against French colonial rule in Algeria.
As for Israel, it feared that Nasser was building up his army in preparation for war against
Israel.
The Israelis were especially determined to knock Egypt down to size before it had a chance
to absorb the huge shipment of arms it had purchased from the Soviet bloc in 1955.
So all three of these countries, Britain, France and Israel, believed that their situations
would vastly improve if Nasser vanished from the world scene.
So the British, French and Israelis worked out a plan for attacking Egypt that may have
seemed clever at the time, but was actually very stupid.
