According to that plan, Egypt, Israel would attack Egypt in the Sinai Peninsula and begin advancing across the peninsula.
Once Israel had seized most of the peninsula, Britain and France would demand that Israel and Egypt withdraw their forces from the canal area.
If either party refused the ultimatum, as Egypt was sure to do since the canal lay within its own sovereign territory,
British and French forces would seize the canal, ostensibly to protect it from damage in the fighting.
The British, French and Israelis also agreed that the US government should receive no prior notice about the impending attack.
The thinking seems to have been that while the Americans would never approve such an operation in advance,
they would probably accept it after the fact given their own dislike of Nasser.
This was, it turned out, a fatal miscalculation.
In late October 1956, Israeli forces crossed into the Sinai Peninsula as planned,
overwhelming Egyptian border posts and quickly advancing toward the Suez Canal.
The next day, Britain and France issued their ultimatum, demanding that Israel and Egypt withdraw to within 10 miles of either side of the Suez Canal
and permit Anglo-French forces to occupy the canal zone.
Israel predictably accepted the ultimatum, and Egypt, equally predictably, rejected it out of hand.
This is why I said the plan was so stupid.
The Anglo-French ultimatum was so patently unfair that it became immediately obvious that the two countries were in collusion with Israel.
It would be as if Canada had invaded the United States from the north and the United Nations stepped in and said,
stop, ceasefire, both sides, the Americans and the Canadians, withdraw to within 10 miles of either side of the Ohio River.
The Americans would say, what? Ohio River?
We get attacked and the aggressor is allowed to keep his forces in Ohio, Indiana and Michigan?
That's outrageous.
Well, that's about how it appeared to the Egyptians and, indeed, to most fair-minded observers at the time.
And nobody was surprised when Nasser immediately rejected the Anglo-French ultimatum.
But Britain and France ignored world opinion and pushed ahead with their ill-considered plan.
They responded to Nasser's rejection by bombing Egyptian airfields near the canal zone,
and a few days later, British and French paratroopers began landing in Egypt and were soon followed by amphibious forces.
Nasser was in a weak position to resist the attack and his country was quickly occupied.
But one thing Nasser was able to do was close the Suez Canal by clogging it up with old sunken ships.
As I said, two-thirds of the oil Western Europe consumed passed through the Suez Canal.
To get from the Persian Gulf to Europe, oil tankers now had to sail all the way around the Cape of Good Hope in Southern Africa,
imposing major shortages and delays on the countries of Western Europe.
The Eisenhower administration was shocked and outraged by the attack on Egypt,
and, like everybody else, immediately figured out that Britain and France had colluded with Israel.
The notion that America's closest allies could plan such an operation behind its back was utterly infuriating to U.S. officials.
Worse still, the attack on Egypt had thrown the Middle East into turmoil.
It seemed possible that the entire Arab world might turn against the West with disastrous consequences for the American position in the Cold War.
Eisenhower realized that the only way to salvage the situation was to bring an immediate end to the war
and to make it clear that the United States was utterly opposed to it.
So Eisenhower publicly condemned the attack and had his UN representative sponsor resolutions in the UN opposing the intervention.
The Soviets shared Eisenhower's outrage and voted with the United States in the UN, an odd spectacle indeed in those Cold War days.
Eisenhower then placed extraordinary political and economic pressure on the attackers to seize their intervention and withdraw from Egypt.
As we saw, Nasser's decision to block the Suez Canal caused a major oil shortage in Europe.
Eisenhower refused to allow any oil from the Western Hemisphere to be sent to Western Europe until British and French forces agreed to a ceasefire.
He also saw to it that Britain was unable to borrow gold reserves from the International Monetary Fund, causing a sudden devaluation of the British pound.
And finally, Eisenhower threatened to impose economic sanctions against Israel too, unless it pulled out of Egypt.
