In early November, Egypt's attackers reluctantly agreed to a ceasefire, and in late December,
Britain and France withdrew their forces from the country.
The Israelis continued to occupy the Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza Strip into early 1957,
but they too were finally compelled to withdraw by the threat of economic sanctions by the
United States and the UN.
The Suez Crisis revealed to all the world that Britain could no longer be considered
the primary Western power in the Middle East.
British power had been declining for years, but the events of late 1956 drastically accelerated
that decline and made it irreversible.
Britain would continue to dominate certain countries in the region, like Iraq, Kuwait,
and the British protectorates on the Arabian Peninsula, but its ability to call the shots
in a more general sense was severely diminished.
This situation posed a serious problem for the United States.
For although Eisenhower had strongly opposed Britain's attack on Egypt, he was equally
unhappy about the rapid erosion of British influence in the Middle East resulting from
that attack.
Such erosion, he believed, created a political and strategic vacuum in the Middle East that
the Soviet Union would fill by giving more economic and military aid to Middle Eastern
countries unless the United States took action.
The United States, in other words, would have to take Britain's place as the primary Western
power in the Middle East.
The Eisenhower administration also believed that the Middle East represented a weak link
in the chain of alliances that the United States and its allies had forged around the
Sino-Soviet bloc.
NATO had come into being in 1949 with Greece and Turkey joining that alliance in the early
1950s.
In the mid-1950s, a similar Western pact had been established in Southeast Asia for the
purpose of containing communist China.
The Baghdad pact, which the British established in 1955, and which I mentioned last time,
had been designed to fill the gap between the European and Southeast Asian Pacts.
But the Baghdad pact was extremely unpopular in Middle Eastern countries, especially after
the British attack on Egypt, and the Eisenhower administration thought it would likely disintegrate.
The administration believed that some new mechanism was needed to keep the nations of the Middle
East oriented toward the West.
So in early 1957, Eisenhower launched an initiative that became known as the Eisenhower
Doctrine.
He got Congress to pass a resolution that, first, authorized the executive branch to
give more economic and military aid to Middle Eastern countries, and, second, authorized
the U.S. military to intervene to protect any Middle Eastern country that was the victim
of overt armed aggression from any nation controlled by international communism.
This phrase was puzzling not just to observers at the time, but to historians ever since.
What did Eisenhower mean by a nation controlled by international communism?
And how likely was it that such a nation would attack a country in the Middle East?
There seemed little prospect that the Soviet Union or any Eastern European country would
commit overt armed aggression in the Middle East.
So what was the point of the Eisenhower Doctrine?
Actually the Eisenhower Doctrine did have a clear set of purposes, though it was difficult
to glean them from the public statements.
Essentially what Eisenhower and Dulles wanted to do was weaken Nasserist Egypt and its ally
Syria and to strengthen Arab countries that had pro-American regimes like Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, Lebanon, and Jordan.
This was to be done on both a material level and a psychological level.
The material dimension was pretty straight forward.
The United States would offer military and economic aid to those Arab countries that
openly supported the United States and resisted Nasser's program of non-alignment in the Cold
War.
On a psychological level, the Eisenhower Doctrine had two purposes, one positive and
the other negative.
On the positive side, the Eisenhower administration wanted to reassure pro-U.S. regimes that if
they stood with the United States, the United States would stand with them.
No one really expected that any of these countries would come under direct Soviet attack.
But they could conceivably get into a conflict with some other Arab state, like Egypt or
Syria, that already had close ties to the Soviet bloc, in which case the United States
could come to the aid of the pro-U.S. Arab governments.
That was why the administration used the murky formulation any nation controlled by international
communism to be prepared for the possibility of inter-Arab conflict, not a Soviet bloc attack
on a Middle Eastern country.
