And if Arab governments with pro-US leanings knew in advance that the United States was
squarely on their side, they would, Eisenhower hoped, be willing to assume an even stronger
pro-American stance in the Cold War.
So that's the positive dimension of the psychological aspect of the Eisenhower Doctrine.
On the negative side, the Eisenhower Doctrine was intended as a form of psychological warfare
against Egypt, Syria, and any other Arab country that might be tempted to follow a non-aligned
course.
In order to get U.S. military and economic aid under the doctrine, each Middle Eastern
country would be required to state, publicly and unequivocally, that it regarded international
communism as a menace.
If a majority of Arab countries could be induced to make such a statement, then those countries
that refused to make it would seem isolated and extreme.
The only way for them to end their isolation would be to get with the program and condemn
international communism.
Nasser's whole program of non-alignment in the Cold War would thus be discredited, and
the Soviet Union would be blocked from making any further inroads into the Middle East.
Or so at least, Eisenhower and Dulles hoped.
The Eisenhower Doctrine was not a great success.
Although Middle Eastern governments were generally eager to accept U.S. aid under the new program,
regional public opinion, especially Arab opinion, was hostile to the Eisenhower Doctrine, which
was seen as an effort to impose Cold War thinking on the Arabs by pressuring them to join an
anti-Soviet alliance.
Nasser's regional popularity by contrast soared in the aftermath of the Suez Crisis,
on account of his having successfully withstood an attack by great powers.
Throughout the whole Arab world, ordinary people began looking to Nasser rather than
to their own governments as their true leader.
The Eisenhower administration had assumed that the Arab people would be so grateful to
the United States for opposing the attack on Egypt that they would want their governments
to ally with Washington.
This was a serious miscalculation.
While Arabs were indeed grateful for Eisenhower's stance, they admired Nasser much more than
they admired the United States.
And when asked to choose between allying with Washington and going along with Nasser, they
almost always chose the latter.
The pro-US Arab regimes, countries like Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon, were in
a ticklish position.
On the one hand, these regimes were eager to receive American aid and protection.
On the other hand, they could not completely ignore domestic public opinion, which tended
to oppose the Eisenhower Doctrine.
The governments of Iraq and Lebanon went ahead and endorsed the doctrine in defiance of domestic
opinion, decisions that would lead to enormous turmoil in both of those countries, as we'll
see in a moment.
The governments of Jordan and Saudi Arabia declined to endorse the doctrine, though they
convinced Washington to give them substantial aid anyway.
What Jordan and Saudi Arabia basically said was, look, you know that we support the United
States and oppose Nasser, but it's too dangerous politically for us to say these things out
loud.
Can't you accept our quiet support and give us the money anyway?
And Washington essentially accepted their reasoning and gave them aid.
The problem, of course, was that this defeated one of the main purposes of the Eisenhower
Doctrine, which was to get as many countries as possible on record supporting the United
States in the Cold War.
From the outset then, the doctrine failed to produce a solid front of outspokenly pro-American
regimes in the Arab world.
Worse still, Washington's efforts to reduce Nasser's influence in the region had the opposite
effect of making Nasser stronger.
A crisis in Lebanon in 1958 nicely illustrates this point.
As I mentioned, Lebanon was one of the few Arab countries to endorse the Eisenhower Doctrine.
