The Lebanese government's embrace of the doctrine had infuriated the country's political opposition,
which favored more cordial ties to Egypt and Syria.
These tensions erupted into a full-scale civil war in the spring of 1958.
The immediate cause of the conflict was the attempt by Lebanon's president, Camille Shamoun,
to amend the Lebanese constitution so that he could stay in office for a second term.
But the deeper cause of the civil war was a basic disagreement between one Lebanese faction,
predominantly Christian, that wanted close ties to the West, and another Lebanese faction,
predominantly Muslim, that identified with Nasser's brand of Arab nationalism.
Without the Lebanese civil war, the pro-Nasser Lebanese opposition received rhetorical support
from Radio Cairo and material support in the form of arms and actual troops over the border
from Syria.
Earlier that year, Egypt and Syria had merged to form the United Arab Republic, or UAR,
a union that would last until 1961.
Nasser had been named president of the UAR, so he was ultimately responsible for the transfer
of arms and troops from Syria into Lebanon.
In May 1958, citing massive UAR interference in his country, Shamoun asked the United States
if it would be prepared to intervene militarily in Lebanon should he request this, though he
held off on issuing such a request for the time being.
In considering Shamoun's question, Eisenhower and Dulles agreed that any U.S. intervention
in Lebanon would be extremely risky.
It could well create a wave of anti-Western feeling in the Arab world, resulting in the
overthrow of pro-Western governments, the closing of the Suez Canal, the sabotage of
oil pipelines in Syria, and an oil crisis for the West.
On the other hand, Eisenhower and Dulles both felt that refusing to honor such a request
would be even worse, since it would show to the world that the United States was not prepared
to come to the defense of its allies with disastrous consequences for the Western position
in the Cold War.
So they told Shamoun that U.S. forces would intervene if he requested this, but they also
urged him to do everything possible to stabilize the situation, either by crushing the rebellion
or by reaching a political settlement, so that intervention would not be necessary in
the first place.
The Eisenhower administration almost got its wish.
In the early summer of 1958, Shamoun and the Lebanese rebels began moving toward a settlement
of their dispute, giving reason to hope that U.S. intervention might be avoided after all.
But then, a sudden upheaval in Iraq dramatically transformed the political situation in the
region.
In July 1958, Iraq's pro-Western monarchy was suddenly overthrown by a group of army officers
who appeared to be followers of Nasser, though this turned out to be an erroneous impression.
The officers' coup unleashed a frenzy of mob violence.
Thousands of ordinary Iraqis took to the streets, venting their fury on the old regime.
Members of the Iraqi royal family and government were murdered in cold blood, their bodies
mutilated and dragged naked through the streets of Baghdad.
Fearing his own regime would be next, Shamoun requested immediate U.S. intervention, and
Eisenhower complied by sending 14,000 U.S. Marines to occupy Lebanon.
There had never been any doubt that Eisenhower would honor such a request if it was made.
To do otherwise, he believed, would be to suffer an intolerable loss of international credibility.
The dire consequences of intervention that Eisenhower and Dulles had feared never came
to pass.
There was intense criticism of the action throughout the region, but the remaining
conservative regimes held on to power.
In Lebanon itself, the U.S. intervention was a virtually bloodless affair.
As the Marines hit the beaches, they were confronted not by hostile gunmen, but by battalions
of soda pop vendors and, so the legend goes, Bikini clad sunbathers.
