In justifying intervention, the Eisenhower administration did not fully invoke the Eisenhower
Doctrine, but mainly relied on Lebanon's right under Article 51 of the UN Charter to
engage in collective security for self-defense.
There was no way that Lebanon could be portrayed as facing aggression from international communism
as required by the Eisenhower Doctrine, so the Doctrine really was not directly applicable.
But it was indirectly involved in that the administration believed its global credibility
would suffer if it failed to help a country that had, by embracing the Doctrine, so closely
allied itself with the United States.
Ultimately, though, the intervention in Lebanon and its aftermath served to undermine the
Eisenhower Doctrine.
The United States made it clear that its marines were in Lebanon not to prolong Shamoun's
presidency, but to permit an orderly transfer of power to a new president.
And the new president, once in office, repudiated the Eisenhower Doctrine and established friendlier
relations with Egypt, thus underscoring Nasser's regional hegemony.
In late 1958, the Eisenhower administration made a policy reassessment that, without repudiating
the Eisenhower Doctrine itself, explicitly abandoned its underlying anti-Nasserist strategy.
The administration instead concluded that Nasser was so politically powerful that the
United States had no choice but to seek an accommodation with him.
Since we are about to get thrown out of the area, Eisenhower said, we might as well believe
in Arab nationalism.
Such a conversion became easier to stomach in early 1959, when tensions unexpectedly
arose between Nasser and the Soviet Union.
The dispute resulted from the Soviets' support for the new Iraqi government, which had allied
itself with local communists in opposition to local Nasserists.
In this case, then, Nasserism functioned as a barrier to, rather than an avenue of, Soviet
encroachment on the region.
The result of this surprising development was a U.S.-Egyptian rapprochement that lasted
for the rest of Eisenhower's term and into the Kennedy years.
Now in evaluating the success of the Eisenhower Doctrine, it's important to distinguish between
the policy's ultimate objective and the strategy employed to achieve that objective.
The objective was to prevent a Soviet takeover of the Middle East, and since such a takeover
never occurred, it has to be said that the objective was achieved.
But the strategy to achieve that objective, discrediting Arab figures deemed soft on communism
by promoting other Arab figures who were conspicuously anti-communist, failed miserably.
Fortunately for Eisenhower, that strategy was so ill-chosen in the first place that its
failure did not compromise the ultimate objective.
In other words, the Eisenhower administration was the beneficiary of its own prior miscalculation.
This sort of irony was typical of the Eisenhower administration's performance in the Middle
East, which was highly sophisticated in some ways and strikingly clumsy in others.
The Eisenhower Doctrine was a work of considerable subtlety, intricacy, and internal coherence.
And yet the whole edifice rested on a basic misreading of political realities in the Arab
world, on an underestimation of the power and independence of Nazarism, and an overestimation
of the political strength of the United States.
Nazar himself was bemused by this contradiction.
Once, when discussing the Eisenhower Doctrine with an American friend, he said,
The genius of you Americans is that you never made clear-cut stupid moves, only complicated
stupid moves, which make us wonder at the possibility that there may be something to
them we were missing.
One thing that was definitely accomplished under Eisenhower, though this was more by
default than through any brilliance on Eisenhower's part, was that the United States became the
dominant Western power in the Middle East.
Western had stumbled so badly in the Suez Crisis that it was increasingly relegated
to the margins of Middle Eastern politics.
In our subsequent lectures, we won't be hearing a great deal from the British.
From now on, the Middle East will be, at least as far as Western powers are concerned, an
exclusively American stomping ground.
