Like Eisenhower before him, Kennedy saw Nasser as the most important leader in the Arab world,
and he placed an extremely high priority on establishing cordial relations with Egypt.
As we saw last time, U.S. relations with Nasser had actually begun to improve in the
last couple years of the Eisenhower administration, a result of Nasser's own disagreements with
the Soviet Union.
Kennedy hoped to take this process much further, and to insulate it as much as possible from
developments in the Cold War.
So even though Nasser's relations with the Soviet Union grew friendly again in the early
1960s, Kennedy did not make an issue of this, as Eisenhower almost certainly would have
done.
Instead, Kennedy presented a friendly face to Nasser, and did his best to convince him
that U.S. support came without strings attached.
He began a cordial, private correspondence with Nasser, and markedly increased U.S. economic
aid to Egypt.
Most of this aid was dispensed via Public Law 480, or PL480, a U.S. government program
that permitted certain countries to buy surplus American wheat, grain, and other commodities
using their own currencies instead of dollars.
This was beneficial to poor countries like Egypt that had limited amounts of hard currency.
The United States had begun to sell Egypt PL480 wheat in the closing years of the Eisenhower
administration, but the program was greatly expanded after Kennedy became president.
In early 1962, the United States signed an agreement with Egypt, permitting Egypt to
buy $500 million worth of PL480 wheat over the next three years.
In addition to making Nasser more positively inclined toward the United States, Kennedy
hoped that all this economic aid would encourage Nasser to channel his energies inward, to pay
more attention to developing Egypt economically than to meddling in the affairs of his neighbors.
As one of Kennedy's advisors remarked in 1962, if Nasser can gradually be led to forsake
the microphone for the bulldozer, he may assume a key role in bringing the Middle East peacefully
into our modern world.
For a while Kennedy's approach seemed to be working.
Nasser was flattered by Kennedy's attention and toned down his anti-American rhetoric.
Nasser also pledged to put the Arab-Israeli issue in the icebox, that is, to refrain from
stirring up Arab-Israeli animosities and to allow the status quo to continue for the
time being.
But Kennedy's strategy of ingratiating Nasser and turning his energies inward began to come
undone in the fall of 1962.
In September of that year, the imam, or monarch of Yemen, a small archaic nation in southern
Arabia, was overthrown by nationalist army officers who were sympathetic to Nasser.
The officers declared that the monarchy was abolished and that Yemen was to be a republic.
The imam fled to the north of the country, teamed up with loyalist tribesmen, and launched
a guerrilla war against the new Yemeni government, attempting to reclaim his throne.
The republican government appealed to Nasser for support.
Nasser felt compelled to come to the aid of the Yemeni republicans, partly out of genuine
anti-monarchist conviction, and partly to maintain his radical credentials in the Arab
world.
The Yemeni royalists in turn appealed to their fellow monarchs in Saudi Arabia, and the Saudis
began sending them money and arms.
Nasser responded to the Saudi move by sending the Egyptian air force to bomb Saudi towns
on the border with Yemen, on the grounds that they served as bases for royalist attacks.
Meanwhile, Nasser began calling in his radio addresses for the overthrow of the Saudi monarchy.
The Egyptian Saudi proxy war over Yemen placed Kennedy in a bind.
On the one hand, he needed to reassure his ally Saudi Arabia that the United States was
committed to the security of its territory, and to the survival of its royal family.
On the other hand, he was eager to maintain good relations with Nasser.
