Kennedy tried to pursue these two conflicting goals by following a balanced policy on Yemen.
To placate Nasser, he formally recognized the new Yemeni government and pressured the
Saudi government to limit its support to the royalists.
To placate the Saudis, he sent a squadron of Air Force jets to Saudi Arabia to patrol
the skies over the kingdom and serve as a symbol of the U.S. commitment to Saudi Arabia.
At the same time, Kennedy sent a special envoy to the Middle East to try to broker a ceasefire
in Yemen.
In the spring of 1963, Kennedy's envoy got all the parties, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the
two Yemeni parties, to agree to a ceasefire, but the agreement soon broke down and the
fighting resumed.
Moreover, Kennedy's attempt to find a middle ground between Egypt and Saudi Arabia had
pleased neither side.
Each country accused the United States of siding with the other.
And so, by the time of Kennedy's death in late 1963, his attempt to end the Yemeni conflict
and thus keep Nasser's energies directed inward had failed.
Let's now take a look at Kennedy's relations with Israel.
As I mentioned, Kennedy's decision to move closer to Israel distinguished his policies
from those of his predecessor.
Eisenhower had kept Israel at arm's length, largely for fear of antagonizing the Arab
States.
For Kennedy, U.S.-Israeli relations became much friendlier.
In a meeting with Golden Meir, Israel's foreign minister and later prime minister, Kennedy
said that the United States has a special relationship with Israel in the Middle East
really comparable only to that which it has with Britain over a wide range of world affairs.
Kennedy repeatedly assured the Israelis that in the event of an Arab attack, the United
States would guarantee Israel's survival and security.
He increased U.S. economic aid to Israel and agreed to provide Israel with weapons systems
that Eisenhower had denied them.
The most significant of these weapons systems was an anti-aircraft missile known as the
Hawk, which Kennedy agreed to sell Israel in 1962.
To some extent, Kennedy's friendlier attitude toward Israel can be explained by domestic
politics.
American Jews have always been more supportive of the Democratic Party than of the Republican
Party, and this was much truer in the early 1960s than it would be in later decades.
Almost any Democratic president was bound to be more pro-Israel than Eisenhower had
been.
But Kennedy also was genuinely convinced that the best way to bring peace and stability
to the region was to reassure the Israelis that the United States would always strongly
support them.
Only if they received such assurance, Kennedy believed, would the Israelis be willing to
make the steps necessary on their part for achieving peace with the Arab states.
There were two main areas in which Kennedy hoped to influence Israeli behavior.
First, he wanted Israel to agree to repatriate Palestinian refugees.
During the 1948 war, about 750,000 Palestinians had either fled or been expelled from their
homes in present-day Israel.
Apart from a very small number of Palestinians allowed back into Israel for the purpose of
family reunification, all of those refugees had been barred from returning to their former
homes.
Some of the Palestinian exiles had become citizens of surrounding Arab countries, and
some had emigrated to other parts of the world.
But as of the early 1960s, half a million Palestinians remained in UN-administered refugee camps
in Jordan, Lebanon and other Arab countries, often living in squalid conditions.
What should become of those refugees was and continues to be an extremely controversial
issue.
The Israelis maintained that the wholesale repatriation of Palestinian refugees would
dilute the Jewish character of Israel and was thus out of the question.
They pointed out that shortly after Israel's creation, hundreds of thousands of Jews from
Arab countries had emigrated to Israel.
And just as Israel had welcomed and absorbed all of these immigrants, the Arab countries
should now grant citizenship to the Palestinian refugees.
The Arabs, in other words, should accept the fact that a population exchange had taken
place and not try to undo it by pushing for the return of Palestinian refugees.
