The Arab states completely rejected this argument.
They pointed out that whereas the Jews of the Arab world had willingly gone to Israel,
the Palestinians had left their homes unwillingly.
So it was totally unjust to speak of a population exchange.
Israel they said was obligated under international law to let the Palestinians back in.
So although the Arab countries did grant citizenship to some Palestinians, especially
to those who were wealthy and educated, they refused to consider the wholesale absorption
of the refugee population.
The Arab states were not the only parties calling for Israel's repatriation of the Palestinians.
In late 1948, the UN General Assembly had passed Resolution 194, which called on Israel
to repatriate all Palestinian refugees who wished to return to their homes in present-day
Israel and who were willing to live peacefully under Israeli jurisdiction.
The resolution also called on Israel to pay compensation to those refugees who chose not
to return.
The U.S. government had co-sponsored Resolution 194 and had voted to renew it every year
since.
Truman as we saw had tried to get Israel to repatriate some of the refugees, but had
abandoned the effort when the Israelis refused, and Eisenhower, though markedly less friendly
to Israel than Truman, had not even tried to push the Israelis toward repatriation convinced
as he was that the effort would fail.
But now Kennedy was determined to solve the refugee problem for once and for all.
As long as that problem continued, he believed, no real peace in the region would be possible,
and the Soviet Union would continue to exploit Arab grievances against the West.
So shortly after taking office, Kennedy asked Joseph Johnson, the president of the Carnegie
Foundation for International Peace, to serve as his point man on the Palestinian refugee
issue.
Johnson was to look into the matter and come up with a recommended solution.
After several months of study, Johnson proposed that Israel be asked to repatriate about 100,000
Palestinian refugees, that the United States offer to help Israel with the costs of repatriating
them, and that the Arab states be encouraged to absorb the remaining 400,000.
Kennedy accepted Johnson's plan, and in the summer of 1962, conveyed it to the Israeli
government.
Although Israel had rejected repatriation in the past, Kennedy thought he could soften
the Israelis up by simultaneously agreeing to sell them the Hawk missiles.
Flexibility on the refugee issue wasn't the only thing Kennedy wanted from the Israelis.
He also wanted them to refrain from developing nuclear weapons.
Since 1960, it had been public knowledge that the Israelis were constructing, with the help
of the French government, a large nuclear reactor in Demona in southern Israel.
The Israeli government claimed that the Demona reactor was intended solely for civilian purposes,
but the size and type of the reactor caused many observers to suspect that the facility
was also intended for producing weapons-grade plutonium, material that could ultimately
be used for constructing nuclear bombs.
The suspicions were correct.
Israel was indeed working to develop nuclear weapons.
Not surprisingly, the discovery of the Demona reactor caused great consternation in the
Arab world.
Nasser declared that if Egypt got the bomb, Egypt would get one too at any cost.
Nasser also warned that Egypt might have to launch a preemptive strike against Israel
if it acquired a nuclear weapons capability.
This situation was deeply worrying to the Kennedy administration.
To be sure, most U.S. officials doubted that Egypt would be able to acquire nuclear weapons
of its own, or that it would launch a preemptive strike against Israel, especially now that
a third of the Egyptian army was bogged down in Yemen.
But Israel's acquisition of the bomb probably would cause Egypt to engage in a major conventional
arms buildup, which in turn would allow the Soviet Union to increase its influence in
the Middle East, as well as destabilize the region more generally.
So Kennedy hoped that his decision to sell Hawk missiles to Israel, combined with his
stated commitment to protecting Israel's security, would convince the Israelis to abandon any
plans to build nuclear weapons.
