The Eisenhower administration had appreciated this stance and had given the Shah almost
uncritical support.
Within Iran, however, the Shah's hardline policies aroused considerable resentment and
by the early 1960s, leftist critics were increasingly willing to raise their voices in opposition.
While some of these critics were members of the Communist Party, most of them were Republican
nationalists of the Mosadeq variety.
People who wanted to democratize the government, make it less repressive, and force it to respond
to the people's economic and social needs.
Kennedy came into office convinced that the Iranian government had to make some effort
to placate these critics.
Otherwise, the dissatisfaction would continue to grow and provide opportunities for Moscow
to increase its influence in the country.
So Kennedy began pushing the Shah to make internal reforms.
At the same time, Kennedy made sure that Iran's internal security forces would be well supplied,
in case the reforms failed to placate the population and unrest broke out anyway.
For at the end of the day, Kennedy was no less determined than Eisenhower had been to
see to it that the Shah of Iran remained in power.
Essentially, Kennedy was trying to strike a balance between the soft approach of appeasing
the Iranian public by means of internal reform and the hard approach of cracking down on
public dissent if it got out of hand.
The Shah, however, wanted to pursue the hard approach alone, and he tried his best to thwart
Kennedy's attempt to follow a more balanced policy.
For the first year of Kennedy's term, the Shah kept sending emissaries to Washington
to ask for more military aid, arguing that such aid was necessary to protect Iran from
communism.
The Kennedy administration kept replying that the best way to resist communism was to attend
to the social and economic needs of the Iranian people.
Eventually, the Shah got the message, and in 1962 and 1963 he implemented a series of
internal reforms that seemed designed to respond to Kennedy's concerns.
Actually, the Shah's reform package was too modest for some of his domestic critics and
too far-reaching for others.
The Shah introduced limited land reforms, limited mainly to breaking up the landholdings
of his wealthy critics, nationalized the country's forests, and gave women the vote.
But because elections themselves continued to be rigged, and because the Shah refused
to ease up on his harsh repression of internal dissent, most critics on the left were unimpressed
by the Shah's reforms.
Iranian university students were especially unhappy, and on a couple of occasions in 1962
and 1963 they staged massive demonstrations throughout the country.
The government brutally suppressed the demonstrations, killing thousands of students in the process,
which of course further alienated the students and their leftist supporters.
But leftists were not the only ones displeased by the Shah's reforms.
Conservative Shiite clerics, who up until now had been relatively apolitical, strongly
opposed the decision to give women the vote.
They also opposed the Shah's land reforms, which in some cases placed lands belonging
to religious institutions under government control.
So the clerics joined with the students in protesting against the government, and so
contrary to Kennedy's expectation, the Shah's reforms angered far more people than they
appeased.
In this case, at least, there was no easy solution to the problem of winning the allegiance
of the indigenous population.
Thus, by the time Kennedy flew to Dallas for that fateful visit in November 1963, most
of his Middle East initiatives were stymied.
Kennedy had tried to win Nasser's trust by assisting with Egypt's internal development,
but now Nasser was engaged in a bitter war in Yemen that placed enormous strain on U.S.-Egyptian
relations.
Kennedy had tried to cajole the Israelis into repatriating Palestinian refugees and abandoning
their efforts to acquire nuclear weapons.
But Israel had pocketed the inducement, the Hawke anti-aircraft missiles, without giving
ground on the two other issues.
And finally, Kennedy had tried to improve the Shah's domestic position by demanding
internal reforms, but those reforms had made the Shah even less popular than before.
This was the situation that Lyndon Johnson inherited when he was suddenly thrust into
the presidency in November 1963.
