Lecture 10, Johnson, Taking Sides
We left off last time with John F. Kennedy's death in November 1963 and the coming to power
of Lyndon B. Johnson.
As we saw, the careful balancing act that Kennedy had tried to perform over U.S.-Iranian
relations, over relations with Arab nationalism, and over the Arab-Israeli conflict had started
to come undone even before his assassination.
Once Johnson became president, that balancing act collapsed altogether, and Washington abandoned
all pretense of even attempting a balanced approach.
Johnson instead assumed a frankly partisan stance, citing openly with the Shah of Iran
against his internal opposition, with the conservative Arab regimes against Nasserist
Egypt, and with Israel against the Arab states as a whole.
This partisan approach to Middle Eastern politics would leave a legacy of bitterness and antagonism
that remains with us to this day.
Johnson's partisan approach to Middle Eastern politics was the product of both personality
and circumstance.
Personally, Johnson was far more emotional and thin-skinned than his predecessor had
been.
Kennedy had possessed an ironic detachment that made it easier for him to deal with volatile
and obstreperous foreign leaders.
In the Kennedy years, if a foreign leader indulged in anti-American rhetoric, Kennedy
tended not to take it personally, assuming instead that the leader in question was playing
to his own constituency or engaging in some tactical maneuver.
Johnson by contrast tended to take anti-American rhetoric at face value, and worse still to
see it as a personal affront to himself.
Consequently, Johnson had far less patience with Middle Eastern leaders who criticized
the United States, and he responded to them in ways that only increased their criticism.
But the problem also had to do with the times in which Johnson served.
The mid to late 1960s were a period of revolutionary ferment throughout the world, and especially
in the Third World.
As we saw in the last lecture, a large number of nations had gained independence in the
early 1960s, and as the decade progressed, Third World nations became increasingly assertive
in world affairs, acquiring a critical mass in the UN General Assembly and other international
bodies.
Because most of those countries had had bitter experiences with Western imperial domination,
and because the United States and its allies were perceived as upholding a status quo that
favored rich, white nations over poor nations of color, the tone of Third World assertiveness
was increasingly anti-Western and anti-American.
The fact that this period also coincided with America's escalation of the war in Vietnam
only intensified the criticism directed at the United States.
In the Middle East too, there was a rising chorus of anti-U.S. criticism.
Although all Arabs saw the United States as excessively partial to Israel, Arab radicals
in particular accused Washington of cozying up to reactionary Arab monarchs who mistreated
their own people and hoarded their nation's wealth.
In Iran, political dissidents blasted the United States for supporting the Shah, another
authoritarian monarch who seemed out of touch with its own people.
Iran-Johnson's lack of personal detachment and the rising tide of anti-Americanism reinforced
each other.
For as I suggested a moment ago, the more criticism Johnson received from Middle Eastern leaders
and commentators, the more he behaved in ways that generated further criticism, reinforcing
his original inclination to give up on trying to win over the critics and to stick with leaders
and governments that supported him already.
Let's start with U.S.-Iranian relations under Johnson.
As we saw in the previous lecture, Kennedy's preoccupation with internal reforms had greatly
irritated the Shah, and there is even some evidence that the Shah was not entirely displeased
to hear of Kennedy's assassination.
And indeed, Johnson proved to be a much easier president for the Shah to deal with.
Johnson essentially returned to the posture of uncritical support for the Shah that had
characterized U.S.-Iranian relations in the Eisenhower years.
He refrained from pressuring the Shah on internal reforms and lavished Iran with military aid.
