As soon as SOFA was made public, a broad coalition of left-leaning secularists and conservative
Shiites, essentially the same coalition that had protested against the Shah's reform program
in 1962 and 1963, began denouncing the agreement.
It was in this context that a little-known Shiite cleric named Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini
was suddenly thrust into the national spotlight.
Then in his mid-60s, Khomeini was a highly revered religious leader who had spent most
of his adult life steering clear of political controversies.
But the Shah's reform efforts of the previous two years, especially land reforms and women's
suffrage, had antagonized Khomeini, and now the SOFA agreement angered him further.
In late 1964, Khomeini delivered a fiery speech in which he charged that Iran's leaders
have reduced the Iranian people to a level lower than that of an American dog.
If someone runs over a dog belonging to an American, he will be prosecuted.
Even if the Shah himself were to run over a dog belonging to an American, he would be
prosecuted.
But if an American cook runs over the Shah, the head of state, no one will have the right
to interfere with him.
Are we to be trampled underfoot by the boots of America simply because we are a weak nation?
Khomeini's emotional speech touched a chord with the Iranian people, religious and secular
alike, and he was widely regarded as a national hero.
The Shah, recognizing the threat Khomeini posed to his regime, had the cleric arrested
and deported.
Khomeini would remain in exile until 1979.
Meanwhile, in early 1965, the Iranian prime minister was shot dead by a right-wing Shiite
activist.
Shortly thereafter, the Shah himself narrowly escaped being assassinated by a left-wing
secularist.
Taking together these two acts provided the Shah with a pretext he needed for crushing
both the religious and the secular opposition movements.
The Shah's internal security organization, a brutal outfit known as Sabak, began arresting,
jailing, and torturing suspected dissidents, a regime of repression that would continue
for the remainder of the Shah's rule.
Such abuses, however, did not deter Johnson and his advisers from enclosing the Shah
in an ever tighter embrace, convinced, as they were, that U.S. security interests in
the Persian Gulf dictated such an alliance.
In effect, a U.S. official remarked in 1968, without evident irony or discomfort, we are
placing our money on a modern Persian emperor.
It seemed a good bet at the time.
OK, let's now briefly look at Johnson's relations with Egypt.
In the last few months of Kennedy's time in the White House, the Yemeni Civil War
had placed strains on U.S.-Egyptian relations.
Shortly after Johnson became president, those relations took a nosedive.
Johnson and Nasser had a visceral dislike for each other.
Johnson saw Nasser as an unscrupulous demagogue who whipped up Arab mobs through hateful and
bombastic rhetoric.
Nasser saw Johnson as an unsophisticated rube who had no business occupying a position
of world leadership.
Nasser was especially put off by that famous photograph of Johnson pulling up his shirt
to show the scar he had received from his gallbladder operation.
Such crude gestures, Nasser thought, were beneath the dignity of a statesman.
And very soon after Johnson took power, a series of bitter disputes, many of them more
symbolic than substantive, brought U.S.-Egyptian relations to a new low.
In late 1964, a group of Congolese students living in Cairo staged a demonstration to
protest U.S. policy toward the Congo.
The students gathered at the United States Information Service Library.
One of the students planted an incendiary device inside the library, and the building went
up in flames.
The Egyptian government had no complicity in this act, and it would have been a fairly
simple matter for Nasser to issue an apology to the U.S. government and offer perhaps to
pay compensation for the damage.
But Nasser was loath to admit that his security forces had lost control of the situation,
so he refused to provide either an apology or compensation, which totally infuriated
President Johnson.
Right about this time, late 1964, another dramatic flare-up occurred, this one equally
pointless.
It all started when the Egyptian Air Force shot down a private plane belonging to an
American businessman, who also happened to be a close friend of Lyndon Johnson.
Several members of the flight crew, though not the businessman himself, were killed.
