The shooting down had been an accident, resulting from the pilot's failure to issue a flight
plan.
But it took a few days to determine precisely what had happened.
In the meantime, while the wreckage of the plane was still being sifted over, the Egyptian
Minister of Supply summoned the U.S. Ambassador to his office and asked whether the U.S. government
would be willing to renew the PL-480 agreement.
PL-480, you will recall, was an American foreign aid program that allowed poor countries
like Egypt to purchase surplus American wheat, grain, and other commodities with their own
currencies.
During the Kennedy administration, the United States and Egypt had concluded a three-year
PL-480 agreement that was due to expire in 1965.
We're now in late 1964.
When the Egyptian Minister of Supply asked about renewing the PL-480 agreement, the U.S.
Ambassador said that this wasn't the proper time to discuss such a matter in the wake
of this tragic accident, or plane crash, it wasn't yet known that it was an accident.
During the course of the meeting, the Minister of Supply offered the Ambassador a glass
of orange juice.
According to one version of the meeting, the Ambassador drank the orange juice.
According to another version, he politely declined it.
At the time of the meeting, Nasser was traveling by train to deliver a major speech in Port
Said, a city in northern Egypt.
While en route, he received an extremely distorted account of the meeting.
According to that account, the U.S. Ambassador not only had flatly turned down the request
to renew PL-480, but had rudely refused to drink the orange juice.
So Nasser, without waiting to get confirmation on this account, went to Port Said to give
his speech and included in it a bitter attack on the United States.
He passed on to his audience the distorted account of the meeting he had just received,
and then breathed defiance against the United States.
Those who do not accept our behavior, he cried, can go drink from the sea, the Egyptian equivalent
of go jump in the lake.
We will cut the tongues of anybody who speaks badly about us.
Nasser went on to insult Lyndon Johnson personally, calling him a cowboy who was guilty of gangsterism.
Nasser's outburst had an extremely negative impact on U.S.-Egyptian relations.
The Americans renewed the PL-480 agreement, but instead of signing another three-year contract,
they insisted on limiting it to six-month installments.
At the end of each six-month period, the Johnson administration could evaluate Nasser's conduct
and decide whether or not the contract should be renewed.
By this mechanism, the administration hoped to be able to regulate Nasser's behavior,
but just the opposite occurred.
Nasser was so outraged by this crude attempt to pressure him that he stepped up his anti-American
attacks and drew closer to the east block, accepting ever larger amounts of Soviet economic
and military aid.
When the Americans responded by cutting back on their wheat supplies, Nasser told them
he was no longer interested in any U.S. assistance at all.
This was where things stood on the eve of the Six-Day War of 1967, a subject we'll look
at in our next lecture.
As U.S.-Egyptian relations deteriorated, the Johnson administration drew closer to the
conservative Arab regimes, especially the two monarchies of Saudi Arabia and Jordan.
Kennedy had tried to limit U.S. support for these regimes so as to avoid antagonizing Nasser.
Johnson, having basically given up on placating Nasser, sold tens of millions of dollars worth
of military equipment to the Saudis and the Jordanians.
As a U.S. official remarked in 1967, it was time to show sympathy for good Arabs as against
bad Arabs.
As in the case of Iran, the realization that Britain would soon be withdrawing its forces
from the Persian Gulf strengthened Johnson's determination to move closer to the conservative
Arab regimes, especially those located on the Gulf.
The idea, of course, was to strengthen regional clients who could then fill the vacuum resulting
from Britain's departure.
By 1966, the Johnson administration had committed itself to a two-pillars policy, that is, beefing
up support for both Iran and Saudi Arabia, though Iran was always the larger recipient
of the two.
That same year, the Johnson administration agreed to sell Saudi Arabia $100 million worth
of non-lethal military equipment, mainly trucks and jeeps.
And by 1968, the United States was selling fighter aircraft to the Saudis.
As we'll see in a later lecture, the two-pillars policy initiated by Johnson would be formalized
and expanded by President Nixon.
