Another major beneficiary of Johnson's new approach to Middle East policy was Israel.
You have lost a very great friend, Johnson told an Israeli diplomat, soon after Kennedy's
death, but you have found a much better one.
And indeed, the new president viscerally identified with Israel in a way that Kennedy never quite
did.
Johnson saw the Israelis as latter-day pioneers on the model of his own Texas forebears, and
the Israeli government had little difficulty convincing him to turn up the spigot of military
and economic aid.
During Johnson's administration, the United States began for the first time selling Israel
weapons with offensive as well as defensive capabilities.
In 1965, for example, Johnson agreed to sell Israel over 200 M-48 tanks, and in the following
year, he approved the sale of 48 A-4 Skyhawk jets.
In late 1968, following an intensive lobbying campaign by the Israeli government and its
supporters in the United States, which by now included most of the U.S. Congress, Johnson
agreed to sell Israel 50 F-4 Phantom jets, the fastest and most sophisticated aircraft
in the American arsenal.
Like his predecessor, however, Johnson was concerned about Israel's ongoing efforts to
acquire nuclear weapons, and he, too, hoped to convince the Israelis to forgo the nuclear
option by providing them with state-of-the-art conventional weapons.
But Johnson was no more successful than Kennedy had been at keeping Israel from developing
the bomb.
In the Johnson years, American inspectors continued to visit the Demona facility, and
their Israeli hosts continued to prevent them from discovering the true purpose of that
facility.
The Israelis accomplished this not by flatly refusing to allow the inspectors to see particular
sites, but rather by carefully circumscribing in advance the scope of each inspection.
As in the Kennedy years, however, these tactics did not prevent high-level U.S. officials
from discovering the true nature of Demona's activities.
Relying on aerial photography and human intelligence, American spy agencies became ever more convinced
that Israel was indeed developing nuclear weapons.
The problem then became what to do with that knowledge.
It became increasingly clear that putting an end to Israel's nuclear program would require
a public showdown between the Johnson administration and Israel, which in turn would provoke a bitter
domestic struggle between the administration and Israel's American supporters.
At a time when Johnson was increasingly preoccupied with the war in Vietnam, with all the international
and domestic headaches that involved, a public fight over Israel was the last thing the president
needed.
Eventually, the American intelligence community got the message that the Johnson administration
did not really want to be officially informed about what was going on at Demona, because
once it had that knowledge, it would have to do something about it.
It was far easier for the administration to remain officially in the dark about whether
or not the Israelis were developing nuclear weapons.
So intelligence reports on the subject were buried in the files, and their conclusions
seldom made it into the intelligence estimates that were officially conveyed to American
policymakers.
The Israelis were aware of Johnson's reluctance to make a stink over their nuclear ambitions,
and they shrewdly provided Washington with official assurances that made it easier for
the Americans to evade the issue themselves.
The standard phrase the Israeli government used when speaking to U.S. officials was,
Israel will not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons into the area, which on its face
seemed pretty definitive.
It turned out, however, that the statement contained significant loopholes, and that
Israel was using the word introduce in a very specific and restricted sense.
