Lecture 11, The Six Day War
In this lecture, we'll continue our discussion of Lyndon Johnson's Middle East policies paying
particular attention to the Arab-Israeli War of 1967, also known as the Six Day War.
The Six Day War dramatically altered the political and strategic landscape of the Middle East,
creating a new situation on the ground with which the peoples of the Middle East and the
international community as a whole continue to grapple to this day.
The war also helped bring about a profound transformation in the nature of Arab opposition
to U.S. policy.
To understand the causes of the Six Day War, it's necessary to go back to the Suez War
of 1956.
On that occasion, you will recall, Britain, France, and Israel launched an invasion of
Egypt, only to be forced by international pressure, especially American pressure, to
abandon the attack.
But although the Israelis were obliged to withdraw from Egypt, they got an important
concession in return, the termination of an Egyptian blockade against their shipping and
an end to cross-border raids into Israeli territory.
In the previous year, 1955, Egypt had tightened a blockade that it had previously imposed
against Israeli shipping through the Strait of Tehran, the passageway between the Gulf
of Akhaba and the Red Sea.
The Egyptian blockade prevented Israel from using a lat, its only southern port, and thus
closed off Israel's most direct outlet to the Indian Ocean.
All of Israel's other ports were on the Mediterranean, and because Egypt had already closed the Suez
Canal to Israeli shipping, any ships departing from the Mediterranean ports would have to
sail all the way around the Cape of Southern Africa to get to the Indian Ocean.
Another problem the Israelis had faced prior to 1956 was repeated guerrilla and terrorist
attacks on their country from Palestinians in the Egyptian-controlled Gaza Strip, attacks
that the Egyptian government had either tolerated or sponsored.
When Israel attacked Egypt during the Suez War, it occupied the Sinai Peninsula and thus
ended the Egyptian blockade of the Strait of Tehran.
It also occupied the Gaza Strip, putting an end to the Palestinian attacks.
And when the Israelis later withdrew from Sinai and Gaza under American pressure, they
did so on the understanding that UN peacekeeping forces would be stationed both on the Sinai
Peninsula and in the Gaza Strip.
The peacekeepers in Gaza would keep that territory from being used as a staging area for Palestinian
raids into Israel.
The Sinai peacekeepers were stationed in two places, along the land border between Sinai
and Israel and in the port of Sharm-e-Sheikh.
The peacekeepers at Sharm-e-Sheikh were especially important since they prevented Egypt from reimposing
its blockade on Israeli shipping through the Strait of Tehran.
The peacekeepers remained in Sinai and Gaza for the next ten years.
Indeed, it was their sudden removal in the spring of 1967 that set the stage for the
Six-Day War.
To understand how this came about, it's necessary to take a look at inter-Arab politics in the
years leading up to 1967.
By the 1960s, the Arab world was divided into two mutually antagonistic camps, a conservative
camp consisting of countries like Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and a radical camp consisting
of Egypt, Syria and Iraq.
The conservative camp was strongly pro-American, while the radical camp was officially neutral
in the Cold War, though with a distinct pro-Soviet bias.
Each camp used the Arab-Israeli issue as a way of discrediting the other.
The radicals would taunt the conservatives by saying, how can you call yourself true
Arabs when you're aligned with the United States, the imperialist nation that brought
Israel into being?
The conservatives would reply, you guys keep talking about how anti-Israeli you are, but
you never do anything about it, you're just full of hot air.
This war of words grew especially intense in April 1967, when a border clash between
Israel and Syria escalated into a dogfight between the two countries' air forces.
