The Israelis decisively won that engagement, shooting down several Syrian planes and flying
with impunity over the Syrian capital, Damascus.
The Syrians pleaded with Nasser to come to their aid, but Nasser refused.
He knew that Egypt was in no shape to tangle with Israel, especially with a third of the
Egyptian army bogged down in Yemen, fighting that obscure proxy war against Saudi Arabia.
King Hussein of Jordan seized on this incident and blasted Nasser for failing to come to
Syria's aid.
Hussein pointed out that Nasser, by allowing UN peacekeepers to remain in the Sinai Peninsula,
was permitting Israeli ships to pass through the Strait of Tehran.
If you were a real Arab patriot, Hussein said you'd expel the peacekeepers and reimpose
the blockade against Israeli shipping, instead you're hiding behind the skirts of the UN.
And just to rub it in a bit more, Hussein remarked that Nasser was perfectly willing
to send troops to kill fellow Arabs in Yemen, but was unwilling to fight against the Arabs'
common enemy Israel.
Hussein's accusations were soon echoed by other Arab commentators, even those ordinarily
sympathetic to Nasser.
Then, in May 1967, the Syrian government started sounding the alarm about an impending Israeli
invasion of Syria.
Ordinarily Nasser would have been inclined to ignore the Syrians, who had a reputation
for being somewhat hysterical on this subject.
But then, the Soviet government privately contacted Nasser and told him that based on
its own intelligence reports, the Syrians claims were credible.
Israel was indeed massing its forces on the Israeli-Syrian border.
Actually, the Israelis were not massing their forces.
The Soviets had either fabricated the report or made a mistake.
But Nasser had no way of knowing this at the time.
So now Nasser had two reasons to take some countermeasures against Israel.
To silence Arab accusations that he was a coward, and to deter what appeared to be an
impending Israeli attack on Syria.
He decided he needed to make a threatening gesture that would be simultaneously impressive
to the Israeli government and to Arab public opinion.
At the same time, he would have to be careful not to start a war for which he was unready.
The most credible threat Nasser could pose to deter an Israeli attack on Syria was the
threat of conducting a counterattack across the Egyptian-Israeli border.
The problem was what to do about the UN peacekeepers.
Demanding a total withdrawal of the peacekeepers would leave a military vacuum in Gaza and
in Sharm-e-Sheikh.
Nasser would then face enormous political pressure to re-occupy those areas with his
own forces, and having entered Sharm-e-Sheikh, he would face even greater pressure to reinstate
the blockade on Israeli shipping through the Strait of Tehran.
But if he blocked the Strait, the Israelis would almost certainly go to war against Egypt
since they had made it clear that free passage through the Strait was a vital interest for
which they were willing to fight.
So Nasser tried to follow a middle course.
He asked the United Nations to remove their peacekeeping force from Egypt's land border
with Israel so that Egypt's own forces could take up positions along the frontier, but
to keep the force in place in Gaza and Sharm-e-Sheikh.
This would allow Nasser to make a deterrent gesture against the Israelis without raising
the issue of Israeli shipping through the Strait of Tehran.
Unfortunately for Nasser, U-Tant, the Secretary General of the UN, was unwilling to conduct
a partial withdrawal of the peacekeeping forces.
Nasser had to choose between a total withdrawal and none at all.
Having gone this far, Nasser felt he couldn't back down, so he said, OK, in that case, remove
the whole force.
The UN peacekeepers were withdrawn from all of the Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza Strip.
For the next three days, as stern calls for Egyptian action emanated from Arab capitals,
Nasser hesitated.
Although his troops did take up positions along the land border with Israel, they initially
steered clear of Sharm-e-Sheikh.
