The Nixon Doctrine also came to mean that the United States would become increasingly
reliant on regional proxies, powerful pro-western governments that would protect American interests
in various parts of the world.
With these cops on the beat, as the expression went, the United States would be spared the
burden of having to intervene with its own forces.
This brings us now to U.S. policy in the Middle East, and particularly U.S. policy in the
Persian Gulf area.
In 1968, Britain had announced that it would withdraw its military forces from the Persian
Gulf in three years' time, giving rise to speculation over who would fill the vacuum
created by Britain's departure.
The new Nixon administration was determined to prevent the Soviet Union from encroaching
on that area.
Moscow was already cultivating Iraq, one of the oil-rich states of the Persian Gulf, as
a client state, and the Americans were concerned about the further extension of Soviet influence.
At the same time, the Shah of Iran was growing more assertive.
As the date for Britain's departure approached, Iran militarily occupied three small islands
previously controlled by the British, located near the Strait of Hormuz, through which the
Persian Gulf feeds into the Indian Ocean.
The Shah also revived an old dispute with Iraq over Shatt al-Arab, a tidal river lying
on the border between Iraq and Iran.
In these ways, the Shah was making a clear bid for Iran to succeed Britain as the next
regional hegemon.
The Shah's ambitions dovetailed with Nixon's foreign policy.
By supporting Iran's claims to regional domination, Nixon could ensure that the Persian Gulf remained
in pro-Western hands, without the necessity of direct U.S. involvement.
So Nixon intensified the policy of generous support for the Shah that Lyndon Johnson had
begun, vastly increasing the amount and quality of military aid to Iran.
The high point of Nixon's pro-Sah policy came in 1972, when Nixon paid a visit to Iran and,
in essence, told the Shah that he could purchase from the United States any type of military
equipment except for nuclear weapons.
When cozying up to the Shah in this manner, however, the Nixon administration turned a
blind eye to the Shah's growing unpopularity at home.
The Shah liked to see himself as a progressive modernizer, bringing the enlightened values
of the West to his backward people.
It would be more accurate to say that he was an authoritarian modernizer, imposing on his
country the physical trappings of modernity, high-rise buildings, massive public works
projects, a high-tech military establishment, casinos and nightclubs, without offering any
of the civic or political freedoms associated with Western liberalism.
This was all deeply resented by the Iranian people, many of whom lived in poverty, gaining
little from the country's enormous oil wealth, which instead lined the pockets of foreign
corporations, corrupt government officials and a tiny handful of wealthy Iranians.
Worse still, the Shah had an atrocious human rights record.
His internal security police, Savak, routinely jailed, tortured and executed political dissidents,
practices toward which the Nixon administration turned a blind eye.
In the late 1970s, of course, these circumstances would come back to haunt the United States.
Another Middle Eastern country to take on greater importance under the Nixon doctrine, albeit
to a lesser extent than Iran, was Saudi Arabia.
I mentioned in a previous lecture that the Johnson administration, toward the end of
the Johnson administration, the United States had given up on trying to befriend both conservative
and radical Arab states and had moved closer to Saudi Arabia.
This evolution continued under Nixon, but was now hastened by the requirements of the
Nixon doctrine.
Indeed, in some formulations of Middle East policy, Iran and Saudi Arabia were described
as the twin pillars on which Washington depended to ensure the status quo, though Iran was
always the bigger pillar of the two.
Transformations in the international oil market made it possible for Saudi Arabia to
take on this new role.
