In the first couple decades of the post-war period, the world had experienced an oil
glut allowing for a buyer's market.
That is to say, the oil companies could decide for themselves what the price of oil would
be and the oil producing states had little say in the matter.
But by the late 1960s, global demand for oil began to outstrip available supply, creating
a seller's market.
Now it was the oil producing states that could dictate the price of oil.
One of the main beneficiaries of this development was the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries, or OPEC, an oil cartel consisting of the major oil-rich Middle Eastern states
along with some non-Middle Eastern states like Indonesia and Venezuela.
OPEC had been formed in 1960, but it wasn't until the early 1970s, following the sharp
rise in the global demand for oil, that the cartel became a major international player.
In a historic agreement in 1971, the major oil companies of the West conceded that OPEC
could set the price of oil, which, not surprisingly, began to increase substantially.
The rise in oil prices provided Saudi Arabia, a major member of OPEC, with a good deal of
disposable income, which it could now use to beef up its military.
In the 1970s, the Saudi government bought billions of dollars worth of arms from American contractors,
especially in the area of air defense.
This process became known as the recycling of petrodollars, since the huge amounts of
money that Saudi Arabia extracted from American oil companies were being funneled back into
the U.S. economy by means of arms purchases.
This cozy arrangement was, needless to say, much beloved by the American government and
corporate sector alike.
But like the close relationship with the Shah, Washington's courtship of the House
of Saud would, years later, come back to haunt the United States.
Let's now take a look at U.S. policy toward the Arab-Israeli conflict during Nixon's
first term.
This policy area, too, eventually came to be defined by the Nixon Doctrine, with Israel
serving as one of the regional powers operating under U.S. auspices.
But this was not how Nixon initially intended it.
Indeed, for the first two years of his presidency, Nixon didn't want to have much to do with
the Arab-Israeli conflict, since he assumed, realistically, that the prospects for success
in that area were slight, while the domestic political dangers were high.
So Nixon initially designated the Arab-Israeli conflict to be one of the few policy areas
that his Secretary of State, William Rogers, would be allowed to handle.
But by 1971, this area, too, had been rested from Rogers' jurisdiction and brought under
the nearly exclusive control of Nixon and Kissinger.
Nixon's elevation to the presidency coincided with an upswing in Arab-Israeli hostilities.
In the Six-Day War of 1967, as we saw, Israel had overwhelmingly defeated the Arab states,
making the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip from Egypt, the Golan Heights from Syria,
and the West Bank from Jordan.
Shortly after the war ended, violence resumed at a lower level, as some Arab actors revived
the struggle against Israel and began trying to dislodge it from the Arab lands it had
seized.
The major challenges came from Egypt to the West and to the East, from a new phenomenon
in world affairs, an independent Palestinian movement.
Let's look at the Egyptian challenge first.
Since the conclusion of the 1967 war, Egypt had conducted sporadic artillery attacks
and commando raids against Israeli positions in the Sinai on the eastern side of the Suez
Canal.
In early 1969, just as Nixon was taking office, Nasser greatly stepped up these activities,
turning them into a major, coordinated offensive along the whole length of the canal that became
known as the War of Attrition.
By this time, although Egypt had substantially rebuilt its military with the help of the Soviet
Union, it still lacked the capability to liberate the entire Sinai Peninsula by force.
Nasser was painfully aware of this fact, but he was also determined to prevent the new
status quo from being solidified.
He hoped that a resumption of hostilities would convince the great powers that the status
quo was untenable, causing them to force Israel to withdraw from all of the Arab territories
it had occupied in 1967 in accordance with Egypt's interpretation of Resolution 242,
i.e. that Israel must withdraw first, and then there could be talk about mutual recognition.
