Israel's initial reaction to the war of attrition was to conduct massive air raids against Egyptian artillery positions, surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft guns, and radar stations.
Indeed, by the end of the year, Egypt's entire air defense system was in ruins.
The U.S. State Department was alarmed by the escalating violence, and in December 1969, William Rogers, the Secretary of State, unveiled a major Arab-Israeli peace initiative.
The Rogers Plan, as it was dubbed, called for an Israeli withdrawal from virtually all of the territories occupied in 1967 in exchange for peace and recognition from the Arab states.
Israel immediately rejected the plan as violating the principle of the direct bilateral negotiations between Israel and the Arab states.
Egypt did not reject the Rogers Plan outright, but declined to endorse it either since the plan demanded specific concessions from Egypt, such as the demilitarization of parts of the Sinai Peninsula that Nasser deemed unacceptable.
So it seemed as if the Rogers Plan had fallen flat.
One person who had quietly undermined the Rogers Plan was Nixon's National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger, who saw the plan as giving too much to the Arabs.
Kissinger believed that as long as states like Egypt and Syria maintained close ties to the Soviet Union, the United States should refrain from pressuring Israel to give up the occupied territories.
Only when the Arabs had severed their ties to Moscow should Washington make any effort to give the Arab states satisfaction.
Shortly after the Rogers Plan was unveiled, Kissinger convinced Nixon that the plan was ill-advised.
Nixon was unwilling to repudiate the plan outright, especially in the immediate aftermath of its unveiling,
but he did authorize Kissinger to quietly assure the Israelis that the plan would never be implemented.
Kissinger not only passed on this assurance, but encouraged Israel to criticize the Rogers Plan.
When Golda Meir, Israel's Prime Minister, came to the United States for a speaking tour in early 1970,
Kissinger used Leonard Garment, Nixon's liaison to the American Jewish community, as a special conduit for some off-the-record advice to Meir.
Tell her wherever she goes, Kissinger instructed Garment, that we want her to slam the hell out of Rogers and his plan.
Meir was only too happy to oblige.
In January 1970, the War of Attrition sharply intensified.
The Israeli Air Force began conducting what it called deep penetration bombing raids over Egyptian territory,
which had been rendered extremely vulnerable by the destruction of the Egyptian air defense system.
Israeli planes struck military and industrial targets around Cairo and in the Nile Delta.
Nasser was shocked by the severity of the Israeli raids, and he secretly flew to Moscow,
where he convinced a reluctant Soviet government to supply Egypt immediately with new surface-to-air missiles known as SAM-3s.
Because Egyptians lacked the requisite training in using the SAM-3s, the missiles were operated by Soviet technicians.
The SAM-3s were so effective at shooting down Israeli planes that Israel was forced to abandon the deep penetration raids.
Egyptian crews then began moving the missile sites closer to the Suez Canal.
The idea was to erect a missile shield that covered the opposite bank of the canal,
permitting the Egyptian army to cross it eventually.
The Israeli Air Force ferociously attacked the sites, killing as many as 2,000 Egyptian construction workers.
But the construction crews pressed on, and by the summer of 1970, the SAM-3s were about 25 miles west of the canal.
Alarmed at this development, the U.S. State Department launched another, more modest initiative,
sometimes referred to as the Second Rogers Plan.
It called on Egypt and Israel to seize all military hostilities for three months' time,
and to refrain from changing the military status quo along the Suez Canal.
Egypt and Israel both accepted the ceasefire.
Israel and the United States thought that the agreement would freeze Egypt's missile construction,
but the Egyptians found a loophole in the agreement that allowed them to install several additional missile sites on the west side of the canal.
In a couple other cases, Egypt violated the actual letter of the agreement.
