By the summer of 1971, the Egyptian initiative had all but collapsed.
And a frustrated Sadat announced that 1971 would be the year of decision.
If Egypt could not regain its territory through negotiation, it would have to resume hostilities
instead.
Much to Sadat's embarrassment, 1971 passed into history without a decision for either
peace or war.
By now Kissinger had finally rested control of U.S. Middle East policy from Rogers.
Kissinger supported Israel's refusal to give back any territory without first getting full
peace treaties with the Arab states.
Both Kissinger and Nixon viewed the Arab-Israeli crisis through a Cold War lens.
And by early 1972, both men were convinced that Israel could serve as a strategic asset
in the Middle East, countering the influence of pro-Soviet governments and movements in
the Arab world.
So neither Kissinger nor Nixon was inclined to give Sadat any help.
Nor was Moscow giving Sadat much assistance.
Although the Soviets did supply Egypt with arms, they withheld their most advanced military
equipment, which Sadat considered essential to a credible military option.
Although Sadat was unable in 1971 to pursue either diplomacy or war.
In early 1972, Sadat renewed his ultimatum.
1972 would be the year of decision, and this time he really meant it.
By now, Sadat was becoming something of an international joke.
As Henry Kissinger later admitted, I thought of Sadat as a character out of Aida.
He kept making grand, deliquent pronouncements and never acted on them, so I frankly thought
he was bluffing.
In the summer of 1972, Sadat did make one dramatic move.
He insisted that thousands of Soviet advisors, who had been stationed in Egypt since 1967,
leave the country at once.
Sadat's expulsion of the Soviet advisors has long puzzled historians.
Was Sadat clearing the decks for imminent war with Israel?
Or making a bid for closer relations with the United States?
Evidently, Sadat was preparing for both possibilities, neither of which could be pursued unless relations
with the Soviets were placed on a new footing.
On one level, the expulsion was aimed at getting the Soviets' attention.
As I mentioned, Moscow's stinginess with sophisticated arms prevented Egypt from exercising
a military option.
By expelling the advisors, Sadat hoped to show the Soviets that they could not take Egypt
for granted, and thus shock them into giving him more military aid.
But Sadat's expulsion order can also be read as clearing the way for better relations with
the United States.
Kissinger had passed word to Sadat that the Soviet presence in Egypt stood in the way
of a peace settlement.
As long as the advisors remained, Washington would be unwilling to press Israel for concessions.
So just as Sadat wanted to convince Moscow that Egypt couldn't be taken for granted,
he wanted to show Washington that Egypt might be up for grabs.
Sadat's gambit succeeded with the Soviets, but failed with the Americans.
The Soviets were stunned by the expulsion order and rushed to salvage the situation,
agreeing to furnish Egypt many of the arms they had previously withheld.
Kissinger, on the other hand, declined to exploit the opening provided by Sadat.
As I mentioned, Kissinger didn't take Sadat seriously, seeing him as a buffoon who kept
making dire threats that he was unable to carry out.
Indeed, the fact that Sadat asked for no American concessions in return for the expulsion convinced
Kissinger that Sadat was an amateur who didn't know how to play the international game.
The superpower's differing reactions to Sadat's action had fateful consequences.
By Russian military aid to Egypt, Moscow made war possible.
By ignoring Sadat's gesture, Washington made war all but inevitable.
Accordingly, by the spring of 1973, Sadat had forged a military alliance with Syria,
and military leaders from both countries were planning a coordinated offensive against Israel,
scheduled to take place the following October.
The Egyptians would cross the Suez Canal and attack Israeli forces in the Sinai Peninsula.
Simultaneously, Syria would attack Israeli forces in the Golan Heights.
It's important to stress, however, that Sadat saw the coming war as a means to diplomacy,
not as a substitute for it.
He hoped that a successful Arab campaign would shock both the Israelis and the Americans
out of their complacency, forcing them to reconsider Egypt's previous political overtures.
Sadat was obliged to think in such terms by military necessity.
He knew it would be unsafe for Egyptian forces to advance more than about six miles east
of the Suez Canal, since their aircraft and surface-to-air missiles could not provide
adequate protection beyond that distance.
Sadat's intention, therefore, was to establish a narrow bridgehead on the opposite bank of
the canal and use it as leverage in the negotiations he expected to result from the war.
Unfortunately, Sadat did not reveal to his Syrian allies just how limited Egypt's military
objectives were.
