Sadat knew that Syria's president, Hafiz el-Assad, would not join the war effort unless
Egypt was committed to a more ambitious campaign in the Sinai Peninsula.
Otherwise, the Israelis would be free to devote the bulk of their forces to blocking
Syria's attempt to retake the Golan.
So to secure Assad's participation in the war effort, Sadat had his military commanders
draw up a two-part plan for the Sinai operation that could be shared with the Syrians.
The first part called for the Egyptian army to cross the canal and secure a narrow strip
on its eastern bank.
The second part envisioned a subsequent advance to a series of mountain passes in Sinai lying
about 25 miles east of the Suez Canal.
What Assad was not told was that only the first part of the plan was to be implemented.
Sadat's deception would, as we shall see, fatally undermine the whole Arab operation.
In the early phases of the operation, however, Egypt and Syria made an extremely impressive
showing.
Both armies were much better armed, better trained, and better led than in 1967, and both
of them enjoyed the advantage that comes with striking the first blow.
The Yom Kippur War began on the early afternoon of October 6th.
Under cover of a heavy artillery barrage, thousands of Egyptian troops crossed the canal in rubber
dinghies, laying down pontoon bridges so that tanks and other heavy equipment could follow
behind them.
With simple gas-powered water pumps, the Egyptians blasted passageways through the high mounds
of sand that the Israelis had built up on the east bank of the canal.
In these ways, the Egyptians breached an Israeli defensive line that most military analysts
had believed to be virtually impregnable.
By October 8th, the Egyptians had advanced six miles east of the Suez Canal.
Meanwhile, the Syrian army entered the occupied Golan Heights.
Although the Syrian attack was blunted in the northern and central part of the Golan,
two divisions to the south broke through the Israeli line and seemed in danger of crossing
in to Israel proper.
Because they had assumed that the Arab states were too weak and ill-prepared to go to war,
the Israelis were completely taken by surprise.
In a panic, they appealed to Washington for immediate assistance.
It was Henry Kissinger, not Richard Nixon, who dominated American policymaking during
the Yom Kippur War.
Just a few weeks earlier, Kissinger had replaced Rogers as Secretary of State while retaining
his old position as National Security Advisor, so Kissinger controlled not just the machinery
of the State Department, but the National Security staff as well.
Moreover, by the fall of 1973, Nixon was almost entirely consumed by the Watergate scandal,
which would force him from office less than a year later.
For these reasons, Kissinger had enormous freedom of action on the foreign policy stage.
So let's look at Kissinger's response to the crisis.
Like the Israelis, Kissinger was caught off guard by the Egyptian Syrian offensive.
But he quickly recovered his balance and devised a strategy for dealing with the crisis that
he pursued consistently throughout.
First, Kissinger wanted to ensure that Israel was sufficiently powerful to repel the Egyptian
Syrian attack, and even to some extent to take the offensive.
This would teach the Arabs that they could not get their way by using force against an
American ally.
But Kissinger didn't want Egypt and Syria to be totally humiliated either.
For the outbreak of the war had convinced Kissinger that Arab grievances could not be
ignored quite as blithely as before.
Once the war ended, there would have to be some sort of U.S.-sponsored peace process,
and this might be impossible if the Arabs were too embittered.
The final element of Kissinger's strategy was to prevent the Soviet Union from increasing
its political influence in the Middle East, indeed to reduce the influence it already had.
This last objective became especially clear in the latter stages of the war.
Kissinger's determination that Israel enjoy only a limited advantage would soon cause
friction between the U.S. and Israeli governments.
But in the early stages of the war, the two countries' interests were broadly compatible.
To help Israel beat back the Egyptian-Syrian offensive, the U.S. government agreed to airlift
military supplies to Israel.
Although it took several days to get the operation up and running, once it was underway, it became
one of the biggest airlift operations in U.S. history, with a thousand tons of military
equipment being flown into Israel each day.
