Lecture 14, Carter and Camp David In this lecture, weíre going to look at
President Jimmy Carterís efforts at Arab-Israeli peacemaking, in particular the Camp David process
that resulted in a peace agreement between Israel and Egypt, which over the previous
quarter century had been Israelís most formidable foe.
To most historians and commentators, and probably to most ordinary Americans as well, Camp David
is one of the few clear successes in a presidency otherwise marked by failure and defeat. Camp
David also has served as the blueprint for most subsequent American efforts to settle
the Arab-Israeli conflict. Nevertheless, the agreement reached at Camp David fell significantly
short of what Carter himself had hoped to accomplish upon becoming president in early
1977. Moreover, Camp David was angrily rejected by most people in the Arab world, and especially
the Palestinians, in whose plight and aspirations Carter had taken a special interest.
Before discussing the Camp David peace process, let me make some general remarks about President
Carter, which will help us make sense of his policies not just toward the Arab-Israeli
conflict but also toward the Iran hostage crisis, the oil shocks, and the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan, the subjects of our next three lectures.
Carter was an extremely unusual president, the product of an extremely unusual set of
national circumstances. In 1976, the year Carter was elected president, the nation was
still reeling from the Watergate scandal. There was a widespread feeling in the country
that the United States government had become cynical and corrupt that American leaders
had lost their moral compass. Jimmy Carter, a former governor of Georgia, was well suited
to the public mood. He was a born-again Christian who spoke of restoring morality to political
life and who famously pledged to the American people, I will never lie to you.
What is particularly interesting about the public mood of 1976 is that the emphasis on
morality was also combined with an upsurge in anti-militarist and peace-loving values.
For in 1976, it was not just the Watergate scandal that was fresh in people's minds.
The election also came on the heels of the Vietnam War and of a series of revelations
by Congress and the media of abuses committed in foreign countries by the CIA. Official
wrongdoing and deceit Americans discovered had extended to foreign relations and had
facilitated violent and aggressive American actions abroad. For the first time in the
post-war period, a large segment of the American electorate was convinced that the U.S. government
had behaved immorally abroad. In the 1976 election, Carter skillfully exploited
this sentiment. He pledged to rein in the CIA and to pursue a foreign policy that was
dedicated to promoting peace and human rights, not to the incessant pursuit of advantage
over America's Cold War adversaries. He promised to seek solutions to problems that plagued
mankind generally, problems like poverty, hunger, racial oppression, nuclear proliferation,
and environmental degradation. This set of appeals struck a chord with many Americans
and Carter won the election by an extremely narrow margin. In fact, the dissenting mood
that Carter rode to the White House was an aberration, a temporary reaction to the shocks
of Watergate, Vietnam, and the revelations about the CIA. And therein lies the key to
Carter's failure as president. For the dissenting mood lasted just long enough to get Carter
elected but not long enough to support a complete reorientation of American foreign policy of
the sort Carter was talking about. Almost immediately after Carter took office, public
opinion began switching back to its more familiar mode of distrusting foreigners and seeking
to maintain America's honor abroad, especially its military honor. This shift in mood, combined
with a series of foreign crises that caused America to seem weak abroad, made Carter's
original approach politically impossible. And toward the end of his presidency, Carter
switched over to a more hard line foreign policy.
