When Yasser Arafat first took over the PLO in the late 1960s, the organization was committed to destroying Israel and establishing a Palestinian state in its place.
This was a totally unrealistic vision, but it was the only program that could hold the allegiance of all the disparate groups that made up the PLO.
In the early to mid-1970s, however, the dominant factions of the PLO, with Yasser Arafat and the lead, moved away from an insistence on supplanting Israel entirely
and began contemplating a political settlement whereby a Palestinian state would be created on the West Bank and Gaza and existed side by side with Israel.
To be sure, many factions within the PLO rejected this formula and continued to speak of liberating all of Palestine.
Indeed, not until the 1980s would a two-state solution have sufficient support within the PLO to become the organization's official position.
Still, by the mid-1970s, there were clear indications that addressing Palestinian national aspirations did not necessarily mean opposing the existence of Israel.
Important segments of the American political establishment took note of this development and began speaking ever so cautiously about the necessity of addressing Palestinian political rights.
In 1975, the Brookings Institution, a mainstream think tank in Washington with somewhat liberal leanings, issued a report that called for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
involving Israel's withdrawal from virtually all of the territory occupied in 1967 and recognition of the Palestinian's right to self-determination,
resulting either in an independent Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, or in a Palestinian entity federated with Jordan, provided the Palestinians were willing to recognize Israel.
One of the authors of the Brookings Institution report was Zbigniew Brzezinski, who went on to become Carter's national security advisor.
Carter himself was not willing to advocate an actual Palestinian state or to deal directly with the PLO.
In 1975, Henry Kissinger had pledged to the Israelis that the United States would not deal with the PLO as long as it refused to recognize Israel.
By the time Carter took office in early 1977, the PLO was close to satisfying this demand.
In that year, 1977, the PLO's legislative body, the Palestine National Council, approved a resolution stating that the PLO would accept an independent state limited to the West Bank and Gaza, thus implicitly recognizing Israel's existence.
But the PLO was not yet willing to take the next step and explicitly recognize Israel's legitimacy, preferring to hold such recognition as a bargaining chip for the future.
And as long as the PLO withheld explicit recognition, Carter was unwilling to violate Kissinger's pledge and deal directly with the PLO.
Though he did recognize that the Palestinians had important political rights that could not be ignored.
Shortly after taking office in 1977, Carter publicly advocated establishing a homeland for the Palestinians, though he stopped short of calling for a Palestinian state.
At about the same time, Carter proposed holding an international conference in Geneva to deal with the Arab-Israeli conflict comprehensively.
Such a conference would be attended by Israel, the major Arab states, and the major powers of the world, including the Soviet Union.
Carter did not invite the PLO to attend, but he was willing to have Palestinians not affiliated with the PLO take part in the Geneva conference, perhaps by being attached to the Jordanian delegation.
The Soviet Union and most Arab states welcomed the Geneva formula, but Israel strongly objected to it.
Israel feared that it would be outnumbered at a multilateral conference and forced to make bigger concessions than it wanted to.
It preferred to deal with the Arab states one at a time, preventing them from using their numerical advantage collectively.
And it certainly did not want the Soviet Union, which had backed Israel's Arab enemies, involved in any settlement.
