By now, Sadat was so relieved to be getting back the Sinai that he'd essentially abandoned
his original demand for an independent Palestinian state.
Or to be more precise, he continued to voice that demand, but he was no longer allowing
the Palestinian issue to stand in the way of his efforts to recover the Sinai.
On September 17, 1978, in an emotional ceremony on the White House lawn, Carter, Bagan and
Sadat unveiled the Camp David Agreement.
The agreement consisted of two parts.
The first part, which was extremely detailed and specific, concerned the bilateral relationship
between Egypt and Israel.
In essence, it stipulated that Israel would withdraw from the Sinai Peninsula in exchange
for a peace treaty and normalized diplomatic relations with Egypt.
The second part of the agreement, which was much more vague, concerned the disposition
of the Israeli-occupied territories in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The agreement called for Egypt, Israel and Jordan to negotiate a transitional self-governing
authority to replace the existing Israeli military government in those occupied territories.
This authority would last not more than five years, during which time negotiations would
take place to determine the final status of the territories, recognizing the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.
The problem with this formula was that that last phrase was so vague and subject to conflicting
interpretation.
What did the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people entail?
Sadat insisted that they entailed eventual statehood for the Palestinian people.
Bagan insisted they meant only limited autonomy for the Palestinians, with the Israelis maintaining
overall control.
Since the two leaders had not been able to agree on this question, they papered over
their differences by using vague language.
It all became moot in any event since Jordan refused to go along with this formula.
And no negotiations took place even for a transitional government, let alone over the
final status of the occupied territories.
Where was there any firm agreement on Jewish settlements, apart from those in the Sinai
which, as we saw, the Israelis did agree to dismantle?
Carter claimed that he had a verbal promise from Bagan to freeze the construction of settlements
in the West Bank and Gaza while the status of those territories was pending.
But Bagan denied he had made such a promise and continued to build settlements.
Carter believed that Bagan had double-crossed him.
But by the time Carter had reached this conclusion, he was so distracted by other crises, especially
the situation in Iran, which we'll look at next time, that he was not in a position to
do much about it.
As it became clear that no real meeting of the minds had taken place over the West Bank
and Gaza, the remaining Arab governments insisted that Sadat repudiate the Camp David Agreement.
It was selfish and immoral, they said, for Sadat to proceed with the bilateral Egyptian-Israeli
deal as long as the other questions remained unresolved.
But Sadat rejected this criticism and went ahead with the deal, which was formalized
in an Egyptian-Israeli treaty in 1979.
As agreed, Egypt extended formal recognition to Israel, and Israel began withdrawing its
forces and residential settlements from the Sinai Peninsula, a process that was completed
in 1982.
The Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, as well as the Golan Heights, continued.
For his willingness to make peace with Israel, Sadat became a hero in the West.
For his willingness to cut a deal that benefited Egypt alone while leaving the Palestinians
under Israeli occupation, he was vilified in the Arab world.
In 1981, Sadat was assassinated by Islamic extremists who were partly motivated by outrage
over his dealings with Israel.
As I mentioned a moment ago, developments in Iran greatly weakened Carter's hand in
dealing with Begin.
In fact, they did quite a bit more than that.
They crippled Carter's entire presidency and played a key role in shaping the contemporary
Middle East.
We will examine events in Iran in our next lecture.
