Lecture 15, The Iranian Revolution and the Hostage Crisis
In this lecture, we're going to continue our examination of the presidency of Jimmy Carter
focusing on the Iranian Revolution of 1978-79 and the subsequent hostage crisis.
The Iranian Revolution introduced a new force in world affairs, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, which over the subsequent quarter century would pose a formidable challenge to American
power in the Middle East and Central Asia.
More immediately, the prolonged captivity of 52 Americans at the hands of a hostile
foreign power, combined with the Soviet Union's simultaneous invasion of Afghanistan, made
Carter appear weak and ineffectual to American voters, ultimately ensuring his defeat to
Ronald Reagan in the 1980 presidential election.
By the time Carter became president in early 1977, there was probably nothing he could
have done to prevent the Shah of Iran from being toppled by his own people, who had come
to loathe their leader with a passion.
Even so, Carter's initial toleration of the Shah's human rights abuses and his vacillation
after the Iranian Revolution began made the inevitable fall much more damaging to the
United States and to Carter personally than it needed to be.
From the start of his presidency, there had been a marked contradiction between Carter's
policy toward Iran and his professed devotion to human rights.
During the 1976 presidential campaign, Carter had pledged to promote human rights throughout
the world.
Our commitment to human rights, he proclaimed, must be absolute.
To make good on this pledge, Carter established a special office within the State Department
whose sole function would be to promote human rights, to see to it that the State Department
in formulating U.S. policy toward each nation or region of the world considered the human
rights implications of that policy.
In the case of countries with serious human rights abuses, the Human Rights Office was
to recommend economic sanctions or other penalties.
From the beginning, however, the Human Rights Office was resented by career officials in
the State Department, who found it extremely bothersome to have to consider the human rights
implications of their foreign policies.
Many of these officials were able to intercede with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, or even
with Carter himself, and secure exemptions for the countries with which they were concerned,
on the grounds that relations with those countries were far too important to be complicated by
human rights considerations.
So in the end, Carter's record on promoting human rights was decidedly mixed.
To his credit, there were a number of countries in which his administration did push hard
for human rights by imposing economic sanctions or curtailing economic or military aid.
These countries included the apartheid regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia, the latter of
which in 1979 switched over to black majority rule and changed its name to Zimbabwe, and
Latin American dictatorships like Chile and Argentina.
In these countries, Carter's human rights policies did accomplish some good by calling
attention to the plight of victims and pressuring the offending regimes to treat them less harshly.
But there was also a long list of human rights violators that were never subjected to significant
sanctions.
These included major countries with which the Carter administration was trying to improve
relations like China and the Soviet Union, and countries that were already staunch allies
of the United States like the Philippines, South Korea, and Iran under the Shah.
The Shah, as you know, had a terrible human rights record.
He ruled the country with an iron hand, crushing any opposition to his rule by means of Savak,
his vicious secret police.
Except for a brief period under President Kennedy, the United States had generally refrained
from criticizing the Shah's internal abuses.
And Carter, convinced that the Shah was far too important to alienate, continued in this tradition.
