Although the Shah's atrocious human rights record was no secret, Carter decided early
on that Iran's strategic importance made it necessary to maintain the Shah in power,
so Carter chose not to make an issue of human rights violations in Iran.
Worse still, he gave lavish political and moral support to the Shah.
In late 1977, Carter paid a state visit to Iran, where he publicly toasted the Shah,
saying that Iran, because of the great leadership of the Shah, is an island of stability in
one of the more troubled areas of the world.
This is a great tribute to you, your majesty, and to your leadership, and to the respect
and admiration and love which your people give you.
We have no other nation on earth who is closer to us in planning for our mutual security,
and there is no leader with whom I have a deeper sense of personal gratitude and personal
friendship.
So really laid it on quite thick.
At the time Carter made this statement, neither he nor his diplomats in Iran had any real
inkling of the level of opposition to the Shah brewing in the country, largely because
the U.S. Embassy in Iran had limited its contacts to government officials, who were
themselves totally out of touch with local events.
By the summer of 1978, riots had broken out throughout the country.
Iranian security forces tried to crush the uprisings by force.
On one occasion in September, they fired into a crowd of demonstrators killing hundreds
of people.
This only caused the disturbances to intensify, and the Shah began losing his ability to govern
the country.
Only now, in the fall of 1978, did the Carter administration come to realize how precarious
the Shah's position really was.
And as the administration faced the crisis in Iran, the diverging approaches and philosophies
of Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, the National Security
Advisor, came to the fore.
Vance and most of his subordinates at the State Department were convinced that it was
futile for the Shah to try to crush the demonstrations by force.
They wanted him to appease the opposition by implementing political reforms and agreeing
to limit his own power, perhaps even to the point of becoming a figurehead monarch and
allowing a new government to take charge.
Brzezinski, on the other hand, thought the Shah could hold on to power if he launched
an immediate and massive crackdown.
Carter was caught in between these two positions and was unable to decide what to do.
He couldn't bear the thought of bluntly telling the Shah he had to give up power and become
a figurehead.
But neither could he stomach urging the Shah to launch a bloodbath.
So Carter hesitated and the Shah's position continued to deteriorate.
In January 1979, the Shah fled the country, ultimately ending up in Mexico.
The Iranian army quickly collapsed, clearing a path for the revolutionaries to seize state
power.
Although the Iranian Revolution was mounted by a wide sector of Iranian society, incorporating
people of all political persuasions, it was not long before Shiite Muslim fundamentalists
began asserting their control over the revolution, edging out more secular forces.
This revolution within a revolution, if you will, was both symbolized and consolidated
by the return to Iran of the Shiite cleric Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
Khomeini, you will recall, was a long time political opponent of the Shah, who had been
expelled from the country in the mid-1960s, eventually ending up in Paris.
From the start of the disturbances in the summer of 1978, Khomeini had encouraged the
revolutionaries through stirring addresses that were recorded on audio tape and then
smuggled into Iran.
And now, in February 1979, Khomeini triumphantly returned to Iran to take command of the revolution.
He set up a revolutionary government in the capital city, Tehran, supported by a loyal
cadre of radical Iranian students.
