So, on November 4th, 1979, a huge crowd of Iranian students surrounded the embassy compound.
Soon, students began climbing over the compound gate, overwhelming the marine guards who chose
not to fire their guns.
The students occupied the embassy compound and took 76 embassy employees captive.
Now, initially, just about everyone, including the students themselves, assumed that the
embassy seizure would end quickly.
The expectation was that the students would parade the hostages around for a while, make
some fiery anti-American speeches, but then the Iranian government, the grown-ups, would
step in and say, okay, boys, you've made your point, now it's time to let the Americans
go, and the students would let them go.
But the Iranian government never intervened in this way.
What happened instead was that the Ayatollah Khomeini, sensing an excellent opportunity
to consolidate his power within Iran, publicly endorsed the seizure of the embassy.
And once Khomeini had given his blessing, it became impossible for anyone else in the
Iranian government to publicly consider releasing the hostages.
So the students continued to hold the hostages now under the auspices of the Iranian government.
It was the start of what was to be a 444-day ordeal for the hostages, for the American people,
and for President Carter.
Once they had gotten control of the US embassy, the students began ransacking the compound,
searching for evidence that the embassy had indeed been used as a headquarters for an
effort to destroy the revolution and restore the Shah.
And it was not long before the students hit paydirt.
At the start of the embassy takeover, embassy employees had begun frantically shredding
sensitive documents.
After they burst into the embassy, the students took possession of the shredded documents.
They brought in women who were expert carpet weavers and put them to work, painstakingly
restitching the documents into readable form.
It was by restoring these documents that the students first learned of Vernon Cassin's
contacts with Benny Sutter.
One of the restored documents, which the students published shortly thereafter, is a report
from the CIA station to the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
It describes Cassin's, aka Rutherford's, meetings with Benny Sutter, who is given the
codename SD Lure 1.
And it remarks that efforts should continue to obtain his cooperation.
An individual with the access he enjoys should be able to furnish info of value in the paper.
The document also describes Benny Sutter's potential as a long term asset for the United
States.
Cassin describes Benny Sutter as having a promising political future.
Ambitious and politically astute, he appears to be playing his game cautiously, with an
eye to the day when Khomeini passes from the scene.
Being a long time plotter, he could see his way in the future to plot against the regime,
if either he feels it is drifting away from its revolutionary objectives, or that it would
be in his interest to do so.
Faulty parallelism there, but you get the point.
By the time this document was made public in 1980, Benny Sutter had become president
of Iran.
Even though Benny Sutter probably hadn't known he was hanging out with the CIA, the
revelation deeply damaged his credibility, and he was soon forced to resign.
Benny Sutter's departure was a further sign that moderates had lost influence within the
Iranian government, and that radicals were securely in charge.
The disturbances in Iran caused a disruption of oil shipments from Iran to the West, leading
in turn to a 60% hike in oil prices and a steep rise in inflation.
In 1975, the inflation rate in the United States had been 7%.
In 1980, it was 13%.
As had happened after the Yom Kippur War, there were long lines at gas stations.
