Although these problems could not be blamed on the Soviet Union, they led to an increased
sense of vulnerability in the West and to a fear that the Soviet Union might somehow
take advantage of the West's distress.
And such concerns seemed to be vindicated in December 1979, just a month after the U.S.
hostages were taken, when 80,000 Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, quite out of the blue
as far as most Americans were concerned.
I'll have more to say about Afghanistan in a later lecture.
For now, suffice it to say that Moscow's audacious move, coming in the midst of the
Iranian crisis, only deepened the sense of crisis then enveloping the United States and
indeed much of the rest of the world.
Events in Afghanistan also reinforced the widespread impression that Carter was weak
and ineffectual, incapable of standing up to America's foes.
In early 1980, Carter passed word to the Shah, who was now dying of cancer, that he was no
longer welcome in the United States.
So the Shah left the country, ultimately settling in Egypt.
By this time, American society was totally obsessed with the hostage crisis.
The U.K. news programs began their broadcast by emblazoning on the screen day 32, or whatever
day it was, in the captivity of the American hostages in Iran.
They did this day in and day out, even when there was no news on the hostage front to
report.
So Carter was under enormous pressure to do something about the situation.
Now, I mentioned earlier that the Iranian students had taken 76 Americans captive, but
shortly after seizing the embassy, the students released all the women and black hostages
on the grounds that Islam respected women and that blacks were already victims of American
oppression, so now there were 52 white male hostages.
In April 1980, Carter authorized the U.S. military to proceed with a daring attempt
to rescue the hostages.
The idea was to fly eight helicopters to a remote desert site inside Iran.
After being refueled by cargo planes, the helicopters would proceed to a secret airbase
outside Tehran.
The rescue team would then get into trucks, drive over to the embassy, rescue the hostages,
take them back to the airbase, and helicopter them to safety.
The fact that this plan seemed preposterous on its face was one of the strongest arguments
in its favor.
It was so far-fetched, the argument went, that the Iranians would not possibly be prepared
for it, and it thus might just succeed.
The planning for the rescue mission brought the rivalry between Vance and Brzezinski to
a head and resulted in Vance's final defeat.
Brzezinski strongly supported the rescue mission.
He thought it was essential for American credibility and honor that the United States show it was
willing to use force to achieve its objectives.
Vance was equally strongly opposed to the operation.
He thought it would likely fail and could well be catastrophic, resulting in the deaths
of many Iranian civilians and some or all of the American hostages, embittering U.S.-Iranian
relations even further.
When Carter overruled Vance's objection and authorized the mission anyway, Vance told
the president that he would say nothing until the mission had been completed, but once the
mission was over, he would tender his resignation, whether or not the mission succeeded.
As it happened, the rescue attempt failed in its first stage, when, in a remote portion
of the Iranian desert, clouds of atmospheric dust caused serious mechanical difficulties
for the helicopters.
The commander of the rescue team recommended that the mission be aborted and Carter agreed.
During the evacuation, a plane and a helicopter collided with each other, killing eight servicemen.
Carter reported the humiliating news to the American people, taking full responsibility
for the failure.
Vance tendered his resignation as planned and was replaced as Secretary of State by
former Senator from Maine Edmund Muskie.
The debacle only deepened the public impression that Carter had lost control of foreign policy.
