In July 1980, the Shah died in Egypt.
Two months later, Saddam Hussein, the president of Iraq, launched an attack on Iran.
Iraq, as you know, had a long-standing dispute with Iran over the Shat al-Arab waterway,
which lies at the head of the Persian Gulf.
In 1975, under the pressure of a Kurdish uprising supported by the United States, which I'll
discuss in greater detail in a later lecture, Saddam had reluctantly agreed to share Shat
al-Arab with Iran, despite the fact that a prior treaty had placed the waterway under
Iraqi jurisdiction.
With Iran now distracted by domestic turmoil, Saddam decided to launch a war that would
weaken Iran further and force it to return to the older agreement.
And more generally, Saddam wanted to eliminate Iran as a rival for hegemony in the Persian
Gulf region.
The resulting Iran-Iraq war would continue for the next eight years, causing a million
casualties on both sides.
More immediately, however, it helped set the stage for a diplomatic settlement of the hostage
crisis.
Iran's difficulties with Iraq predisposed it to be more pragmatic about the hostage
issue.
It would be impossible to give full attention to the war unless the hostage crisis could
be brought to a conclusion.
Accordingly, the Iranians signaled their willingness to cut a deal with the Americans.
But the Iranians' realization that they would have to take a more realistic view came too
late to save Carter's presidency.
In the fall of 1980, the Republican presidential nominee Ronald Reagan incessantly hammered
away at the hostage issue and at the pitiful state of U.S. foreign relations more generally,
claiming that Carter was hopelessly weak and ineffectual.
In early November, Reagan was elected by a landslide.
Now a lame duck, Carter spent his final weeks as president trying desperately to get the
hostages freed before he left office.
And the Iranians, now in a more realistic mood, negotiated with the United States using Algeria
as an intermediary.
By the end of Carter's term, the essential elements of a deal were in place.
The United States would turn over to Iran about $8 billion in Iranian assets that had
been frozen in American banks following the takeover of the embassy compound.
The United States would also pledge not to interfere in Iran's internal affairs.
In return for these gestures, Iran would release the hostages.
But in a final effort to humiliate Carter, the Iranians refused to release the hostages
while he was still president.
Only so a few minutes after Ronald Reagan had been sworn in in January 1981.
Nevertheless, it was Carter's tireless efforts that got the hostages out, and it is to his
lasting credit that he was able to do so peacefully, with the exception, of course, of the failed
rescue effort.
I mentioned a moment ago that the upheavals in Iran led to another major increase in the
price of oil, reviving many of the economic problems that had first appeared during the
Arab oil embargo of 1973 to 74.
In our next lecture, we'll revisit the decade of the 1970s, paying special attention to the
economic, political, and cultural changes in American life that resulted from this country's
growing dependence on Middle Eastern oil.
