All this started to change in the 1960s, as the level of American oil consumption began to overtake domestic supply.
In 1968, the United States for the first time became a net importer of oil.
The amount of oil America imported from the Middle East was still relatively small, less than 10% of total imports, but that amount was steadily growing.
Of even greater significance was the fact that the United States no longer had excess capacity that could be brought online in the event of an oil emergency.
Up until the late 1960s, everyone assumed that if there were a major disruption in the oil supply anywhere else in the world,
the United States would be able to step in and meet the resulting demand by drawing on its own reserves.
After the late 1960s, however, the United States was no longer in a position to play this role.
In the event of a major oil crisis, Americans would be scrambling for oil just like everybody else.
Accordingly, when the Yom Kippur War of October 1973 resulted in an Arab oil embargo, the United States was in a poor position to deal with the crisis.
The embargo consisted of two main elements.
First, there was a general reduction in the amount of oil the Arab countries exported to all of their buyers.
Second, there was a total cutoff of oil shipments to the United States and to some countries in Western Europe.
Separate from the oil embargo itself, but clearly made possible by it, was a drastic increase in the price of oil that remained on the market.
From about $3 per barrel in October 1973 to nearly $12 per barrel in December of that year.
To be sure, Western oil companies and governments were able to redistribute the oil after it was shipped and thus see to it that the targeted countries did get oil in the end.
But the sheer complexity of this task, combined with the general reduction in the amount of Arab oil on the market, caused enormous disruptions throughout the entire industrialized world.
In cities across the globe, motorists waited in long lines to buy gas.
Other commodities became scarce as well, a result of panic buying.
In Japan, people became convinced that the shortage of gas would soon lead to shortages of other goods, so Japanese families began hoarding toilet paper, in some cases enough to last two years.
The Arab oil embargo ended in the spring of 1974, and thus the supply was no longer as restricted as before.
But oil prices remained extremely high, and this had ramifications for the entire world economy.
After all, oil was the commodity on which virtually all other economic activities depended.
It was needed for operating industrial plants and farms, for transporting raw materials and finished products, for fueling the tourist industry, and for countless other human endeavors.
In the years following the oil embargo, nearly all of the oil-producing states in the Middle East nationalized their oil industries, formalizing what had become, in recent years, a situation of de facto control.
It now seemed as if the overall health of the world's economy depended on decisions made by oil-producing states primarily in the Middle East.
A new class of global actors, oil ministers from wealthy Middle Eastern states, rose to international prominence.
The world's news media, including gossip columnists, followed their every move with a mixture of anxiety and fascination.
One of the most famous of these personalities was Ahmad Zaki Yemeni, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia.
Yemeni was an extremely suave and smooth operator, brilliantly effective both in private negotiations and in public interviews.
He had a knack for making it sound as if Saudi Arabia's oil policies were being pursued in the interests of the entire world economy,
and that every price hike the Saudi government imposed was the only sane and logical response to a highly complex global economic system that ordinary mortals could not hope to comprehend.
Henry Kissinger, himself a master at this sort of manipulation, recognized Yemeni as a fellow professional.
