I found an extraordinarily intelligent and well-read, Hissinger later recalled.
He could speak penetratingly on many subjects, including sociology and psychology.
His watchful eyes and little, van dyke beard made him look like a priggish young Don playing
at oil policy, but not really meaning the apocalyptic message he was bringing, especially
as it was put forward with a gentle voice and a self-deprecatory smile at variance with
the implications of his actions.
Of course, not everyone was susceptible to Yemeni's charms, and American commentators
often harshly criticized the Saudi oil minister as an unscrupulous operator who was mercilessly
exploiting Americans in their hour of need.
Yemeni's name was pronounced Yamani in the United States, giving rise to the one-liner
Yamani or Your Life.
For a while in the mid-1970s, it seemed as if every American comedian and commentator
was using this line and acting as if he had thought of it himself.
Actually, Saudi Arabia's position on oil prices was fairly moderate compared to the position
of Iran, which was still being ruled by the Shah.
Iran did not take part in the oil embargo of 1973 to 1974.
Iran, after all, is a non-Arab country, and at that time it had friendly relations with
Israel.
But Iran was a member of OPEC, and in the immediate aftermath of the Yom Kippur War,
the Shah was in the forefront of OPEC's effort to raise oil prices.
The Shah had grandiose ambitions to dominate the Persian Gulf region, and this in turn
required a massive military buildup to be funded, the Shah hoped, by a drastic increase
in oil revenues.
So in debates within OPEC over the price of oil, the Shah always pushed for the highest
possible price.
The Saudis, by contrast, thought that prices should increase but at a slower rate.
They realized that their security and prosperity ultimately depended on the economic strength
of the West, and especially of the United States.
It didn't make sense, the Saudis argued, to pursue policies that caused economic dislocation
in the West, nor was it terribly wise to go too far in alienating the United States.
And finally, the Saudis warned, if OPEC oil became too expensive, the societies of the
West would seek out non-OPEC energy sources, causing the demand for Middle Eastern oil to
drop.
These were all prescient warnings, but the Shah pressed ahead with his price-gouging
agenda, hoping to increase his oil revenues as quickly and as dramatically as possible.
For the most part, the Shah was able to get his way within OPEC, to convince the organization
to push for the highest possible price due to the fact that many other important members
of OPEC, like Venezuela and Iraq, were also eager to maximize their revenues.
But even though Iran was the biggest offender as far as price-gouging was concerned, the
American media tended to associate the high oil prices almost exclusively with the Arab
world.
There were a couple of reasons for this perception.
In the first place, the dramatic hike in prices had been precipitated by the Arab oil embargo
of 1973-74, which had, after all, been aimed at punishing the United States for supporting
Israel.
Non-Arab Iran had then capitalized on the resulting oil shortage by jacking up its prices,
but this was an act of self-interest on the Shah's part, not hostility.
It was understandable that Americans would focus their resentment on those countries
that had acted in a hostile and vengeful way rather than on those that had simply tried
to make a buck.
The second reason for the nearly exclusive focus on Arabs, and this was related to the
first reason, was that Arabs had imposed their embargo as part of their war against Israel.
Thus, pro-Israel groups within the United States, many of which had considerable influence
in the American media, had a powerful incentive to blame America's energy difficulties on
the Arab states.
At that time, as I said, Iran had friendly relations with Israel, so pro-Israel groups
were less inclined to direct their resentment against Iran.
