Indeed, in the years following the Arab oil embargo of 1973 to 1974, there was enormous
concern in the United States, sometimes bordering on hysteria over the extent to which the United
States had become vulnerable to economic control by wealthy Arabs.
Not only were the Arab states trying to force the United States to change its Middle East
policy, the argument went, they were buying up American properties at an alarming rate.
A serious foreign threat had become a terrifying domestic threat as well.
This fear of the coercive power of oil-rich Arabs was a persistent theme in popular culture
of the mid-to-late 1970s, looming large in movies, TV shows, novels, and cartoons.
It's often forgotten that one of the most famous slogans to come out of 70s cinema,
I'm as mad as hell and I'm not going to take this anymore, was itself closely tied to American
sense of impotence and rage in the face of an economic onslaught from the Arab world.
That line, of course, comes from the award-winning movie Network, released in 1976.
As the title suggests, the movie is about an imaginary television network called UBS.
One of the news anchors on UBS, a man named Howard Beale, suffers a mental breakdown and
starts to make outrageous statements during his news broadcast.
Instead of doing the humane thing and taking Beale off the air and getting him into treatment,
the greedy managers of UBS decide to keep him on the air because his wild rantings are
good for ratings.
Though clearly insane, Beale delivers penetrating Jeremiah's about the eroding quality of life
in America, the rampant inflation, the exploding crime rate, the worsening pollution, the incompetence
and corruption of political leaders, and so forth, striking a chord with the TV-watching
public.
At first, the executives at UBS are delighted with Beale's popularity, but then the unpredictable
Beale turns his wrath on UBS itself, charging that the network's parent company is about
to be bought up by Saudi investors.
So Beale launches into a wild diatribe about Arab economic encroachment on American life.
The Arabs, he says, are going to own what you read and what you see.
We all know the Arabs control $16 billion in this country.
They own a chunk of Fifth Avenue, 20 downtown pieces of Boston, part of a port of New Orleans,
an industrial park in Salt Lake City.
There's only one thing that can stop them.
You.
You.
By midnight tonight, I went a million telegrams in the White House saying, I'm as mad as hell
and I'm not going to take this anymore.
I don't want my banks selling my country to the Arabs.
Now, as I said, Beale is clearly understood to be insane.
But in this particular scene, the implication is that Beale has stumbled into a deep and
painful truth about American life in the 1970s.
Films like Network vastly overstated the extent of Arab investment in the United States, although
Arab governments and companies were buying up some properties in the United States.
These transactions represented a tiny fraction of overall investment in this country, less
than one percent of the total.
By far the biggest sources of foreign investment were countries like Britain, Canada and the
Netherlands.
And yet somehow the specter of rampaging Dutchmen never inspired much fear in American hearts.
Mainstream Americans may have exaggerated the economic strength of the Arabs, but OPEC's
new assertiveness did pose a serious challenge to American society.
For a generation after World War II, Americans had led a carefree life as far as energy was
concerned, behaving as if oil supplies were unlimited and fully under their control.
After 1973, they had to face up to the fact that oil supplies were finite and largely
in foreign hands, and more particularly in the hands of governments in a volatile part
of the world.
Regaining some measure of energy independence became a major preoccupation for American
commentators, politicians, industrial managers and government officials.
And Carter in particular was obsessed with the issue, and he expended an enormous amount
of time, work and personal prestige on it.
Indeed, in a major television speech in 1977, Carter declared that the effort to achieve
energy independence was the moral equivalent of war.
Carter hoped to turn this phrase into a stirring slogan for his policy, but gave up on the effort
when critics started referring to it by its acronym, Miao.
