There were two main ways that the United States could try to lessen its dependence on Middle
Eastern oil.
First, it could seek out alternative, non-Middle Eastern sources of oil.
Second, it could try to decrease its dependence on fossil fuels altogether.
Carter pursued both approaches simultaneously, though he was convinced that the latter course
was ultimately the more promising way to go.
Increasing the nation's dependence on fossil fuels could itself be broken down into two
main categories, increasing fuel efficiency and seeking alternative sources of energy.
Carter tried to get Congress to pass a comprehensive energy bill that promoted these options, such
as by imposing stiffer tax penalties on cars that use too much gas and giving tax relief
and subsidies to industries developing alternative energy sources.
But due to the growing influence in Congress of conservative politicians, who, like their
counterparts of today, believed that the answer to the problem lay in drilling for new oil
reserves not in conservation, and due to Carter's own lack of political skill, Congress either
ignored Carter's initiatives or enacted them in gutted form.
Addition to Carter's energy proposals came also from environmentalists, who were alarmed
by Carter's insistence on building nuclear power plants to serve as a source of energy.
Environmentalists warned that nuclear accidents might occur, and there was no safe way to
dispose of nuclear waste.
Carter, who as a young naval officer had served aboard a nuclear submarine, considered himself
an expert in this area, and he dismissed the environmentalists as ignorant luddites.
But then, in a stroke of misfortune all too typical of Carter's presidency, a spectacular
accident occurred that seemed to vindicate the environmentalists and discredit the nuclear
option.
In the spring of 1979, at a nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania known as Three Mile Island,
800,000 gallons of radioactive water gushed out of a ruptured cooling unit, gravely threatening
the Susquehanna Valley and its inhabitants.
Thousands of residents had to be evacuated from the area, and many more fled in panic.
By an amazing happenstance, the accident at Three Mile Island coincided almost exactly
with the release of the movie The China Syndrome, starring Jane Fonda and Jack Lemon, which
portrayed an accident in a nuclear plant eerily similar to the one at Three Mile Island.
The two events amplified each other, and the nuclear power industry suffered a devastating
blow from which it has yet to recover.
At the time of Three Mile Island, 71 nuclear power plants were operating in the United
States, and another 125 were under construction or in the planning stages.
After Three Mile Island, 30 of those planned plants were cancelled, and for the remainder
of the century, no new plants were approved.
By the time of the Three Mile Island accident, the Iranian Revolution was in full swing.
The disturbances in Iran caused a major disruption in Iranian oil exports, leading to a marked
reduction in the world's oil supply and to another surge in oil prices.
To the average American, it was 1973 all over again, a sharp rise in gasoline prices, long
lines at the gas pump, and a steep increase in the general inflation rate.
Frustrated by his inability to get his energy policies enacted, and alarmed by the energy
implications of the Iranian Revolution, in July 1979, Carter secluded himself for 10
days at Camp David, the site of his diplomatic triumph a year earlier, to brainstorm with
his advisors on the energy problem.
Carter also had a large number of outside thinkers, historians, psychiatrists, religious
leaders, even poets, flown into Camp David to advise him on the crisis afflicting the
nation.
Thus enlightened, Carter came down from the mountaintop to deliver what became known as
his Malay's speech, even though that word never appeared in the text.
The nation's problem, Carter said, was not energy itself, but something much deeper.
A moral and spiritual crisis striking at the very heart and soul of our national will.
In the manner of a revivalist preacher, Carter castigated Americans for abandoning their
old values.
In a nation that was proud of hard work, strong families, close-knit communities, and faith
in God, he said, too many of us now tend to worship self-indulgence and consumption.
Human identity is no longer defined by what one does, but by what one owns.
