Now, Carter was not necessarily wrong in his diagnosis.
But these are not the things a president of the United States can get away with saying
to the American people.
Nor did Carter offer any concrete solutions in his speech.
Americans were simply to look into their hearts, purify themselves, and become worthier human
beings.
Needless to say, Carter's Malay speech did not go over very well.
Indeed, it strengthened the public impression of an ineffectual president seriously out of
his depth.
And by the end of the year, of course, this is 1979, the Iranian students had seized the
American hostages, all but sealing Carter's political fate.
By the time Carter faced the electorate in November 1980, there was a widespread feeling
that the U.S. government and Carter personally had completely failed at the task of decreasing
America's dependence on Middle Eastern oil.
Now more than ever, the United States appeared to be totally at the mercy of the region's
explosive conflicts, its unstable political systems, and its volatile leaders.
Actually, America's position was not quite as bad as it seemed at the time.
To the surface, forces were at work that were weakening the position of oil-rich Middle
Eastern states and strengthening the position of the industrialized West.
True, Carter had made little headway in reducing oil consumption or in promoting alternative
sources of energy, but another approach to the problem, finding non-Middle Eastern sources
of oil, had met with greater success.
In the immediate aftermath of the Arab oil embargo, when Nixon was still president, Congress
had appropriated the funds for the construction of an oil pipeline from Alaska to the contiguous
48 states, making Alaskan oil available to the American market.
The pipeline was completed in 1977, and by the early 1980s, 2 million barrels of oil
per day were flowing through the line, substantially reducing America's dependence on Middle Eastern
oil.
Developments in other countries were even more dramatic.
On the whole, Western Europe and Japan were much more successful than the United States
in reducing their reliance on fossil fuels altogether.
They developed more stringent fuel efficiency standards, imposed higher gas taxes, and invested
far more heavily in public transportation.
So these societies, too, decreased their reliance on Middle Eastern oil, though their level
of absolute dependency on that oil remained very high in relation to that of the United
States.
Meanwhile, Western oil companies found an alternate source of oil beneath the North Sea,
which lies between Britain and Norway.
For some years, prospectors had known about huge oil deposits lying at the bottom of the
North Sea, but prior to 1973, there had been little economic incentive to extract them.
Why go to all the trouble and expense of drilling for North Sea oil when Middle Eastern oil
was so cheap and plentiful?
The drastic increase in the price of Middle Eastern oil overturned these assumptions.
Now oil companies had every incentive to drill for North Sea oil, and they rushed to bring
that oil online.
In other words, by raising its prices so high, OPEC had inadvertently encouraged its customers
to start looking elsewhere for their energy needs.
The cumulative effect of these developments was a significant drop by the early 1980s
in the global demand for Middle Eastern oil, and OPEC was obliged to lower its prices.
Moreover, the industrialized societies had learned crucial lessons about how to cope
in the event of an embargo, how to pool their resources, how to make instant adjustments
in the allocation of oil from one country or industry to the next, so that they would
be far less vulnerable to such pressure in the future.
The possibility that oil could ever again be used as a political weapon, at least by
Middle Easterners against the industrialized West, became increasingly remote.
This erosion in the economic position of oil-producing states in the Middle East and the corresponding
improvement in the position of the West was obscured from view as the 1970s drew to a close,
but it would become strikingly evident in the remaining decades of the 20th century as
we shall see in many of our remaining lectures.
