Lecture 17, The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan
In this lecture, we will examine American responses to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
which began in December 1979 and continued for the next decade.
Throughout the 1980s, the United States would wage a highly successful proxy war against
the Soviet presence in Afghanistan, severely weakening the Soviet Union, and even contributing
to its final demise.
In mounting this proxy war, however, Washington would inadvertently help spawn new and far
more deadly foes of the United States.
Let me give you a little background on the Afghan crisis.
Afghanistan is a mountainous, landlocked country lying between Iran and Pakistan.
For the first three decades after World War II, Afghanistan was officially non-aligned
in the Cold War, though the Soviet Union, which bordered Afghanistan to the north, wielded
heavy influence in the country.
Even so, Afghanistan's overwhelmingly Muslim population jealously guarded its independence.
In 1978, a pro-Soviet government under the leadership of President Noor Muhammad Taraki
came to power in Afghanistan.
This in turn gave rise to an Islamic resistance movement known as the Mujahideen.
The communist regime in Kabul, the Afghan capital, tried to put down the Mujahideen,
but their rebellion continued to grow.
At this time, of course, the Carter administration was in power.
The establishment of a pro-Soviet government in Afghanistan caused the differences between
Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security advisor,
to assert themselves once again.
Vance took a relatively relaxed view.
He was not happy to see a pro-Soviet regime in Kabul, but neither was he surprised that
the Soviets would seek to dominate the government of a country on their own border.
Vance had the State Department recognize Taraki's regime.
Brzezinski, on the other hand, took a much more alarmist view.
He feared that the Soviets, seeing the instability then taking place in Iran, would be tempted
to take over Iran, using Afghanistan as a launching pad.
And once the Soviets gained a foothold along the Persian Gulf, they would be in a position
to threaten Western access to Middle Eastern oil.
So it was essential, Brzezinski believed, to prevent the Soviets from consolidating their
position in Afghanistan in the first place.
Moreover, as Brzezinski pungently put it at the time, here was an opportunity to finally
sow shit in their backyard.
So in the summer of 1979, six months before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Brzezinski
convinced Carter to start sending covert aid to the Afghan Mujahideen.
This aid consisted primarily of communications equipment.
The Iranian Revolution caused the Soviets, too, to worry about Afghanistan.
Moscow feared that the Mujahideen would draw strength from the Islamic Revolution in Iran.
And if Afghanistan was subject to Islamic takeover, this could give rise to Islamic revolutions
in Muslim Soviet republics to the north of Afghanistan.
So just as Brzezinski was determined to prevent the Soviets from consolidating their position
in Afghanistan, the Soviets were determined to maintain that position and keep Afghanistan
from going Islamic.
Causing the Soviets further worry was the lack of stability within the Afghan government.
For Taraki, the president, was in a power struggle with his prime minister, Hafizullah
Amin.
Amin was a brash and impatient man who attempted to collectivize the country, that is, turn
it into a socialist state, at a very rapid rate.
A number of Amin's initiatives were quite laudable in and of themselves.
He pushed to educate women and equalize their status.
He also promoted land reform that broke up large holdings and redistributed land among
the poor peasants.
