The problem was that Amin was trying to impose these reforms from above, without considering
the sensibilities of the conservative rural population.
Amin was also extremely ruthless and dictatorial, determined to crush any dissent he encountered.
Amin's approach was further alienating the Afghan people, and both Taraki and the Soviets
agreed that Amin had to go.
So in the fall of 1979, Taraki flew to Moscow to talk to the Soviet government about how
to get rid of Amin.
Unfortunately for Taraki, Amin got wind of these plans, and when Taraki returned to Afghanistan,
Amin had him killed.
So now the Soviets were stuck with the guy they had been trying to remove.
And then, for reasons that aren't entirely clear, the Soviets became convinced that Amin
was secretly working for the CIA, and was on the verge of aligning Afghanistan with
the United States, determined to keep their client state from slipping out of their control.
In December 1979, 80,000 Soviet troops surged across the border into Afghanistan.
The Soviets had Amin killed, replacing him with a more reliable Afghan puppet named Babrak
Karmal.
It was the start of what was to be a decade-long Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
Karter reacted extremely sharply to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, treating it as a
grave threat to U.S. security, indeed as the first step in a Soviet move to drive into
the Persian Gulf and forcibly take control of the region's oil resources.
Karter totally abandoned any semblance of conciliation toward the Soviet Union he had
previously shown.
He imposed an embargo on all sales of U.S. grain and high-tech products to the Soviet
Union.
He ordered young men to register for the draft, and requested that the U.S. Olympic team boycott
the 1980 Olympic Games, which were scheduled to take place in Moscow.
The U.S. Olympic team honored Karter's request.
Most dramatically, in his State of the Union address in January 1980, Karter announced
what became known as the Karter Doctrine.
An attempt by an outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region, he said, would
be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.
To put teeth into this statement, Karter cut $36 billion in planned domestic spending
and got Congress to appropriate $47 billion for new weapons systems.
Privately, Karter signed a statement known as Presidential Directive 59, which ordered
the Pentagon to plan for a possible nuclear war against the Soviet Union.
To a significant degree, the great surge of militarism and hostility to the Soviet Union
commonly associated with the Reagan administration actually got its start in the final months
of Karter's presidency.
In Afghanistan itself, the Karter administration stepped up its support for the Mujahideen,
supplying the rebels with arms and equipment.
As I mentioned earlier, this aid had started even before the Soviet invasion, when the
Karter administration began giving the Mujahideen communications equipment, with which to wage
their rebellion against the pro-Soviet puppet regime.
After the Soviets got involved directly, and especially during the presidency of Ronald
Reagan, the U.S. assistance program mushroomed.
Over the course of the Afghan war, the Mujahideen received billions of dollars in U.S. aid.
Among the most valuable items the Mujahideen received from the United States were the
so-called Stinger missiles, the most effective shoulder-held anti-aircraft weapon in the
world, capable of shooting down Soviet helicopters.
The Mujahideen's use of the Stinger missiles had a devastating effect on the occupying
Soviet forces, exacting a heavy toll in Soviet casualties.
The introduction of Stinger missiles into Afghanistan may well have been the decisive
factor in convincing the Soviets to pull out of the country in the late 1980s.
In the effort to give support to the Mujahideen, the United States worked closely with Saudi
Arabia and Pakistan.
Both countries were anxious to prevent the Soviets from gaining a foothold in the area,
which in the case of Pakistan was right next door, and both were eager to extend their
influence beyond their own borders.
