Saudi Arabia's principal role was to provide financial assistance to the anti-Soviet effort.
With Saudi funds, the CIA bought weapons from China and Egypt and provided them to the Mujahideen.
Because Pakistan shares a border with Afghanistan, its role in the Afghan war was far more extensive than Saudi Arabia's.
Most of the aid the Mujahideen received, whether from the United States or Saudi Arabia, was funneled through Pakistani territory and dispensed by the Pakistani government.
Indeed, Pakistan was so important to the war effort that Washington was obliged to modify its policies toward it.
Prior to the Soviet invasion, the Carter administration had imposed economic sanctions against Pakistan on account of its bad human rights record and its efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
Just days after the Soviet invasion, however, Carter was on the phone with Zia El-Hak, Pakistan's prime minister, offering Zia hundreds of millions of dollars in aid if he would help the United States arm and train the Mujahideen.
And Zia accepted the deal.
This arrangement continued into the Reagan years, during which Pakistan became the third largest recipient of American aid, the first two being Israel and Egypt.
With Pakistan now helping to sustain the Afghan freedom fighters, the United States, first under Carter and then under Reagan, turned a blind eye to Zia El-Hak's human rights abuses and to his efforts to acquire nukes.
Washington also took an indulgent attitude toward Zia's political agenda in the region.
Zia wanted to promote the cause of fundamentalist Islam, and he funneled the American money and arms to Afghan groups that shared his Islamist views.
One of the most notorious of these groups was Hizbi Islami, or the Islamic Party, led by Gulbideen Hekmatyar.
Hekmatyar had little popular following among the Afghan people, nor was he terribly effective at fighting the Soviets.
But due to the extensive Pakistani support he received, and to the ruthlessness with which he killed off his Afghan rivals, Hekmatyar and his organization quickly became dominant within the Mujahideen.
In return for his support of Hekmatyar, Zia won a powerful ally among the Afghans who could be expected in the event of a victory against the Soviets to orient Afghanistan in a pro-Pakistani direction.
Zia was joined in this hope by the Pakistani military, which was honeycombed with pro-fundamentalist officers.
In addition to cozying up to Pakistan, the US government worked to swell the ranks of the Mujahideen.
One of the major initiatives that the CIA engaged in, along with the governments of Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, was recruiting tens of thousands of young men from across the Muslim world to come to Pakistan,
where they would receive weapons and training, and then be sent into Afghanistan to fight the Soviets.
This was a very extensive operation.
Between 1982 and 1992, about 35,000 fighters were recruited from over 40 Islamic countries, in the Middle East, in North and East Africa, in Central Asia, and in the Far East.
For the young Muslim men who responded to this recruiting drive, the great appeal of the Afghan war was the opportunity to take part in Jihad, an activity in which all Muslims were encouraged to engage.
The term Mujahideen is derived from Jihad.
It's the plural of Mujahid, or one who engages in Jihad.
The precise religious meaning of Jihad is itself a subject of sharp controversy.
Literally, the word means religious struggle, and it can be interpreted to signify either an outward physical struggle or an inner spiritual one.
That is, as an actual war against non-believers, or as a personal attempt to make oneself a better Muslim, such as by avoiding temptation, or by pushing oneself to be more concerned about others.
Indeed, this divergence in the meaning of the word Jihad lies at the heart of the great debate going on within Islam today.
