In Afghanistan in the 1980s, the U.S. government took a definite position in this debate in
favor of defining Jihad as a literal war against non-believers, who in this case were the
godless Soviets.
And so Washington teamed up with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to recruit Muslim youth on this
basis.
One of those recruits was a young Saudi man named Osama bin Laden.
Bin Laden was the 17th son of Muhammad bin Laden, a wealthy construction magnate with
extremely close ties to the Saudi government.
In fact, due to his wealth and prominence, Osama bin Laden was hardly a regular foot
soldier in Afghanistan.
His function was more that of a financier and emissary sent by the Saudi royal family
to signal its commitment to the Mujahideen's cause.
There are some who claim that bin Laden was on the CIA's payroll in the 1980s.
Whether or not this was true in a literal sense, he certainly worked in tandem with the CIA.
For example, he served as a fundraiser for an organization based in Pakistan called
Mekdab al-Khidmat, or Office of Services, a recruiting and training agency that the
CIA was also funding.
Another figure the CIA cultivated was a blind Egyptian cleric named Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman,
who was brought to Pakistan in the 1980s to deliver inspirational sermons to the anti-Soviet
recruits.
After the Afghan war ended, Sheikh Omar came to the United States, reportedly using a visa
provided for him by the CIA.
He settled in New York City, where he proceeded to engage in anti-American activities as part
of the Al Qaeda network, which bin Laden had formed after the Afghan war.
Sheikh Omar was subsequently implicated in the first World Trade Center bombing in 1993.
Of course, at the time of the Afghan war in the 1980s, few Americans had any idea that
their government was snuggling up to such unsavory bedfellows.
In the news and entertainment media, the Mujahideen were overwhelmingly portrayed as gallant and
romantic freedom fighters, valiantly defending their homeland and way of life.
The specter of a ragtag collection of mountain tribesmen resisting the army of a superpower
captured the imagination of the American public.
Dan Rather of CBS News had a sensational scoop when he sneaked into Afghanistan to do a story
disguised as an Afghan tribesman, prompting critics to dub him Gunga Dan.
In Sylvester Stallone's movie Rambo 3, the hero goes to Afghanistan to free an old buddy
from Soviet captivity with the help of a loyal band of Mujahideen.
Although Stallone hogs all the best scenes for himself, the highlight of the film is
when Rambo shoots down a Soviet helicopter with a bow and arrow, the movie does give
a nod to the Mujahideen's courage and piety, explicitly endorsing their call for a holy
war against the Soviets.
This picture of the Mujahideen as brave and selfless warriors was not entirely false.
The Mujahideen were indeed pulling off a most impressive achievement, made possible in the
first instance by their courage, determination and readiness for sacrifice.
But what most Americans failed to realize was that many of these so-called freedom fighters,
or at least the warlords who commanded them, were committed to an extremely reactionary
brand of Islam.
No less fanatical than what could be found in neighboring Iran, with which the United
States of course had an extremely hostile relationship.
The invasion of Afghanistan proved to be a disaster for the Soviet Union.
The Soviets would eventually have 115,000 troops in the country, waging an increasingly
brutal, though unsuccessful, war against a determined indigenous foe.
Trying to exploit their air superiority, the Soviet forces developed a mode of attack involving
heavy air assaults on rebel positions, followed by mobbing up operations by ground troops
ferried in by helicopter, but not too different from US operations in Vietnam.
And like the Americans in Vietnam, the Soviets were winning most of the battles, but losing
the overall war.
No matter how much destruction they wrought, or how many Afghans they killed, they could
not overcome the Mujahedin's will to resist them.
