Throughout the 1980s, third parties attempted to resolve the Afghan crisis diplomatically.
In the early 1980s, UN representatives proposed a peace plan whereby the Soviets would pull
out of Afghanistan in exchange for a cessation of outside assistance to the Mujahideen.
But the Mujahideen, with U.S. backing, rejected the plan, insisting that Soviet withdrawal
was not enough, it was also necessary that the pro-Soviet government in Kabul be dismantled.
Until that happened, the Mujahideen reserved the right to receive outside assistance.
So the war ground on.
Afghanistan itself bore the brunt of the tragedy, of course, but the Soviet Union paid a heavy
price as well.
Tens of thousands of Russian soldiers were killed or maimed in the fighting.
More than a million Afghans lost their lives.
And the Soviet army was crippled by defeatism and drug abuse.
Billions of rubles that could have been spent on reviving the Soviet economy were instead
diverted to the increasingly pointless war in Afghanistan.
Back home, ordinary Soviet citizens began openly questioning the wisdom and morality
of the war, a new phenomenon in Soviet life.
The nascent political movement formed of mothers of dead soldiers began demanding that the
government bring the boys home.
Indeed, the Afghan fiasco would play an important role in the final unraveling of the Soviet
Union in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Eventually Mikhail Gorbachev, the last of the Soviet leaders, concluded that the situation
was intolerable and that he could no longer wait for a diplomatic settlement.
So in 1988, he announced that the Soviet Union would start withdrawing troops from Afghanistan
unilaterally.
The withdrawal was completed in 1989.
The Russians left behind a puppet government in Kabul that they tried to keep afloat, with
military and economic aid, and the United States continued to funnel aid to the Mujahideen,
so the fighting continued.
The pro-Soviet regime finally collapsed in 1992, and the victorious Mujahideen, who had
always been a motley collection of disparate ethnic groups, began fighting among themselves,
plunging the country into even deeper chaos.
In what is now universally acknowledged as a major blunder, the U.S. government washed
its hands of Afghanistan and turned its attention elsewhere.
By the mid-1990s, Afghanistan was in desperate shape.
Public order had collapsed throughout the country, much of the population was threatened
by famine, and the countryside was littered with unexploded landmines, which continued
to kill and maim Afghan civilians.
In the cities, rival warlords engaged in hand-to-hand combat, fighting over turf, food, horses, supplies,
even the sexual services of children.
For a decade and a half, Afghan society had known nothing but war.
An entire generation had been raised with virtually no peacetime skills.
The experience of wartime was so thoroughly integrated into everyday Afghan life that
it even made its way into children's textbooks.
A fourth-grade mathematics primer published in Afghanistan in the 1980s contained the
following word problems.
The Mujahideen are on the path of God in an attack on a convoy of the interventionist
Russians and communists.
After most of the enemy are killed, 500 boxes of shells are seized as booty.
If in every box there are 820 shells, how many shells are seized as booty?
Here's another one.
The speed of a Kalashnikov bullet is 500 meters per second.
If one Russian is at a distance of 3,200 meters from a Mujahid, and the Mujahid aims at the
Russian's forehead, calculate how many seconds it will take until the bullet hits the Russian
in the forehead.
So that's a fourth-grade primer.
Due to the shortage of school materials, the textbook from which these questions were
drawn remained in use long after the Soviets had withdrawn from the country.
Indeed, it was being used as late as the year 2000.
