It was against this grim backdrop that the Taliban emerged in the mid-1990s as the dominant
political faction in Afghanistan.
The Taliban were a party formed primarily of Afghan refugees who had been raised in
refugee camps in Pakistan.
Most of them had been trained in religious schools in Pakistan known as madrasas, in
which they had been indoctrinated in an extremely austere interpretation of Islam.
Although some of the Afghan refugees who would later become the Taliban had fought against
the Soviets in Afghanistan, most of them did not return to Afghanistan until after the
Soviets had withdrawn from the country.
In some cases, people who became Taliban had been born in Pakistani refugee camps and
didn't set foot in Afghanistan at all until after the war had ended, or at least after
the Soviets had withdrawn.
Once back in Afghanistan, the Taliban constituted themselves as a self-conscious political party
committed to rescuing their country from the chaos and misery into which it had fallen.
They would do so by bringing order to the country and imposing a strict interpretation
of Islamic law.
The Taliban received strong backing from the Pakistani government, which saw them as a
useful instrument for extending Pakistani influence into the country.
When they first appeared on the scene, the Taliban did a pretty good job of ingratiating
themselves with the Afghan population.
Unlike most Afghan warlords who used their power to enrich themselves at the expense
of the populations they controlled, the Taliban were principled advocates of political Islam.
They supported the people against the warlords, asking nothing in return except support for
their goal of establishing an Islamic state.
This fact, combined with the support they received from Pakistan, made it possible for
the Taliban to take over most of the country by 1996.
Once in power, however, the Taliban imposed an incredibly repressive regime, banning everything
from soccer, to kite flying, to music, to television.
Girls were forbidden to study in schools, women were forced to cover themselves in public
from head to toe, and men were required to grow long beards.
The Taliban even banned the use of paper bags on the remote chance that the paper from which
they were made consisted of recycled pages of the Quran.
Despite their atrocious human rights record, the Taliban initially had fairly good relations
with the United States, which welcomed them as a stabilizing influence in Afghanistan.
In the mid to late 1990s, while many observers criticized the Taliban's behavior in their
own country, few appreciated the danger they might pose beyond the borders of Afghanistan.
Former National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, for example, was enormously proud
of the role he had played in convincing Carter to lend support to the Mujahideen even prior
to the Soviet invasion.
That early support, Brzezinski said in a 1998 interview, had the effect of drawing the
Russians into the Afghan trap and getting them bogged down in a conflict that brought
about the demoralization and finally the breakup of the Soviet Empire.
When asked if he regretted the subsequent destabilization of Afghanistan, Brzezinski
contemptuously brushed the question aside.
What is most important to the history of the world?
The Taliban or the collapse of the Soviet Empire?
The Taliban stirred up Muslims or the liberation of Central Europe and the end of the Cold War?
Such cavalier statements would become impossible, of course, in the aftermath of the attacks
of September 11, 2001.
But we're getting way ahead of our story.
Before we can even begin to discuss the recent background to 9-11, we need to take a look
at U.S. policy toward the Middle East in the 1980s, which will be the subject of our next
two lectures.
