Lecture 18, Reagan and the Middle East.
Today we're going to look at the Middle East policies of President Ronald Reagan.
Reagan is an extremely puzzling figure, a politician who had both astonishing weaknesses
and astonishing strengths.
Among the weaknesses was the fact that Reagan was often extremely ignorant about the basic
issues of American politics, and seemed to have little interest in becoming better informed.
Nor did he care to get to know many of the people he had working for him.
Once when a delegation of black mayors was visiting the White House, Reagan walked up
to Samuel Pierce, his own secretary of housing and urban development, and the only black
person in his cabinet, and said, How do you do, Mr. Mayor?
And on some questions, Reagan's ignorance was downright dangerous.
Reagan once said at a press conference that there was no need to worry about an accidental
nuclear war, because if nuclear missiles were launched by mistake, they could always
be called back in mid-flight.
This wasn't true.
Among Reagan's strengths, however, was an uncanny ability to connect with the American
people.
Through his speeches and gestures, Reagan was able to instill in his audience a powerful
sense of reassurance and confidence, for this he was known as the great communicator.
Certainly Reagan's background as an actor assisted him in this performative aspect of
the presidency.
After all, the job of the actor is to project himself onto his audience, to make you feel
the range of emotions that he's called upon to express.
As Reagan was a master at evoking the desired emotions in his audience, once when he was
asked whether an acting career was suitable training for the presidency, Reagan replied
that he didn't see how anyone could do the job who had not been an actor.
As far as foreign policy was concerned, Reagan came to office bearing a simple message, that
the Soviet Union was the sole cause of America's trouble abroad.
As he said in an interview during the 1980 election campaign,
The Soviet Union underlies all the unrest that is going on.
If they weren't engaged in this game of dominoes, there wouldn't be any hotspots in the world.
At his first press conference as president, Reagan said that the Soviets reserved the right
to commit any crime to lie, to cheat, and that the United States would no longer tolerate
such an attitude.
In a famous speech in 1983, Reagan called the Soviet Union an evil empire and the focus
of evil in the modern world.
Reagan saw the Middle East as no exception to this rule.
When he first came into office in early 1981, he professed to believe that virtually all
of the world's terrorist groups, including Middle Eastern ones, were being controlled
from Moscow.
It was widely expected that Reagan's actions in the Middle East would be overwhelmingly
focused on blocking Soviet moves.
But Reagan's policies in the Middle East did not quite bear out this expectation.
To be sure, many of Reagan's actions in the Middle East were directed against the Soviet
Union.
He embraced Israel as a strategic partner in the Cold War, willing and able to confront
radical and pro-Soviet forces in the region.
He sought to contain Syrian influence on the assumption that Syria was a proxy for the
Soviet Union.
He repeatedly skirmished with Libya's Muammar Qaddafi, a recipient of Soviet military and
economic aid.
Nevertheless, most of Reagan's energy in the Middle East was devoted to containing or
thwarting a very different sort of foe.
Militant Islam, usually taking the form of radical Shiite groups drawing inspiration
and material support from the new Islamic Republic of Iran.
Interestingly, most of the Middle East crises Reagan faced either originated or unfolded
in the little country of Lebanon.
Never before or since did Lebanon occupy such a prominent place on Washington's foreign
policy agenda, so Lebanon will be at the center of the events recounted in today's lecture.
Reagan's problems with Lebanon really began in 1982, the year in which Israel launched
a massive invasion of that country.
