Meanwhile, the Israelis had pressured the Lebanese Parliament to elect a Lebanese president to Israel's liking, a Christian warlord named Bashir Jameil, whom Israel had been secretly arming for some years.
The Israelis hoped that Jameil, once in power, would sign a peace treaty with Israel, following the example of Egypt.
So by September 1982, the Israelis seemed to be riding high.
They had ousted the PLO from Lebanon and had placed that country under the control of a friendly regime.
But then, in mid-September, Israel's plans for Lebanon began to go awry.
In September 1982, President-elect Bashir Jameil was assassinated in a bomb blast.
Days later, members of Jameil's political party, the Falange, who blamed the PLO for the death of their leader,
entered two Palestinian refugee camps named Sabra and Shatila, lying on the outskirts of Beirut.
For two days, the Falange made their way through the camps and brutally massacred hundreds of Palestinian civilians, men, women, and children.
Because the Falange were allies of Israel, because the camps lay within a zone that the Israelis controlled,
and because Israeli commanders on the scene were obviously aware of what the Falange were doing, Israel received enormous international criticism.
Jerome himself was so tainted by this affair that it was widely, and of course wrongly, assumed that his political career was over.
To prevent further such attacks, and to maintain security within Lebanon generally, U.S. Marines were dispatched to Beirut,
along with French and Italian forces.
On the diplomatic front, the Reagan administration decided to push for a peace treaty between Israel and Lebanon.
This proved to be a major blunder on Washington's part, and especially on the part of George Shultz, the new Secretary of State.
Pushing for an Israeli-Lebanese peace treaty was a blunder because it flew in the face of political realities both inside Lebanon itself and in the region.
As I said, achieving such a peace treaty was a major objective of the Israelis.
They were eager to get another Arab state to join Egypt in reaching a separate bilateral peace treaty with Israel.
The idea was to make a separate agreement with one state after another, first Egypt, then Lebanon, then probably Jordan,
and thus avoid having to negotiate with the Arab states collectively, which in turn might eventually force Israel to make political concessions to the Palestinians.
And so, by pushing for a separate peace treaty between Israel and Lebanon, Shultz was endorsing Israel's fundamental political strategy.
This was bound to arouse bitter opposition in the Arab world, and from two quarters in particular, from various Lebanese communities that were enraged by what Israel had done to their country,
and from Syrian President Hafiz el-Assad, who not only opposed the idea of separate peace treaties with Israel, but already had troops occupying Lebanon
and felt he had a right to dictate Lebanese foreign policy.
But Shultz ignored these considerations and encouraged Lebanon's new president, Amin Jameil, brother of the slain Bashir, to sign a peace treaty with Israel.
Amin Jameil agreed, and in May 1983, Israel and Lebanon concluded a peace treaty.
The mere existence of the treaty was sure to arouse opposition, but when the terms of the treaty were made public, it became clear that the opposition to the agreement, both in Lebanon and in Syria, would be incredibly intense.
In the first place, the treaty contained language that effectively allowed Israel to exercise military control over southern Lebanon.
Moreover, the agreement stipulated that the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon would be conditional on the withdrawal of Syrian troops as well.
There was no way that Assad would tolerate such a deal.
In the U.S. State Department, mid-level officials warned Secretary Shultz that Syria would do everything to sabotage the peace treaty.
But Shultz dismissed these warnings, apparently convinced that the Syrians had been so weakened by the Israeli invasion, which had resulted in the destruction of much of the Syrian air force, that they would have no choice but to accept the treaty.
This was a grave miscalculation on Shultz's part.
