I remember these kidnappings quite vividly, since a number of the hostages were people
I knew personally.
I myself had lived in Beirut as a kid, back in the 1970s, in the same expatriate American
community that was now being victimized by the kidnappings.
For example, one of the American hostages, the Reverend Benjamin Weir, was the father
of a girl I had gone to high school with.
Throughout the mid-1980s, there would be, at any given time, about six or seven Americans
held hostage in Lebanon.
The number fluctuated because some hostages were released fairly early, even as fresh
hostages were being taken.
The Reagan administration was under constant pressure from the hostages' families to do
something about the situation, perhaps to negotiate some deal with the hostage takers.
Publicly, however, the Reagan administration insisted that negotiating with the kidnappers
was impossible, that it would merely encourage them to take more hostages.
This position does have a certain logic to it.
But for those of us who had family members or friends in captivity, it was an extremely
difficult position to accept, and the Reagan administration's posture seemed unduly rigid
and inflexible.
Still did we know, however, that the Reagan administration was indeed negotiating with
the hostage takers, or at least with figures who were allied with them.
In the mid-1980s, U.S. officials, using Israel as an intermediary and in great secrecy, began
making contact with the revolutionary Iranian government to see if there was any basis for
improved U.S.-Iranian relations.
In the course of these contacts, a general understanding was reached whereby the United
States would sell shipments of arms to Iran, and Iran would pressure the hostage takers
in Lebanon, with whom they were allied, to release some of the American captives.
And in 1985 and 1986, two American hostages, Ben Weir, whom I just mentioned, and David
Jacobson, were actually released as part of this quid pro quo.
Those of us who rejoiced at the release of Weir and Jacobson had no inkling at the time
of the strange machinations that had produced this result.
But those machinations soon became even stranger, and got mixed up with the politics of Central
America of all places.
In 1979, Nicaragua had come under the control of a left-wing government with close ties
to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Since taking office in early 1981, Reagan had been obsessed with getting rid of this
regime, and he tried to do so by giving covert support to a right-wing guerrilla force known
as the Contras.
Reagan's secret war in Nicaragua eventually became public knowledge, and Congress tried
to put a stop to it.
In 1983 and 1984, it passed legislation barring the Reagan administration from giving any
aid to the Contras.
But Reagan was utterly determined to continue his war against the Nicaraguan government,
and he instructed his subordinates to figure out a way to keep the Contras in the field.
So someone in the Reagan administration, probably William Casey, the director of the CIA, came
up with an ingenious scheme to kill two birds with one stone.
The idea was to take the profits from the arms sales to Iran and divert them to the
Contras in Nicaragua.
The diversion of funds from Iran to the Contras was engineered by a young Marine Lieutenant
Colonel named Oliver North, then working in obscurity in the National Security Agency.
Meanwhile, in the summer of 1985, just as the secret dealings with Iran were getting underway,
Lebanon became the site of a far more prominent hostage drama.
In June of that year, TWA Flight 847, en route from Athens to Rome, was hijacked by Lebanese
Shiites with ties to Hezbollah.
The flight had 153 passengers on board, 135 of them American.
The kidnappers ordered that the plane be flown to Beirut, then to Algiers, then back to Beirut,
where they brutally beat and then killed a U.S. Navy diver who happened to be one of
the passengers.
Most of the passengers were released in the early stages of the hijacking, but 39 hostages
were taken off of the plane and held in safehouses in Beirut.
The hijackers said they would not release the hostages until Israel released over 700
Shiite young men who had been taken from their villages in southern Lebanon, which, as I
mentioned earlier, Israel was still occupying.
The U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, is now a part of the
U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the
U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the
U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the
U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S.
Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force, which is now a part of the U.S. Air Force,
