Lecture 19, The First Palestinian Intifada
In this lecture, we are going to look at the American policy regarding the first Palestinian
Intifada, or Uprising, which began in late 1987 and continued until the early 1990s.
The Intifada transformed the political dynamics of the Arab-Israeli conflict and paved the
way for an unprecedented political dialogue between the United States and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, or PLO.
Lecture coming on both sides, however, prevented that dialogue from yielding tangible results.
The last time we examined the Israeli-Palestine dispute was in the context of the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
That invasion, you will recall, had been aimed at destroying the PLO, which was then
headquartered in Beirut.
If this could be accomplished, the Israeli government hoped that Israel would no longer
be under international diplomatic pressure to enter into negotiations with the PLO, which
in turn could result in an Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza and the creation
of a Palestinian state on those territories.
The Israeli invasion had failed to destroy the PLO completely, but it did succeed in
expelling that organization from Beirut, forcing it to relocate to Tunisia hundreds
of miles away to the West.
This geographical distance made it difficult for the PLO to influence events in Israel-Palestine
and was thus a clear setback for the PLO.
Five years later, however, events in the occupied territories themselves shook up the status
quo and gave the PLO an opportunity to recoup its fortunes.
One group of Palestinians who had not been heard from much were those living under occupation.
Up until this time, most Palestinian activism, or at least most activism that received international
attention, had been conducted by Palestinians living outside of historical Palestine.
But all of this changed in late 1987, when a major uprising occurred in the occupied
territories.
By 1987, an international consensus had emerged over what should become of the occupied territories.
And by consensus, I mean the vast majority of countries in the world, not just Arab
or Third World countries, but Western European nations as well.
According to that consensus, Israel should withdraw from all or virtually all of the
territory it had taken in 1967, and an independent Palestinian state should be established in
those territories.
The PLO itself had by now come to accept the idea of a Palestinian state existing alongside
Israel.
This had been an extremely difficult decision for the Palestinians, since it involved giving
up their claim to 78% of their original homeland.
But the PLO hoped that by making this historic compromise, it would be able to establish
a sovereign Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, having East Jerusalem as its
capital.
As of 1987, the PLO had not taken the final step of formally recognizing Israel, but it
had made it clear that it would accept a two-state settlement.
Two nations that resisted this international consensus were Israel and the United States.
Israel was extremely reluctant to relinquish control over the West Bank and Gaza, primarily
in my view for security reasons.
Prior to 1967, both areas had been sources of Palestinian commando and terrorist raids
against Israel, and the Israelis were adamant about not returning to that state of affairs.
Whether Israel had the right to achieve physical security by permanently controlling the Palestinians
of the West Bank and Gaza was, of course, another question.
The consensus in international opinion was that Israel did not have that right, that
it had to find some other means of ensuring its own security.
But the security motive was a genuine one.
