Another reason the Israelis resisted the international consensus was ideological.
Significant portions of the Israeli population saw the West Bank and Gaza as lands given to the Jewish people by God,
and they were determined to attach them to the Jewish state.
Sometimes people taking this view held positions of power in the Israeli government and could shape policy directly,
but even when they were out of power, they wielded considerable political influence.
The United States too had resisted the international consensus out of a mixture of strategic and domestic political motives.
Since about 1970, and except for a brief interlude under President Carter,
American administrations had regarded Israel as a strategic ally,
engaged with them in the effort to contain the Soviet Union and its regional clients.
One consequence of this strategic alliance was that the United States had been extremely reluctant to take actions that Israel strongly opposed,
like pressuring it to relinquish the occupied territories.
At the same time, there were powerful domestic incentives to go easy on Israel.
In the 1970s and 1980s, a highly sophisticated and influential pro-Israel lobby had emerged in the United States,
and it had been extremely effective in convincing the national government, especially the Congress, to follow pro-Israeli policies.
One form these pro-Israeli policies had taken was a high level of U.S. economic and military aid, about $3 billion by the late 1980s.
Another was Washington's habit of protecting Israel diplomatically, such as by using its veto in the UN Security Council
to block resolutions condemning Israel's actions in the region.
For Palestinians living under Israeli occupation, the situation was becoming increasingly intolerable.
For 20 years, they had lived under direct occupation by the Israeli army, which controlled virtually every aspect of their lives,
sometimes with great brutality.
Palestinians were prevented from expressing their political views, or from moving freely in their villages and towns.
Israeli regulations made it difficult for Palestinian entrepreneurs to build factories or establish businesses,
so Palestinian workers were forced to find employment inside Israel, where they had become an exploited labor force.
And all the while, of course, the Israeli government was encouraging Israeli Jews to build settlements in the West Bank and in Gaza,
often on lands that had been confiscated from Palestinian owners.
Sometimes military authorities would simply fence off Arab lands and declare that they now belonged to Jewish settlements,
leaving the original owners with no legal recourse.
It seemed only a matter of time before Israel had effectively annexed the occupied territories,
turning the Palestinians into foreigners in their own land, or causing them to be so discouraged that they left Palestine altogether.
Palestinian frustration exploded in December 1987, when an Israeli army truck accidentally struck a car carrying four Palestinian laborers in Gaza,
killing them all.
A crowd of Palestinians gathered at the accident site and a teenaged boy threw a stone at the Israeli soldiers.
The Israelis responded with gunfire, killing the boy.
The incident unleashed a spontaneous rebellion among Palestinians, spreading quickly from Gaza to the West Bank.
In towns throughout the occupied territories, rock-throwing Palestinians confronted Israeli soldiers, often eliciting gunfire in return.
The Palestinian uprising, or Intifada, as it was called, took everyone by surprise.
Not just the Israelis, but the PLO leadership as well, which scrambled to assert its leadership over the uprising.
But the PLO was now hundreds of miles away in Tunis and was ill-equipped to exercise day-to-day control.
Instead, the Intifada was directed and sustained by a loose network of local Palestinian committees.
These committees were remarkably successful in banning the use of guns and knives and restricting the uprising to demonstrations and rock-throwing.
The strategy was clearly to limit the scope of Palestinian violence, making Israel's attempts to suppress the rebellion seem cruel and excessive.
The strategy worked.
