At the time, Israel had a coalition government in which the top posts were divided between
politicians from the Labour Party, which was left of centre, and the Likud block, which
was right wing and hawkish.
Yitzhak Shamir, the prime minister, was from Likud, while Shimon Peres, the foreign minister,
in Yitzhak Rabin, the defense minister, were from Labour.
Shamir and the other Likud members of the coalition wanted to crush the uprising with
tanks, but the Labour ministers objected to this course on the grounds that it would blacken
Israel's reputation in the world, and would probably fail anyway.
Eventually a compromise was reached whereby Rabin, the defense minister, was instructed
to put down the Intifada, but to do so without resorting to major firepower.
So Rabin ordered the Israeli army to round up stone throwers and subject them to severe
beatings, to break their bones, as he famously put it.
Breaking the bones of Palestinian demonstrators was not as bad as shooting them, but it still
made for extremely disturbing news footage, and there was an international outcry against
Israeli brutality.
On other occasions Israeli soldiers fired rubber bullets, which could be lethal at close ranges.
The American news media, which had previously been reluctant to find fault with Israel,
were openly critical of Israel's tactics, and began portraying the Palestinians in a
more favorable light.
Opposition to Israeli government policy arose within Israel itself.
There were large demonstrations against the occupation inside Israel, and a small but
growing number of young Israeli men began refusing to serve in the Army of Occupation,
opting for jail terms instead.
It would take a few years for such sentiments to have a discernible impact on Israeli government
policy, but the conviction that the occupation could not continue indefinitely was steadily
gaining ground.
So let's now take a look at the American government's response to the Palestinian uprising.
Since the collapse of the U.S. brokered Lebanese-Israeli peace treaty back in 1983-84, George Shultz,
Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State, had shown little enthusiasm for Arab-Israeli peace
initiatives.
But the Intifada forced Shultz to get back into the game of Middle East diplomacy.
Shultz's initial efforts were quite ineffectual.
By now it was increasingly obvious that any viable peace process would have to include
the Palestinians, and that this in turn meant including the PLO.
For although the PLO had no hand in launching the Intifada, the Palestinians engaged in
the uprising had insisted from day one that they considered the PLO to be their only
legitimate representative.
So there was increasing pressure on the Reagan administration, mainly from abroad, but to
some extent from within the United States as well, to start talking with the PLO and
to encourage Israel to do the same.
But Shultz was strongly opposed to dealing with the PLO, partly because he had a personal
aversion to Arafat and partly because he hoped to avoid getting into a fight with the Israelis.
Shultz's official reason for refusing a dialogue was that that would violate Henry Kissinger's
old pledge not to deal with the PLO until it first recognized Israel and accepted UN Security
Council Resolution 242, which had been passed shortly after the Six-Day War of 1967.
Indeed, by this time, that is by the time of the Intifada, the American conditions for
a U.S. PLO dialogue had become even more stringent.
The Reagan administration now insisted not only that the PLO recognize Israel and accept
Resolution 242, but that it also renounce terrorism.
Each of these conditions posed a problem for the PLO.
The PLO was willing, in principle, to recognize Israel, but it didn't want to extend such
recognition until it was assured of getting a Palestinian state in return.
Recognition, in other words, was the PLO's final card.
It didn't want to play that card simply to get a dialogue with the United States, it
wanted to play it for an actual state.
