On the terrorism question, the PLO was already officially on record as opposing terrorism,
though certain groups within its coalition had from time to time engaged in acts of terror.
Yasser Arafat had no problem condemning terrorism, indeed he had done it many times already,
but renouncing terrorism implied that the PLO had been guilty of it in the past and was now changing its ways.
The PLO was indeed guilty as charged, but no self-respecting organization with pretensions for statehood
can easily assume that sort of guilt, so Arafat balked at renouncing terrorism.
As for Resolution 242, it too posed a special problem for the PLO.
Although the resolution called for Israel's withdrawal from occupied Arab territory,
it said nothing about the national rights of the Palestinians.
To the extent that it alluded to the Palestinians at all, it simply said that there should be a just resolution of the refugee issue.
By the time the interfather started in 1987, the PLO's formal position on 242 was to accept the resolution
on the condition that the Palestinians' right to national self-determination were recognized as well.
But the PLO was unwilling to say we accept Resolution 242, period.
Because the PLO took these positions, Schultz continued to refuse to speak to that organization.
For a while, Schultz tried to get around the problem by working through Jordan.
The idea was to promote bilateral talks between Israel on the one hand
and a joint Palestinian-Jordanian delegation on the other
to negotiate over Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories
and over the granting of short-term autonomy to the Palestinians
with the final status of the territories to be worked out later on.
Essentially, the formula set forth in the Camp David Accords of the late 1970s.
The Palestinians in this joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation
could not be affiliated with the PLO and the delegation as a whole
would be basically controlled by the Jordanian government.
But Schultz's plan was quickly shot down by all of the relevant parties.
The PLO rejected it because it excluded them from the talks.
The Israelis rejected it because they didn't want to talk about withdrawing from the territories at all,
even with a delegation controlled by the Jordanians.
Jordan, too, thought the plan was unrealistic.
King Hussein of Jordan had long hated the PLO and had shuttered at the thought
of an independent Palestinian state being created in his own backyard
since such a state could well stir up unrest among the huge Palestinian population
that lived in Jordan.
But Hussein also recognized that Palestinian nationalism
had acquired so much momentum that it would be suicidal to be seen as standing in its way.
And that's just what Hussein would have appeared to be doing had he agreed to speak
on behalf of the Palestinians, as Schultz was proposing.
So King Hussein, too, rejected the Schultz initiative.
And just to make sure there was no misunderstanding, in the summer of 1988,
Hussein formally renounced Jordan's claim to the West Bank.
If there was to be any agreement over that territory, Hussein said it would have to be concluded
by Israel and the Palestinians.
Hussein's renunciation of Jordan's claim to the West Bank removed the principal alternative
to the PLO, a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation,
and thus gave the PLO a golden opportunity to insert itself into the peace process.
Moderate voices within the Palestinian community began pressuring Yasser Arafat
to make a dramatic gesture that would achieve just that.
A group of West Bank Palestinians led by Faisal Hussein, a moderate Palestinian activist,
drafted a public statement urging the PLO to formally recognize Israel.
Arafat realized that a new opportunity had presented itself,
and he began lobbying other PLO leaders for authorization to make a fresh diplomatic overture.
By November 1988, Arafat was confident he had the necessary support,
and he convened a special session of the Palestine National Council, or PNC,
the PLO's Parliament in exile, at which he could unveil his overture.
