The PNC session was the first scene in an almost farcical international drama in which
Secretary Schultz would dictate in advance what Arafat was supposed to say, and Arafat
would issue a statement that didn't quite get the wording right, prompting Schultz to
say not good enough, and insist that Arafat try again.
Only after several tries would Arafat's performance meet Schultz's exacting conditions
for daining to open a dialogue with the PLO.
At the PNC session, Arafat made a dramatic speech in which he accepted Resolution 242
and declared the existence of an independent Palestinian state on the West Bank and Gaza.
Although he did not explicitly recognize Israel, such recognition was implicit in the
fact that the declared Palestinian state was confined to the occupied territories.
Arafat's statement was put to a vote and was overwhelmingly passed by the PNC.
Arafat's declaration of a Palestinian state was entirely symbolic.
The Palestinians had no means of actually establishing an independent state while the
territory of that proposed state remained under Israeli occupation.
But the fact that the PLO as a body had implicitly recognized Israel put further pressure on
Schultz to start dealing with the PLO.
But Schultz resisted the pressure, saying that Arafat's statement at the PNC still
failed to meet U.S. conditions for a U.S. PLO dialogue.
So Arafat tried again.
At a special session of the United Nations convened in Geneva, it couldn't be held in
New York because Schultz had refused to issue Arafat a visa to come to the United States.
Arafat made another speech in which he condemned terrorism and recognized the right of all
states in the region, including Israel, to live in peace.
This was almost exactly what Schultz had wanted to hear.
But Arafat interspersed these remarks with other, more defiant statements designed to
appease hardliners within the PLO.
For example, Arafat's exact words on terrorism were,
I condemn terrorism in all its forms, and at the same time salute those sitting before
me in this hall who, in the days when they fought to free their countries from the yoke
of colonialism, were accused of terrorism.
Arafat's audience in the General Assembly, many of them veterans of anti-colonial struggles
in the Third World, burst into applause.
Arafat's balancing act infuriated Schultz, as he remarked to President Reagan after hearing
the speech, in one part of his statement he said,
Unk, Unk, Unk, and in another part of his statement he said,
Cole, Cole, Cole, but nowhere did he say Uncle.
Schultz was also angered by Arafat's insistence on condemning terrorism rather than renouncing it.
So the State Department passed word to the PLO that Arafat still hadn't gotten it right.
So Arafat tried yet again, and this time he finally passed Schultz's test.
The day after the UN speech, Arafat held a press conference, and one by one fulfilled
Schultz's conditions.
He recognized Israel, accepted Resolution 242, and said that the PLO renounced all forms
of terrorism, though his pronunciation was a little imprecise and for a second there it
sounded like he was renouncing tourism.
Schultz had no choice but to agree that the conditions had been met, and he announced
that the United States would finally open a dialogue with the PLO.
The Israeli government harshly criticized this decision and continued to refuse to have
anything to do with the PLO, but an important milestone had been passed in Palestinian-American
relations, and a surge of hope and euphoria swept through the Arab world.
Little, however, would come of the breakthrough.
The decision to open a dialogue with the PLO was made just as the Reagan administration
was about to leave office and turn things over to Vice President George Herbert Walker
Bush, who had been elected to the presidency in his own right.
So any follow-through on this decision would have to be accomplished under the new administration.
Unfortunately, both the Bush administration and the PLO squandered the opportunity presented
by the dialogue, and it was not long before the talks came to an end.
