The Bush administration failed to treat the dialogue as a significant diplomatic exchange.
The chief interlocutor on the American side was the U.S. Ambassador to Tunis and the administration
never authorized a higher level official to enter the dialogue, signaling to the Palestinians
that the talks were low priority as far as Washington was concerned.
Meanwhile, the administration continued to shield Israel diplomatically from international
criticism for its repression of the Palestinians, who continued to wage there into Fada.
By 1990, the situation in the occupied territories was becoming more dire than before.
As the Soviet Union imploded, tens of thousands of Russian Jews began emigrating to Israel,
and the Israeli government, now under exclusive Likud Party control, encouraged those Jews
to settle in the West Bank and Gaza, in a transparent attempt to alter the demographic
character of those territories for good.
By now, nearly a quarter million Jewish settlers were living in the West Bank, in East Jerusalem,
and in the Gaza Strip.
Meanwhile, following an upsurge of violence in which several hundred Palestinians were
injured by Israeli soldiers, the UN Security Council voted on a resolution that would have
authorized the Council to conduct an investigation of the situation in the occupied territories.
14 of the 15 Security Council members voted in favor of the resolution, but the Bush administration
vetoed it on the grounds that it was unfair to Israel.
Faisal Hosseini, who had been staging a hunger strike to dramatize the plight of Palestinians
under occupation, was shocked by the veto, calling it a rude slap in the face for all
Palestinians.
Instead of encouraging us, he said, we are being punished for seeking protection.
If the Bush administration's actions had managed to infuriate a moderate like Hosseini,
imagine how they appeared to harder line Palestinians.
For his part, Yasser Arafat discredited himself in American eyes by failing to impose discipline
on the PLO, a chronic problem with Arafat's leadership that would continue to bedevil
the Palestinians in later years.
The problem, as always, was that the PLO was a broad coalition of groups, including
some radical factions that Arafat was fearful of offending.
So whenever one of those factions behaved in an unacceptable way, Arafat was extremely
reluctant to condemn those actions, leaving himself open to the charge that he had no
interest in peace.
The diplomatic downside of this approach was amply demonstrated in May 1990, when a PLO
splinter group called the Palestine Liberation Front, or PLF, launched an abortive raid
on a Tel Aviv beach, with the apparent purpose of murdering Israeli civilians.
The attackers were apprehended before they could kill anyone, but the political damage
had been done.
The Bush administration demanded that Arafat condemn the PLF raid.
The raid had not been authorized by the PLO, and Arafat did dissociate the PLO from it,
but because he was unwilling to specifically condemn the attack, the Bush administration
suspended its dialogue with the PLO.
It was back to square one for the PLO, at least as far as its relations with the United
States were concerned.
By this time, the Intifada was starting to die down, a consequence of exhaustion and
internal division among Palestinians.
More and more, the Palestinians under occupation were turning their anger on each other, with
secularists batting Islamists and militants of both stripes murdering fellow Palestinians
accused of collaborating with Israel.
The exuberant spirit that had animated the Intifada in 1988 and 1989 was starting to dissipate,
giving way to a mood of bitterness and despair.
It was just at this moment, the summer of 1990, that the world's attention suddenly
shifted to the Persian Gulf, where the brutal occupation of a tiny, oil-rich Arab sheikdom
plunged the region and indeed the world into a new and urgent crisis.
We'll examine that episode in our next lecture.
