There was one final way in which the Reagan administration showed its preference for Saddam
by taking a tolerant attitude toward his war crimes.
On a couple of occasions during the Iran-Iraq war, the Iraqi government used chemical weapons,
first against Iranian soldiers and then against Iraqi Kurds living in eastern Iraq, whom the
Iraqi government accused of collaborating with Iran.
Most of the victims of the latter attack were Kurdish civilians, including old people, women
and children.
When news of these atrocities came to light, the Reagan administration did criticize them,
but it did so in the mildest possible terms, imposing no sanctions or other forms of punishment
on Iraq.
In 1988, Iran and Iraq finally ended their war.
Soon thereafter, however, tensions arose between Iraq and Kuwait.
During the war, Iraq had borrowed about $15 billion from Kuwait, and Kuwait now demanded
that Iraq payback the money.
Saddam Hussein replied that the Iraqis had already paid in blood to defend the whole
Arab world against Iran, and that the least Kuwait could do was forgive the dead.
Iraq also accused Kuwait of producing too much oil, which had the effect of driving
down the price and causing Iraq's own oil revenues to suffer.
Saddam Hussein further charged that the Kuwaitis were drilling for oil on the Iraqi-Kuwaiti
border, but doing so in a slant-wise fashion, extracting oil from reserves lying within Iraqi
territory.
In late July 1990, Saddam began insisting that the only way Kuwait could redeem itself
was by turning over to Iraq two strategically located islands named Bubion and Warba, which
lay at the head of the Persian Gulf.
Ever since Britain had drawn the Iraqi-Kuwaiti boundary at the end of World War I, the Iraqis
had claimed that those islands were rightfully theirs.
Saddam now threatened to attack Kuwait unless it turned those islands over to Iraq.
To drive his point home, Saddam gathered tens of thousands of troops on his border with
Kuwait.
At this point, the U.S. Ambassador to Iraq, April Glassby, held a fateful meeting with
Saddam Hussein.
Although Glassby urged Saddam not to use force against Kuwait, she also said that the United
States had no position on the Iraqi-Kuwaiti dispute.
Glassby was later harshly criticized for failing to warn Saddam that the United States would
come to the defense of Kuwait, thus giving Saddam the impression that he could attack
it with impunity.
Although Glassby probably did leave that impression, she was simply following the instructions
she had received from the State Department, which had itself failed to grasp the seriousness
of Saddam's threats against Kuwait.
Nevertheless, Glassby would become the scapegoat for the failures of her superiors and her
career would suffer as a result.
On August 2, 1990, Iraqi troops suddenly surged across the border into Kuwait, quickly occupying
the country and forcing the Kuwaiti royal family into exile.
Saddam announced that Kuwait was being permanently annexed to Iraq.
The seizure of Kuwait now gave Saddam control over 20 percent of the world's oil reserves,
and his forces seemed capable of moving on into Saudi Arabia, which contained an additional
20 percent of the world's oil.
In Kuwait itself, the Iraqi forces behaved with extreme crudeness and brutality, looting
and defacing Kuwaiti property, rounding up and arresting Kuwaiti officials and anyone
else who defied the Iraqi invasion.
Hundreds of individuals were tortured or killed in captivity.
Although some of the stories about Iraqi savagery turned out to have been fabricated, for example
the claim that Iraqi soldiers broke into a hospital and pulled premature babies out
of their incubators, leading them to die, the verifiable facts were disturbing enough.
Also among Saddam's victims were hundreds of foreign civilians who had been living in
Iraq and Kuwait at the time of the invasion.
These people were now held hostage by Iraq, and Saddam arranged to have some of them moved
to strategic and industrial sites in Iraq to deter any attack from the West.
Saddam insisted, however, on maintaining the fiction that these people were not hostages,
but rather were guests, and he even granted an audience to a group of American and European
residents in full view of the global media.
In one particularly sickening moment, he had children brought up to him one by one and
unctuously quizzed them about their conditions, trying to get them to say how happy they were
to be his guests.
Saddam had hoped that this would improve his image in the West, but of course it had precisely
the opposite effect.
These foreigners were released over the next few months.
