The Bush administration was shocked by the invasion of Kuwait.
Although it had expected some sort of Iraqi action, it had thought that this would be
limited to the seizure of Bubion and Dwarba, not the seizure of the whole country.
Nevertheless, President Bush's initial reaction was quite passive.
His first public statement on the invasion, on the very day that it occurred, was to say
that the United States had no plans to use force to help Kuwait.
But later that same day, Bush met with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who was
visiting the United States, and Thatcher immediately put backbone into Bush's public posture.
Remember, George, she is reported to have said, this is no time to go wobbly.
Accordingly, Bush began taking an unyielding position against the Iraqi action, calling
it an act of naked aggression that could not be permitted to stand.
Over the next several days, Bush began laying the diplomatic foundation for what was to
become the Gulf War.
He worked closely with the UN Security Council in drafting a tough resolution condemning
the invasion and demanding an immediate withdrawal from Kuwait.
The Security Council also imposed economic sanctions against Iraq.
Such resolutions were possible in the first place because the Soviet Union did not exercise
its veto powers, as it almost certainly would have done a few years earlier.
Iraq had been a client state of the Soviet Union, but these were the waning days of the
Soviet Union.
And Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, was far more interested in improving relations
with the West so as to save the Soviet system from collapse than he was in maintaining influence
with Iraq.
Working the phones, Bush skillfully lined up a diverse coalition of nations that opposed
Saddam's actions and were prepared to reverse it by force if necessary.
Under UN authorization, a massive international military force began materializing in Saudi
Arabia.
Twenty-eight nations contributed to the force, but the Americans were driving the process
and it was they who contributed the bulk of the troops.
Commanding the U.S. forces were General Norman Schwarzkopf Jr., whose father Norman Sr. had
been stationed in Iran in the early 1950s and had played a key role in the overthrow of
Mohamed Mosadek and his immediate superior, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Colin
Powell.
In an attempt to break up the coalition gathering against him, Saddam tried to link the Kuwait
crisis to the Palestine issue.
Saddam said that he would consider withdrawing from Kuwait provided this was in conjunction
with Israel's withdrawal from the territories it had occupied in the 1967 war.
This proposal was enthusiastically received throughout the Arab world, since it promised
to kill two birds with one stone, ending the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, which most Arabs
opposed, and ending Israel's occupation of Arab lands, which had outraged the Arab world
for a generation, as well as subjecting hundreds of thousands of Palestinians to harsh Israeli
occupation.
Bush, however, refused to consider any quid pro quo.
The invasion of Kuwait was wrong, he said, and must be ended unconditionally.
Linking Iraq's withdrawal to an end of the Israeli occupation would allow Saddam to emerge
as a hero in the Arab world, thus rewarding him for his aggression.
To most Arabs, Bush's posture seemed like a double standard, if not outright hypocrisy.
The United States had itself repeatedly invaded other countries and had permitted its allies
to do the same.
Now that an Arab country had transgressed, Bush was acting as if this were a uniquely
heinous crime.
For the remainder of the crisis, there would be deep hostility in Arab public opinion toward
Bush's actions regarding Iraq, a fact that could not be ignored by the Arab governments,
like those of Egypt, Syria, and Saudi Arabia, that had joined the anti-Iraq coalition that
Bush was forging.
