These governments urged the United States to accept some linkage between the Iraqi invasion
and the Israeli occupation.
But Bush refused.
The most he would do was make a vague promise to look into the Palestine-Israel question
once Iraq had withdrawn unconditionally from Kuwait.
Bush also saw to it that Israel did not take part in the anti-Iraq coalition, realizing
that Israel's participation would make it politically impossible for any Arab country
to stay on board the coalition.
Meanwhile, the military buildup in the Saudi desert continued.
Initially, the deployment in the desert was billed as being wholly defensive, aimed at
preventing Iraq from pushing southward from Kuwait into Saudi Arabia.
Indeed, the initial deployment was codenamed Desert Shield.
But in the fall of 1990, Bush doubled the number of U.S. troops in the region from 250,000
to 500,000, as many as had been stationed in South Vietnam during the peak of the Vietnam
War.
This move signaled that Bush was moving from a defensive posture, preventing Iraq from
attacking Saudi Arabia to an offensive posture, driving Iraq out of Kuwait.
In late November 1990, the UN Security Council passed a resolution demanding that Iraq withdraw
from Kuwait by January 15, 1991, authorizing the use of force against Iraq should it fail
to withdraw by that date.
Four of the five permanent members of the Security Council, the United States, Britain,
France and the Soviet Union, voted for the resolution, while China abstained.
The prospect of an offensive war created enormous anxiety within the United States.
There were large anti-war demonstrations throughout the country, especially in the major cities.
Demonstrators charged that the United States was preparing for war not to thwart aggression,
as Bush repeatedly claimed, but simply to ensure Western access to Middle Eastern oil.
This critique was summed up in the chant, No Blood for Oil.
Demonstrators also warned that any war against Iraq would be extremely long and bloody, that
thousands of Americans would come home in body bags, as had happened during the Vietnam
War.
Indeed, it would be worse than Vietnam.
It was already known that Saddam Hussein had used poison gas in the 1980s.
Anti-war demonstrators predicted that American soldiers would be subject to Iraqi gas attacks
and would die horrible deaths.
This critique later backfired against the anti-war movement, since it implied that war would be
fine as long as massive American casualties could be avoided, as indeed they were.
Meanwhile, critics in Congress, especially Democrats, insisted that Bush had no right
to go to war without congressional approval.
Under heavy domestic pressure, Bush agreed to let Congress vote on the question, though
he made it clear in advance that he would do whatever he thought was necessary, regardless
of how that vote came out.
Bush also authorized James Baker, his Secretary of State, to meet with Tarik Haziz, the Iraqi
Foreign Minister, to see if it was possible to avoid war.
On January 9th, Baker and Haziz met in Geneva, but neither man could change the other's position.
Baker insisted on an unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.
Haziz insisted on linking the Kuwait issue to the Palestine issue, so the talks collapsed.
On January 12th, Congress debated the issue.
On the one side were those who believed that the economic sanctions against Iraq, if given
time to work, would eventually compel Iraq to get out of Kuwait.
On the other side were those who believed that an Iraqi withdrawal could be achieved
only by force.
In the end, both houses approved the use of force against Iraq, the Senate by a vote
of 52 to 47, the House of Representatives by a vote of 250 to 183.
The January 15th deadline came and went without any Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.
So on January 16th, the United States and its coalition partners launched Operation Desert
Storm.
