On the American side, fewer than 150 people were killed in the fighting, all of them military personnel.
The liberation of Kuwait was wildly applauded within the United States, and Bush's approval rating shot up to 89%.
The last modern president to enjoy such popularity had been Harry Truman immediately after the surrender of Japan in 1945.
The anti-war movement, having predicted that thousands of Americans would come home in body bags, was severely undermined.
Anti-war activists probably would have been better off had they stuck to a more principled argument that war would be wrong no matter how easy it was on U.S. personnel.
But they had calculated that the body bag argument was more likely to gain the support with Middle America.
Indeed, Bush himself had made a similar calculation.
He realized that public opinion would turn against the war if it dragged on too long and killed too many Americans, as the Vietnam War had done a generation earlier.
But if the war could be won quickly with few U.S. casualties, the American public would be on board.
And now that victory had been achieved, Bush allowed himself to hope that the American people would not be so guns shy in the future, that they would willingly support other U.S. interventions elsewhere.
As Bush exalted days after Kuwait was liberated, by God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all.
In the immediate aftermath of the ground war, the Iraqi army was in such disarray that coalition forces probably could have marched on to Baghdad and overthrown the Iraqi government with little difficulty.
But they declined to do so, confining themselves to securing the liberation of Kuwait.
This decision was strongly criticized at the time, but Bush felt that the UN mandate would not permit such an expansion of the original mission.
He also realized that his coalition partners, especially the Arab states, would never go along with an invasion of Iraq.
Even so, during the Gulf War, Bush publicly encouraged the Iraqi army and people to overthrow Saddam.
One way to end the bloodshed, Bush said, is for the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people to take matters into their own hands and force Saddam Hussein, the dictator, to step aside.
In the immediate aftermath of the war, some Iraqi people did rise up, though apparently not the ones that Bush had in mind.
In March 1991, two separate Iraqi rebellions, one by Iraqi Shiites in the south and one by Iraqi Kurds in the north, broke out.
Despite his earlier encouragement of rebellion, Bush now had second thoughts.
He feared that an overthrow of the Iraqi government could cause the whole country to split apart, resulting in a mad scramble for territory by each of Iraq's neighbors, beating in turn to a new regional war.
However unsavory Saddam Hussein might be, it would be better if he stayed in power and held the country together, provided he could no longer threaten his neighbors, or so at least appeared to be Bush's thinking.
So as Saddam moved to crush the two rebellions, Bush did nothing to come to their aid.
The situation for the Kurds was especially dire. Following the collapse of their rebellion, hundreds of thousands of desperate Kurds began fleeing to the Turkish and Iraqi borders, Iranian borders, creating a humanitarian crisis of vast proportions.
Eventually the United States military did step in and set up refugee camps for the Kurds, and to prevent the Iraqi army from attacking the Kurds, the U.S. government declared a no-fly zone in northern Iraq over which the Iraqi Air Force was forbidden from flying.
A similar no-fly zone was established in southern Iraq to prevent the Baghdad regime from attacking Shiite dissidents.
Long after the Gulf War ended, U.S. and British aircraft would continue to patrol both no-fly zones, engaging in constant skirmishes with Iraqi anti-aircraft positions.
In Baghdad, however, Saddam remained in power, a constant reminder of the limited nature of Bush's UN-backed mandate in the Persian Gulf.
Saddam would continue to be a thorn in Washington's side, and it would remain for Bush's successors, presidential and filial, to deal with the unfinished business of 1991.
