But Israel too had been damaged politically, and many Israelis were eager to bring an end
to the conflict.
By now the Palestinian Intifada were uprising in the occupied territories was starting to
wind down, a consequence of exhaustion and internal division among Palestinians.
But the Intifada had accomplished one thing, it had convinced a growing number of Israelis
that the status quo was untenable, because it was blackening Israel's name and world
opinion and tearing Israeli society apart.
Many Israelis were starting to conclude therefore that Israel could not directly rule the Palestinians
of the occupied territory for an indefinite period of time.
This was not yet the position of the Israeli government, which was headed by Prime Minister
Yitzhak Shamir, a hardline Likud politician, but Israeli public opinion increasingly favored
reaching some sort of political accommodation with the Palestinians, if not with the PLO
itself, then with some other party that represented the Palestinian people.
So Bush decided to take advantage of these circumstances and push for a final settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In the fall of 1991, the United States and the Soviet Union, which had only a few weeks
left to live, sponsored an international conference in Madrid to discuss the Middle East conflict.
Attending the conference were Israel, a number of Arab states, and a Palestinian delegation
that was officially separate from the PLO, but whose membership the PLO had approved.
At first glance, then, the Madrid conference seemed to fulfill the grand objective that
Jimmy Carter had harbored when he first became president back in 1977.
You will recall that Carter came into office hoping to convene an international conference
in Geneva attended by all the major parties, including a Palestinian delegation informally
linked to the PLO, at which the Arab-Israeli conflict would be resolved comprehensively.
But the Madrid conference provided only the appearance of a comprehensive approach, not
the reality.
After a few days devoted to public speeches, in which each of the delegations publicly presented
its position, and usually in the most vociferous and demagogic terms, the conference broke
up into a series of bilateral negotiations, a separate Israeli-Jordanian negotiation, a
separate Israeli-Syrian negotiation, and a separate Israeli-Palestinian one.
This was a major concession to the Israelis, who had made it clear that they would not
attend any conference where they had to negotiate with the Arabs as a bloc, and thus be outnumbered
by them.
These bilateral talks would continue sporadically for the next year and a half.
In November 1992, Bush was defeated in his reelection bid by Bill Clinton.
When Clinton took office in early 1993, the bilateral negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinian delegation had reached an impasse.
It was clear that the Israelis were unwilling to consider a full withdrawal from the West
Bank and Gaza, the principal demand of the Palestinian delegation.
So the Palestinian delegation was starting to get frustrated.
What the delegation didn't realize, however, was that Israeli and PLO officials were holding
secret contacts in Oslo, Norway, a process facilitated by the Norwegian government.
Now why you ask would the Israelis agree to such contacts, considering that they had
consistently refused to have any dealings with the PLO?
Well it turned out that Arafat, ironically, was prepared to be quite a bit more flexible
than the non-PLO delegation was.
This in turn was due to the fact that Arafat was now desperate to cut a deal with the Israelis.
I already mentioned the diplomatic isolation and financial difficulty Arafat had suffered
since the Gulf War.
Meanwhile, of course, the Soviet Union had collapsed, eliminating another previous source
of funding and diplomatic support for the PLO.
And finally, Arafat was approaching his mid-60s and starting to worry about his political
legacy.
The thought of exiting the world stage without having achieved a significant political breakthrough
was distressing to him, and he was willing to make significant concessions to achieve
a settlement in his lifetime.
