In Norway, the Palestinians and the Israelis worked out a formula for resolving their dispute
that built on the Camp David Agreement of the late 1970s.
According to the Oslo Agreement, Israel would withdraw its occupation forces from the Gaza
Strip and from the West Bank town of Jericho, allowing for Palestinian self-rule in those
areas.
From this nucleus, the Palestinians would elect a self-governing authority that would
gradually assume responsibility for administering Gaza and an unspecified portion of the West
Bank.
Then, after a transitional period not exceeding five years, there would be negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians over the final status of the territories.
Although Clinton himself had almost nothing to do with achieving this breakthrough, he
was able to grab a large share of credit for it.
Once it became known in the summer of 1993 that a provisional agreement had been reached,
Clinton invited Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's new prime minister, to come to Washington
to formalize the agreement there.
The two leaders accepted Clinton's invitation and sealed their fate with the famous of sealed
their agreement and their fate with the famous handshake on the White House lawn as Clinton
benignly looked on.
From the start, however, some Palestinian critics accused Arafat of having given away
the store, of having cut a deal with the Israelis that effectively forfeited long-standing Palestinian
national claims.
For years, the mainstream Palestinian position had been that Israel should withdraw from all
of the West Bank and Gaza, and that an independent Palestinian state should be established in
those areas with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Palestinians had generally agreed that any negotiations with the Israelis must proceed
on this basis, with the understanding that at the end of the negotiations, the final
outcome would be an independent Palestinian state along the lines I just described.
But under the Oslo formula, critics charged, the PLO entered into protracted negotiations
with the Israelis without any assurances on what the final result would look like.
Instead, all the basic issues, the ones that would actually determine the nature and extent
of Palestinian sovereignty, borders, the status of Jerusalem, the fate of Jewish settlements
in the occupied territories, and so on, were postponed for negotiation in the final status
phase.
Meanwhile, as the negotiations proceeded, the Israelis would be free to continue with
the building of Jewish settlements, the annexing of Palestinian land, the demolition of Palestinian
homes, and all the other activities that would prejudice the outcome of the negotiations.
Now surely you say Arafat must have gotten some guarantee at Oslo that this sort of creeping
annexation would come to an end, didn't he?
Well, sort of.
He got the Israelis to agree that they would take no actions that fundamentally altered
the status quo on the West Bank and Gaza.
Despite this agreement, between 1993 and 2000, the number of Jewish settlers in the occupied
territories doubled from about 100,000 to about 200,000, and that's not even counting
the number of settlers in the Jerusalem area, which also went up.
But this increase in population was accomplished mainly by expanding existing settlements
rather than by building new ones.
So even though Israel's actions did by any rational standard fundamentally alter the
status quo, the Israelis could deny this by pointing to the fact that the number of settlements
was not increasing.
It was Arafat's failure to get a firm guarantee on settlements and on his willingness to settle
for a vague formulation that the Israelis could later interpret to their advantage that
it caused some Palestinian commentators to be so critical of Oslo.
So that was one of the major Palestinian critiques of the Oslo process.
And in my view, events in the 1990s have generally confirmed that critique.
Israel withdrew its occupation forces from most of the cities and towns in the West Bank
and Gaza, and a Palestinian authority under the presidency of Yasser Arafat gradually
asserted its control over Palestinian population centers.
But Israel remained in control of much of the surrounding countryside, where it could determine
the nature and extent of industrial and agricultural development, and even prevent Palestinians
from traveling from one town to another.
The settler population continued to increase, and Israel constructed a web of bypass roads
accessible only to settlers that carved up Palestinian territory and prevented contiguous
development.
