Meanwhile, the Israeli government was telling its people,
don't worry, even though the Palestinians continue to make extravagant claims,
they're locked into a settlement that will severely limit their ability to acquire true sovereignty
and thus threaten our security.
The Palestinians won't like it, but they'll have to accept it.
The events of 2000 showed that both of these assurances were false.
In July of that year, Clinton convened a second major summit meeting at Camp David
to be held between Arafat and Ehud Barak, Israel's new prime minister.
Both Clinton and Barak were eager for the summit meeting.
Clinton was about to leave office and wanted to go down in history as a peacemaker.
Barak was expecting to face the voters sometime in the following year
and thought a peace agreement would improve his chances.
Arafat was reluctant to go to a summit just then
because there was a good deal of division among Palestinians and within the wider Arab world
over how to proceed with the peace process.
Arafat wanted to wait until there was more consensus on his end.
In what would prove to be a major blunder, however,
Arafat succumbed to Clinton's and Barak's pressure and went to Camp David anyway.
Precisely what happened at Camp David is subject to dispute,
but it appears that Ehud Barak presented Arafat with a take it or leave it offer
for a final settlement of the conflict.
Although Barak's proposal was later portrayed in the American media as an extremely generous offer,
it fell far short of what the Palestinians saw as the minimal requirements for a settlement.
Indeed, and this is a crucial point,
it fell short of what the international community as a whole agreed
were the necessary ingredients of a just and lasting peace.
Barak did apparently offer to withdraw from most of the West Bank and Gaza,
but he insisted that a large number of Jewish settlers remain in the territories.
Moreover, the tracts of land Barak insisted on annexing to Israel were configured in such a way
that the resulting Palestinian state would be broken up into separate enclaves.
Although Barak was willing to discuss Palestinian administrative autonomy over portions of East Jerusalem,
he demanded that the entire city, East and West, remain under Israeli sovereignty.
Arafat rejected these proposals and the summit meeting collapsed.
In a public statement issued immediately afterwards,
President Clinton endorsed Barak's proposal and chastised Arafat for failing to accept it.
Two months later, in September 2000,
former Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon paid a visit to the Temple Mount,
or the Noble Sanctuary as it is known to Muslims,
the compound in Jerusalem containing the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the third holiest site in Islam.
Sharon's visit, which was accompanied by armed guard,
was designed to assert Jewish sovereignty over the Temple Mount.
Sharon was an extremely notorious figure to Palestinians.
Not only had he been associated with the massacres of Palestinian civilians in Sabra and Shatila in 1982,
he had also over the years been one of the strongest promoters of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
As Sharon himself must have expected, his visit to the Temple Mount provoked angry protests by Palestinians.
Israeli forces fired on the demonstrators with lethal force,
setting off a renewed rebellion in the occupied territories.
This second Intifada was far more violent than the first.
They were just throwing rocks, Palestinian activists resorted to guns and bombs as well.
I mentioned a moment ago that each party to the peace process, the Palestinian Authority,
and the Israeli government had given its own people an extremely misleading picture of what the Oslo process would likely accomplish.
In the summer and fall of 2000, both populations discovered just how misleading those pictures were.
Palestinians learned that the peace process had gotten them no closer to genuine independence.
It was this painful realization that underlay the second Intifada.
Sharon's visit to the Temple Mount may have provided the spark,
but the tinder was in place long before Sharon set out on his mischievous errand.
