The Israeli public, for its part, had to face the fact that the Palestinian people would
not accept the limited sovereignty that the Israeli government was offering them, but would
rather insist on full sovereignty in the territories.
This in turn would require Israelis to make the difficult concessions they had long thought
they could avoid, dismantling the settlements and allowing Jerusalem to be divided.
Such steps would be anathema to certain segments of the Israeli population and could well result
in civil unrest among Israeli Jews.
Moreover, the violence of the second interfather convinced a growing number of Israelis that
the Palestinians would not be satisfied with the state on the West Bank and Gaza, but rather
were bent on Israel's destruction.
This was an erroneous reading of mainstream Palestinian opinion, but those Palestinians
who were bent on Israel's destruction were sufficiently active to lend some credence
to this view.
Remarkably though, even as attitudes hardened on both sides, negotiations continued.
In January 2001, at the urging of President Clinton, who was just about to leave office,
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators met again in the Egyptian town of Taba.
The Israelis made another, more forthcoming proposal, whereby Israel would withdraw from
about 95% of the West Bank and exercise less control over Palestinian borders than Barak
had demanded at Camp David.
While the Palestinians still had problems with this offer, they accepted it as a basis
for further negotiations.
The time was running out for the peace process.
As I said, the mounting violence of the interfather had caused a hardening of attitudes among
the Israeli public, and Prime Minister Barak, sensing the public mood, began backing away
from the proposals his own negotiators were making at Taba.
It was too late for Barak as well.
In February 2001, the Israeli electorate rejected Barak and elected Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister.
So Sharon was the beneficiary of the crisis he helped provoke.
Under Sharon, the situation in Israel-Palestine went from terrible to worse.
The negotiations collapsed, and Sharon stepped up the policy begun by his predecessors of
engaging in targeted assassinations of suspected Palestinian militants.
Militant Palestinian organizations sponsored suicide bombings inside Israel itself.
Most of the suicide bombings were conducted by members of Hamas, which had since regained
its strength.
But some of them were the work of a new organization, the El Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, a group with
loose ties to Arafat's own FETA organization.
Although the Martyrs Brigade was formally committed to a two-state solution, it believed
that the only way to convince Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories was to make
Israeli civilians bleed.
This was, it turned out, a disastrous strategy from both a moral and a pragmatic point of
view.
The increasing reliance on terrorism demanded damaged Palestinians' reputation in the world
and simply hardened Israel's determination to crush the Intifada and tighten its control
over the occupied territories.
Sharon's mantra was that Israel's adversary was not a genuine movement for national liberation,
but an insatiable and depraved terrorist monster.
Initially, the second Bush administration, which took office around the time Sharon did,
was skeptical of this claim, insisting that the crisis in Israel-Palestine was largely
political and could not be reduced to a simple war on terrorism.
But Arafat's failure to bring the suicide bombings under control, combined with the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, would swing administration opinion sharply
in Sharon's direction, and Washington would acquiesce in Israel's reoccupation of much
of the West Bank.
But the Palestinians were not the only Middle Eastern people who faced an uphill battle in
securing their political rights.
In our next lecture, we'll look at efforts by the Kurds to achieve national self-determination
and that American responses to those efforts.
