Lecture 22 The United States and the Kurds
In this lecture, we'll do something a little different.
Instead of recounting a single event or historical process, we'll trace American relations with
a single Middle Eastern people, in this case the Kurds, over a long span of time.
For most of the history of American involvement in the Middle East, the U.S. government has
paid little attention to the Kurds.
To the extent that Kurds have made an impression on Washington, their political aspirations
have presented the United States both with opportunities for weakening its regional adversaries
and with difficulties in stabilizing its regional allies.
The Kurds are a non-Arab Muslim people whose traditional homeland, Kurdistan, is located
in parts of modern Turkey, Syria, Iraq and Iran.
Since the nineteen teens, various Kurdish separatist groups have attempted to achieve
national independence or increased autonomy in the areas they inhabit.
For the whole time it has pursued coherent policies toward the Middle East, the United
States has always opposed efforts by Kurds to achieve national independence, and it has
usually opposed Kurdish efforts to gain greater autonomy within or at the expense of established
Middle Eastern states.
There have been two main reasons for America's historical reluctance to support Kurdish political
aspirations.
In the first place, those aspirations pose at least a potential threat to the territorial
integrity and political stability of existing Middle Eastern states, and the United States
has traditionally sought to uphold the territorial and political status quo in the region.
In the second place, during the Cold War, Kurdish separatist groups, especially those
operating in Turkey and Iran, had often received encouragement and support from the Soviet Union,
so U.S. officials had gotten into the habit of seeing Kurdish activism as ideologically
subversive.
I said that Washington has usually opposed Kurdish efforts to gain greater autonomy within
established Middle Eastern states.
A major exception to this general rule has been Washington's occasional encouragement
of the Kurds of Iraq, first in the 1970s and then in the years since the Gulf War of 1991.
The fact that the established state in this case, Iraq, was an adversary of the United
States, made the U.S. government far more willing to encourage Kurdish activism, though
not to the point that it threatened Iraq's territorial integrity.
America's first efforts to encourage the Kurds of Iraq began in 1972, the year President
Nixon and Henry Kissinger, his national security adviser, made the fateful decision to throw
America's full weight behind the Shah of Iran.
One way they sought to bolster the Shah was by backing his drive to dominate the Persian
Gulf.
And to dominate the Gulf, Iran needed to weaken its historical rival, Iraq, which under the
leadership of a ruthless young military officer named Saddam Hussein, was trying to strengthen
its own position in the area.
In particular, the Shah wanted to gain control over Shat al-Arab, the tidal river at the
head of the Persian Gulf.
A previous treaty, dating back to the 1930s, had granted control over Shat al-Arab to Iraq.
The Shah wanted to revise the treaty, and the Americans supported him in this goal.
The fact that Iraq was a client state of the Soviet Union made Nixon and Kissinger especially
eager to see Iraq knocked down a peg or two.
Nixon and Kissinger concluded that the best way to weaken Iraq and thus strengthen their
ally Iran was to support an initiative already started by the Shah, encouraging the Iraqi
Kurds to rebel against the Iraqi government and to demand greater autonomy.
