Now, Nixon and Kissinger did not want the Iraqi Kurds to actually succeed in gaining
more autonomy.
In fact, that was the last thing they wanted, since that might encourage Kurds in countries
friendly to the United States, like Turkey and Iran itself, to start agitating for their
own rights.
The purpose, rather, was to weaken the Iraqi government and harass it, thus decreasing its
ability to challenge the Shah's bid for regional hegemony.
The U.S. government strongly opposed, rather the U.S. State Department, strongly opposed
supporting the Iraqi Kurds in this way, but it had little ability to shape U.S. policy,
which Nixon and Kissinger were controlling from the White House.
In fact, once Nixon and Kissinger decided to back the Kurdish rebellion, they didn't
even tell the State Department about the decision for fear that disgruntled officials
at the State Department might leak it to the press.
Even William Rogers, the Secretary of State at that time, was kept in the dark.
Instead, Nixon and Kissinger worked through the CIA, getting the agency to funnel $16
million to the Iraqi Kurds during the period 1972 to 1975.
Clearly this was not a great deal of money.
It was more symbolic than anything else.
The Kurds got much more substantial aid from the Iranian government.
The main purpose of the CIA payments was to convince the Kurds that the United States
was on their side, strengthening their determination to fight on.
The Kurds were indeed won over by the gesture.
As Mustafa Barzani, the leader of the Iraqi Kurds confided to a reporter in 1973, I trust
America.
America is too great a power to betray a small people like the Kurds.
Barzani alas would soon learn otherwise.
The U.S.-supported Kurdish rebellion did succeed in weakening the Iraqi government.
And in 1975, Saddam Hussein met with the Shah in Algiers and signed an agreement over
Shatt al-Arab that was generally favorable to Iran.
Whereas under the previous agreement, Iraq had controlled Shatt al-Arab, the Algiers
agreement established that Iraq and Iran would now share that waterway.
It was a galling concession for Saddam to have to make, but the Kurdish rebellion had
weakened his hand.
In exchange for the Iraqi concession, the Shah agreed to stop aiding the Iraqi Kurds,
and he promptly pulled the plug on their rebellion.
Deprived of Iranian aid, the Kurds were easy prey for Saddam, who brutally crushed the
rebellion, causing thousands of ordinary Kurds, men, women and children, to flee across the
border into Iran.
Seeing that Iranian aid had dried up, Barzani appealed to the United States, sending a series
of desperate letters to Kissinger, pleading with him to aid the Kurds.
But Kissinger, who of course had no interest in a Kurdish victory in Iraq, ignored Barzani's
appeals.
When one of his colleagues expressed qualms about the abandonment of the Kurds, Kissinger
famously remarked, covert action should not be confused with missionary work.
The second instance in which the U.S. government became involved with the Iraqi Kurds was in
the immediate aftermath of the Gulf War of 1991, when, as we saw in a previous lecture,
Iraqi Kurds once again rose up in rebellion.
In this case, too, lack of U.S. support for the rebellion permitted the Iraqi government
to crush it.
To be sure, in 1991, Washington had not encouraged the Kurds in particular.
The Kurds had acted on the basis of President Bush's more general call for the overthrow
of Saddam Hussein.
Although Bush had mentioned both the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people in his exhortation,
it appears that he was really appealing to the Iraqi military.
Instead, two popular rebellions, one by Iraqi Shiites in the south and the other by Iraqi
Kurds in the north, broke out.
Fearing the instability that could result from these ethnic rebellions, Bush declined
to come to the aid of either the Shiites or the Kurds, and Saddam was able to crush both
of those rebellions with impunity.
To many Iraqi Kurds, this was yet another act of betrayal by the United States.
