In a less deliberate way, however, the United States came to sponsor a situation of de facto
autonomy for the Iraqi Kurds.
Following Saddam's crushing of the Kurdish uprising in the spring of 1991, hundreds of
thousands of Kurdish people, again men, women and children, fled to the Turkish and Iranian
borders, creating a dire humanitarian crisis.
After growing international pressure to do something for the Kurds, Bush eventually agreed
to the establishment of a no-fly zone in northern Iraq, which prevented the Iraqi government
from using its aircraft to attack the Kurds.
In late 1991, Saddam withdrew the central government administration from northern Iraq,
and the Iraqi Kurds, under the umbrella of U.S. and British aerial protection, were able
to carve out a semi-autonomous region in the north, complete with elections and a parliamentary
style government.
For the next few years, the Kurds of northern Iraq lived in relative tranquility, but from
1994 to 1997, two rival Kurdish parties waged a bitter, fratricidal war against each other.
One party was the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, or PUK, led by Jalal Talabani.
The other was the Kurdistan Democratic Party, or KDP, headed by Masoud Barzani, the son
of Mustafa Barzani, the leader Washington briefly supported in the 1970s.
The struggle between the PUK and the KDP became a problem for the U.S. government, which by
this time was trying to unseat Saddam Hussein by covert means.
In the spring of 1995, the Clinton administration encouraged an organization of dissident Iraqis
known as the Iraqi National Congress, or INC, which consisted mainly of Iraqi Arabs, to launch
an anti-Saddam insurgency inside Iraq.
Eager to have Kurdish participation in the effort, the CIA convinced the PUK to join
forces with the INC.
But then the KDP, taking advantage of the PUK's involvement in the planned insurgency,
launched an attack on the PUK.
The PUK pulled out of the insurgency to fend off the KDP attack, causing the whole insurgency
to collapse.
A year later, Masoud Barzani, the leader of the KDP, went so far as to request military
assistance from Saddam Hussein himself, so that he could continue to wage his war against
the PUK.
In 1998, the Clinton administration brokered a truce between the PUK and the KDP, and from
then on the two groups peacefully coexisted, though each insisted on maintaining a separate
power base, the KDP in the northwestern part of Iraq and the PUK in the northeast.
From the late 1990s and into the early 2000s, Kurds in both sections of northern Iraq enjoyed
a high level of autonomy and political freedom.
There were hundreds of independent newspapers and magazines, dozens of television and radio
stations and scores of political parties, and unfettered access to the Internet.
There was also a relatively high level of prosperity, resulting from the fact that northern
Iraq was exempted from many of the economic sanctions imposed on central Iraq.
In the aftermath of September 11, 2001, however, as the second Bush administration began preparing
for possible war with Iraq, there was enormous uncertainty about the fate of Iraqi Kurdistan.
It was unclear how much autonomy the Kurds would enjoy in a post-Saddam Iraq.
Compounding this uncertainty were deep apprehensions about how Iraq's neighbor, Turkey, which also
contained a significant Kurdish population, might react to any changes in the political
status of the Iraqi Kurds.
But before getting into that subject, let me say a few words about Turkey's treatment
of its own Kurdish population, especially as it relates to American policy.
