Generally speaking, the United States showed far less sympathy towards efforts by Turkish
Kurds to achieve greater autonomy than it showed towards comparable efforts by the Kurds
of Iraq.
The reason for this difference was obvious.
Turkey, unlike Iraq, was a long-standing ally of the United States, indeed the only
Middle Eastern member of NATO.
Under no circumstances would the United States countenance a separatist or autonomous movement
that might compromise the territorial integrity or political stability of its ally, Turkey.
Since the 19-teens, Turkish Kurds had waged periodic struggles to achieve political independence
or autonomy, and the Turkish government had succeeded in suppressing each attempt.
During the era of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who in the 1920s and 1930s served as the first
president of the modern Turkish state, the Turkish government engaged in a systematic
campaign to expunge all signs of a separate Kurdish nation or culture.
The government's basic claim was that the Kurds didn't exist as a distinct national
or cultural group, that those people in eastern Turkey thought they were Kurds, but they were
really just Turks who spoke a funny dialect.
The government wouldn't even use the word Kurds, referring to the Kurds as mountain
Turks instead.
In fact, to the extent that Ataturk's government uttered the term Kurd at all, it was to deny
its historical or cultural significance and to subject it to ridicule.
The government said that the name Kurd, or Kurt, as it's pronounced in Turkish, was simply
a form of onomatopoeia, approximating the crunching sound your feet make when you walk
around in the snow, Kurt, Kurt, Kurt, Kurt.
And since mountain Turks were always crunching around in the snow, they'd acquire the silly
habit of calling themselves Kurds.
Following Ataturk's death in the late 1930s, the Turkish government became a little less
strident about denying the very existence of Kurdish culture, but it continued to suppress
any manifestation of Kurdish political activism, which, as I said, erupted periodically over
the course of the 20th century.
The most recent phase of Kurdish activism lasted from 1984 to 1999, when a Kurdish organization
known as the PKK, the Kurdish initials for the Kurdistan Workers' Party, led by a left-wing
Kurdish activist named Abdullah Ocalan, mounted an armed insurrection against the Turkish state,
both inside and outside the country.
The PKK differed from most other Kurdish organizations in that it was almost entirely
composed of the Kurdish working class, and directed its hostility not just against the
Turkish government, but against the wealthy and land-owning classes of Kurds.
The PKK charged, with some justification, that wealthy Kurds had been bought off and
co-opted by the Turkish government, and thus stood in the way of a truly nationalist Kurdish
movement.
So the PKK began launching violent attacks against Kurdish landlords as well as against
the Turkish army and police.
As in past cases of Kurdish activism, the PKK insurgency elicited a wave of government
repression against the Kurds.
The Turkish government conducted sweeps of Kurdish villages, engaging in mass arrests
and outright killings of suspected PKK activists and their sympathizers.
Hundreds of Kurds were arbitrarily imprisoned and tortured, hundreds more, hundreds more
ended up in unmarked mass graves.
Prior to the Gulf War of 1991, the Turkish government's harsh response to Kurdish activism
received little attention in the United States, despite the fact that much of this repression
was accomplished with U.S. supplied weaponry.
It is true that for a brief period in the mid-1970s, following Turkey's invasion of
Cyprus in 1974, U.S. military aid to Turkey was suspended, but U.S. aid was restored in
the late 1970s, and military aid was never tied to the Kurdish question.
After the Gulf War, however, the Kurdish issue began receiving much more international attention.
As we saw, there was an outpouring of sympathy for the Iraqi Kurds, and the United States
helped to establish a no-fly zone for their protection in northern Iraq.
These developments were both bad and good for the Turkish government.
