Assad concluded that he had strung out the game for as long as he could, and he agreed
to expel Ojalon from Lebanon, which he did in the fall of 1998.
So Ojalon, deprived of a base, began flying around the world, trying desperately to convince
some country to grant him asylum.
For a while it seemed that Russia, then Italy, then Greece might take him in, but all of
these countries, apparently under diplomatic pressure from the United States, eventually
denied Ojalon asylum.
Ojalon finally ended up in Kenya, where Kenyan security forces arrested him and turned him
over to Turkish authorities.
Ojalon was sent back to Turkey, put on trial, convicted of treason, and given the death
penalty, though his sentence was later commuted to life in prison.
Ojalon's capture both symbolized and consolidated the Turkish government's victory in its 15-year
war against the PKK.
About 37,000 people, most of them Kurds, had died in the struggle.
One indication that the Turkish government believed it had largely put its Kurdish problem
behind it was its subsequent decision to relax some of the restrictions on the use of the
Kurdish language.
In 2002, the Turkish government announced that it was authorizing the state-run television
and radio stations to air limited broadcasting in the Kurdish language, something it had
always forbidden in the past.
In addition to signaling a new confidence about the Kurdish issue, the decision was also
aimed at meeting some of the European Union's requirements for Turkish admission into that
body.
Turkey was extremely eager to be admitted to the EU, but the EU had long insisted that
such membership would be impossible unless Turkey improved its human rights record.
Relaxing the restrictions on Kurdish language was one small step in that direction.
Of course, the political status of the Kurds continued to be a pressing issue for Turkey
when it came to determining the future of Iraq.
Indeed, one of the dilemmas the second Bush administration faced in the early aftermath
of September 11th as it began contemplating war with Iraq was how much support to give
Iraqi Kurds in their struggle for increased political autonomy within Iraq or even national
independence outright.
On the one hand, the administration needed as many indigenous Iraqi allies as it could
find.
On the other hand, the Turks had made it clear that they would not tolerate the creation
of an independent Kurdish state on their southern border since that would almost certainly
reignite the Kurdish issue inside Turkey.
In this connection, the Iraqi city of Kirkuk assumed major importance.
Kirkuk was located just to the south of the northern Nofly zone and thus remained under
Saddam Hussein's control.
It sat adjacent to oil fields that contained 10 billion barrels of proven oil reserves
and was thus highly coveted by the Iraqi Kurds, who controlled only a few minor oil wells
themselves.
If the Kurds could gain control of Kirkuk, they would ensure the economic viability of
their autonomous region, perhaps laying the basis for an independent Kurdish state.
The Turks realized this and were determined to prevent Kirkuk from falling into Kurdish
hands.
And as it prepared for possible war with Iraq, one scenario that the Bush administration
had to worry about was a desperate clash between Turkey and the Kurds over the oil fields
of Kirkuk.
This situation illustrated the larger point that because the Kurdish question was so thoroughly
transnational, changes in the Kurds' status in one Middle Eastern country were bound to
reverberate in other countries in the Middle East.
Whatever the future held for those countries, it was clear that the Kurdish issue would
continue to shape the international politics of the region.
But the Kurdish issue was not the only transnational phenomenon to threaten the stability of Middle
Eastern nations.
So the growing prominence of the Kurdish question in the 1990s coincided with the appearance
on the world scene of another transnational movement, this one far more antagonistic to
the existing order than even the most radical Kurdish organizations ever were.
In our next lecture, we'll look at the spectacular rise of Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network
and at America's initial efforts to counter that phenomenon.
