Lecture 23, The United States and Osama Bin Laden
In this lecture, we are going to look at the spectacular emergence in the 1990s of Osama
Bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network.
In addition to narrating the events of Bin Laden's rise, I'd like to explore some of
the deeper causes of this remarkable development.
How was it that someone like Bin Laden was able to carry his peculiar vision of religion
and politics as far as he did?
What was it about the circumstances of Bin Laden's place and time, the Middle East in
the 1990s that allowed him to acquire the wherewithal to pose such a formidable challenge
to the United States and its allies?
How was he able to recruit scores of young men for suicide missions or to raise millions
of dollars from Arab and Muslim donors?
More concretely, how was he able to turn Afghanistan into a base of operations?
It would be presumptuous, of course, to venture final and total answers to these questions,
but partial and provisional answers can be found if one searches along two broad dimensions,
the political dimension and the logistical dimension.
The political dimension, which stretches back over a century, concerns the development
in the Middle East of a feeling of powerlessness and rage in the face of Western domination,
a feeling that Bin Laden was able to exploit.
The logistical dimension, which goes back just a couple decades, concerns the particular
historical circumstances that allowed Bin Laden to transform Afghanistan into a launching
pad for his escalating attacks.
I don't need to spend too much time on the political dimension.
You already know about the legacy of Western imperialism in the Middle East, a legacy that
lingered long after most countries in the region had achieved formal independence.
You know that much of the resentment generated by that legacy was eventually transferred to
the United States as it emerged from World War II as a superpower in its own right and
began pushing its way around in the Middle East and elsewhere.
The fact that the United States played a crucial role in bringing Israel into being and in
later years provided de facto support for Israel's occupation of Arab lands added yet
another layer of anti-American grievance.
Compounding this sense of resentment against the United States has been a feeling that previous
formulas for resisting foreign domination have failed and that more drastic and thoroughgoing
methods are called for.
In the 1950s and 1960s Middle Easterners placed their hopes in secular nationalists like Gamal
Abdul Nasser.
But by the early 1970s there was a growing perception that secular nationalism had failed
to deliver the goods and that some alternative form of political organization had to be found.
Many Middle Easterners became convinced that their governments had gotten into trouble
because they had abandoned their Islamic heritage and had turned instead to ideologies imported
from the West like liberalism, socialism, relativism and secularism.
Such ideologies the argument went had corroded Middle Eastern societies from within making
them more vulnerable to Western domination.
Consequently there would be in the last two or three decades of the 20th century a dramatic
growth in the size and assertiveness of Islamist groups throughout the Arab and Muslim world.
And by Islamist groups I mean groups committed to organizing the political system according
to Islamic principles.
Now it should be stressed that most Islamists were committed to working non-violently, seeking
supporters through persuasion and example in much the same way that the Christian right
operated in the United States.
But on the fringes there were Islamists willing to use violence to achieve their goals and
due to the deep sense of dissatisfaction that existed in many Middle Eastern societies such
violence was sometimes tolerated or even applauded by people who would never dream of engaging
in it themselves.
So all of these developments, the resentment against the United States, the disillusionment
with secular nationalism and the growing appeal of political Islam created a political
climate generally hospitable to a movement like Bin Laden's.
But there were also some more specific historical circumstances that allowed Bin Laden to succeed
in a logistical sense as well.
And it's to these circumstances that I will be devoting the bulk of this lecture.
