As we saw in a previous lecture, Osama bin Laden made his debut on the world stage during
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s, working loosely in tandem with the
CIA.
At that time, as we saw, the U.S. government was working closely with the Saudi and Pakistani
governments to recruit tens of thousands of young men from across the Muslim world to
come fight with the Afghan Mujahideen.
These recruits became known as the Afghan Arabs, even though many of them were from
non-Arab Muslim countries.
Bin Laden was one of those Afghan Arabs, serving mainly as a fundraiser for the Mujahideen
and as an informal emissary of the Saudi government.
Bin Laden was by no means a creation of the CIA.
Indeed, he seems to have hated the United States from the start, but he did share with
the United States the overall objective of thwarting the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
This objective was achieved in 1989 when Moscow pulled its troops out of the country.
Seeing the withdrawal of Soviets from Afghanistan was an intoxicating experience for Bin Laden
and other Arab Afghans.
Using rudimentary weapons, they had helped defeat a mighty superpower.
It seemed there was no limit to what they could accomplish.
Flushed with victory, Bin Laden began turning his sights on other foes.
In 1989, Bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia and created the Al-Qaeda network.
Al-Qaeda is simply the Arabic word for the base.
Al-Qaeda's initial purpose remains something of a mystery.
It may have been as innocuous as compiling documentation on Muslim recruits who were
missing in action in the Afghan war so that their families could be informed of their status.
Very soon, however, Al-Qaeda began promoting a reactionary brand of political Islam and
working to undermine regimes in the region that seemed to be standing in the way of this
agenda.
By the early 1990s, Bin Laden had concluded that the Saudi government was one of the regimes
that stood in his way.
Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the Saudi government had allowed the United
States to station troops on Saudi soil.
Eventually this deployment was portrayed as a measure to defend Saudi Arabia against
the possible Iraqi attack.
Later it became the force that was used to expel Iraq from Kuwait.
Even after the Gulf War ended, U.S. troops remained stationed on Saudi soil, ostensibly
to protect the kingdom from any further resurgence of Iraqi aggression.
Throughout the Muslim world, Islamic purists condemned the deployment of U.S. troops on
Saudi soil as a violation of Islam.
Because Saudi Arabia contains the two holiest cities in Islam, Mecca and Medina, Islamist
critics charged that it was blasphemous to allow non-Muslim soldiers to set foot in that
land.
A conclusion based on a narrow reading of a statement attributed to the Prophet Muhammad
let there be no two religions in Arabia.
Bin Laden shared this narrow interpretation and in the early 1990s he was one of numerous
Saudi figures who called on the Saudi government to expel the U.S. troops from Saudi soil.
But the Saudi government convinced that it was more important to have the protection
of the U.S. government than to appease the sensibilities of some Islamic purists, refuse
this demand, and the U.S. troops remained stationed in the country.
So Bin Laden turned against the Saudi government, though as he saw it, it was the Saudi government
that had strayed from the principles of true Islam, and he, Bin Laden, who had always remained
true to them.
In 1991, Bin Laden and a couple hundred of his supporters left Saudi Arabia and settled
in Sudan, which had recently come under the control of an Islamist government.
In Sudan, Bin Laden operated a number of legitimate businesses, like banks, farms, and construction
firms, but he also established training camps for his growing band of militant supporters.
The Sudanese government permitted the latter activities both because it shared Bin Laden's
ideology and because the Sudanese economy benefited from his legitimate businesses.
