From the early 1990s on, Bin Laden presided over a loose network of militant groups, all
sharing the general goal of promoting fundamentalist Islam and opposing any manifestations of Western
power and influence in the Islamic world.
In the early 1990s, a series of attacks took place that seemed isolated at the time, but
in retrospect appeared to have been committed by people with links to Bin Laden.
One of those attacks was the successful downing of two U.S. military helicopters in Somalia
in 1993, resulting in the deaths of 18 American soldiers.
It was later established that some of the Somalis who shot down the helicopters had
received training in Bin Laden's camps in Sudan.
Another attack that seemed isolated at the time was the first bombing of the World Trade
Center, also in 1993.
In February of that year, a rider moving van laden with explosives was driven into the
World Trade Center parking garage.
The driver left the van in the garage and the explosives were detonated by timer, killing
six and wounding over a thousand.
Most of the culprits, who turned out to be Arab residents of New Jersey, were quickly
apprehended and jailed.
The mastermind of the first World Trade Center bombing was a Pakistani operative named Ramzi
Yusuf, who had been an associate of Bin Laden during the Afghan War.
After setting the World Trade Center plot in motion, Yusuf had fled the United States,
ending his co-conspirators holding the bag.
For the next two years, Yusuf was on the run, traveling to Thailand, the Philippines, Pakistan.
While in the Philippines, Yusuf was forced to abandon his apartment when an explosives
experiment he was conducting got out of hand, filling the place up with smoke.
Yusuf was in such a hurry to get out that he left behind his laptop computer, which
the local police recovered.
The files on the laptop outlined a plot to blow up 11 American passenger jets and assassinate
Pope John Paul II.
Around the same time, the Filipino police captured and interrogated one of Yusuf's
associates, who revealed that Yusuf was also planning to hijack a plane and crash it into
the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
In 1995, Yusuf was finally apprehended in Pakistan and flown back to the United States
for trial.
After landing in New York, FBI agents took Yusuf in a helicopter to his jail cell in
Manhattan.
As they flew past the World Trade Center, one of the agents pointed out that the towers
were still standing.
They wouldn't be if I had enough money and explosives, Yusuf replied.
Yusuf was convicted of numerous felony charges and is now serving a 240-year prison term.
In the mid-1990s, U.S. forces in the Middle East came under direct attack.
In 1995, a car bomb exploded outside a U.S. military facility in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
killing five Americans and two Indians.
Saudi authorities arrested four Saudi men, all of whom confessed to the bombing, and
one of the four claimed to have been inspired by Osama bin Laden.
U.S. authorities wanted to interrogate the men themselves, but Saudi Arabia executed
them before this could happen, quite possibly to prevent the suspects from disclosing further
information about their ties to prominent Saudis.
In 1996, a far more devastating explosion took place outside the Kobar Towers military
complex in Dahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 19 servicemen and wounding hundreds more.
Bin Laden praised the attack but denied having anything to do with it himself, and indeed
it does appear that the culprits were Saudi Shiites with ties to the Iranian government
rather than people from al-Qaeda.
By this time, the Clinton administration was coming to the conclusion that bin Laden
posed a major threat to its interests in the Middle East, and in 1996, it began pressuring
the Sudanese government to expel bin Laden from the country.
Quite unexpectedly, the Sudanese government, which was growing uneasy over the activities
of its guests, offered to turn bin Laden over to the United States, but the Clinton administration
in what would later be seen as a major blunder, turned the offer down on the grounds that
it didn't yet have sufficient evidence to put bin Laden on trial.
