So, Sudan encouraged Bin Laden to leave the country on his own.
And in May 1996, Bin Laden and his militant supporters returned to Afghanistan, the site
of their intoxicating triumph nearly a decade earlier.
Bin Laden arrived in Afghanistan just as the Taliban were taking over the country.
The Taliban, as we saw, were Afghan refugees who had been trained in religious schools
in Pakistan.
They were then sent back into Afghanistan with the strong backing of the Pakistani government,
which saw them as a useful instrument for extending Pakistani influence into Afghanistan.
The Pakistani-Taliban alliance continued right up until September 11th, and it was only with
great difficulty that the Pakistani government subsequently extricated itself from that alliance.
It should also be said that, at least at first, the Taliban had fairly good relations with
the United States.
The U.S. government initially welcomed the Taliban as a stabilizing influence, and generally
refrained from criticizing their atrocious human rights record, much to the dismay of
human rights activists and feminists.
Fairly quickly, however, the Taliban came under Osama Bin Laden's influence and began
echoing his anti-U.S. views.
No doubt the large sums of money that Bin Laden was able to waive in the Taliban's faces
played some role in their conversion.
In any event, the Taliban did not object when Bin Laden began using their country as a staging
area for increasingly audacious attacks on the United States and its allies.
In the summer of 1996, shortly after he arrived in Afghanistan, Bin Laden issued a call for
Jihad against the United States on the grounds that it was trespassing on the sacred soil
of Islam, a reference to the deployment of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.
Nearly two years later, in early 1998, Bin Laden announced the formation of the World
Islamic Front for Jihad against Jews and Crusaders, a confederation of militant Islamic
groups from across the Muslim world, all of them operating under Bin Laden's loose auspices.
Along with this announcement, Bin Laden issued a lengthy denunciation of the U.S. government,
in which he again accused the United States of trespassing on sacred ground.
But Bin Laden also alluded to the economic sanctions against Iraq and to U.S. support
for Israel, charging that Washington was using those policies to wage war against Islam.
I've discussed the Palestine issue at some length in previous lectures, but let me say
a few words about the economic sanctions against Iraq.
As we saw in the lecture on the Gulf War, the sanctions were first imposed by the United
Nations in 1990 in response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, but they remained in place after
the war, mainly at the behest of the United States and Britain.
The purpose of the sanctions now became to prevent Iraq from importing any materials
that could be used for producing weapons of mass destruction.
Saddam Hussein was indeed showing a keen interest in developing such weapons, partly to secure
his power base inside Iraq, and partly to counter the existing nuclear arsenal of one
of his rivals, Israel, and the potential nuclear arsenal of another rival, Iran.
The economic sanctions impact on Iraq's military programs is debatable, but there is no doubt
that these sanctions contributed to a severe humanitarian crisis for the Iraqi people,
especially in the mid-1990s, especially in the mid-1990s, before the UN modified the
sanctions regime so as to allow Iraq to sell some of its oil and use the revenues for buying
food, medicine, and other humanitarian supplies.
Definitive figures are elusive, but apparently hundreds of thousands of ordinary Iraqis died
as a result of the public health crises associated with sanctions.
The question of who bore responsibility for this humanitarian crisis was bitterly contested.
The U.S. and British governments charged that Saddam Hussein was to blame because he was
hindering the work of UN weapons inspectors and was refusing to distribute the available
resources fairly and efficiently.
By sanctions activists, while not necessarily exempting Saddam from criticism, insisted
that the United States and Britain were primarily to blame because they persisted in a sanctions
regime that targeted the Iraqi people while leaving Saddam unharmed.
