Arab public opinion generally sided with the anti-sanctions activists, seeing Iraq's
humanitarian crisis as being mainly the fault of the United States and Britain.
Now it is certainly true that Arab commentators often gave short shrift to the Iraqi government's
own complicity in the humanitarian crisis, and U.S. officials were right to complain
that they seldom got a fair hearing in the Arab media.
But it also has to be said that American officials sometimes treated the sanctions issue with
astonishing callousness.
In a 1996 interview on the TV program 60 Minutes, Madeline Albright, who was then Clinton's
ambassador to the UN and would soon become his Secretary of State, was asked to comment
on a recent UN report that half a million Iraqi children had died as a result of health
problems related to sanctions.
Was the objective of containing Saddam Hussein really worth the death of so many innocent
children?
She was asked.
We think the price is worth it, was Albright's reply.
So the sanctions issue, like the Palestine issue, was a source of enormous Arab and Muslim
resentment against U.S. policy.
By alluding to both issues in his 1998 call for jihad, bin Laden was clearly trying to
broaden his appeal to attract more secular Arabs and Muslims, people who were unlikely
to be moved by the specter of American infidels occupying the sacred soil of Islam.
To punish the United States for its perceived outrages, bin Laden urged his followers to
fight and kill Americans and their allies, whether civilians or military.
In retrospect, of course, bin Laden's calls for jihad against the United States were a
most chilling development.
And the Clinton administration did take them seriously at the time.
But the American public and news media paid little attention to bin Laden, consumed as
they were by the Monica Lewinsky scandal, which broke in early 1998, just around the
time that bin Laden issued his second call for jihad.
For the next several months, coverage of Monica Gate consumed almost all the available airtime,
and it was difficult to find news of any other national subjects, let alone of foreign affairs.
Indeed, whenever Clinton tried to turn his attention to foreign policy, such as by traveling
abroad or hosting a foreign leader, he was immediately accused of seeking to divert the
public's attention away from his embarrassing predicament.
Some even joked that Clinton might get the country into war solely to take the focus
off of Monica.
The coincidental release of the satirical movie Wag the Dog, in which an imaginary president
deflects attention from a sex scandal by staging a simulated war against Albania, did not,
of course, help Clinton's case.
It was Clinton's further misfortune that his moment of confrontation with bin Laden occurred
right at the peak of the Monica Lewinsky scandal, leading to inevitable speculation that he had
manufactured the crisis for domestic political reasons.
That charge was false, of course.
The bin Laden threat was all too real.
But the hasty and careless manner in which Clinton tried to deal with that threat probably
did have something to do with pressures generated by Monica Gate.
The immediate provocation for Clinton's action was the simultaneous bombing of two U.S. embassies
in East Africa, one in Nairobi, Kenya, and the other in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, on August
7, 1998, eight years to the day after U.S. troops were first stationed in Saudi Arabia.
In each case, an al-Qaeda operative drove a vehicle filled with explosives into the embassy
building.
The Nairobi bombing was especially devastating, killing over 200 people, most of them Kenyans.
Within days of the bombing, Kenyan officials apprehended two of the men involved in the
Nairobi bombing.
They confessed their guilt and revealed that they were working for al-Qaeda.
Very quickly then, the Clinton administration established that bin Laden was behind the
embassy attacks.
On August 20, 1998, just three days after Clinton had been forced to appear on television
and admit his improper relationship with Lewinsky, the president ordered rocket attacks
against three bin Laden training camps in Afghanistan and against a pharmaceutical factory in Khartoum,
Sudan.
That factory, Clinton alleged, had financial ties to bin Laden and was involved in the manufacture
of chemicals needed for chemical weapons.
