Lecture 24, September 11, and its aftermath.
In this, our last lecture, we'll look at the attacks of September 11, 2001, and their
aftermath, and then revisit the main themes of the course with some concluding remarks
about the overall nature of US-Middle East relations.
There's no need for me to recount in any detail the events of September 11.
No one who was even faintly cognizant at the time can ever forget those horrifying images
of the planes slamming into the buildings, the huge plumes of smoke marring the skylines
of New York and Washington D.C., the desperate office workers jumping to their deaths, the
collapse of one tower than the other, shrouding the terrified and stampeding onlookers in
spreading clouds of airborne plaster and debris.
About 3,000 people perished on September 11.
It was the biggest day of carnage to occur on American soil since the Civil War, and
the first time since the War of 1812 that the capital had come under outside attack.
The immediate question on everyone's minds, of course, was who could have staged such
a spectacular and deadly attack, and who would do such a thing?
Just immediately, evidence pointing to Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda network began to accumulate.
The 19 hijackers of the planes were quickly identified, and a number of them turned out
to be figures with known ties to Al Qaeda.
Indeed, some of them were people the FBI was supposed to be monitoring, but had, of course,
failed to keep track of.
Like everyone else that day, President George W. Bush, then only eight months in office,
was staggered by the attacks, and his initial public addresses to the nation were faltering
and unsure, which only compounded the sense of disorientation and dread that had overtaken
the country.
Over the next few days, however, Bush recovered his footing and fashioned a response to the
attacks that had far-reaching implications for U.S. Middle East policy, perhaps even
more far-reaching than Bush himself quite realized at the time.
Indeed, by the evening of September 11th, Bush had made the crucial decision that his
administration would not simply go after the immediate sponsors of the attacks, but would
also call to account those nations that were, by design or neglect, giving safe harbor to
terrorist groups.
This position, which was quickly dubbed the Bush Doctrine, was more fully articulated
in a speech to the Congress that Bush delivered on September 20th, 2001, just nine days after
the attack.
Every nation in every region, Bush said, now has a decision to make.
Either you are with us or you are with the terrorists.
From this day forward, any nation that continues to harbor or support terrorism will be regarded
by the United States as a hostile regime.
The most immediate target of Bush's new doctrine was, of course, the Taliban regime of Afghanistan,
which had allied itself with bin Laden and had allowed its territory to be used as the
headquarters for al-Qaeda.
The Bush administration demanded that the Taliban turn over Osama bin Laden, but the
Taliban refused, insisting that he was their guest and that to turn him over would be a
violation of Islamic tradition.
Washington then enlisted Pakistan, the erstwhile ally of the Taliban, to try to talk some sense
into the Taliban, but the latter dug in their heels and refused to offer up bin Laden.
Though in October 2001, Bush authorized the U.S. military to attack the Taliban and al-Qaeda
in Afghanistan.
The first phase of the operation involved high-altitude airstrikes, which were not terribly effective.
The U.S. military knew very little about Afghanistan and had only the vaguest sense of where the
Taliban and al-Qaeda strongholds were located.
So many of the bombs failed to hit important targets or, worse still, caused civilian casualties.
