But the CIA had a plan for dealing with Afghanistan, which basically involved using bribery to
obtain the necessary intelligence that would enable the U.S. military to target the Taliban
and Al-Qaeda more accurately.
The CIA sent a number of paramilitary forces called Special Forces A teams into northeastern
Afghanistan, which was then under the control of the Northern Alliance, a coalition of anti-Taliban
Afghan forces.
Offering money and arms as inducements, the Special Forces convinced the Northern Alliance
to take them into Taliban-held territory and show them the locations of Taliban and Al-Qaeda
bases.
The Special Forces then relayed this information to the U.S. Air Force, which attacked the
bases using precision-guided weapons.
The marriage of Northern Alliance intelligence and U.S. military technology proved to be
an effective combination, and in November and December 2001, the Taliban and Al-Qaeda
were ousted from their major strongholds in Afghanistan.
A pro-U.S. Afghan government, led by a suave Afghan politician named Hamid Karzai, was established
in Kabul, and the Bush administration claimed a major victory.
There were, however, a number of sour notes in the Afghan affair.
First, despite the reliance on precision targeting, a large number of Afghan civilians
were killed, with estimates ranging from several hundred to a few thousand.
Moreover, one of the Northern Alliance leaders with whom the Special Forces were allied,
a battle-hardened warlord named Abdul Rashid Dostam, was later revealed to have committed
a serious war crime.
After capturing the Afghan city of Mazar-e-Sharif in late 2001, Dostam loaded hundreds of Taliban
and Al-Qaeda prisoners into sealed freight container trucks, leaving them to suffocate
to death.
Because Dostam was operating in such close proximity to the Special Forces, questions
arose as to whether they knew or could have prevented what Dostam was doing.
The Special Forces insisted they had no idea what Dostam was up to, but a cloud of suspicion
remained over the whole incident.
Another way in which the Afghan intervention was less than fully successful was in the
political situation that emerged in Afghanistan following the installation of Karzai.
It turned out that Karzai had limited popularity inside Afghanistan and was unable to venture
outside of Kabul without being accompanied by American bodyguards.
A number of his cabinet members were assassinated and Karzai himself narrowly escaped being
killed.
By any measure, of course, Karzai was a major improvement over the Taliban, but his inability
to command the allegiance of the Afghan people was a source of some embarrassment to the
Bush administration.
An even bigger embarrassment, of course, was the failure to capture Osama bin Laden.
In December 2001, the US military thought it had trapped bin Laden in the eastern Afghan
town of Torobora, but bin Laden apparently managed to sneak over the border into Pakistan.
So the Afghan intervention was a mixed bag for the Bush administration.
The Taliban were removed from power, but this was accomplished at a heavy price in civilian
casualties and bin Laden himself remained at large.
By early 2002, however, the Bush administration was clearly turning a corner, broadening the
scope of its war on terror to take on foes without demonstrable ties to the attacks of
September 11th.
Such a broader approach had been hinted at in the initial articulation of the Bush doctrine,
but the ensuing war in Afghanistan had temporarily obscured these wider implications.
The first sign that Bush would be casting a wider net came in his January 2002 State
of the Union address in which the President declared that America was menaced by an axis
of evil consisting of Iraq, Iran, and North Korea.
Each of these countries, Bush said, was not only repressing its own people, but was threatening
world peace through its relentless efforts to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
