The three states had indeed shown an interest in acquiring such weapons, though North Korea
was considerably more advanced than the other two, being on the verge of achieving a nuclear
weapons capability.
Of more significance than the relative threats posed by these three nations, however, was
the newly assertive posture that Bush was presenting to the world.
As he warned in his State of the Union address,
I will not wait on events while dangers gather.
I will not stand by as peril draws closer and closer.
The United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten
us with the world's most destructive weapons.
In the months to come, the Bush administration would release a series of policy statements
that elaborated on Bush's State of the Union address.
These statements outlined a policy of U.S. preemption and unilateralism regarding certain
kinds of foreign threats.
If nations hostile to the United States seemed poised to develop weapons of mass destruction,
the United States would not hesitate to strike out at them first, and to do so unilaterally,
if need be.
Now in themselves, preemption and unilateralism were not new behaviors for the United States.
Throughout the post-war period, the United States had, on occasion, engaged in both of
these activities.
What was new was the institutionalization of such practices in a formal national security
posture, such that they were no longer seen as exceptional behaviors, but as part of the
regular arsenal of the United States.
Indeed, the posture of prevention and unilateralism became so formalized and prominent that it
too came to be called the Bush Doctrine.
Precisely how Bush would apply his doctrine, or doctrines, is beyond the scope of this
lecture series.
Suffice it to say that within a few months of 9-11, it was clear that the United States
had drastically lowered the threshold for military intervention in the Middle East, and perhaps
in other regions as well, and that an era of frequent military engagements for the purpose
of eliminating threats before they could materialize was on the near horizon.
But this, as I said, is beyond the purview of this course.
So what I would like to do for the remainder of this lecture is return to the four themes
with which I began the series, and suggest how these themes continued to define America's
relations with the Middle East, and would likely do so in the period following 9-11.
The first theme, you will recall, was that of growing American involvement in the Middle
East, itself a consequence of increasing American power on the world stage.
Certainly, the events of 9-11 did nothing to invalidate this theme.
The fact that Al Qaeda chose to target the United States in the first place as part of
its war on Western influence in the Islamic world was a clear indication of American prominence.
The most grievous American offense in the eyes of bin Laden was the stationing of U.S. troops
on the sacred soil of Islam.
Such a deployment would, of course, have been utterly inconceivable in the era of Woodrow
Wilson.
Though inconceivable, in fact, that Wilson's political opponents raised the possibility
of U.S. military involvement in the Arab world as a way of ridiculing his internationalist
vision.
In 1919, you will recall, the U.S. Senate debated the Treaty of Versailles, which, if ratified,
would have taken the United States into the newly formed League of Nations.
One of the most contentious provisions of the League of Nations Charter was Article
10, which obligated all League members to engage in collective self-defense, that is,
to band together to oppose, by military means if necessary, acts of aggression by individual
states.
Under Article 10 critics charged, the United States could well find itself having to come
to the defense of tiny, obscure nations in which it had no conceivable national interest.
The countries of the Arab world were frequently mentioned in this connection.
One senator asked his colleagues, are you willing to draft our boys to die in wars that
concern us not on the burning deserts of Arabia and on the frozen plains of northern Siberia?
Senator warned that American troops might one day march by thousands to drive the invader
back from the Yalu, the Ganges, the Tigris or the Euphrates.
