To Wilson's critics, mere mention of such places was sufficient to demonstrate the utter
absurdity of the obligations contained in Article 10.
By the end of the 20th century, however, the American body politic had taken a rather
different view of the appropriateness of sending U.S. forces to occupy key portions of the
Arab world.
The second theme of the course was Middle Easterners' ongoing quest for political independence
and self-mastery.
Again, the spectacular emergence of Osama bin Laden in the 1990s bears out this theme,
albeit in a somewhat complicated way.
For the rise of bin Laden was, at one and the same time, an extreme manifestation of
Middle Easterners' drive for self-mastery and a conspicuous symbol of their failure
to achieve it.
As I indicated in a couple previous lectures, political Islam had risen from the ashes of
secular Middle Eastern nationalism, promising success where it had failed.
Yet by the late 1990s, political Islam itself was starting to run out of steam, and some
analysts see bin Ladenism as a last desperate effort to keep Islamism alive.
In the immediate aftermath of 9-11, it was too soon to tell how valid this observation
was.
Indeed, a good deal seemed to depend on what sort of policies the United States chose to
follow in the months and years ahead.
For some other analysts, we're warning that a heavy-handed American approach might lend
credence to Islamists' claim regarding the depravity of the West and thus breathe new
life into that movement.
To be sure, my observation about the general failure of Middle Eastern Nationalists to
fulfill their potential does not apply across the board.
Some Middle Eastern groups, the Israelis being the most obvious examples, were highly successful
at achieving self-mastery and establishing vibrant political societies.
But by the end of the 20th century, most other Middle Eastern nationalist movements had proved
to be disappointments, and few of them continued to hold the imagination of their constituencies.
In a less organized fashion, ordinary Middle Easterners continued to resist what they saw
as manifestations of foreign domination.
But there were few parties or institutions, and certainly no governments to speak of,
that could serve as vehicles for the mobilization of such sentiment.
The third theme of the course is the difficulty the United States has experienced in balancing
among diverse and sometimes conflicting interests and objectives in the Middle East.
Such conflicting agendas resurfaced in the aftermath of September 11, and especially
after the Bush administration had defeated the Taliban and had started to pursue the
wider implications of the Bush doctrine.
Following the 2002 State of the Union address, the Bush administration increasingly made
the case that disarming Iraq, and perhaps overthrowing its government as well, could
not be separated from the effort to defeat the Al Qaeda network.
The administration's critics, on the other hand, maintained that the preoccupation with
Iraq was diverting precious energy and resources away from the war against Al Qaeda.
Worse still, the critics said a heavy-handed campaign against Iraq might so alienate Muslim
opinion as to provide Al Qaeda with fresh opportunities for recruiting new members.
The fourth and final theme is the increasing antagonism between Americans and Middle Easterners.
The relevance of this theme to the world of 9-11 requires little elaboration.
As I indicated in the introductory lecture, the attacks of September 11 served as a wake-up
call in that they alerted ordinary Americans to the existence of a shadowy terrorist network
committed to the destruction of the United States and its allies.
Yet the problem went deeper than that.
For in the wake of 9-11, opinion surveys documented a dramatic rise in anti-American sentiment
throughout the Middle East, as well as a stubborn unwillingness on the part of some Arabs and
Muslims to acknowledge Bin Laden's complicity in the attacks of September 11, despite the
mounting evidence for such complicity.
