For their part, Americans had long been primed by images prevalent in popular entertainment
media to expect the worst of Arabs and Muslims, and the attacks of September 11th fit all
too easily into that mental template.
And as President Bush lowered the threshold for military intervention in the Middle East,
he encountered little in the way of popular American opposition.
Indeed, in the wake of 9-11, there was a resurgence of interest in the work of two scholars,
the historian Bernard Lewis and the political scientist Samuel Huntington, both of whom
offered interpretations of U.S.-Middle East relations that stressed deep-seated cultural
conflict between two worldviews that were all but irreconcilable.
For decades, Bernard Lewis had argued that Arab and Muslim resentment against the West
had little to do with concrete political grievances over recent Western policies.
Rather, Lewis insisted such resentment was rooted in a rejection of Western culture itself
and in a feeling of chagrin that Arabs and Muslims experienced over the centuries-long
decline of their once glorious civilization.
The phrase Lewis came up with to describe this phenomenon was the clash of civilizations.
And in the early 1990s, Samuel Huntington borrowed this phrase and used it as the title
of a highly influential article in the journal Foreign Affairs.
Huntington, too, argued that Arab and Muslim anger at the West was rooted in ancient cultural
antipathies, not in modern political disagreements.
In academia, Lewis' and Huntington's interpretations received heavy criticism.
Perhaps the most frequent objection was that both scholars treated the West and Islam as
if they were monolithic, downplaying the considerable diversity within each realm.
In the aftermath of 9-11, however, Lewis and Huntington enjoyed a remarkable popular
revival. Although academics continued to dismiss their work as simplistic, journalists
and politicians found it a convenient guide for making sense of what appeared to be a confusing
and menacing Muslim world.
Bernard Lewis in particular became a favorite of the Bush administration, making frequent visits
to Washington to enlighten the administration on Middle Eastern affairs.
The most appealing of Lewis' insights from the Bush administration's perspective was
the observation that Arabs and Muslims had little use for Western values like freedom,
democracy and respect for human rights, but did have a healthy respect for firmness and strength.
So the best way to win over regional opinion, Lewis advised, was not to try to accommodate
the political demands of Middle Easterners, but to hang tough and to show a willingness
to use force.
Now the problem I have with this sort of thinking, apart from the fact that it provides such
an easy rationalization for avoiding compromise and engaging in force, is that it places far
too much emphasis on cultural differences between Westerners and Middle Easterners.
Of course there are cultural differences, of course there are divergent value systems,
but as I see it, the bitterest conflicts between Americans and Middle Easterners,
the ones that have led to violent conflict, have actually taken place within a shared
moral framework.
Polls recently taken in the Middle East have indeed revealed a high level antagonism
toward the United States, but such antagonism seldom focuses on American values.
To be sure Middle Easterners are somewhat critical of what they see as American's
excessive materialism, their self-absorbed individualism and their lack of concern for
the interests of society at large or even for their extended families, but Middle Easterners
also frequently express admiration for America's economic dynamism, its political openness,
its technological innovation and its educational excellence.
What really angers Middle Easterners is not the values of American society, but the policies
of the US government, which are often seen as violating the very values they profess
to uphold, like human rights, democracy, national self-determination and concern for
the interests of poor and weak peoples.
