In survey after survey, Arabs and Muslims will point to U.S. support for Israel, not
just the support for Israel's existence and security, but the financial underwriting of
its ongoing occupation of Arab lands and the frequent use of the UN Security Council veto
to shield Israel from criticism for that continuing occupation.
They will point to Washington's obsessive concern with Iraq's desire to acquire weapons
of mass destruction and total silence over the fact that Israel already has a nuclear
weapons capability.
And they'll point to the U.S. government's long-standing support for authoritarian regimes
in their region, regimes that have mistreated their own citizens and hoarded their nation's
wealth.
These are the critiques of ordinary Middle Easterners as revealed in recent surveys conducted
by Western polling agencies.
Yet, even if we focus on the views of Islamists in particular, those most likely to think
in terms of a clash of civilizations, we find that their critiques of U.S. policy typically
employ moral categories perfectly intelligible to the Western mind.
Anger over what they see as American military aggression, outrage over the loss of civilian
life, indignation over the defamation of Islam in the United States, and rejection
of the double standard with which the U.S. government reacts to Israeli misbehavior
versus that of other Middle Eastern countries.
I'm not saying that these critiques of U.S. government behavior are necessarily accurate
or fair.
In fact, in many cases they are exaggerated and in some cases untrue.
What I am saying is that these critiques have much more to do with American behavior
than with the values supposedly underlying that behavior.
Even the critiques voiced by Osama bin Laden seem to confirm this point.
To be sure, in his heart of hearts, bin Laden really did seem to believe in the clash of
civilizations.
What most outraged him about Washington's behavior was the stationing of U.S. troops
in Saudi Arabia in 1990, profaning the sacred soil of Islam.
That's what launched him on his anti-American jihad in the first place.
But if we look at the rhetoric that bin Laden employed in the 1990s to gain support within
the wider universe of Arab and Muslim opinion, we find that he relied heavily on standard
political critiques that Middle Easterners of all stripes were lodging against the United
States, that America was supporting Israel's occupation of Arab lands, that it was starving
the Iraqi people via the economic sanctions, and that it was propping up corrupt and authoritarian
regimes throughout the region.
So while bin Laden himself may have had a clash of civilizations agenda, he realized
that the best way to sell that agenda in the Arab and Muslim world was to package it
in more standard political rhetoric.
So the problem I have with Bernard Lewis and Samuel Huntington is that they talk as if
the entire Muslim world thinks like Osama bin Laden, which is demonstrably not the case.
So as we conclude our lecture series, which I imagine has made for some pretty depressing
listening, I'd like to leave you with this one small basis for optimism, that Americans
and Middle Easterners have much more in common than they themselves may realize.
It is true that Americans and Middle Easterners are divided by important cultural differences,
and that some of these conflicts, some of their conflicts stem from this fact.
But the bitterest conflicts over life and death, peace and war, freedom and coercion
occur within a common moral framework.
It is tragic, of course, that Americans and Middle Easterners have applied their shared
values so selectively, and have used them as weapons against one another.
But the shared values endure, and with them a faint hope that these two peoples might
someday achieve a mutually beneficial and respectful political friendship.
I thank you for your attention.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH12.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Thank you very much.
