We didn't have the power of God, so to speak, to need to have the wisdom and love and prudence
of God to be able to guide it. So World War II comes along and all of a sudden we actually can
destroy the whole world in a relatively short interaction. We are not safe stewards for this
much power because the power that we did have, whether it was catapults or whatever, we always
used that power to kill the people. And we used the power to harm the environment. We've been
actually cutting trees down faster than they could reproduce for a very, very long time.
We just could only do it at so much scale. With industrial capacity, we started to be able to
do it at a much larger scale. But you're like, okay, we've used our technological power to
damage nature and kill each other and then create class systems that would suppress each other.
We've used it that way for a long time. We've not been the greatest stewards of power. Now we have
the power to actually mess everything up. How do we make it through that technological adolescence?
When I think of Daniel Schmockdenberger, it reminds me of Professor Xavier hooked up to the
cerebro. I've never met anybody who's able to grapple with all of the complex things that are
happening in the world at the same time. And with that, he paints a very interesting picture
about the place we're in as a global society and the changes that we need to make to make it
through this period. But nonetheless, despite all of the awareness of everything that could go
terribly wrong, he remains optimistic. And in this podcast, we talk about all of the situations
and what the case is and what the real purpose and way in which our optimism can play a role
in bringing about the reality that we all are looking for. Check this podcast out with Daniel
Schmockdenberger. The truth is, is that we're all the master. We're all the healer. We're all the
mystic. Give it up one time for Aubrey Marker. Daniel Schmockdenberger. It's great to have you
back, my brother. Very good to see you, my friend. Yes, indeed. And you were fresh off a very powerful
podcast on the Joe Rogan experience with Tristan Harris. And you guys spent three hours really
covering the basis of some of the challenges we're facing right at this very unique moment
in human history. And I would like for you to take a moment to just summarize in a cursory way
some of the issues that you explored on that. And from there, we're going to go a lot deeper
into some of the solutions and how we can be active participants in creating those solutions
and the necessity to hold this kind of right relationship with optimism through what could
be seen as this Kobayashi Maru unwinnable situation. But of course, as Captain Kirk showed us,
there's a way. There's always a third door. There's always another lane that we can take. And so
I'm excited to explore these issues with you. Yeah, so you said there's always a third door.
Maybe we'll take an exploration of what the two doors in front of us that both seem to suck
currently are as a way of explaining what the one one way of looking at kind of what
an overview might be to then say what is the third door, the third attractor we're looking for.
And we did get to discuss this at a bit of depth with Joe and having some other places. So people
can check that out. But just for a quick summary, for whatever total human history is something
like 300,000 years of Homo sapiens, we never got to a population over half a billion until the
Industrial Revolution. And then we went to we didn't get to a first billion till about 1815.
Um, the before the Industrial Revolution, the number of people we had and the amount of power
that we had in total military power and environmental harm power, like we just couldn't
destroy the world. We just didn't have the capacity to do that. With the Industrial Revolution and
starting to move into massive industrial scale capacities, we went from half a billion people
to you know, around 8 billion people in the what's really functionally the blink of an eye
from evolutionary time scales. And not only do we go from half a billion to a billion week,
the resource per capita being used went up many hundreds of fold, right? We if we look at how
many what are called extra corporeal calories, my life depends on how how much energy beyond the
food that I eat, the average person right now averaging the fact that there's so many people
in poverty are still, I believe the current numbers around 300 x the corporeal calories,
however much I eat, there's about 300 times more energy than that that's involved in making my
life work. And that obviously means for those of us in the affluent West, it's way more than
that to average. So way more people, way more resource consumption per capita with industrial
tech, we're coming up to a time period where the cumulative effect of a few hundred years of that
is hitting planetary boundaries, right? Overfishing of the oceans, excessive pollution in terms of
nitrogen runoff and dead zones. And so we have all these environmental issues, whether we're
talking about total loss of biodiversity, loss of forests, loss of key species, and also running
out of key resources on one side of a linear materials economy where we extract stuff from
nature faster than nature can make it to turn it into trash faster than nature can process it.
We try to do that exponentially because we try to exponentiate our monetary supply because you have
to make interest. The interest means that I need more money next year and the total monetary supply
than there is yet this year. And that's not even including growth of the economy beyond interest,
fractional reserve banking and all that. But that means I need to exponentiate my monetary supply,
which means I have to have an exponential growth of goods and services, which means an exponential
growth of the linear materials economy in relationship to a finite planet that you can't
run exponential growth on forever. So industrial era tech getting bigger and bigger and globalizing
still couldn't extinct us immediately, but the cumulative effects actually break the planet
down. So we're coming up to the place where around 300 years of the kind of cumulative effects are
getting us towards like planetary boundaries and fragility all over the place, then add to that
exponential tech, which is well beyond digital, I mean, well beyond industrial era tech. And now
I guess we'll start with go back to World War II and the development of the bomb.
And that was the first tech, right? Post industrial, the beginning of nuclear
phase. That was the first tech where we actually had the ability to kill everything all at once.
And it's really important to understand that for the whole history of the world and every
philosopher, whoever thought about human power and whatever, we didn't have to destroy the whole
world. We didn't have the power of God, so to speak, to need to have the wisdom and love and
prudence of gods to be able to guide it. So World War II comes along and all of a sudden we actually
can destroy the whole world in a relatively short interaction. You're like, we are not safe stewards
for this much power because the power that we did have, whether it was catapults or whatever,
we always use that power to kill the people. And we use the power to harm the environment. Like
we've been actually cutting trees down faster than they could reproduce for a very, very long time.
We just could only do it at so much scale. With industrial capacity, we started to be able to
do it at a much larger scale. But you're like, okay, we've used our technological power to
damage nature and kill each other and then create class systems that would suppress each other.
We've used it that way for a long time. We've not been the greatest stewards of power. Now we have
the power to actually mess everything up. How do we make it through that technological adolescence?
So you look at the history of Europe in particular, but you can look at the history of the world and
it's defined by the major empires warring with each other. And there's actually this beautiful
animation that shows a time lapse of the rise and fall of empires. It's set to some kind of
classical music. We should put the link in the show notes. I'll send it to you because
it gives a sense of like, it's just a history defined by bloody war. And then the bomb comes
the first time where the major empires can never fight again. And yet the whole thing is defined
by fighting. You're like, how the fuck are we going to do that? So we had to make this entire
world system to ensure that we don't fight, which is the post-World War II system, which was the
Bretton Woods monetary system, plus create the United Nations and all of the international
governmental organizations and mutually assured destruction. It was like a whole world system.
And the key was, okay, the major reason we fight is to compete over scarce resources.
So in order to make sure that everybody can get more, because everybody wants more, but we don't
have to take each other's stuff, which becomes the basis for fighting, we just have to make
exponentially more stuff all the time. So let's make a monetary system that allows us to just
make exponentially more stuff. It's so positive some so abundance oriented that everybody can
keep getting more without having to kill each other. Now, of course, the major nations will
still oppress the minor nations and class systems within the major nations will oppress lower class
within them. But nonetheless, the major empires don't have to kinetically war.
But that world system that was based on globalization and exponential growth,
you just can't keep running that thing forever because eventually you hit planetary boundaries
everywhere and we're there. Also, it said, let's make the world so globally interconnected
that you don't want to go to war with anyone because the computer that you're talking over
is made on six continents, the supply chains. And so whoever you bomb, you end up messing up the
thing that you depend on. So let's make it so interconnected. But then what that also means
is the system becomes so fragile that you get a virus in one part of the world and you start
getting cascading shutdowns of supply chains across the whole world. And so you get to a place where
the fragility means that the inevitable collapses that happen locally can start to have global
effects. So you can't keep doing that thing. You have to create more resilience in the system.
And the other key part of how we made it through the World War II nuclear tech is
mutually assured destruction. If they fire, we fire. And so nobody can use the weapons. But
that only worked when you had two parties that had one catastrophe weapon. Now with drones and
bioweapons and cyber weapons that can do catastrophic level of damage on infrastructure,
you have dozens of catastrophe weapons beyond the bomb. And you don't have two actors that have
them. You have dozens of actors, including non-state actors. So you're like, how do you do
mutually assured destruction when you don't even know what type of weapon you're talking about
or who has it? You don't. So basically, up until World War II, the world did not have to take
responsibility for global destruction power. Humans never had to think that way. At World War II,
we had the things that way. We built an entire world system that bought us like 75 years but
did it at the cost of planetary fragility, supply chain and planetary fragility,
literal biosphere fragility, and driving the tech that moved us from one catastrophe weapon
to dozens of catastrophe weapons. So basically, that phase is over and now we're entering a new
phase. And there is no previous precedent for how to make it through this phase, which is we can't
keep running exponential growth of the materials economy. We can't keep doing the cumulative
industrial thing, let alone the new exponential tech thing, the way we have. And so the two doors,
let me come back, I took a tangent. Exponential tech in particular, it's not just exponential tech
because it's the cumulative effective industrial tech within exponential tech, AI, computation,
et cetera, sitting on top of it. Exponential tech is so much more powerful than all the legacy forms
of tech and all the legacy forms of power that only the groups that are developing and deploying
exponential tech will really define the future because everyone who isn't will just lose.
This is not a it should be that way. This is a real politic assessment of it is that way.
So then we have to say, are the groups that are developing and deploying that power doing it,
like what is the value system they're doing it oriented to? What is the underlying philosophy
or civics? And that doesn't look really good. The exponential tech radically decentralizes power
in some ways and centralizes it in other ways. These are the two bummer doors that we're looking
for a third door on. Decentralizes it means drones are way easier to get access to than nukes. Nukes
are really, really technologically hard to make, like you're enriching uranium is really hard.
And it's pretty easy to control, but weaponizing drones not so hard, meaning tiny little non-state
actors can get them and can do really, really serious damage. Same with cyber weapons, the same
with CRISPR and biotech making like real advanced bio warfare abilities cheap in the next few years.
So on one hand you have, and we already see versions of this, which is little
actors being able to pollute the information ecology with nonsense
and affect the minds of so many people. So you've got like, on one side, the exponential tech that
is supposed to democratize things actually is democratizing catastrophic capacity,
meaning catastrophe weapons for everybody. How the fuck does the world make it through
catastrophe weapons for everybody? So one way that one of the doors that sucks is we just collapse,
like catastrophe and cascading catastrophe, catastrophes of an increasingly fragile world
with increasingly more decentralized tech with increasingly more radicalized people from the
nature of the way the media environment is radicalizing, the world will just kind of break.
That's one path. And there's a million different versions of that, but that's one path.
The other path is to control that and make sure that doesn't happen
requires the only way of trying to control it right now is like the way China's trying to do it,
which is totalized surveillance. Let's make sure that we know nobody's building drones in their
basement or building cyber weapons or building air weapons in their basement. In order to do that,
you got to know what everyone's doing in the fucking basement. And so ubiquitous surveillance
means you don't have to have catastrophe forever or one, but it means you end up getting totalizing
dystopias, exponential tech, AI-empowered dystopias. Those are the two doors we have. So the
exponential tech can decentralize power, it can also centralize power. And it's already doing that
naturally, like when you see there's really one search engine, right? You have one search engine
that's bigger than all the other ones combined, Google. You have one online store that's bigger
than all the other online stores combined, Amazon. You have one social media network, Facebook,
that owns Instagram and what's happened, whatever, that has more attention than everything else.
The network dynamics themselves already create centralization of power. And so you've got
decentralization and centralization, both of which are happening in ways that are not really
guided by any values we would want for the world. And so you either have dystopias or
catastrophes. Those are the two doors. All right, well, how do we have a 21st century that is neither
catastrophic nor dystopic? It means you have to be able to bind all the catastrophes without
some top-down state binding it or some top-down power binding it. So how do you have some form
of power that can check and balance all of this exponential tech power, but that has checks and
balances itself so it isn't dystopic? I would say that's a fair way of defining the third door we
want. How do we prevent all the catastrophes where the mechanisms that prevent them are
themselves not dystopic? So one of the things that I've really identified and felt for a long time
is the development of consciousness and the rewriting of our own understanding of who we are
collectively as one world, one species, one organism called Earth interconnected has not
developed at the rate that our technology has. It just hasn't. And you can look and blame a variety
of different causes for this, potentially the prohibition and the war against psychedelic medicine,
which is a powerful tool to help bring people into states of awareness of the interconnectedness.
I mean, you do enough of that and you realize that you are not so different from that person next to
you or that tree or that animal or that environment. This happens over and over again. It's a reliable
effect of this, but that has been prohibited. You can also go back even deeper to the nature
based wisdom traditions that have been largely suppressed by top down religious organizations
and different other forces, whether it's state or whether it's religion that's actually suppressed
a lot of this wisdom. Look at the burning of the witches, people who carry these wisdom traditions
that have been suppressed. So a lot of these different ways in which we could have been
evolving our consciousness along with our technology haven't happened. And we're making
a rally right now to try and catch up real quick, but some damage has been significantly done.
And it's landed us in this position right now where our consciousness is still in that war
mentality. All right, maybe the proliferation of nuclear weapons has stopped the nation states
from being able to kinetically fight, but we're still in fighting mindset. We haven't changed
that separation mentality that says, I am going to defeat you. We're just using now different
bot farms to destabilize nations and compete in other economic ways. And all of these different
things that are happening now between the nations that are competing and between people that are
competing within political systems, et cetera. So what needs to happen is a very quick catch up
of our consciousness, it seems, which in turn could then provide the avenue for the third door,
which is people creating an emergent understanding of something of a new way of doing things
that's different from the mentality itself that's brought us to this position.
Yeah, so when you talk about a new mentality, a new basis for choice, right, because all the
problems we're talking about are the result of human choices and technology is a massive lever on
human choice. I can attack somebody with my hands, I'm much more effective if I get to extend my hands
with a knife more with a gun and a lot more with a major nation states military, right, or an ICBM,
but it's a technological extension of a particular choice-making type of process.
First, it's important to know that it's not true that technology has values agnostic, it's neither
good nor bad, it's just power and how we wield it is just based on our consciousness. It's
extending our consciousness, but it's influencing it as well. It's a very good point because I've
often gotten stuck in this kind of reductionist argument that technology is agnostic. You don't
like Instagram, just use it in a different way. Use it in a way for, and yes, you can use it for
good, and there are ways to use it better, but it does have a built-in value system, and I think
that's something that the social dilemma and something that you guys covered in a really
powerful way on that podcast was understanding like, oh, okay, these tools aren't neutral,
because you can say that about guns as well, and I think that's actually a fair argument. The guns
don't kill people, it's people pulling the trigger that kill people, but the guns are far more neutral
than the algorithms, which are really designed to actually pull people apart and garner attention
in a really, it's like the guns don't beg people to fire them, it just gives them the opportunity
to fire them, but the social media systems are actually in some ways even more nefarious because
they have a built-in, they have a built-in kind of incentive and a built-in way about them that
is actually more harmful. Well, social media is, of all of the technologies that influence patterns
of human behavior and human psyche, it's the most powerful one we have evolved yet, because that's
it is a tool intentionally designed to do that. The intention of the tool is to take all of the
world's content and curate it uniquely based off of personalized tracking of my behaviors in a way
that optimizes my behaviors for purposes, for engagement and advertisers and like that.
So it's using exponential technology, specifically personalized data harvesting,
decentralized content curation and artificial intelligence to affect certain outcomes of
behavior mod, and it's why it's important to understand these companies are different in kind
than big agriculture or big pharma or even big defense, is that those are not intended to be
multi-billion person AI-empowered personalized behavior modification systems. This is actually
a behavior modification system down to a personalized level that is AI-empowered at scale,
at a scale that dwarfs nation-states. That's different. It's such a different category of tech
that it really needs thought of not just as a corporation in the market sector, in the private
sector, because already it has changed the nature of what the market itself is. To be able to be
effective in the market, you have to be effective in marketing. Now that there are monopolies of
where everyone's attention is, to be effective in marketing means you have to be effective in
marketing on Facebook, which means appealing to its algorithm, which actually means that the Facebook
algorithm has captured the invisible hand of the market and turned it into an algorithm,
which means there is no longer a thing called a market in an Adam Smith sense. There is now a
fully privatized captured set of algorithms that determines what succeeds and what doesn't
succeed very largely. To think of it from the old lens of we believe in capitalism and private
enterprise and blah blah blah, it's just nonsense. But now let's come back to technology's not
values agnostic. Technology extends human choice, which is human choice arising from human motivation,
which is our values and our understanding and our desires and all like that. But it doesn't just
extend the power of it, it also influences it. This is true for every piece of tech, actually.
And cumulative tech. If I had made this shirt by hand, right, depending upon how deep I go,
I raised the sheep and then sheared the sheep and made the wool and knitted the fucking thing,
I would treat the shirt very differently than my ability to press one button on Amazon and get
quite a few of them and to see which ones I like. So built right into the ease with which I get
the thing and can replace it affects the nature of how I engage with it, that affects multiplied
by all human behavior and not just shirts, but all the things I want affects the nature of
waste management and the environment writ large, right? Like my ability to get shit easily means
I'm going to go through a bunch of shit, right? Whereas if it was much harder to get, I just
wouldn't go through the shit in the same way. It means that I'm not even going to think about,
do I really need this shit in the same way that I would if I had to make it. So the nature of
the way that things get made easier affects human values, right? In almost invisible ways.
So we go back to the first really classic example. I mean, we can obviously go to stone tools,
but the plow is my favorite example. Because that's the beginning, it's a good place to take as
the beginning of what we call recorded history and civilization, where we started creating
cities and empires. Once we were able to create a plow, which means we were able to create grain
and store grains, we started having stores of calories rather than just hunter gather, right?
The hunter gather to agrarian transition. But we got something like 300,000 years of homo sapien
history before that to then have maybe only 10,000 after that. That's not enough to have affected
really our genetic makeup or anything. But before that, there's the best evidence indicates that
pretty much everybody around the world was animistic, right? The North America, South America, Asia,
wherever, the spirit of the animals, the spirit of the river, the spirit of the trees, there was
a sense of the spirit of everything, right? So if I'm a hunter and a gatherer, I might kill an animal.
But I'm making this prayer as I kill the animal that says I am killing the buffalo.
And then when I die, my body will go into the ground and create grass that its grandchildren
will eat. And there's this great cycle of life and we're connected and I do a prayer.
So I can believe in the spirit of the buffalo and kill it because I need to eat.
But can I take that buffalo and domesticate it into an ox, castrate it, put things through
its nose to then be able to yoke it and beat it all day long to pull this plow and still believe
in the spirit of the ox or the buffalo? Not really. Not really, right? Like the beginning of that.
It's at least very uncomfortable if you have to do that, right? And that discomfort drives the
separation. Yeah, because either I have to just say it's just a dumb cow and man who is given
dominion over earth. Or I have to say, no, there's a spirit of what it's like to be it and I'm an
evil motherfucker, right, who's just right, right, working this thing all the time. And so,
which is why in the American slavery system, which was so much worse than other forms of slavery
for some important reasons, which was other places didn't have the Declaration of Independence
saying all men are created equal and all deserve the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness. Like feudalism didn't make that claim. There was a very clear class system. The nobility
had a better deal than everybody else. But when you make that, all men are created equal and they
all deserve life, liberty and pursuit of happiness. And then you want to keep slavery, you have to
do some weird mental gymnastics to justify that. And it was at the time stuff like, well, the blacks
are a subspecies more like the animals, right? There was a lot of that kind of nonsense that
happened to justify that immoral kind of behavior. But that was already what we were doing with the
animals when the plow came. So the plow ended animism, right? There's a lot of different scholars
who will kind of debate fine points, but there's a kind of overarching assessment. And so let's say
I have a tribe that says, no, I'm not going to castrate the thing and beat it all the time. I'm
just going to continue to hunt and gather. Well, those people aren't going to populate nearly as
much as the people who get the plow and can create a lot more calories and support a much
larger population and make it through the famines. As a result, the non-animistic ideas will proliferate
and the other ones will die out and then get killed off in the tribal warfare between the ones
that have a much larger population and more resources. So the ideas themselves that caught on
were the ideas that lent themselves to power, not necessarily the ideas that lived in harmony with
nature or were true, good, and beautiful. And similarly, when you're talking about burning
the witches to death, somehow in the name of this Jesus guy who said, let he who has no sins cast
the first stone. And who says, Father, forgive them for they know not what they do while they're
nailing them up. Somehow in his name, we think that burning witches to death makes makes like
weird mental gymnastics to make that shit happen, right? And then the witches are
people who maybe believed in herbs or whatever was, but something that was,
let's say they were matriarchal cultures that were generally more peaceful,
but we offered them the Bible and they either got that or they got the sword.
There was a place where the more violent cultures, when they interacted with the more
peaceful cultures, killed the more peaceful cultures, took their stuff and moved on. So the
thing that you're mentioning about the kind of cultural breakdown is the thing that was selected
for was the thing that was selected for in the process of resource competition and war.
Now, then we get to a place where the wars become big enough that nobody can win them,
but what's been selected for is the ability to win wars, economic wars as well as kinetic wars.
So you're like, okay, what's been selected for for a long time will now self terminate,
which means we have to consciously select something that can make it through rather than
unconsciously just have it selected via domination capacity. And that's the unique turning point
we're at. And it's also very well said. And it's not only what we've been selected and almost
bred through these thousands of years of this mentality. It's also the stories that guide the
culture in which there's always the story of redemptive violence. That's the way that actually
wins. And this was a really potent critique of Avatar that came from Charles Eisenstein when
I was talking to him as I have an avatar pinball machine. I was real fired up about it. I was like,
yeah, fucking avatar, great movie. And he's like, well, there's a huge problem with that.
And the problem is that it's still the same thing. Somehow the, you know, the Navi people got enough
power together that they were actually able to kill and destroy the other conquerors,
which is the same story. It's the same war mentality. It wasn't the new story, like you could
read about in Starhawk's Fifth Sacred Thing, where they actually changed the mentality of
the conquering tribe at that point and rewrote their understanding of how to live in peace
and in a different way. It was still the same old story, but just told in a really attractive way.
And this dances with wolves attractive, you know, kind of format. But it seems like not only do we
have to rewrite our own selection, this natural selection that's occurred to select us for this
environment, but we also have to rewrite the stories that are guiding us so that we can understand,
like, what's the new way of the third door? How does that even look? And we're starting,
one of the ways in which I'm optimistic is we're starting to see some stories turn out like that.
Like there was a Disney movie, Raya and the Last Dragon. And that story actually has this
type of solution where the enemy was not ultimately defeated by a good that eventually got more powerful
even though they were good and smashed them. The enemy was defeated by making the enemy aware
that this lust for power and this need to destroy the other was actually a delusion
and to have them lay down their arms and live in peace. Like that's a different story. And I think
those stories hopefully will start to get told more and more because the futility of this system,
it leads only one direction and it's destruction.
I never heard Charles's critique of Avatar in terms of its narrative.
I had a very similar one when I watched it because the movie was done so well
that it was very easy to just like fall in love with the Omadikaya.
I'm like, fuck, I want to watch it again because I miss them. But I was also equally
bothered instantly by the narrative landscape because even before the point you made is
they were warriors, right? Some of them, the men were warriors. You're like, well, wait,
if they're all peaceful, what the fuck are they warriors for? Like there's a little conflict
and who are they warring before the white folk in the ultimatum or whatever it was came.
Unobtainium.
Unobtainium. But it's been many years since I saw it. But the other thing was that I really,
really disliked was it was very much a classic and then magic happened solution.
They were giving, they were losing and then all the animals just came in and kind of magically
turned the tide as a result of the prayer or whatever they did. I heard from a number of
Native American elders that like, we fucking hated that show because obviously it was kind of glorifying
a version of what the Native American processes and we're like, we prayed around and we got a
damn tree and the animals didn't just start fighting the white men. Like that just didn't happen.
Like that's not the right answer. The right answer is the dudes with the guns are going to beat
the one arrows. We have to do something other than just and then magic happens.
And so one of the other things is like, it was fundamentally a Luddite narrative. It was an
anti-tech narrative. Why guys with tech bad, right? Something that is kind of a high-nature
low-tech good, but there's no way to bridge how the low-tech thing will not lose to the high-tech
thing because the tech equals power, right? And so ultimately, like I feel very convinced
that there are no futures that work, that don't require complete catastrophe first,
that are low-tech, just aren't. Because anyone who goes and that we can be more peaceful through
low-tech permaculture, great, you will not direct the topology of the world as a whole.
The dudes building the AI weapons will and the other forms of like advanced technology. So you've
got to say, all right, we know that there were Buddhist cultures and Jainist cultures and matriarchal
cultures that got slaughtered by warring cultures. We know why Tibet isn't there anymore. We don't
need to try to build something that just definitely loses. But how do you not lose to something that
is putting all of its attention at effective dominance without becoming better than it at that
thing? That's a really tricky question, right? And I actually don't think it was really possible
before the type of tech we have today. I think the type of tech we have actually makes it possible
to create certain kinds of very adaptive and abundance generating power that are not offensively
oriented and can actually facilitate collective intelligence and collective sovereignty and
things like that. That doesn't mean that's how it's currently being developed, but could be
developed that way. Yeah, there's a saying in the permaculture, which is the problem is the solution.
If this exponential tech is the problem, well, then likely it's also the solution as well.
But it's a different application of it, which must come from a different consciousness, which
much has come from a different culture, which must come with different stories. And so these are the
things that must happen that must weave its way through. Like a lot of people want to demonize
McDonald's and say like, oh, McDonald's serving all of this. Well, McDonald's is feeding a lot
of people. So instead of demonizing McDonald's, how about utilizing this network of ability to
distribute food, but with a different consciousness about how they source their animals, where they
source their food, what they're offering on the menu, the education around what is actually nourishing
and what is not nourishing. But it's using the actual infrastructure of the thing itself rather
than saying, let's destroy that. And just, you know, Molotov cocktail all McDonald's. Well,
then people are just going to be fucking hungry. But if we use that infrastructure and the technology
that they've developed, but train it in a different way, that's how you're going to actually affect
change. And it's, in my mind, the same with tech, it has to come from the inside, almost like the
inside out, rather than the outside forces squashing what's already in existence.
Let's give an example of what that could look like for social media. Since that is, as far as tech goes,
both at the very cutting edge, and the thing that is most debasing the social and cultural
systems we've had so far. Let me take a quick detour there to explain, you were one of the most
intelligent, self-aware human beings I've ever had the pleasure of encountering and conversing with.
And you told a story on that podcast about how you intentionally trained the algorithm to show you
police brutality videos for a little while, and then police, you know, like police being heroes
and fighting for the good, and trained yourself in both ways. And even though you knew you were
running the experiment, you were still affected by it. And I think this is important to recognize,
don't get confused that you're going to be somehow so much more powerful than social media,
that you're going to be immune to its natural effects. So if you want to just share that,
so people understand what it's actually doing to the human psyche, and how almost irresistible
it is to fall into these traps. You know, there's actually an example that just came to mind as
you were saying that I think many people have experienced, which is, let's say you're watching
a good nature show, and you're following the deer, then the wolf is a bad guy, and it's really
terrible when the baby deer gets eaten, and everybody's really bummed. But if you're watching
another nature show, and you're following the wolf, and you see the baby wolf grows up, and then
the mom has to feed its babies, and they've already lost four hunts. And the wolves are hungry, and
they're starving, and you see their ribs. Then it captures the deer, and it's like it's a big
celebration, and you're like it's the same fucking thing, depending upon which one we were following.
So it's so interesting to watch how our own emotions can feel so differently about that
scene, just even based on the context, right? And if I take any war or any cultural conflict,
and I look at it from the interior propaganda of one side of it, I'll start empathizing with it.
There was a project that was done many years ago on Second Life, where it was done with women who
were on either side of the Israel-Palestine border, who had very strong views on it. So like Zionists
and pro-Palestinian that were kind of on the Caliphate side. But for a week, it was something
like this. For a week, they took on an avatar in a made environment of the other side to see what
it would be like if I went from being an Israeli woman on this side to being a Palestinian person
with these experiences on the other side. And even though the tech was pretty low, it was enough
that it changed their views within a week of having that vicarious experience in the VR
environment. This is an example of all the really terrible things the metaverse will be.
There are some good things that the same tech could do, and the ability to take on different
avatars and have different vicarious experiences, one of the pretty awesome ones,
if done consciously, right? If done as a empathy training in a perspective-seeking process.
And little threads of this are starting to weave its way into the stories. Like imagine
the old Star Wars. Stormtroopers were absolutely dehumanized. You just blast as many of those
white fuckers as you can, and you blast them, and you keep blasting them. And as many as you
blast, the better off you are. And then in the recent retelling of Star Wars, there was one hero
that eventually took off his white Stormtrooper mask and was like, this is fucked up. I don't
want to do this. I was pressured into this situation in the first place, and I had no
interest in this. I'm going to join the other side. Now, of course, there's still the issues in
Star Wars with redemptive violence and the good versus evil and them never actually coming to
any kind of union and any kind of agreement of balance and respect for each other. But nonetheless,
it was starting to show that these are not just all dehumanized evil. There's a person underneath
that white mask or that black mask, and they're a real person. And that person has a real life
and real emotion. And it was a rehumanization, at least in partial, for this idea that as I think
helping support the new narrative that I think is really important for this third door.
Okay, so I'll finish the example you were bringing up about social media, because it's so important
for everybody. But let's come back to this redemptive violence thing, because we need to address it.
With regard to social media, we evolved in an environment where we could trust our senses to
give us a good sense of the world very differently than we can through telecommunicated media.
Because if I am just looking around the area that I'm in, what I see is pretty actually
reflective of the world that I happen to be in, at least in the bandwidth of light that I can see
in whatever that's relevant for my survival and evolutionary purposes. And it happens to be that
everyone else is going to see about the same thing, right? It's not going to be that I'm seeing bears
and they're not seeing bears. And so there's a shared basis of sense making, which is we have
shared sensing. So then there gets to be a shared basis of choice making, we can talk through and
seeing pretty much the same shit. And if someone says, no, really, this thing is over there, we can
just go look and check it out, right? So we evolved to believe our senses were giving us a good picture
of the world. But it was a tiny little world, right? It was this very tiny geographic area,
very tiny number of people that we were able to directly sense. So then we start getting
telecommunications and I can see the news and I'm seeing stuff happening in all parts of the world.
And I've never been to those parts. And I don't have a sense of what are all the other ways they
could have filmed and viewed that and all the other perspectives and what's happening about it.
And then there's way more total information than I can process. Then let's say I am watching
police brutality videos and I'm on a YouTube channel that just curates police brutality videos
and I watch a hundred of them. By the time I'm finished watching a hundred of them in a row or
even 10 in a row, I haven't also watched a million interactions of police not being violent, right?
So what I'm getting is a curation of a particular kind of thing where my sensing of the world
is curated in a very specific way that is not statistically representative of the whole world.
As a result, my blood is boiling and police are totally the enemy, right? And I have the sense,
look, it's just fucking universal, too ubiquitous. This is the whole thing that happens. And I read
the comments and everyone else thinks similarly because they're watching the same thing. So I
feel like everybody knows, right? But then if I'm watching another one that's curated for people
attacking police and the danger police are in and the heroism that they go through, I can have
this completely opposite sense that is also not statistically representative. So for me to be able
to look at the statistics, I got to say, what are all of the police non-police interactions that
happen? What percentage of them are heroic? What percentage are violent? Which percent
are very low-grade violent, like just slightly asshole-ish and abusive or kind of low-grade
heroic of them going above and beyond versus mostly just boring, right? Interactions. And can I
statistically average from all that anything that's insightful? But that's not what I get when
I'm watching social media. I get an emotional flood of I'm having a direct sensory experience of the
world, but it is cherry-picked to be non-statistically representative of the world. No one emotionally
is immune to that outside of weird neurological disorders, like weird kinds of emotional
in-processing, lack of the process disorders. So what that means is if you're receiving a curated
view of the world, which you are, because there are no views of the world that are coming that
aren't curated by somebody's agenda, then you're going to be having a sense that you understand
the world even though what you're getting is manipulated and not statistically representative
and you'll be having an emotional reaction that will both make you more certain than you should be,
more outraged than you should be. And we'll just start with those, both more certain and more
outraged and probably more righteous or sanctimonious. And yet there will be people just like the deer
video from the deer side or the wolf side, right? The hunt video. There will be people
whose view of the same issues is curated on the exact opposite side. Let's say we call it social
justice and CRT or vaccines or whatever it is, who have just as much certainty, sanctimony and
outrage in the exact opposite direction. And everybody's wrong. Like there's little partial
truths, but everybody is getting a view that has been curated more than is representative and is
under nuanced. So yeah, it's super important to understand if you think you're immune to it,
you are not, right? Like there are a number of us who have intentionally curated those
experiments. And even while we know we're doing it to ourselves, we're being emotionally affected
by it. So we're like, oh, fuck, there's a kind of humility I have to have because I am not immune
to this. Right. There seems like there's a way in which that can be actually used to our advantage
ultimately, you know, because what I sense is, is I sense that pressure creates adaptation,
you know, that's, that's always the way it happens. You put pressure on one particular
thing, adaptation arises. I've seen in my own, you know, in my own social media feed, which is
going through the same algorithms and which is used to hijacking extreme polarizing opinions,
people are so used to that now, they've pressed that button so many times that when I come with a,
what, you know, I've created the idea, the concept United polarity, which is built upon
shared reverence and an understanding of both sides. When I make those posts, they outperform
all other posts that I do by like a seven X, you know, seven X multiple. And I think the reason
is, is that people are now the pressure that we've felt from this polarization is actually
creating the opportunity for this middle path, this third door to actually flourish. It's like
this, it's gone to such an extreme that we're not quite there yet. And I think, unfortunately,
we may have to get even a little more extreme for actually it to take hold even more. But the
pressure itself is creating this other desire, this deep craving for a balanced and nuanced
conversation. Now, of course, there's selection bias, people who follow me, people who follow my
podcast, more likely to engage with that, I understand. But nonetheless, just in my own
audience, like those are the type of posts and discussions that people are really enjoying
the most. And I think that's, and when that happens, the algorithms will start feeding those,
you know, more often, because if we understand that these algorithms are not actually trying to
destroy the world, they're actually just trying to maximize profit and attention. So if profit and
attention are actually going to a more nuanced perspective, well, they will guide and deliver
that more nuanced perspective, that more shared reverence understanding. And so,
actually, the same mechanism could be used to create this other, you know, revolution of consciousness.
Okay, so the phenomena you're describing is that when there is a race to the bottom at a
certain point, it often creates the basis for a new race to the top. And that's what creates
boom and bust cycles. And this is kind of a well known market idea. So I've got a bunch of whatever
it is, fishermen that are all fishing in the same lake, somebody figures out that there's a way of
doing the fishing that is a little bit more polluting or a little bit more exploitative or
whatever, but more profitable, they do it than everybody else races to do the same thing more.
Eventually, the lake is so polluted and fucked up because of that race to the bottom,
that someone's starting to say, we don't do that thing, and we do this clean thing,
they can charge more for it because there's now a market basis for the organic or the free
trade or the whatever, or there's now a market for water purification devices or something like
that, right? So now you have a new niche because the badness of the race to the bottom created
a new desire. Unfortunately, though, it's all still just based on how I can get ahead market
dynamics and they will keep being both, right? So then I start having some little bit of race
to the top and there still keeps being a good niche for race to the bottom. We have to close
the race to the bottom niches. So it's like, only once fast food had kind of gotten as much
proliferation, fast food and junk food as it did, that you started getting ubiquitous obesity,
did you start getting the diet industry emerging so much? But then you have big consumer goods
companies that are selling diet products and fast food products in the same investment portfolio,
right? And it's like, great, are you feasting? Are you fasting? We'll sell both sides of that thing.
And so, but if you have boom and bust cycles, right, you have race to the top and race to the
bottom, but with exponentially growing tech in an increasingly fragile world, the busts start to
become things that you can't make it through, right? There's much harm from them. And so we
have to actually go a step better than that. Because yes, some people will be really excited
to get a more nuanced view that is not totally polarizing and weaponized. But that doesn't mean
that there still won't be susceptibilities to push on particular views that get a lot of traction.
And, you know, this is why like the Occupy movement, you started to get like the Tea Party
and the Green Party on the same side about something. We are the 99% and it was like
class issues are deeper than our other issues. It's like, whoa, that's a big fucking thing.
And then the news cycle started to run stuff like, I remember correctly, stuff about abortion rights
and gun control and gay marriage and boom, they just separated very quickly because you could find
the cleaving lines and push on them. Now, what Facebook is, is it a unbelievably powerful AI
that finds all the cleaving lines and up regulates both sides of them, right? Because it's optimizing
for engagement and you end up getting the most engagement where people feel the most passion.
They feel the most passion or they feel the most threat. And it was classic enemy hypothesis.
Now this comes back to the redemptive violence because a lot of those comments are some sublimated
form of violence, right? And so then you, when you were getting to the culture topic,
what you were getting to is how do we evolve what people want? How do we evolve their basis
for choice internally? Because the catastrophe side and the dystopia side, the catastrophe side is
if people have access to increasing catastrophic power and they are psychologically oriented
that they would use that, then the people can't self-govern, right? And they have to be governed
by something. It's too dangerous to let them self-govern. You can't just do some fully libertarian
whatever they'll figure it all out if the harm is not just that they kill somebody in the street,
but that they release a bio weapon. So you're like, okay, no, when people have that much catastrophic
capability, the libertarian ideas just become nonsense. So then if the answer is they have
to be governed, well, who could have the power to govern all of that? And how would we possibly
trust that thing? Now that thing becomes dystopic. Okay, fuck, we have to go back to how do we evolve
to have something that is more libertarian work? And I'm not saying we go full libertarian,
but to even have something where the people engage in institutions that have the ability, right?
So there's both bottom up libertarian type checks and institutional checks, but the institutions
derive their power from the consent of the governed and a governance of formed by the people,
the people have to all care about each other's cares and be able to really sense make all of
the stuff well. Otherwise, there's no capacity, no basis for it. The whole idea in a democracy was
that emerged like these modern democracies emerging out of the Enlightenment was the idea
that there was a patriotism as a binding where I wasn't going to make my fellow countrymen the
biggest enemy, like just not realize that compromise is better than war. And that we're only going to
do that if I have enough respect for my fellow countrymen that I will really listen to their
ideas because I don't want to come up with something they hate so much they have to war with me.
And so how do we respect each other enough to listen well enough to come up with strategies
that can work for everybody, right? I think the, but I believe that in this, the same dynamic,
I understand the cyclical nature of the race to the bottom creating the race to the top,
but if the race to the top is the end game move, which is, which is the anti fragility
where you don't have cleaving lines anymore because you don't see yourself as separate.
And that's the fundamental race to the top is back to unicity, back to union. So you're actually
becoming anti fragile in that same, in that same capacity. And in that top, well, not only reach a
top, but potentially theoretically could, could reach the top and stick. Because if it, if it's
designed in the right way, you know, the pressure that's pulling us apart, then creates the desire
for this other thing. But if it's steered in the right direction, and we've talked about how all
of the great religions reducing them to their mystical roots, not reducing them, but kind of
filtering away all of the different power grabs that have happened over all of these years and
understanding that everybody's pointing to the similar thing. If we actually get back to that
understanding, that is actually almost an invincible understanding. It's like, it's very, if you really
get that, you're not going to be susceptible. You may still be to some small and some small capacity,
but it feels like that's the end game move that actually creates a race to the top of consciousness
from which there is no retracement. You know, there is no race back to the bottom because you
can't unsee and unfeel what you've already come to know. And everything relies on that old structure
that's pulling you apart. Okay, so let's let's explore this together. So when you say if
the race to the top gets to be towards some kind of
culture that has the ability to be a wise planetary culture. And because it's planetary,
you don't have to keep having the selection for war on different sides, right? It can truly be
not based on unifying against an enemy, where you still have all those multipolar trap things.
Okay, well, you mentioned kind of unicity and oneness. We know this is part of it, but we also
know this is not the whole thing. So like, it's actually worth, we're not going to get into what
is the full memetic payload that is necessary and sufficient for an enlightened culture, but we'll
start because you've had experiences in nature and in meditation and on psychedelics of some
profound sense of interconnectivity with everything, right? The love thy neighbor as
thyself wasn't love your neighbor as much as yourself, but as an expression of consciousness.
That there is some sameness of consciousness in the eyes you're looking at, right? At the same time,
you come out of those peak experiences that you can't stay in and you don't want to share your
bed with every single human and all the homeless people in Austin. And you don't want to share
your clothes and all your shit with them, right? And so there, and there is a basis at which if
they were trying to really kind of aggressively push that you did share all your shit, you'd
knock the person out and be like, no. Okay, wait, I don't believe in oneness perfectly.
I don't experience it. I experience being an individual who wants some shit individually
and has a differential orientation to my own experience relative to the experience of others.
Now, how do I hold those together? Because if I try to pretend that there is no real
deep basis of the individuality, it'll just become a pathological shadow. We'll all bullshit about
oneness and yet still want our partner to be sexual just with us and not with anyone else and
want some of our stuff to ourselves and we'll share the stuff we want to share, but we don't
want to share everything. So we have to be able to say what is the right relationship to the
individuality as well as the oneness to the difference as well as the sameness, right?
That has to be part of that memetic package. Otherwise, it's just the failed case of it.
Right. And the metaphor I use for that for holding those boundaries is the rose.
Like the rose, which gives its scents and its flower and its beauty to the world,
also has thorns. And the thorns don't go out seeking other people to attack and whip and
punish and whatever, but it holds its boundary. And because the boundary is necessary so that
it doesn't get trampled so that the flower, its love, its consciousness doesn't get trampled,
the bush doesn't die because something just comes and mows right through it. I mean,
obviously machines can and whatever, but the metaphor is that it carries the thorns to protect
itself, but also offers its love universally, which is through its scent. And so I think
these kinds of metaphors and these ideas need to be held because we are a multi-dimensional
being. We are both individual and same. And both are true and it's a paradox,
but that's the paradox of being multi-dimensional as we are, going all the way back to source
and oneness and all the way as far as we are now in separation, both being very real.
And I think so that has to become a part of this story as you correctly pointed out,
like we have to tell a more nuanced story than this, oh, we're all one. Well, that's, of course,
not true. It's only part of the story, but that part of the story is the neglected part of the
story, which needs to be brought back into balance with the individualism, which we got that shit
down. We understand that. We got a pretty good idea of our individualism, but it's our interconnectedness
and shared reverence and shared commonality and unicity that we don't get. And there will be
some, perhaps, that'll go full Jesus and be able to go all the way into that dimensional reality
where they're just seeing the unicity. And it is very important to not pretend to be Jesus.
It's great to be Jesus if you're Jesus, but don't pretend to be Jesus because then you're just,
your spiritual bypass and you're actually bullshitting yourself. And it's not actually real.
And again, you're living out your own shadow. So it is definitely a more nuanced story than
that. But I think I point to the one side because that one side is just grossly neglected and
underrepresented compared to the individualism story.
Okay, this is a really fun and fertile place. So when you say if one's experience authentically is
Jesus-like, cool, so if you notice most of the monastic traditions of the world had vows of
poverty and chastity. And there was a reason they had vows of poverty and chastity. As we just
said, the things you have a hard time sharing is your physical stuff, right? And because evolution
selected for survival and mating. And so there's a very strong desire to get stuff that enables
survival and to get stuff that enables mate selection. And interestingly in humans,
having more stuff than the other guy is there's no upper bound to how much that stays relevant
to mate selection, right? My 250 foot super yacht no longer seems as good when the 300 foot super
yacht pulls in. And so there is no upper bound on the amount of resource, even though there is for
survival. So both the survival impetus and the and the mate signaling impetus create a competitive
basis that drives this thing that we're talking about. Right, right, right. Violence happens.
So you're not going to own anything, you'll just live in the monastery and you're not going to mate
and you're not going to have kids that have you more focused on your own progeny than focused on
the good of everyone. That was the idea in so many of the monastic traditions. And usually even
further, you're going to shave your head, right? And either like the Buddha shave it fully or
like the fryer shave just the top so it looks maximally goofy as an ego game. So that you are
maximally not connected to the individual, either your own genetic progeny, your aesthetics,
or anything else, your your stuff. Well, we see that that didn't even work in monasticism all that
well. Right. And definitely not outside of it. And so okay, so it's important to recognize that
these beings genetically did evolve where mate signaling and survival were very real impetus
that are coded into the structure of our neurology and endocrinology. So we have to deal with those
impulses, right? We have to have an enlightened way, a more enlightened way of dealing with them.
And they're not one this oriented because I can survive and you die
if there's not enough resource. And I can mate and you not mate, right? Like really physically,
there is a differential basis there. And yet when I multiply that not just by we're going to fight
with our fists over who gets to get the food or get the mating opportunity, but we're going to
fight within weapons and then up to nukes, that same impulse multiplied by technology destroys
everything. There's a lot of people get stuck on this like, wait, what is the fucking cause of all
the problems in the world? It's a capitalism. But the USSR seem to have a lot of problems. And that
wasn't capitalism. It's something like competition. But wait, competition seems to actually drive
evolution in nature. Why is competition good for nature and not for us? But in sports, it seems
like it's kind of good in terms of developing certain things. Unbounded competition, competition
multiplied by tech is different than competition not multiplied by tech, different in kind.
In the evolutionary process where the lions are fighting for alpha lion mating status or whatever
it is to select for the genes that are best for lions as a whole, there is a cemetery between
all the lions where the difference is tiny. And that's what's being selected for. And not just
lion to lion, but also lion to deer that they're chasing, the deer gets away more often than the
lion catches it. So there is a cemetery and the power in all of those types of dynamics,
which is why we have weight classes. You and I talked about this before. The idea that like,
okay, we're going to show up to the boxing ring, but you show up as you and I show up with an
Apache helicopter. That's not an interesting competition to see who has better skills, right?
The Romans might have been interested in it, but yeah.
Not from the point of view of competition and selection, just from the point of view of enjoying
cruelty and spectacle. So the thing with technology is that we can have our competition
drives arms races, right? So if we want to compete, but we go from just having a little bit more stuff
to needing larger superyocks, and there's no upper boundary on that mate signaling kind of thing.
And then also not just us, but nation states, which are these weird fictions or major corporations,
and they have to keep evolving the tooling to compete. And they're competing on a single metric,
but they're externalizing harm to other metrics. If you get unbounded competition driving arms races,
competing for narrow metrics, externalizing harm for others, that system self-terminates on a finite
planet. And yet the goal to do that thing is coded in us. And we have to deal with that.
This is really, this is really shaking my, this is really important because I could,
I could suppose that if I could transfer my understanding of the world to everybody at once,
and not saying that this is moral or desirable or any of those sorts of things, but I could
hypothesize prior to this discussion, like people would be a lot cooler to each other.
And, and I believe that's to be fundamentally true. However, if everybody was an Aubrey,
you know, I understand my own sexual desire and my desire to win. I'm a, I'm a competitive person.
I enjoy the finite games and I enjoy, but I also have a deep understanding of the infinite game,
but I'm still compelled within the finite game because of my deep, deep lure and draw to sexual
experience. You know, I mean, I am, I'm very satisfied with my beautiful Wi-Fi Lana, which
I'm glad you got a chance to meet. And I'm in a great spot there, but all of the other
Aubreys would be looking at, you know, the different Aubreys and being like,
how do I get what that fucking Aubrey has? You know, and so it wouldn't necessarily,
wouldn't necessarily ultimately solve the problem of a finite world with the infinite
opportunity to accumulate and compete. So now let's say, now let's say that this other asshole,
Aubrey, he's an asshole just because he got some head injury, right? Stuff happens,
even if you try and get a culture well. He wants to do whatever he can, underhandedly,
to take FiLana, right? And so now you got to actually try to protect. Now you,
now you create a security service, but he also is doing well. He's got a lot of money. So he's
creating a more advanced attack service. Now you have the beginning of five stumps that have to
put more and more of their resources into the military process over the scarce resource, right?
And I would go to the fucking bitter end. I would go to the, if it came to protecting my
Vilana, I would go, I would go to the bitter end. I would get all the cans of proverbial spinach
to make sure I was fucking Popeye and that Bruno did not succeed in raping my olive oil.
And if every step that you make, he's making a comparable step, you're going to try to innovate
how to do fundamentally better types of steps, right? You're going to try to innovate. Okay,
well, my security forces in symmetry with his are problematic. I want to go asymmetric in the
competition. So let me see if I can get a helicopter in here in an Air Force to deal with his
workforce. Let me see if I can get some fucking surveillance on his team or whatever it is, right?
And so you can see how an arms race happens. And you start to say, well, why just wait for the
fucker to attack me? If I know he's going to, I should, the best defense is an offense. I should
just preemptively defend myself, right? Which is an offense. But then he knows that and that. So
then you see how the world gets to where it is. And now what we're getting to with the finite
number of Vailanas and an infinite number of Aubreys, we're in a very dangerous world.
That's a fundamental truth. And let's say that there's some really beautiful spot on the Austin
Lake that you want to live on. And it's right on the cliff. And there's just one of them. There's
not lots of other cliff sites quite like that one. Somebody else wants the same place, right?
And you kind of want for other people so long as they don't want the exact thing that you have,
because you don't want to share that thing. And there's a finite number of them. And so
all of a sudden our oneness-oriented empathy decreases radically and our individual-oriented
desire to win increases radically. And so then it becomes that it's not just Aubrey with this, but
Aubrey creates a relationship with a bunch of other people around because this is happening
now at a tribal level. It's not just you having that point and you having that woman, but it's you
and everybody you know having the chance to have any women and not all be slaughtered by these other
fuckers coming in where you and all your friends all decide to unify to create a military to deal
with that. And then some of the other tribes actually unify to be larger. Now you got to
unify with some other tribes and start doing politics to be larger. And you end up getting,
you go from tribes to chiefdoms to fiefdoms and kingdoms to nation-states to global economic
trading blocks to, you know, you get this fucking thing, right? And yeah, this thing self-terminates,
right? Because the thing that wins at the tribal warfare scale kills everything at the global scale.
And so we're at a place where what has been selected for,
selects itself out of existence soon. And our ability to understand that and consciously
select something different is kind of the only path, but it's not a really simple one.
Now, this is where we actually have to get not just the oneness, but the individuality and what
is the right ethics around that because we haven't got individuality well. Because our models of it
are almost exclusively competitive more than synergistic. And so my where I'm the same as others
gives me some basis for empathy, but where we have differences, how does that, how do we relate to
that in the more healthy and enlightened ways has to be just as important a part of the new
religion or new philosophy or ethos. A friend who I believe you just met, Mark Gaffney,
he has this whole rabbinic thing on the unique self, which is a big part of the kind of
Kabbalistic tradition is. So it's not just Buddhist oneness. And we can all kind of meditate into
that oneness because the moment you leave the meditation, that's not where you're at anymore.
Right. And that's not the whole story. That's a part of the story, but there's also that oneness
embodied and incarnated in unique ways. And so then is there a way to be able to hold the difference
where there is a uniqueness to you and what you can experience and what you can offer,
but where that uniqueness, if you and me are both actually unique, we can't compete on the same metrics.
Right. If I say that we can compete, like we are a function of our
money and the size of our cocks and our whatever it is for our main function thing,
and there's like four things we can compete on those and who's a better package. That's
actually not uniqueness. That's sameness. That's the sameness of a few metrics of selection.
At the heart of when you fall in love with someone deeply is something ineffable. It's
unspeakable. That is beyond a package, right? There is a taste or a quality of the uniqueness
of the thing that you have a relationship with. And so if there is something where the difference
of everyone actually has a uniqueness that has the interconnectedness, the quality of oneness,
but with a totally unique form to it, then those unique forms can't fundamentally compete.
There's no metric to measure or assess it on. And then there is, you can offer something to the
world that is different than what I can offer to the world, but where the world is better at my
own assessment if you offer it fully. It seems like still though, there's the issue of finite
resources, but I think the solution that I can see with that is we often think that we want
things, but we don't really want the things. We want the sensations that the things give us,
right? Like that's really what we're chasing. We don't want necessarily the car or the bank
account or the place in the lake. We want the feeling of what that brings to us, the feeling of
awe, perhaps when we look out at the view, the feeling of power and self-worth and validation
from the things that we accomplish. We want the feeling of love that our sweetheart gives us.
We really want feelings. So it seems like in order to get beyond the necessity to compete
over things is to break down the myth that it's actually the things we want and say, no, no, no.
You don't actually want the things. You want the sensations that the things give you, but there's
a way to get those sensations without the things. And that's like a deep, deep spiritual kind of
practice that would be required to train everybody how to get sensations without the things that
are giving them the kind of quick hit of the sensation that they're chasing.
Well, here's a real easy answer. It's already underway. Just hook everybody up with their
Oculus to the Metaverse. And in the Metaverse with Oculus, an Oculus will progressively turn
into a matrix boot. I can give anybody any feelings that they want, and there's no scarcity of
resources because it's all digitally created simulation. Well, that's on the hypothesis that
there are some feelings that are reducible and replicable by a machine universe, which I think
for those of us who've experienced the numinists like you and I, we believe fundamentally as a
tenant of faith that there is something that's irreducible. I'm wearing this little toad
necklace around my neck. I fucking guarantee you that, well, I don't guarantee you, I don't know
anything for that shirt, that certain, but I'm fairly confident that you're not going to get
a Bufo journey in the Metaverse. You're not going to be able to duplicate this feeling,
which is pure love, God, there's no other real way that I have to describe it. So I think there
may be some sensations that we could get by jacking ourselves into it, but some that may not
be even possible by, you know, and not replicable in the machine world and perhaps love itself,
even in the more mundane sense rather than the psychedelic, you know, rocket ship sense,
is not reducible to that, nor is the feeling of awe or nor is the feeling of that deep kind of
enlivening piece that you get in the meditative state. Maybe if you can alter your brainwave
chemistry and some things can happen, it's possible, but I think I feel like there's
things that are irreducible. And I don't know, that's just like a feeling that I have, but maybe
I'm underestimating what technology could potentially offer. So let's say that in addition to the
Oculus, you know, visual auditory haptic input. And of course, as soon as I go three, I start
three different axes of input, visual auditory haptic, I start getting the ability to simulate
immersive experience in the brain pretty deeply. But let's say we start to figure out how to add
chemistry to it. We've already know there are a lot of people and the thing with the heroin
addiction is someone is going for a particular kind of sensation, independent, decoupled from what
evolutionarily would have given them that sensation, right? Like why do I even have
receptor sites for heroin? Well, because natural opiates do emerge in certain kinds of processes,
what I'm in the same way that like if I'm doing the math and I'm getting the dopamine or the cocaine,
dopamine is naturally produced. But it's naturally produced in association with things that had
evolutionary relevance, right? But if I can couple them and just get the sensation about the other
thing, that is almost always destructive because the thing that wasn't the sensation was actually
part of what was fundamentally meaningful, right? The sensation was just a part of it, which is why
in the simulation story, if I could simulate it better, I can use transcranial magnetic stimulation
on the right hemisphere to induce God experiences and whatever. And I know that I'm in that simulation.
Do I want to blue pill and just jack back in and have the thing? Or do I want a red pill because
there's some connection to reality that is meaningful for me beyond just the sensation of it?
It's a very important question. It is an important question. It seems like that actually
the synergy, it seems like while people are pushing against this technology, it could actually
be a useful part of the solution where people all of a sudden, when they realize that they can get
a lot of the sensations they are craving in a unlimited virtual universe where that sensation
is universally, ubiquitously available to them, then it may actually decrease some of this
competitive individualism, which is actively seeking to take from this finite world. It
could be productive in some ways, I suppose. I suppose this could be a part of this multifaceted
solution is in kind of helping to tame our baser instincts. Now, it depends upon
what it is being developed for, because let's say we look at the heroin and the McDonald's.
If the thing that is guiding the development of the tech, whether it's food tech or
farm tech or whatever, if the thing that's guiding it is a market process,
I can offer people sensations that they want. In fact, sensations that then they want so much
they get addicted to. Driving addiction is the best thing I can do from a business point of view,
because I want to maximize lifetime revenue of a customer. I maximize lifetime revenue by driving
addiction and ideally starting the addiction as young as possible. Then expanding the addiction
to the largest number of people possible. Now, if you think about this nonsense idea in the market,
the demand is like, when I say nonsense, there's an Adam Smith idealized market where people want
real things that will really enrich the quality of their life, and then wanting that and being
willing to give something to it creates a basis for supply. The rational actors here will choose
the supply that is the best product or service at the best price. People's desire creates a basis
for healthy innovation and the whole world gets better, except that the supply side becomes coordinated
in a way the demand side doesn't. There isn't all customers working together in some customer union
against Nike or Google. But Nike or Google is actually a company that is highly coordinated,
and the supply side starts to realize we've supplied the ship people want, but now we'll
make more money if we can get them to want shit they don't currently want. How do we change the
style every year so people need to keep getting new shit? How do we either do designed obsolescence
or perceived obsolescence or addiction driving so that we can manufacture demand artificially?
The entire idea of the intelligence of markets dives with that, with manufactured demand and
supply side drive in that way. Now it's just a self-authoring extraction machine on the way
to self-termination on the finite planet. If the thing that can provide the experience, because
there's no question when you're eating the hostess, you're having an experience that is of a different
nature of the total amount of dopamine than when you're eating a salad or whatever. You figured
out how to extract salt, fat, sugar and combine them in the ways that maximize that dopamine
hit. The same is true with whatever, the porn and lots of things. In the metaverse,
if it is continuing to have the technology developed by supply side that wants to optimize for
manufacturing demand, which will appeal to the lowest angels of people's nature, that becomes a
dystopian hell. What would the tech be that was actually healthy where we say, how do we ensure
that when someone straps the oculus on, it's not creating such hypernormal stimuli that it makes
people have a shittier experience out here because it's desensitized them to normal stimuli?
Because every girl in there is AI airbrushed and shit, so now all normal girls are not pretty and
whatever it is. My avatar in there is so dope that I don't want to be this avatar out here.
Let's say that one of the criteria of the digital world has to be that it increases the
quality of life in the non-virtual world. Well, then it could be a really awesome tool,
but who the fuck builds that thing? Because it's not going to be a market-driven process.
It would have to come from the pressure of the world not being optimized,
almost getting enough destruction that actually there's the motivation to do it. It almost feels
like there needs, and I pray that this is as gentle as possible, but it feels like the necessity
for things to fall apart a little bit to shake people out of this reality that we can continue
on the path is almost necessary for people to actually start making the choices and build
a new ethics that isn't bound to some white-bearded god who's going to punish you if you don't do
this or if you do do this or whatever, but it's built on this, again, mutually assured destruction
like where people really understand that this path is actually going to destroy the world,
not only for you, but for your children, and everything is going to degrade, so we must make
a different choice, but it feels like a little bit of pressure might be actually what's needed to
kind of raise that level of consciousness and actually allow ethics to bind people to their
desires. So I want to comment first on something really brilliant about the white-beard god thing.
Independent of whether and like whatever was problematic about it or whether it's true or
not, just like a functional thing that it did, and basically any system of heaven and hell or
reincarnation were able to do this, which is a perfected system of justice for self-organization.
So let's say that we have not got people to deeply empathize with other people's experience and really
care about their experience, independent of how it affects their own experience, and they're still
mostly just selfish fucks who care about their experience, and there are ways that they could
hurt other people and get away with it because they can hide it, they can pretend they didn't do it,
they can whatever it is, systems of actual justice are tricky because you got to have
policing in court systems and in jails and it's expensive and people still can get away with stuff,
they can figure out how to hide it, but an invisible watcher that sees absolutely everything and not
one jot, not one tittle shall go unnoticed before the day of judgment and that kind of thing,
that also is an absolute perfected authority so there is no appeal. And with infinite reward and
infinite punishment, it's really just like the zenith of behavior mod, right? What's the
best reward be? Well, eternity of everything awesome and what would the worst punishment be?
Eternity of everything terrible, absolute authority and absolute surveillance,
but it also sees your thoughts, not just even your actions, and you can go to health with
wrong types of thoughts, so now forever is so much longer than a short little time here,
even if you're just selfishly oriented to not burn in hell and to have good heaven or to not
have a shitty reincarnation and have a good reincarnation, you're still oriented to do
whatever the moral things in that belief system are because it's all being seen and there's
going to be consequence positive or negative for all of it. That's kind of awesome actually
from the point of view of how do we get a whole big group of people to follow some kind of code
when it's very hard to enforce them and where you have not yet necessarily figured out how
to have them all care about everyone authentically, how do you bind that caring about their own
experience requires doing the virtuous thing? And so like we're really missing a lot without
something like that. Well actually, so this is interesting because, all right, so I grew up
and I was in a pretty much atheist leaning agnostic family and Jewish by heritage and genetics,
but not really practicing, kind of phoned in a Hanukkah when my grandma was around and did
Christmas too because it was fun and then moved to Texas, it's much more Christian and I saw people
racked with a lot of guilt. I saw a lot of things happening with my friends and peers,
like people's first sexual experiences being incredibly traumatic and I was like,
what is going on? Like this is some craziness and then move along, I go take a trip to Italy,
I go to the dungeons of the Inquisition, which was in one of the cities in Italy and it was one of
the most horrifying things that I've ever witnessed in my life and then I started getting very anti-
religious and so atheist to the point of crusading to be anti-religious. Like this is,
I have to dismantle all of this superstition that's caused all this harm and it's continuing to
cause harm that I'm seeing in my peers. Okay, fast forward, I go do my first guided medicine journey,
combination of MDMA and psilocybin in the mountains of New Mexico. I feel my body evaporate,
this thing that emerges, which is consciousness or I could call it a soul, that was really what I,
the only name that I could say, what is this thing, this unborn, undying aspect of self?
Then what I ultimately realized was that there is a recapitulation of all of your actions and
deeds and thoughts that happens with the perfect unblinded clarity of seeing yourself without
all of the delusional, projective rationalizations and notions that we have that get us to do all of
these things that are sometimes blindingly pernicious, ways in which I've treated girlfriends and
different things. I mean, I was never like bad quotes, but I'd done things that were selfish
for sure and I just had to look at those like somebody had things that were holding my eyes
open and I couldn't look away from them. And that feeling was akin to hell. And then the
forgiveness of that was then the redemption and then the feeling of heaven, which was waiting.
And so I had this real interesting moment where I was like, wow, the story isn't that far off
in that there will come a reckoning where we have to look with perfect clarity at all of our
deeds and actions and that will be a hell if we've lived a life in ignorance or in denial of
some of these real morals and it will be a heaven and a celebration when we get to release this
physical form and experience the divinity of these other dimensional realities.
And then another layer which has recently come into my awareness is that moment when you actually
do it, because I was just pretend doing it with the psychedelics, right? I got to like touch it
and taste it partially, but not completely. Well, that moment you're outside of the bounds of time.
And this is of course, based upon predicated upon a multidimensional understanding of our
existence. And then these dimensions are not bound by time. So in a place that's not bound by time,
what could be a moment is also infinity. There's no, there's no difference between a moment
of this recapitulation of like, wow, what did I do? I can't believe I did I'm feeling all of that
guilt and the pain and the empathy for everything that you've done that stretches to infinity also
and is also a moment, you know, depending on how long it goes. So
in an interestingly, there was one of my very first experience 22 years ago, there was a synergy
that I never really thought about the importance of this, but it's coming to light now like,
wow, maybe that's actually really important to recognize and highlight that this is a way to
maybe potentially bind our own ethics is to understand that yes, there is a hell and there
is a heaven and it's us that's the judge. And it's the truest, fairest judge because it knows
not only our actions, but our intentions and it knows the truth, the truth of all things it's
aware of it's not blinded by the stories in the indoctrinations of cultures. It's really bound
to the truth and it's us lifted from all of our delusions. So I guess that's one way of saying
that potentially this is reality in some just slightly different way and maybe that is an
important piece to this puzzle is to bring this awareness back. Yeah, it's interesting when you're
in that experience, you're reviewing all of your actions, you're seeing them. So
that the space of that experience is that kind of review and judgment and the reward and punishment
whatever are in that space. When we talk about, but what's interesting is there's a transparency,
someone is forced to see themselves on the Ibogaine journey in a way that they aren't most of the
time. Right. And so this is that whole thing of like, how do you have, what is the basis of the
kind of behavioral upgrade of people if there is no transparency? What's the basis of justice?
You don't have justice if you can hide the effect of the action, right? So there's a kind of
transparency required for justice, which is required for the kind of cause and effect that
motivates behavior to move in the right direction. And so the psychedelic or the
self-reckoning experience is one way of that. The idea of a sky god who sees everything and will
punish reward is another. The sky god had to come when we moved from a small tribal scale
to a much larger scale. At the tribal scale, literally the tribe saw everything because
it was a small enough scale you couldn't fucking hide it. And it's actually interesting to think
about for the vast majority of human history and all of our evolved history, these small little
tribes of less than 150 people, you could never effectively lie and get away with it because
everybody's gossiping about everybody's talking, everybody's seeing everything and you couldn't
like hide the pollution somewhere or like make a mess and get like literally the tiny scale
created a forced transparency where what was good for the individual was good for the tribe became
bound. You weren't going to get ahead by fucking the tribe over, it just wasn't going to happen.
If you tried, you'd get exiled and then you'd die. And it's interesting to note that our whole,
like individual humans weren't selected for, individual humans would die.
Tribes were selected for, but they were at a small enough, they were at a big enough scale,
they could deal with bears and the cold, but they were at a small enough scale that what was good
for the individual was good for the tribe as a whole was bound because of the forced transparency,
the forced cause and effect. And so as soon as we needed to get much beyond a tribal scale where
I could actually do something where I could leave a mess somewhere and hide and nobody would know
who it was or I could fuck somebody else over or whatever, now I needed a sky god, right? Because
as soon as you start to get to the empire scale, now either you have to have some king that's
rewarding and punishing everyone, which you'd have as well, but it's hard. You have to like
whip a lot of people and monitor a lot of people, whatever, or you have that king as below the same
as above and you have some kind of religious idea. But it's, now the thing that you're noticing with
the psychedelic experience is, okay, can we self police, right? Can we self, where our own sense of
I couldn't actually be fulfilled. I couldn't actually respect myself because I'm monitoring my,
there's a mindfulness, there's a monitoring and I actually have my own sense of ethics that are deep
enough that that is the, a directing and a binding force for my own behavior. And then the question
is through the combination of both numinous experiences and ethical development and cognitive
and mindfulness development, can we develop people where they don't need a sky god and they
don't necessarily even need a tribe to have internalized that type of function?
It seems like, you mentioned Iboga and the, my first Buiti shaman that I spoke to and perhaps
there's different variations of the initiation tradition, but it's a very heavy dose of Iboga.
And what he described is they would have somebody look into a mirror for like the duration of
24 hours or some obscenely long amount of time where instead of gazing out at nature or wearing
a blindfold, you're looking at a mirror and you're looking back at yourself. And that was the
initiation of like, with this clarity that, you know, Iboga is bringing you, looking into the
mirror so you can't escape seeing yourself. You know, this was the initiation that actually
allowed the other people in the tribe to be able to trust you. Now let's come back to all those
other aubris, right, that conflict theory world, but where you're having that experience looking
in the mirror on Iboga regularly, it starts to, you see that there is one, you see where the
devil on one shoulder and the angel on the other shoulder image came from, right? And that there
is a sort of kind of lower angels of our nature that really just has to do with survival and
mate signaling and the desire to do better than the other guy at that. And there's also then a
higher angels of our nature where there are ways that I can do better than the other guy where I
can't actually be at peace with who I am. Right. And then specifically the pressure that you mentioned,
not only can I not be at peace with who I am, I realize that the other guy trying to do that as
well and us escalating actually ruins everything for everybody. And so I'm now bound to try to help
that guy in a way where we can find a better solution because there is no good, like I don't
just win the war once and for all, I win the battle and engender more enmity and a counterattack
and then all of our energies and this thing. So it's like, okay, ultimately, I have to find a
better way for all of us because they don't plan it. And so now we take the heaven and hell
myth of poetics and actually bring it back to something pretty literal.
One way I like to think of like the rapture story is, and this is not the only right way to think
about it. As you mentioned, you can have your own rapture experience in deep meditation or on a
bogey looking enemy, right? But the rapture story of the end is nigh, this phase is coming to an end,
there's going to be a great time of judgment. There's going to be a purgatory where we have a
chance to reconcile and rectify the wickedness of our ways. And if so, we get some much better thing,
heaven on earth or the reinstatement of the garden or whatever, or if not, we get hell or death or
some kind of bad thing. There's kind of a hard fork and there's like a purgatory choice hard fork.
I think we're facing something that is very much like that kind of literally,
which is we've been kind of shitty stewards of power for a long time. We've used our power to
extinct other species, destroy ecosystems, destroy other cultures and oppress people of lower
classes. We've done some good stuff with it. We've been a very mixed bag, but the mixed bag that we
are has used power destructively enough that and it's continued to select for better coordination
and construction, but also destruction capacities that with the
arms race of that continuing to exponential tech, if you continue to be equally shitty stewards of
power with exponential tech, everything blows up. You ruin the planet and you have wars that nobody
wins and can make it through and so either we continue to be humans like the humans we have been
and the thing self terminates or we are getting so much power through the technology we've created.
We are forced to become good stewards of that power so we don't destroy ourselves and good
stewards of that power means what does it mean to be a good steward of power itself and power means
the ability to influence effect control others, other humans and other non-human life. What does
it mean to be a good steward of those types of capacities? What is the wisdom, love, values,
prudence that would guide that? Either we have to step up into that kind of planetarily to safely
steward the power or we destroy ourselves with it. That's very much a rapture story and I imagine
there's an there's an atheistic version of it which is just philosophically oriented
people, social philosophers in the Bronze Age at the end of a war seeing all of the dead people
that were killed at a much greater distance than before we had the whatever the new weapon was,
the crossbows or the whatever thing and a large area of desert that used to be for us because we
got better access and better saws and whatever has the technology. They could just sit there and
we keep building better tech and we're about to move from the bronze into the Iron Age and
we keep destroying nature and killing each other better with it. We don't get to do that forever
like at a certain point you can't destroy all the nature and kill at that full scale so this
phase is coming to an end and there's a wickedness of our ways and how we deal with power that has
to be reconciled and either we get it and we get this garden or not. To me that story
and very much like the Kali Yuga to Sat Yuga Hindu story or the end of the Mayan calendar,
like they're just decent forecasting of the nature of continued technological power.
If it is driven by the lower angels of our nature, it self-terminates and so if that power continues
it forces the higher angels of our nature to become the basis of culture or we self-terminate,
that's the forcing function.
Yep and then going back to what I was saying earlier, unfortunately as much as I would like to
hope and pray for the and I still do this very smooth transition, this awakening that happens
without the necessity for massive disruption and I still will hold that prayer and I will
add to that prayer with my own belief that that is a possibility and I don't know exactly how.
It seems from my understanding of what is most likely is that there is going to need to be a
little bit of discomfort, a little bit of pain that we probably feel that actually propels us
into taking these threats really seriously because climate change, it's a couple degrees
hotter here, it's not and it's like yeah okay we kind of understand it but until we run out of water
or until it's so hot that people are dying and like shit's getting really gnarly,
are we really going to take it seriously enough and I hope so and I pray so and I pray that this
happens gradually and we wake up with great speed and awareness that happens remarkably and I think
with the psychedelic renaissance there are factors that are coming into play that can accelerate
things beyond what the normal capacity is but it just feels like all right we might need to prepare
ourselves for a little bit of a bumpy road here that's actually necessary for us to make it through
to the other side. Let's think about this for a minute. We already just went through a year and
a half or so of people largely being on lockdown let alone what happened in Nigeria and so many
other places much more violently as a result of effective COVID and COVID response, supply chain
dynamics whatever else. We talk about you know are we going to need some pain to come and climate
change well it's probably the case that climate change was the cause of the droughts in Syria
that made all the subsistence farmers who had been there for such a long time no longer able to
farm so they moved to the cities that led to resource pressures that led to the war there
that already pretty much destroyed what the quality of life in Syria was and almost brought
about a fully armed conflict between the West and Russia right on the border and
we don't have to talk about the planet getting so hot that no one can live on it to talk about
heat waves in areas that destroy crops in areas where there's food instability so you have a huge
population in India and in Bangladesh sharing watersheds with huge populations on either side on
China one side Pakistan on the other side the waters running out of those watersheds the heat
waves in the summer are increasing the supplies of food decreased during COVID because there was
food shock that occurred because not having fertilizer and things because of the shutdown of
transportation so the 50 plus Celsius heat waves that are anticipated over the next few summers
like we already had enough refugees that nowhere wants refugees anymore so what happens when the
next chunk of refugees that are much larger in number than the previous ones came because people
don't just die peacefully and you have very tense political fault lines so the heat wave
turns into human migration turns into resource wars can very easily turn into escalating large
scale wars we're in a situation where being able to say we need some pain like it's already happening
basically depending upon where you are in the world it's already happening so then we need
greater awareness greater awareness of the pain and it can escalate so fast that it goes from like
oh shit that's really here to oh fuck there's nothing we can do about it anyway
our large-scale war and so we need greater awareness and greater action and responsibility coupled to
that um and it's like most people will either be stasis oriented or just personal pursuit
oriented unless pain pushes growth tear to shard on the catholic theologian who kind of after
darwin started incorporating evolutionary theory into catholic theology um if you haven't read him
you'd really love tear to shard on um but he talked about rather than a creator agent god relating
to the creative impulse god that moves everything towards more elegantly order to complexity and
more capability and beauty and um and that that evolutionary process brought about humans that
have enough complexity to think about the evolutionary process to feel all about it and to
decide to consciously help mediate it so that rather than just being parts of the whole we could
step up into being agents for wholeness itself and what would it mean to be local agents for
wholeness consciously aware of all that and he talked about what he called the lure of becoming
rather than have to be pushed by pain because otherwise we're stasis oriented we understand
the inexorability and beauty of evolution and we are drawn to become more and not just in service
of self but in service of all that we wouldn't exist without um and this is the interconnectivity
part of what you were mentioning is as soon as i realized that without plants i don't exist there's
no atmosphere i'm dead so an idea of myself separate from plants is nonsense and without back
soil bacteria and microorganisms plants don't exist so i can't even define myself without
plants and bacteria and fungus in a cogent way because i wouldn't exist but also without all
of the people who make all the shit that my life depends upon where my identity actually is wrapped
up in all this stuff so i'm like well my sense of myself as a separate thing is only because
i take for granted the rest of the universe i depend upon but if i said that which is required
for me to exist has to be included in my definition of self then my impulse of becoming is bound to
the support of all of that right now this is interesting because someone can have the mushroom
experience of oneness but not also have the cognitive model of how all that works and
together both the experience and the understanding of it and then the understanding of okay there's
there is individuality but even when we're talking about individuality as opposed to oneness there's
interconnectivity across the differences right um there's things that are not me in the individual
sense but that i depend upon and that create a world that either i don't exist without or that
i want to see um so yeah there's no question that pain can drive evolution but we need to depend upon
pain to drive it less and proactively be pursuing it in the awareness of the total eminent amount
of pain that will come otherwise more because especially in a world where so many people are
on painkillers and um anti anxiety meds and anti emotional pain meds and whatever else and all the
other forms of distraction from their own inner pain through social media and porn and dating
and whatever else it is like pain doesn't even have the same effect right so we arrive we arrive
at a place where there's a little we need to have a little bit of faith in in this divine creative
process that is going to awaken awaken in a way that's stronger than what we've seen prior and again
as i said i think the psychedelic renaissance is uh potentially uncalculable very incalculable
variable that can assist in this but the optimism that to go back to where we're we're coming from
the optimism is not a knowledge of exactly how it's going to go but requires some some faith
like there is this thing which is true which is an interconnectedness and an understanding of that
and this creative drive to protect and support the whole and the better nature that we have
late you know latent and nascent within all of us and to have a bit of faith that that can awaken
and potentially that you know the awareness of some of the pain could actually facilitate this
let's pray for as little as possible and as much on the affirmative side of the awakening of this
divine creation impulse and it's interesting like i one of the reasons that i think people
take all of the painkillers whether it's the ssri version or the benzo version or the opiate version
or the aqua version is because they don't pain as a signal that something is off they don't know
what to do about it right they don't like they can do anything about so just numbing it is the best
thing um which then allows us to keep doing the fucked up thing um if i if i put my hand in the
fire the pain is an evolutionary signal for me to pull my hand out of the fire if i yeah morphine i
put my hand keep burning off so much of the psychological pain we feel is because we're
living in ways that are really not uh meaningful and not fulfilling and so as to be able to keep
going and doing the cubicle job or whatever the thing is that i'm unfulfilled by now i'm gonna
numb out the pain of the fact that my life sucks so that i can keep doing that thing
i want people i like i want to actually feel the pain but i want to be a powered relationship
to it right so i'm not just broken but i'm taking it as a signal to then be able to say
what is this a signal that needs corrected and then what agency do i have to be able to actually
correct it and move in the right direction and not just my individual pain but also the collective
pain there's only so much i can do about the collective pain if i'm bypassing my own right
because i've got to actually be able to feel it so what do i clean it up and fix an address in my
own life to then be able to feel more of the larger pain to then be able to do something about it
and i think this comes back to the sense of faith that you're talking about you talk about
faith and optimism in empowered ways it's easy to
give up on optimism and be negative or or nihilistic and i'm obviously not going to be
part of any good solutions if i've done that right nor will i have much any meaning much
any fulfillment it's possible to have faith that doesn't require me to act because like i have faith
that some other institutions or other people or god or magic will fix it all and that's also
obviously not useful and it's easy to say i'll have faith when someone shows me a solution
that seems like it makes sense and tells me what i can do about it which is like it's the
it's not faith consciousness of a child yeah right that needs some parent authority figure to
explain to them how to how to live um there's a certain kind of like well how would anyone ever
come up with a solution to something that we don't know how to solve like how does any inventor
or innovator do it is that they have a faith that a solution exists before they know what it is that
doesn't have them just chill it has them work their ass off to figure out what it is right
so there's a certain faith in possibility that orients you to be an agent of it which
orients you to actually work um add things that you don't know exactly how to do right
and so then you end up having a faith in the actual solutions as they're gaining traction
but you get those through a process of a more intangible faith but that orients you to learning
discovery and action yeah you know one of the ways that you could describe mdma is uh as an
empathogen and you know obviously the first time i did it was in conjunction with psilocybin and
that's a very different experience than and i was out in the mountains and i was in a you know it was
guided by a shaman and it was a different scenario than the first time i did mdma which was in
australia with my girlfriend and we were walking around downtown brisbane and i understand the
term empathogen because for the very first time i saw the city life the nightlife past midnight
nightlife of bustling bris vegas as they call it but i saw it in a totally different way that that
woman who was a little bit drunk but crying on the on the sidewalk probably went through a breakup
or a fight with her boyfriend i could feel what she felt and i was like oh my god like that poor
that poor woman and that you know that homeless person who is hungry like i could feel is hunger
and it was a very interesting experience where i felt love for people that were beyond the people
that i normally a lot my love to and so i guess you know to me this a lot of people are going to
be pretty soon here within a within a year or so give or take depending on fda and a few variables
are going to be going into mdma psychotherapy for the healing of trauma but we all have many
of us have trauma so i'm sure the indications are going to increase and then other different
indications are going to be proven it's going to be used off-label there's going to be a lot of
different proliferation of this as an empathogen and so while it doesn't seem like there's going to
be any end to the painkillers although a more stoic philosophy and a different attitude towards
pain could be a culturally relevant story of like no we must feel the pain the pain is a signal
stop numbing the pain so that you can actually solve the pain which is a very empowering message
which i think can carry some weight there will always be a there will always be a market for
painkillers but also at the same time raising people's sensitivity to collective pain through
empathogenic molecules and i think mdma is just the first of potential empathogenic molecules that
actually can connect people to collective pain in a different way i mean if you know i just released
a documentary about my time in the darkness and i take off my my blindfold for the first time and
you see me i mean i'm weeping at the at an unbelievably you know intense depth of the grief
of having taken this world for granted and the the beauty that i'm beholding and you can't watch
that i mean you i guess you could but i haven't had an experience of someone watch that and not
feel a bit of what i felt like we're wired also for that level of empathy and i think it's about
being able to switch that back on whether it's through stories or whether it's through media
whether it's through chemicals or whether it's some technological way in which you know empathy is
being trained i think huberman what andrew huberman was talking to me about different empathy
research that they were doing in the lab with vr goggles where they were having you be a person
of color and going into a racist racially charged situation and then feeling what that feels like
and how impactful that was it seems like there's a lot of different ways you know for the mind
that needs and i understand like the feeling of a solution just knowing that there is a solution i
think that's important but for the mind that needs to say well i need some plausible limb
to hang on to some vine i can grab onto to give me some rational reason i think there's a lot of
shit that's happening that could give at least enough to support your faith and that the solution
is going there is is available and uh and i think that to me leaves me with the sense of optimism
which i don't know exactly how it'll be but i can see a lot of different channels of stories
changing philosophies changing understandings changing different ideas about our spirituality
changing these compounds that are coming online technology being used in beneficial ways all
of that is enough for me to say like all right i believe because i believe but there's a couple
good reasons to believe as well and i guess for me you know that's enough for me to leave this
conversation without going into my dark dark room and just crying softly into a pillow somewhere
i think one okay a couple things i want to say one thing that you said is important is that there
are things that you see that are inspiring in a lot of different areas it's important to recognize the
the basis of hope or solution is not a single thing right because it's like there's some stuff we
see in material science that makes better solar panels possible and better batteries possible and
things like that and and better recycling and manufacturing of goods possible and there's
some things in the application of AI to personalizing education that could make completely
better types of education possible and some things that we see in psychedelics and so when
but that also doesn't mean that we can say we don't also see applications of those technologies
that are super destructive and so we can't just say the techno-optimist version it's all happening
it's all good just just let the market do its thing and it'll happen or and tech do its thing it's
not true but it's also not true to say that there aren't the precursors to adequate solutions
but also it's not one thing it's it's lots of things right so then there's a whole ecosystem
of solutions what do they have in common um we can get that like whether we're talking about
tragedy of the commons or arms races there's something in common to uh escalating competition
in for narrow success metrics that externalizes harmful lots of things with that thing has to
change has to change across the scope writ large and that's why we're talking about culture and the
mindsets of people that could build new types of social institutions and even better versions of
what we think of as the market right now um I just I want people to not think about like oftentimes
they'll hear about the crisis be like what is the solution as if there's like some singular
thing someone could say that would make any sense and that's nonsense it's not going to be a the
solution not the second coming or just let the market do its thing or AI will solve everything
so it's like well what are the problems there's a whole scope of things and it's a it's a lot of
stuff that has to happen then seeing how it's all connected is important but it's not going to fit
into a tweet and so expanding your attention span to not say my my hope you've got like 90 seconds
to give me the solution of the thing I'll feel hope about and if I if I don't have that then I'm
going to jump to either nihilism or you know some kind like that's important the other thing I was
going to say is um you were mentioning that people are oriented towards the sensations they want to
have not necessarily the thing the thing is a path to it uh and then you're talking about
the spiritual experience and sensations that were occurring that were decoupled from external
things happening right you are rather than things you needed to get in the world you really you were
even more overwhelmed sensationally by how much you had taken for granted all the little things
in the world even uh like that there is such a thing as color at all right as opposed to
or sight itself yeah um or a reality to see or the fact that reality happens to be as
fucking beautiful as it is um when you're having that experience it's very recontextualizing to
the other state of mind that can really obsess over exactly what stuff your house is made of right
so it's interesting there's something where you're saying like okay I want certain kinds of
sensations those as long as those sensations are based on just what's happening in the external
world I will have the basis to need to compete with the other guy to rearrange my external world
better than his or with those scarce resources one way you can think about what the heart of almost
all spiritual traditions was we're trying to do was deal with that basis of conflict by being able
to say can you find something like peace and happiness unconditional to external can you
find those sensations internally so that you are no longer driven to get sensations
there's this very interesting question it says like okay as long as happiness is really conditional
but I need it I have almost no free will I'm basically controlled by this tyrant of unconditional
happiness to pursue whatever I think will give me those hits of sensation if but if I've already
been able to cultivate an inner state that I'm happy with then what is my basis for what I want
it's probably something other than my own state so it's almost like and this is the
why do you start your day with the right kind of meditation whatever it's actually only when
I have tended to my own state that real virtue can even emerge where I can want something other
than what's in it for me okay and so this is another real deep basis of of spiritual personal
development is virtue can emerge authentically more when I've tended to my own state and I can
tend to my own state independently of rearranging the atoms and the universe to be a particular way
the last thing I was going to say is what you were mentioning about psychedelics and the
empathogens the MDMA so imagine if you had this experience and you feel the hunger of the homeless
guy and you feel the heartbreak of the woman and all the people and afterwards you come journal about
it and you ask yourself how do I tangibly change my life starting tomorrow to be aligned with what
I just realized and you have to come up with some fucking answers otherwise the journey didn't mean
anything right like there's a if if it really changed how I am understanding the world how
does it tangibly change my basis for choice so we don't just do the journey have an experience
and then it's a nice story it's like I'm now inquiring I have a deeper understanding of reality
how do I live differently and then I look at how do I create a community of practice where then I
share that as a commitment I'm held accountable to that right with with other people and then the
next time I journey we I take another step similarly and then the other part is when you're
like okay I would arms race with that guy who wanted to compete with me for the thing that I want
what if the next time I go into my psychedelic experience and I do the
mushrooms or the iboga that's going to let me see myself what if I journal first what are all the
places where I can be shitty what are all the bases where I can go into otherizing people
losing empathy and just going into conflict or let's say I'm going to do the empathogen I say
what are all the places who are the people that are hardest for me to empathize with
and then I go in and I only think about them on the empathogen
and or I look specifically at those places where I can have the lower angels of my nature kind of
take hold the psychedelics start to become much more interesting when the tool is used
consciously where you think about okay all these problems in the world have to do with conflict
theory multiplied by tech so we need to deal with the basis of the conflict theory but we
need to not pretend that it's not there so how do I inventory where that conflict theory arises in
my own life and how do I use those psychedelics to help me transcend how I deal with it like how
do I deal with it better that starts to get very interesting no doubt because there'll be some
benefit that's gained just from the just from the experience itself but it's multiplied you know
it's it's multiplied not added it's multiplied by the intentionality behind it and the structure of
doing those similar things which sometimes can naturally arise in the nature of a traumatic
experience usually there's a perpetrator of said trauma and you will be often invited to go find
the place of forgiveness for that perpetrator which is the ultimate alchemy of the trauma you
know as I've watched this arc I've been in the room during the MDMA assisted psychotherapy I've
been blessed to be a part of these different scenarios and you watch the you know the the
rage which is hiding the grief and then behind the grief is the forgiveness and then the release
of that thing and that's the way that the the process is is guided but it's all it's very
self-guided as well but to do that with intentionality not just in the specific of this person did
this thing to me but in the universal like how do I really it's very powerful and a good and a good
like a little star a little asterisk to put up upon this kind of revolution that we're on the
precipice of and in a community of practice of other people who are doing so if I have a blind
spot I'm missing where I'm assessing where I can be an asshole or go into unnecessary conflict
other people can show me hey you're missing this place I'm like oh okay good that's helpful and
where if I'm really growing or not there's other people that can help assess actually you keep
talking about the same shit journey yeah journey so that we're not kind of narcissistically
deluding ourselves and then just having the journey be another sensation we like to have
yeah like are we actually really growing being able to help each other with that
is very very important part of it well as always Daniel these conversations are some
of my favorite experiences that I am fortunate to have I'm glad we get to share this conversation
with the world and whether it's just us in a restaurant or broadcast to all the people over
the internet it's really a pleasure and I'm just deeply grateful for you and your heart and your
work and your mind and everything you're doing I want people to know too that I'm a you know a
significant contributor to the the foundations that you're a part of and I'm going to continue
to do that because I really believe in the work that you're doing as I believe in my own abilities
to you know play some role in this this cosmic orchestration but uh so if you want to just explain
briefly what those are if people are interested in in supporting your work
as we make our way through this thing together
yeah uh the you being an ally in the way that you have has been hugely helpful
to work that we've been able to do with talking to key government institutions about shifts that
they can make and also work that we're embarking on now and helping education in these areas more
widely culturally uh some of the people can check out now as uh the conciliants project.org
conciliantsproject.org his website uh a lot of the issues we were talking about today regarding
um propaganda social media culture issues there's a whole good series of articles on there we're
about to do a series that addresses a 10 article series that is like the most fundamental things
about what the state of the world is and what it would take to come to a um post exponential
tech viable civilization and uh so uh yeah really grateful you uh have helped us be able to do that
work and would love to have more people check it out and be involved and then in terms of like
where do I find hope I guess the last thing I'll say is there's this model that I like we're actually
about to write a paper on this uh this guy Marvin Harris developed a school of cultural
anthropology called cultural materialism uh really profound insightful work I don't agree with some of
the conclusions but he basically said you can think of civilization as the result of these three
categories infrastructure social structure and superstructure infrastructures all the tooling
energy transportation waste management modes of production uh social structure is like economics
governance law the institutions with which we mediate our agreements and the superstructure
is more like what we think of as culture which is what are the values that we're orienting towards
what is the definition of the good life that we're orienting towards so religion and nationalism
and various various kind of social ideologies live here what he focused on was what we were
starting to talk about at the beginning which was the plow was so much more productive than just
hunting and gathering from the point of calories you could produce that the plow basically meant
anyone who would do the plow thing would get ahead over those who wouldn't so it coded for a pattern
of behavior which ended up coding for a mindset because it meant those who were not animistic
were going to get ahead from those who were animistic even if being animistic made them more
in harmony with their environment so he focused on the way the tools the infrastructure ends up
driving social structure and superstructure uh we can do a deep analysis we'll show this in this
paper of how all three of them inter-effect each other the nature what is being economically
incentive determines which tools take off also what's being regulated the value systems can
orient what we're doing science and exploration of those types of things ultimately the superstructure
the values of what matter to us like the causal arrows from technology to drive our social structures
to drive our superstructure is destructive like most of the destruction we have comes from that
direction this other direction which is what are the values that we then encode into social
structures so how do we basically have a value system become the basis of law and rule of law
that can then bind and direct the technology to be uses of tech that are not catastrophic and not
this topic but actually in service of life so our technology has gotten so powerful and it's
kind of eroded our social structures and our superstructure all that's left of the social
structures of this kind of liberal democracy period is really like money on money returns and
some very limited stuff and mostly what's left of superstructure is like fairly self-centered
nihilism and narcissism and nihilism but so the development of culture to then have people
of four by the people create new institutions that we can actually trust put faith and have
rule of law that can then bind guide and direct the tech so that we can have a future that is
high tech and high meaning high nature is kind of the only path and I see that what you've already
been doing with your podcast and where I see it going conversations we've had being how do we
really help the cultural revolution to be the basis of rebuilding social institutions that
can have the power to be able to guide this this godlike tech that we have where we're good stewards
of it is yeah of all the place of all the things where I feel hope it's not the tech the question
is what's going to guide the tech and it has to be people that have evolved in these ways
para bien de todos as Don Howard was fond of saying for the good of all and may we be put to
good use and I'm honored to walk this path with you brother as as we said when we were walking
from the restaurant we've all lived in such a rich and beautiful way in which there's been
moments of our life that have been so phenomenal and stunning that you know we've we've lived well
enough to be able to really dedicate ourselves truly to service and sure there's moments of
selfishness and there's moments where you know I I lose my hunger for service but I do know
that when I'm deeply in service and I know I'm in service there's no better drug on the planet
there is no better fucking drug than service when you're taking it pure and I think we both tasted
that drug too and I'm looking forward to a lot more of that drug however and which way ever
it takes me in this life likewise all right I much love my brother thank you so much everybody
for tuning in much love embrace what you know from direct experience what you know right now
what you know from having gathered here together you know something can you even put it into words
maybe not but it happened here we are look you felt things those are real and you'll go back to
routines social surroundings that are at odds with what you have experienced and what you've
known here the more deeply you enter into that the more it seems like this wasn't real this is just
some games we were playing I didn't feel those things I didn't see what I saw that's gaslighting
yourself the bad news that I'm going to tell you is that force of will alone is not enough to stop
that from happening you can set the intention I'm going to remember I saw something here I felt
something I experienced myself in a different way something of me was expressed I saw something of
what life is revealed I'm gonna hold on to that I'm gonna do a practice around it if you are able
to hold on to it may be because you tried hard but it won't be only because you tried hard I'm not
telling you not to try but what I'm saying is something else is required to hold on to that
and what I'm talking about actually is to hold on to sanity sanity is to believe what you know
doesn't get any simpler than that it's real to live as if something that is real is not real
that is insanity and the bad news is you can't hold on to it through will alone
how do you hold on to it with a little help from your friends that's why I say sanity is a group
project you need something to counteract the reinforcing circumstances of the default society
in order to stay sane you have met people here you trust they will not betray you
they will not lie when you ask them is it real even if they are in despair
they will be called by your trust into truth because your trust is authentic
the story that we tell about another person the way that we see another person
is a powerful invitation to them to be that that's the essence of coaching it's I see you as who you
can be I'm not making it up even if in a month or two months you may be again in a place of despair
where the reality of this moment is a distant memory even so you will come back to this
and more you will come to what this promises and by sitting a moment in gratitude for it
you establish it more firmly its own base these three four days will never happen again you cannot
hold on to it something of them is in you maybe you have doubts but at the same time along with
those doubts you know that it is true you know that the world can be built on this you know that
there is a future that has sent even its bare shadow
which is already so beautiful to the present
staying sane means that you stay in the knowledge of this and it is true
and I don't think anybody here is going to stay sane
but there's an island of sanity and
to establish it more firmly
take a little more time
you
thanks for tuning into this video make sure you hit subscribe follow me at
Aubrey Marcus check out the Aubrey Marcus podcast available everywhere and leave a comment
let me know if this video resonated or what else you would like to hear from me in the future
thank you so much
