Which is most effective for helping people learn?
Punishment or reward?
Well, consider the case of Israeli fighter pilot training,
because instructors there found that negative feedback
was far superior to positive feedback.
If a cadet performed a particularly poor maneuver,
they would reprimand him,
but they noticed that on follow-up attempts,
his performance invariably improved.
In contrast, if they praised a cadet
for executing a skillful maneuver,
his performance on subsequent attempts typically declined.
So naturally, they concluded that positive feedback
is ineffective or even detrimental,
whereas negative feedback is what works.
The problem is this seems to contradict a body of research
that shows positive feedback is actually more effective
than negative feedback.
For example, in studies involving teachers,
it was found that if a teacher increases the ratio
of positive feedback to negative feedback,
that actually increases the percentage of time
students spend on task.
In another study, rugby players were given
a video feedback session following a game.
Except half of them were shown their highlights
and they were praised for what they had done,
and the other half were shown their biggest blunders,
their mistakes, and they were scolded
for doing things incorrectly.
Now, a week later at the next game,
it was the players who had received
the positive reinforcement who performed the best.
And in fact, the difference was not just psychological.
Blood tests revealed that the players
who received positive feedback
actually had higher levels of testosterone
than players who would receive the negative feedback.
I think that's quite remarkable
that even a week post-feedback,
you could still see a physiological difference
between the two types of feedback.
Wow.
Well, so why didn't this work for the Israeli fighter pilots?
Well, maybe there are cultural differences
and in some cultures, negative feedback works better.
Or maybe it's task dependent.
Perhaps some skills like learning to fly a fighter jet
require more negative feedback.
Or maybe the feedback had nothing to do
with the performance of the fighter pilots at all.
Maybe they would have performed in the same way
regardless of the feedback they received.
Go with me on this.
Imagine you have 100 students taking a test
which consists of 100 true or false questions.
On a subject, they know nothing about.
Now, assuming they all answer randomly,
we know that the resulting distribution of scores
will have an average of around 50.
But just by chance,
some students will have scored significantly better
or worse than the average.
Man.
If you select the top 10 students
whose scores were all above 50
and gave them a second very similar test,
you would find that the average of their scores
would drop back to around 50.
Similarly, if you selected the bottom 10 students,
their score on a subsequent test would rise to 50.
This is just regression to the mean.
Regression to the mean is the reason why
if you have a really good round of golf today,
your round tomorrow will not be as good.
Yes.
That is because random chance plays a role
in virtually everything that we do.
So the outcomes of events are influenced
by both our skill and a little bit of luck.
So if you have especially good luck on one day,
chances are your level of luck
will not be as good the next day.
Now that sounds a little bit like the gambler's fallacy
which states that past events influence future probabilities.
For example, if you flip a coin
and it comes up tails a couple of times,
the gambler's fallacy is to expect the probability
of heads to increase for the next flip.
In reality, it doesn't.
It's still 50-50.
The idea with the gambler's fallacy
is that probabilities change
so that overall things even out in the long run.
That's the idea.
With regression to the mean,
it's not that things are evening out.
It's just that extreme events are becoming diluted
by the average events which happen much more commonly.
Now with these students,
they were completely guessing on every question.
But even when you know something about the subject,
there's still gonna be that element of chance.
And so regression to the mean always occurs
just to a lesser extent.
This is really important to consider in research.
Imagine you're trialing a new drug
to help prevent heart disease.
So from a sample of patients,
you select those in the bottom 10% of heart health indicators,
people with high blood pressure,
high cholesterol and that sort of thing.
Now after a month of being on the drug,
you test them again to find that their scores have improved.
Well, great, the drug is working, right?
Well, maybe not.
See, the trouble is that although blood pressure
and cholesterol are more stable
than say your score on a random true or false test,
there is still some inherent variability
caused by say your level of stress on the day
or your recent diet
or even the uncertainties introduced
by the measuring apparatus.
So the people who ended up in the bottom 10%
on the first test likely had these factors
all count against them.
They were particularly unlucky.
But you should not expect them to be as unlucky
when you test them a second time.
So their scores should improve just based on random chance.
That is why it is so important
that clinical trials use control groups
drawn from exactly the same population
so that you can see whether the drug improved scores more
than random chance alone would.
Or what about assessing the impact of speed cameras?
When they're first installed,
they're normally put in locations
that have had a high volume of accidents
in the previous year or two, makes sense?
Now those accidents are likely due at least in part
to bad road design,
but also due at least in part to bad luck.
And so you shouldn't be surprised
that after a speed camera is installed,
the number of accidents goes down.
It would go down anyway,
simply due to regression to the mean.
Meanwhile, somewhere else
that previously had a small number of accidents
will likely have more.
So the overall accident rate may not change,
and yet we will feel as though our investment
in road safety has paid off.
So perhaps what's most troubling about regression
to the mean is how it influences
our perception of feedback.
For example, with the fighter pilots,
after they execute a maneuver particularly poorly,
chances are the next attempt is going to be better,
regardless of the feedback they receive.
Similarly, after an especially successful display,
chances are the next attempt is not gonna be as good.
And that has nothing to do with the feedback
and everything to do with the statistical nature
of our universe.
But we are hardwired to see patterns
and causality everywhere,
which is why the instructors felt
that positive feedback was detrimental
and negative feedback is what works.
And this is really unfortunate
because that is the exact opposite
of what well-controlled psychological studies show.
You know, I think it's really unfortunate
that if you give negative feedback,
chances are you'll be rewarded.
They will do better.
And if you give positive feedback,
chances are you'll be disappointed
because it's difficult to maintain
that level of luck.
But that's the way our world is.
So think about that next time
before you tell someone off.
If you stay positive,
it may just work out for the best in the long run.
This video was inspired by the book,
Thinking Fast and Slow
by Nobel Prize winning economist, Daniel Kahneman.
So that was the first time I heard
of the Israeli fighter pilot training
and really started thinking about regression to the mean.
It was pretty awesome
and I downloaded this book from Audible.
So I was listening to it on my travels.
I'm currently at the Perimeter Institute,
which you can see has some beautiful blackboards.
Now, if you wanna listen to this book,
you can download it for free
by going to audible.com slash veritasium
or you can listen to any other book of your choice
for a one month free trial.
So thanks to Audible for supporting me.
Thanks to Perimeter Institute
for putting me up in this amazing location.
And I will see you next time
with some theoretical physics ideas.
So stay tuned for that.
