Picture this. You wake up one morning and you feel a little bit sick. No
particular symptoms, just not a hundred percent. And so you go to the doctor and
she also doesn't know what's going on with you, so she suggests they run a
battery of tests. And after a week goes by, the results come back, turns out you
tested positive for a very rare disease that affects about point one percent of
the population. And it's a nasty disease, horrible consequences, you don't want it.
So you ask the doctor, you know, how certain is it that I have this disease?
And she says, well, the test will correctly identify 99% of people that
have the disease and only incorrectly identify 1% of people who don't have the
disease. So that sounds pretty bad. I mean, what are the chances that you
actually have this disease? I think most people would say 99% because that's the
accuracy of the test. But that is not actually correct. You need Bayes'
Theorem to get some perspective.
Bayes' Theorem can give you the probability that some hypothesis, say that you
actually have the disease, is true given an event that you tested positive for the
disease. To calculate this, you need to take the prior probability the hypothesis
was true, that is how likely you thought it was that you had this disease before
you got the test results, and multiply it by the probability of the event given
the hypothesis is true, that is the probability that you would test positive
if you had the disease, and then divide that by the total probability of the
event occurring, that is testing positive. This term is a combination of your
probability of having the disease and correctly testing positive, plus your
probability of not having the disease and being falsely identified. The prior
probability that a hypothesis is true is often the hardest part of this equation
to figure out, and sometimes it's no better than a guess. But in this case, a
reasonable starting point is the frequency of the disease in the
population, so 0.1%. And if you plug in the rest of the numbers, you find that
you have a 9% chance of actually having the disease after testing positive,
which is incredibly low if you think about it. Now this isn't some sort of
crazy magic. It's actually common sense applied to mathematics. Just think about
a sample size of a thousand people. Now one person out of that thousand is
likely to actually have the disease, and the test would likely identify them
correctly as having the disease. But out of the 999 other people, 1% or 10
people would falsely be identified as having the disease. So if you're one of
those people who has a positive test result, and everyone's just selected at
random, well you're actually part of a group of 11 where only one person has
the disease. So your chances of actually having it are 1 in 11, 9%. It just
makes sense. When Bayes first came up with this theorem, he didn't actually
think it was revolutionary. He didn't even think it was worthy of publication.
He didn't submit it to the Royal Society of which he was a member. And in fact,
it was discovered in his papers after he died, and he had abandoned it for more
than a decade. His relatives asked his friend Richard Price to dig through his
papers and see if there was anything worth publishing in there. And that's
where Price discovered what we now know as the origins of Bayes' theorem. Bayes
originally considered a thought experiment where he was sitting with his
back to a perfectly flat, perfectly square table, and then he would ask an
assistant to throw a ball onto the table. Now this ball could obviously land and
end up anywhere on the table, and he wanted to figure out where it was. So
what he'd ask his assistant to do was throw on another ball and then tell him
if it landed to the left, or to the right, or in front, behind of the first ball.
And he would note that down and then ask for more and more balls to be thrown on
the table. What he realized was that through this method, he could keep
updating his idea of where the first ball was. Now of course he would never be
completely certain, but with each new piece of evidence, he would get more and
more accurate. And that's how Bayes saw the world. It wasn't that he thought the
world was not determined, that reality didn't quite exist, but it was that we
couldn't know it perfectly, and all we could hope to do was update our
understanding as more and more evidence became available. When Richard Price
introduced Bayes' theorem, he made an analogy to a man coming out of a cave.
Maybe he'd lived his whole life in there and he saw the Sun rise for the first
time, and kind of thought to himself, is this a one-off? Is this a quirk? Or does
the Sun always do this? And then every day after that, as the Sun rose again, he
could get a little bit more confident that, well, that was the way the world
works. So Bayes' theorem wasn't really a formula intended to be used just once. It
was intended to be used multiple times, each time gaining new evidence and
updating your probability that something is true. So if we go back to the first
example, when you tested positive for a disease, what would happen if you went to
another doctor, get a second opinion, and get that test run again, but let's say by
a different lab, just to be sure that those tests are independent? And let's say
that test also comes back as positive. Now, what is the probability that you
actually have the disease? Well, you can use Bayes' formula again, except this
time for your prior probability that you have the disease, you have to put in the
posterior probability, the probability that we worked out before, which is 9%,
because you've already had one positive test. And if you crunch those numbers, the
new probability based on two positive tests is 91%. There's a 91% chance that
you actually have the disease, which kind of makes sense. Two positive results by
different labs are unlikely to just be chance, but you'll notice that probability
is still not as high as the accuracy, the reported accuracy of the test. Bayes'
theorem has found a number of practical applications, including notably filtering
your spam. You know, traditional spam filters actually do a kind of bad job.
There's too many false positives, too much of your email ends up in spam. But
using a Bayesian filter, you can look at the various words that appear in emails
and use Bayes' theorem to give a probability that the email is spam, given
that those words appear. Now, Bayes' theorem tells us how to update our
beliefs in light of new evidence, but it can't tell us how to set our prior
beliefs. And so it's possible for some people to hold that certain things are
true with 100% certainty, and other people to hold those same things are true
with 0% certainty. What Bayes' theorem shows us is that in those cases, there
is absolutely no evidence, nothing anyone could do to change their minds. And so
as Nate Silver points out in his book, The Signal and the Noise, we should
probably not have debates between people with 100% prior certainty and 0%
prior certainty because, well, really, they'll never convince each other of
anything. Most of the time when people talk about Bayes' theorem, they discuss
how counterintuitive it is and how we don't really have an inbuilt sense of
it. But recently, my concern has been the opposite, that maybe we're too good at
internalizing the thinking behind Bayes' theorem. And the reason I'm worried
about that is because I think in life, we can get used to particular
circumstances. We can get used to results, maybe getting rejected or failing at
something or getting paid a low wage. And we can internalize that as though we
are that man emerging from the cave and we see the sunrise every day and every
day. And we keep updating our beliefs to a point of near certainty that we think
that that is basically the way that nature is. It's the way the world is and
there's nothing that we can do to change it. You know, there's Nelson Mandela's
quote that, everything is impossible until it's done. And I think that is kind
of a very Bayesian viewpoint on the world. If you have no instances of
something happening, then what is your prior for that event? It will seem
completely impossible. Your prior may be zero until it actually happens. You know,
the thing we forget in Bayes' theorem is that our actions play a role in
determining outcomes and determining how true things actually are. But if we
internalize that something is true and maybe we're a hundred percent sure that
it's true and there's nothing we can do to change it, well, then we're going to
keep on doing the same thing and we're going to keep on getting the same result.
It's a self-fulfilling prophecy. So I think a really good understanding of Bayes'
theorem implies that experimentation is essential. If you've been doing the same
thing for a long time and getting the same result that you're not necessarily
happy with, maybe it's time to change. So is there something like that that you've
been thinking about? If so, let me know in the comments.
Hey, this episode of Veritasium was supported in part by viewers like you on
Patreon and by Audible. Audible is a leading provider of spoken audio
information, including an unmatched selection of audiobooks, original
programming, news, comedy, and more. So if you're thinking about trying something
new and you haven't tried Audible yet, you should give them a shot. And for
viewers of this channel, they offer a free 30-day trial just by going to
Audible.com slash Veritasium. You know, the book I've been listening to on Audible
recently is called The Theory That Would Not Die by Sheryl Burch McGrane. And it
is an incredible in-depth look at Bayes' theorem. And I've learned a lot just
listening to this book, including the crazy fact that Bayes never came up with
the mathematical formulation of his rule. That was done independently by the
mathematician Pierre Simone Laplace. So really, I think he deserves a lot of a
credit for this theory, but Bayes gets naming rights because he was first. And if
you want, you can download this book and listen to it as I have when I've just
been driving in the car or going to the gym, which I'm doing again. And so if
there's a part of your day that you feel is kind of boring, then I can highly
recommend trying out audiobooks from Audible. Just go to Audible.com slash
Veritasium. So as always, I want to thank Audible for supporting me and I want to
thank you for watching.
