Arriving from our perceptions, our emotions are multiple, they're complex, and they tend
to be changing as we go along dealing with a conflict.
They can be very difficult to recognize and to be really clear on exactly what it is we're
feeling in the mix of multiple and complex emotions, and they can be even much more difficult
to express when we're involved in a conflict.
So here we've got conflict and emotions are in it, and when we described the nature of
conflict in lecture one, remember we listed the elements that are always present and negative
emotions were one of those elements, they're always present.
If we handle them well, we've got a pretty good shot at handling the conflict well, but
very, very often we don't handle our emotions well in a conflict.
So this lecture is about emotions in conflict and what we can do to handle them as well
as possible.
So let's discuss emotions.
What are emotions?
They're delightful, they're wonderful at times, they can be horrendously painful, they can
be dangerous.
You know, they're an aspect of human nature, especially in a conflict, emotions can be
dangerous because the primary emotion that's most likely to be there is anger, and humans
are dangerous animals when we're angry.
So emotions are going to need dealing with.
How do we think of ourselves as human beings with emotion?
There's a long tradition of this in western civilization that also goes back to the ancient
Greeks, to those people we talked about in lecture two, and it goes back very much to
Plato with his thinking.
And we tend in the western world to think in that tradition of ourselves as human beings,
being reasoning beings, and that's the highest part of it, of what we are.
We're reasoning beings, but we have these emotions which can be nice but can also be
very troublesome, and what we have to do is live by reason and rule by reason.
That's our long two thousand year history of thinking of ourselves as emotional animals.
But you know what, recently studies in neurology and the neurology of consciousness and emotion
and how that works show us that it may be really the other way around, rather than being
reasoning beings who have these troublesome emotions.
What we really are is emotional beings who have evolved this ability to reason that helps
us deal with our emotions.
The last 30 years especially, we've learned an awful lot about emotions, and we can apply
a lot of that to dealing with emotions in conflict.
So how should we think about emotions then?
I want us to think about emotions as being internal facts.
They're facts about us going on.
They're not external facts, they're internal facts.
If I'm having an emotion, if I'm feeling love or hurt or anger, anything positive, anything
negative, it's an internal fact with me.
It's something I'm feeling, and it exists neurologically, it exists biologically, there
are things happening with my body, there are always physical parts of it, and of course
it exists in my mind.
It's going on, and it's relevant.
If it's relevant to the conflict, it's going to have to be reported and accommodated in
the way we deal with the conflict and in what we do to work the thing out.
Emotions are not something that are going to be something I can just put aside and solve
the conflict with reason.
Emotions occur in reaction to stimuli.
What would those stimuli be?
Ha!
Those perceptions of events that we talked about in our last lecture.
Perceptions act as stimuli, and when we assign meaning to them, which may be virtually instant,
we get an emotional response to some of those events that happen.
The central elements in emotions are actually two.
There's a central element of feeling, which can be either positive or negative, and then
there's the other central element, which is arousal.
How strong is it?
I may be angry with you, but it can be slight, or it can be very much.
So there's the scale of what researchers call the arousal level, and then there's the specific
feeling that I'm feeling.
The question is how strongly am I feeling it?
We've always got those two to deal with as we work with this.
Now I want you to notice that emotions, they're not going to be simple.
If you think about your emotions in any conflict situation, if you tuned into yourself at all,
you sort of get that you're not just feeling one thing.
In the same conflict, look in the same person in the face at the same time.
We could be feeling anger.
We could also be feeling some fear.
We could be feeling some sadness for loss and fear about the possibility of loss.
We can be feeling guilty about our part in making this thing turn out the way it is.
We could be feeling shame.
We could also be feeling hope and love and admiration all at the same time, or all in
quick succession as we go through dealing with someone we care about in a conflict.
So emotions are mixed and multiple.
They happen a lot at the same time.
They're not an easy, simple thing to sort out and work with.
I want you to also notice that emotions can mask one another.
It's a very common thing.
One of the things they study in men and they've noticed is that men tend to mask fear with
anger so that more than a female, and this is a statistical difference, it's not all
or nothing, but more than females, males tend to tune into the anger and let it cover the
fear because we're less comfortable feeling fear, just sociologically or whatever.
Women on the other hand may be more likely to mask anger with sadness or hurt and tune
into that feeling.
So really clearly, consciously understanding what we're feeling when we're feeling it
is not as easy as it may seem.
And at the same time, we could be feeling it very strongly, as I said, human beings
are dangerous animals when we're angry.
If we interact badly during a conflict, what's that going to mean?
If I shout at you, if I say something terribly ugly, I can't take it back.
We talked about the four awful truths about a conflict, remember in lecture one, and one
of those awful truths is that some of the damage is irreversible.
All of us can remember things that were said to us at some earlier time, which one we
remember them again, they still hurt.
Something that was said by someone in the heat of anger that they didn't really mean
still hurts us.
You can't take back something that's said.
So we can do lasting harm when we're feeling strong emotion and it's negative emotion.
And so we have to handle these emotions and be careful about that.
We can also set off negative spirals.
What we can do is I can get angry and say something that's a little bit ugly and that
lifts the arousal level in the conflict and we tend to trigger each other in doing that.
The other person that I'm in this conflict with can then rise to my level of arousal
and say something back and then I'll rise and it's a spiral.
And you can think of it, in my mind it's often spirals up, more and more angry.
Other scholars have talked about it as spiraling down like it's setting off a vortex.
Either way you think about it, it's a spiral that sets off with triggering each other's
emotions.
And we can make matters a lot worse.
So it's important when we're in a conflict not to be doing that.
So what we need to do is identify some useful rules for handling emotions in a conflict.
So what would those rules be?
Let's start with remembering that an emotion is not a behavior.
You don't want to mix these two up.
I'm feeling something.
Feeling angry is not the same as acting out on my anger.
Telling you that I'm angry does not require that I scream at you.
So there's a difference between feeling an emotion, communicating about emotion and behavior.
And you want to distinguish the two.
Emotions themselves, we want to treat as those internal facts.
And I don't want, none of us should be doing any apologizing for or explaining away the
fact that we feel something as though we're not supposed to feel it.
Emotion is an internal fact.
It exists.
I shouldn't be apologizing for it.
I shouldn't judge myself poorly for not feeling something I'm supposed to feel.
It's just what I'm feeling.
And it's a response to the perceptions that I'm having.
So I need to just accept it as an internal fact about me.
It's not my behavior.
It's not my morals.
It's an emotion that I'm having, something that I'm feeling.
Let's look at some examples here.
We've got some dramatizations to show you about emotions and how people can handle them.
And we're going to start with some how not to and then move to some how to.
Let's go to a setup where Carl and Anna are colleagues in an organization, not the same
ones we, as the engineering team we talked about in the last lecture, they work together.
Carl has a task that he wants Anna to complete for him so that he can leave and go home early.
He's not her boss.
He's a work colleague.
But if she does this, it means she's going to be working late and he's going to be going
home.
Let's see what happens when someone fakes feelings in response to this request.
Anna, I hate to stick you with extra work.
I've got a meeting to run to.
I've got to get home after that.
I've got people coming for dinner.
I emailed you a draft of the fundraising plan, but it's not quite done.
Can you finish up my part and send it out before you leave tonight?
Sure.
I'll take care of it.
No problem.
Thanks.
You're a team player.
So did you hear what Anna did with that feeling?
She faked it.
I don't think Anna really wanted to stay and work late.
She's not feeling sure this is fine.
There's a problem here.
She thinks she's supposed to feel positive and be cooperative.
She may have learned that it's not ladylike or charming to say no.
But Anna's thinking she needs to be okay with this, and so she's faking it.
She's acting as though she's okay when she's not.
She may even be fooling herself, but she's faking the emotions.
And so what's the result?
She's stuck working late.
Carl goes home early, has his dinner guest, things are fine at home.
He thinks everything is fine at work, but you know what, it's not fine at work.
That's one example.
Now let's see what happens if someone stuffs feelings.
Stuffing is different from faking it.
It's not showing a feeling and trying not to even notice that I'm feeling it, stuffing
it down, hiding it.
All of us have done that at times.
Let's pay attention to how Anna reacts this time attempting to stuff her feelings.
Can you finish up my part and send it out before you leave tonight?
All right, but I need to take care of my part first.
Um, thanks.
Did you notice that?
Anna's not happy.
Carl picks it up, but she's saying she'll do it.
She's stuffing that feeling.
So the difference is much less in the words than it is in the way she says it.
She's stuffing a feeling.
Now things are a little more uncertain.
Carl doesn't walk away thinking everything is fine, but we don't have a solution.
He's still going home early.
Anna's still working late.
What would happen if we went the other direction?
Let's see.
What else could Anna do?
Anna could, um, go off on Carl.
She could get angry and act out her anger.
That's not a good idea either.
Let's take a look and see what happens if Anna does that.
She acts out her anger.
Can you finish up my part and send it out before you leave tonight?
Uh, look, Carl, you're not dumping your work on me anymore.
I've had it with that.
Great.
Thanks.
You're a real team player.
Okay, so that time Anna went too far.
The other direction.
She really pushed it in, in Carl's face in such a way that she created hostility that
maybe wasn't necessary to, to create.
She viewed Carl's behavior as the cause of her problem, but she generalized it a lot
and she just kind of went off on him about it.
So now what Carl's doing, instead of being a little uncertain, Carl's feeling a little
defensive and angry himself and he's wanting to accuse her back.
Thanks for being such a team player.
He says sarcastically.
So we get that acting out, going over the top, doesn't help either.
All right.
Now what would, could we do more positively with this?
What if Anna, just honestly and constructively, expressed how she feels in being asked to
do this at this point?
Wonder what would happen with that?
Let's check it out and see.
Can you finish up my part and send it out before you leave tonight?
OK, Carl, but I've covered for you at least three times in the past month and frankly,
I get angry when this happens.
We have two more fundraising plans to get out next month, so we need to sit down and
talk about how we can stop this from happening.
You're right.
I need to plan better.
Do you have any time next week we could talk about the plans for next month?
How about Tuesday at 10?
That works.
And thanks for covering for me again.
Better outcome.
Notice what Anna did specifically in this case.
She expressed herself using what we call eye statements.
She spoke for her own feelings.
She said, when you do this, I feel this way.
I get angry.
She didn't shout at him.
She didn't say anything ugly.
She just honestly reported to her feelings.
She did what we call owning that feeling.
She just claimed it.
When this happens, this is how I feel.
And then she talked in terms of where we can go from here.
And you know Carl got the message.
I don't know how many Carl's would immediately apologize on the spot, but Carl's would consistently
get the message if we honestly reported out the feeling that we were having at the time.
OK.
So what do we do with this then?
What we want to say about emotions is we need to take them into account.
We've noticed that we shouldn't stuff them.
We shouldn't hide them.
We shouldn't fake them.
We need to honestly report them.
And now what we need to do is take them into account when we deal with trying to resolve
the conflict.
And how can we do that?
OK.
The first thing in terms of taking them into account in the resolution process would
be what Anna just did.
It's reporting them to the other party.
We've got to get them on the table so they can be taken into account.
And both parties will need to say enough of how we're feeling so that we can work with
that in terms of the emotion.
Second thing would be that we need to remember that emotion is not a judgment about the other
party.
Own it yourself.
It's what I feel.
It's not necessarily that Carl is being a clot in this situation.
Anna doesn't really know what all is driving Carl and what his concerns are.
What she knows is when he does this, she feels this way.
And she's reporting how she feels.
So it's not a judgment.
It's not a you statement that you say to you, the other person.
It's an I statement owning the emotion myself.
So we would report it in that way.
I need, in terms of reporting, to take reasonable risks in order to get my true feelings known
and on the table.
But I don't want to suggest that we need to let our hearts hang out openly and foolishly
when it's not safe to be as vulnerable as it takes to put an emotion out there.
If I let you know what my emotions are, there's a certain amount of vulnerability that I take
on in your presence by doing that.
And we're not always in safe company to do that.
So we don't want to be foolish.
We need to make some good judgments and some skill to read situations.
When is it OK to do that?
Then we note that when I'm telling someone about emotions, I want to phrase it specifically
as an I statement.
Keep that point very strongly in mind.
What if the arousal level is just too high to do that well and clearly in thinking about
communicating?
The advice there is take some time.
Now, I don't mean take weeks, I don't mean take days, but I need to step away from a
situation to calm down and get clear.
Some of us know to go take a walk around the block and come back and then deal with it.
Go to our office for a while, take some time, do something different, but calm down enough.
Let myself calm down in order to be able to communicate clearly about an emotion without
overstating or without shouting or without being over the top.
I need to be careful while I'm taking that time not to make the mistake of sort of ruminating
about the conflict and stirring up my anger more, which some of us are want to do in a
conflict situation, you know, just why did he do that?
Don't think in a way that stirs myself up.
If I'm taking the time to calm down, steal my thoughts away from that direction.
Use it to calm down.
Note that conscious thought about how I focus on a communication is behavior itself.
How I choose to think about the conflict is mental behavior.
I can't control an emotion, but I can control my focus.
I can control the way I tend to think about it.
So I've got a good shot at handling the conflict better and calming down if I do it well.
And if Anna had been too angry to speak and she should have taken some time, that would
have helped.
Of course, you can't even always do that because I think Carol would have been gone before
Anna got a chance to walk around the block and come back.
Anyway, take some time to calm down.
Don't ruminate.
Focus differently and that will let you calm down enough to think.
If we're going to express emotions, there's one more kind of collection of thoughts I want
you to think about here that's important and it's what I call the five requisites for deciding
when I can usefully express an emotion in a conflict situation.
By requisites, I mean it's not like prerequisites, they don't have to be there before I talk,
but they certainly have to be there when I talk.
They're not prerequisites, they're requisites.
Five conditions that have to be present in order for me to safely and constructively
describe my emotions in a conflict situation.
Here are the five.
The first one is access.
By access what I mean, and I was fishing for a term for this, the others are easier terms,
but by access what I mean is cognitive access.
The ability to cognitively recognize that I'm feeling something and roughly how intense
it is and what I'm feeling.
Not all of us are aware all the time of the emotions we have.
The common thing that gets described psychologically as denial is actually a good psychological
defense mechanism where I don't let myself know I'm feeling something because I need
to get past it at the moment.
Becomes a problem if I'm in denial too long, but you know what?
While I'm in denial, I don't have the access to the emotion.
I don't know what I'm feeling so I can't describe it.
So I need to get cognitive understanding.
I need to get access to the emotion.
Secondly, I'm going to need the verbal communication skill to just describe this.
I'm going to have to be able to talk about the emotions and I need the language to do
that and the verbal skill to do that.
And some people are more verbally skilled than others.
So I want to get my verbal skills up to a state where they can talk about emotions.
It's not always easy to do, but it's mine to build.
I'll need enough skill to describe what's going on.
The third one in here is also a skill, it's best thought of as a skill, but you don't usually
think of it as that.
And the term is self-esteem.
By self-esteem, what I mean is this, I esteem myself enough to get it that I have a right
to feel what I feel and a right to pursue my own good in life.
What I am is a being existing with the same rights as everybody else.
So I have to get it that I have the right and the ability to take care of myself in
this situation.
It's a skill, the ability to do that is a skill, and a lot of people don't have it
at an adequate level to deal with their emotions very well in a conflict.
So these three I can build up.
The other two are not belonging to me, but I've got to assess to see if I've got them
present.
So let's get to four and five.
The fourth one of these five is a safe environment.
I need an environment that's safe to talk about emotions.
Not every environment is, not every workplace is, not every social setting is, sometimes
in a, even in a close relationship in a marital setting when other things are going on and
there's a lot of fear and trouble around, the environment may not be safe.
So I need the ability to assess the environment around me and think through whether it's
a good time and place and situation to be able to talk about an emotion.
Finally what I'm going to need is a willing partner.
That's the fifth one.
The other person's got to be willing and able to listen and work with me to work that
out.
If I don't have a willing partner who's able to listen and work with me, expressing emotions
well isn't going to be something that, that works.
So the first three of those, those three skills, access, self-esteem and verbal skill, those
three are, are their mind, I can build those.
Safe environment, willing partner, I need to be able to assess, to assess whether they're
okay.
If I don't have those others, if, if I can't get to a safe environment relatively soon,
I may want to change the situation I'm in.
If the partner I have, either a work partner or a friendship partner or even, or even a
romantic partner, can't get around to being a willing and safe partner to work with me
on conflicts, it may come down to my having to decide to change that, okay?
I don't have absolute control of my environment.
I don't have absolute control of, of my partner's behavior.
I can work with them to try to improve them, but they're not mine and the hard truth of
this is I may have to think differently if I can't get my conflicts resolved.
So those might need changing.
Sometimes it only requires waiting for a better, safer time.
So let's try to avoid the pitfall of just avoiding conflict here, but check for that
and see if we can do it.
You know, Deutsch's point that you can get a win-win 80% of the time.
If you think back to what we said about his research, the guy was looking at task-oriented
groups where we're, where we're working together and it was an experimental situation, not
a lot of unsafe environments there.
So his research doesn't include unsafe environments.
So best solution if it's not safe is to remove ourselves from the situation.
It's not safe long-term, okay?
We need to say a little bit about that fifth one.
I can only assess whether the other person is a willing and able partner and we're going
to talk about listening after a while in a later lecture in lecture 13.
So we'll do it in detail then, but we need to say a little bit about being that willing
and able partner in this lecture before we leave that subject entirely.
So just a few things to point out about it.
The first one is I want to be recognized that being that partner, really listening, when
the other party is expressing negative emotions requires courage, requires caring, and to
do it without defending myself and putting in responses, really trying to hear it from
their perspective, that's hard to do.
If Anna says she's angry, what is that like for Carl who's got to get out the door and
his wife expecting it home?
If he really listens and works with her on that, that takes some courage.
That's some real effort from him.
So recognize that first and grant credit yourself when you do it.
One thing is, when you're listening to how the other person feels, don't allow them to
do a lot of abusive expression.
They can tell you how they feel, but it doesn't mean hang in there and take a verbal beating.
So it does not mean that.
So that's a second tip.
Third thing to pay attention to is don't let yourself get triggered into that escalating
spiral of hostility.
If the other party goes up a notch, anger-wise, just don't go with them.
Stay level and try to keep the conversation there.
Otherwise they'll come back down with you.
Then you want to develop that skill of empathy that we talked about in the last lecture and
try to understand how it feels from their expression.
Finally what I want you to do is treat the other party's honest, expressive emotion as
a really privileged communication.
Treat it as confidential.
Be trustworthy with it.
Don't spread that information around and don't use it to hurt them.
Treat it as a privileged communication and honor that they told you something important
about themselves because an emotion really is something important about any of us.
So those are your tips for being that kind of listener.
All right.
What have we learned in this lecture then?
First thing is we can change the way we think about the emotions that we're having.
And humans are emotional beings with reasoning that can help, so we can do that.
Second thing is we can recognize that emotions are present in every single conflict.
They're one of those basic elements that's there.
They are internal facts.
We can't wish them away.
We can't simply will ourselves to feel differently.
They're internal facts and they're going to need to be taken into account.
Thirdly, we can and should report the emotions given the requisites being met.
We can and should report those emotions so we can take them into account in managing
the conflict.
Fourth, when we do that, we want to use I statements.
We want to speak for ourselves and own the emotion that we're having.
I feel this.
Fifth, if necessary, and of course, when it's possible, take some time away to calm down
if that's necessary.
Don't try to communicate about them when the arousal level is too high.
Sixth, remember those five requisites for communicating about emotions and doing it accurately.
Access, verbal communication skill, self-esteem, safe environment, and that willing and able
partner.
That's what we do to handle emotions.
Okay, I've got an assignment for you for the end of this lecture.
Next time you find yourself in a conflict, remember to treat the emotions as internal
facts and try to report them.
If the environment is safe and the person will listen, try to report them without going
off on the other person.
Consider what emotions you feel and think, how can I express them as I statements?
Go ahead and express them that way and then sit back and watch and see what happens.
See if that doesn't work better than pushing it at you statements or yelling at them or
something else.
Try it and see what happens.
Where are we going to go in our next lecture?
Okay, emotions, they're complex, multiple, conflicting.
We explained all of that.
The other thing that's very complex, multiple, and conflicting and changing as we go along
that are basic elements always present in conflict are our goals.
We have goals in every conflict.
They're complex, they're multiple, they're sometimes conflicting and they're changing
as we go along.
They're going to need to be handled in the conflict and we'll talk about that in lecture
six.
