Well, Fisher and Urie gave us those four principles for negotiating win-win resolutions, and they
gave us some nice detailed suggestions for how they could be applied.
In this lecture, we're going to take that a step further.
In this and the next lecture, we're actually going to walk through seven steps, a seven-step
process that we can use applying Fisher and Urie's suggestions to really work through
the win-win resolutions.
Why a step-by-step approach?
Well, if you think about it, when you've got a conflict and it's a significant conflict,
if you start to think, well, how am I going to resolve this, the question can look overwhelming.
It's not the place to start.
The place to start is with the question about, where do I start?
What's my first step in dealing with the conflict?
Once I figure out what my first step ought to be, then I can go, what do I do next?
Work through the process step-by-step if I'm aiming for a win-win outcome.
We break it up into steps, we break it up into seven, and in this lecture and the next,
we'll get through all seven steps.
In this lecture in particular, we're going to do the first four.
These are the steps we take to really do our own preparation and get ready to negotiate
and decide and then arrange a meeting with the other person to do that negotiation.
This is the preparation and negotiation steps that we'll cover in this lecture.
To get started, we really ought to talk about the conditions that we need to have in place
if we're going to be able to use this process because you can't negotiate just anything.
There are two basic conditions that have to be present in order to use this step-by-step
negotiating process.
The first one is that we've got to be able to define that issue in terms of somebody's
voluntary behavior and it's got to be voluntary behavior present tense forward.
We're going to find out whether that condition exists right there in step one.
The other condition, and it's a fairly obvious one, is that the other party or parties are
going to have to be willing and able to negotiate with us that we're going to have to have access
to them, they're going to have to be available, they're going to have to be willing and able
to negotiate with us because if they're not, we've got nobody to negotiate with.
Two conditions, we'll actually find that one out when we get to step four and we go and
try and make the arrangement to meet with them.
We probably also want to note before we start that there's a kind of a step zero that's
going to come before step number one.
What would step zero be?
Well, if you think back to our lecture on emotions and remember that emotions can be
painful, complex, multiple, they can even be dangerous, we can be wound up about our
emotions when we have them.
As Antonio Demasio points out, emotions are really more basic, they come before consciousness.
We talked in the emotions lecture about how you need to calm down enough to be able to
function.
If you need a step zero, if you're upset enough that you're going to have a hard time thinking
clearly, you've got to take a little time.
You've got to breathe, you've got to calm down.
You've got to focus away from it a little bit.
When you're trying to calm down, do not go ruminating a whole lot about why it is I'm
angry at this person.
Take your mind off of it a little bit, calm down and breathe and begin to think about
the future and where you want to go with it so that you can get yourself in a mental state
that will allow you to do some real intellectual works and thinking work because in order to
define an issue clearly, you're going to have to think.
So that would be step zero and it would be there if you need it.
You're not always that upset to begin with.
Now, if we're calm enough to think, calm enough to think, we can go to step one.
Step one will say, define the conflict issue.
That is, state the difference that's bothering you and identify why it bothers.
If you go back to that definition I gave you for conflict in the very first lecture, that
simple two-word definition, it's a discomforting difference.
Just flip it over.
What's the difference?
What's the behavior that I'm objecting to, in other words, and why is that a bother for
me?
That's what I want to be able to do.
Now, this can be a challenging intellectual process, so let me give you some guidelines
and then give you a pitfall to avoid here.
Guideline number one, and it's the preeminent one, you've got to be able to state that issue
in terms of somebody's voluntary behavior from the present moment forward.
See, the past, it may have been voluntary in the past, but it can't be changed now.
We have to give up all hope of having a better past, so it's not about the past, it's the
present forward, and it's got to be stated in terms of behavior.
I can make that clear.
These next two are kind of redundant, but they're, I think, very useful to think.
That's going to mean that we, guideline number two, do not state the issue in terms of somebody's
emotions or attitudes.
There's a cycle that's evident in the research between attitudes or emotions and behavior.
We know that emotions drive behavior, and attitudes drive behavior, and we also know
that behavior changes emotions and changes attitudes, it's a cycle.
The evidence is actually stronger to support our own behavior changing the way we feel
than it is to support the way we feel having to drive our own behavior, so don't object
to emotions.
Why?
They're not negotiable.
I've got no control of my emotions.
I can turn them down by thinking differently, but I can't negotiate them away.
I can't agree to love you tomorrow.
I can't agree to just stop being mad and be held accountable for that, because I don't
have that kind of control over mad.
I can agree to try to behave, to think differently and focus differently, but I can't agree
not to be mad, you know?
So don't state the issue in terms of somebody's attitude or somebody's emotion.
I can't be objecting to how they feel.
How they feel is not negotiable, but if I think I have an objection to how they feel,
they must be behaving in some way that's causing me to think that, and I'm attributing
that behavior to the emotion.
So let me not risk the fundamental attribution error attributing behavior to the feeling.
Let me just identify the behavior and be able to explain why that's a problem for me, not
objecting to emotions.
Similarly, let's don't object to their character.
That one comes up a lot, you know?
I think this person is lazy.
I think this person is sloppy.
I think this person is just not an honest person.
If I'm objecting to character, if that's the way the person is, character isn't really
negotiable.
But similarly, if I think that person has bad character, that person is behaving in
some way, and it might be a pattern of behavior, a sequence of things, but there is behavior
there that's causing me to think that about their character.
So let me identify the behavior and why I object to it, rather than the character.
Because we can negotiate behavior, we can't negotiate character or personality.
So not emotions, not character, instead identify the voluntary behavior present tense forward.
Now there's a pitfall to avoid when I'm trying to do this.
This is serious intellectual work, and I can be working to get it phrased as behavior,
and when I do that thinking about it in that way, I'm at a risk of technically get it down
to where I'm identifying the behavior, but we could fix that behavior and it really wouldn't
solve my problem.
So when I think I've got it identified, this is the behavior and why I object.
Let me double check and ask myself, if I solve that behavior, if we get that changed, well
that fixed my problem.
That will give me a check and avoid that pitfall of getting it technically right for step one,
but then solving it and still not solving my problem.
So make sure that the behavior I identify really gets at what my problem is.
To do this, I might want to write it down.
Writing it out gets it out there objectively and makes it clear for me, and I can look
at it and think with it a bit more clearly.
There are a couple of very simple formulas we can cite for actually stating this.
Two of them.
One of them is kind of for close relationships and is more kind of soft and the other is
a little more concrete, maybe fits better in a business situation.
The first one, the softer one for closer relationships, comes from John Gottman who does all of that
wonderful research on couples.
He calls it the XYZ formula, but it really makes use of the I statement, and it's a simple
formula that works like this.
It says, when you fill in the blank with the behavior, I feel fill in the blank with the
feeling that feels bad.
The softness of that is that it goes to feeling, probably wouldn't work very well at work,
at least not most of the time.
So there's another one that I often use, especially in professional settings, so I'm helping
with people.
That one goes like this, you're doing fill in the blank with the behavior, and that's
a problem for me because, fill in the blank with the explanation.
So you're doing, it's a problem for me because.
Let's illustrate this with some examples.
Let's go back to the scene with our roommates, Rebecca and Jane, grad student and the working
person.
Jane's in the living room watching TV with some friends on the TV's loud and the laughter's
getting louder, and Rebecca's in her room trying to study, and she gets more and more
angry as the volume and the laughter get louder and louder.
Let's see how that one works out in terms of defining the issue.
Jane is so selfish.
Talk about disrespect.
I need quiet time to study, but talking to her is a waste of time.
I guess I don't blame her for wanting to watch TV or hang out with her friends, and I don't
want to lose her as a roommate, but I need quiet time to study.
I guess I just have to try and talk to her again.
Alright, Rebecca's having trouble defining the issue here.
In the first place, she's thinking it's like the fundamental attribution error.
She doesn't respect me.
She doesn't remember what it's like.
That would be the attribution error.
But Rebecca's not really stuck there.
She's thinking further.
She's maybe trying to understand Jane's position, and she's thinking she ought to negotiate,
but she's still struggling with how to define that issue.
Okay, let's do another example.
And in this other example, let's take it to work.
Remember Don and his problem with his sales territory way back from lecture one?
So how might Don define the problem if he wants to negotiate with his boss and work it
out?
Let's find him sitting in his office thinking that through.
Dale's got me driving all over the place.
I can't make sales if I'm stuck in the car.
And Pat drives less, and she's got more potential sales leads in her territory.
Dale's playing favorites.
And if Pat's his favorite, there's not much I can do about it.
What's my real problem here?
It's too much driving and not enough selling, and I need to get a better balance.
I can talk to Dale about that.
Alright, Don's a little further along than Rebecca in this case.
He gets it that if Pat really is his boss's favorite, there's not much he's going to do
about that.
You can't go negotiate that with your boss.
He might even be creating an attribution error if it's based on that anyway.
But he has figured out that he can negotiate about changing that assignment, give him less
time in the car.
And that's real.
It's tangible.
It's about Don's, it's about his boss's behavior in assigning the territory, and it affects
the minutes that it takes him the time he needs to do the job.
So that's a good example of getting toward a better definition.
But there's some what-ifs we need to consider here about definition.
What if it can't honestly be defined in terms of present and future voluntary behavior?
That comes up sometimes.
What if it really is a matter of feelings, character, or personality?
Well if I'm thinking that, remember that cycle.
Let me try to push to see if I can honestly define it as behavior, because there must
be behaviors I'm seeing that are causing me to object.
But if the person really doesn't care, or really doesn't like me, or really isn't trustworthy,
I'm not going to negotiate those emotions or character away.
So if I can't get it as behavior, I can't negotiate.
What if it's about a past transgression only, and it's not about present, what am I after?
Maybe I'm after apology, promise not to do it again, make up, ask the person to make
up for what they did, I've got to bring it to the present.
The past tense thing might be relevant information, but I've got to be negotiating about what's
going to happen now.
So if it can't be defined, if it really can't be defined as voluntary behavior, then I've
found out that that first condition can't be met, and it can't negotiate.
So what would my options be then?
I can choose to accept the situation as it is, and a lot of times we do that in important
relationships at work, in love and marriage, and all kinds of relationships.
We sort of make a decision that's the way it's going to be, it's not a deal breaker
for me, we make a lot of these choices in our lives, and remember I can change my mind
and negotiate later.
So I can choose to accept it.
I can also choose to escalate, I can impose consequences, I can go get an ally, I can
get help.
I can escalate.
That's one option if I can't negotiate.
And a third option is I can leave, I can exit the relationship.
It's painful, it can involve risks, it requires courage a lot of times, but sometimes the
very best choice for the long run is just to get out of there.
So that's one we need to be willing to take if we decide we can't negotiate.
Let's suppose though that we made our decision, our definition, and we got it defined as voluntary
behavior.
Now we can move to step two.
What would we do in step two?
Step two says identify and evaluate your goals.
Now remember we did a whole lecture on goals, and we've already talked about Fisher and
Urie's concept of focus on interests, not positions.
So we've got a lot of concepts to work with here in terms of identifying our goals.
I would suggest this, go to that list of goals that Hocker and Wilma give us.
We want to think first in terms of my topic goals in this instance, and think of trying
to get up my interests that would underline any position I might take.
Ask myself why is it that I want to resolve this?
What's the problem here?
What's the good in a resolution for me?
How important is it to me?
Figure that one out.
An example of that would be if we go to that conflict we did in the workplace where Anna
had the conflict with Carl who wanted her to finish his job for him, doing his work
as well as hers.
The two of them share an interest in getting the proposal out on time, and that would certainly
be her goal.
She has an interest in sharing time and effort fairly and not getting stuck with too much.
So she's got goals that she can focus on there in terms of getting something that would
work better for her in terms of Carl's behavior.
But then go and think about relationship goals.
How would that work?
How do I want to be viewed by the other party in this?
What are my relationship goals?
I want to think about how that relates to my topic goals because I don't want to chase
a topic goal in a way that's going to mess up my relationship.
An example of that might be if you remember our team's design team and the other team
that did the production with the design team led by Hank, and Barry, the other team leader
didn't like Hank's design.
Barry would have relationship goals for his working relationship with Hank, and Hank would
have goals for how he wanted to work with Barry.
And you know what?
Before they get into a clash about this, it would be well for both of them to think about
what are my relationship goals.
Probably also want to think about my identity goals in a given situation.
How does this conflict affect the way I'm viewed by the other party, and how does this
situation seem to be affecting the way I view myself?
Because we're all working on our identity all the time, and if I've got a good sense
of all three of those goals, identity, relationship, and topic, I'm going to be in better shape
to figure out what I'm after here.
Example of that with Rebecca and Jane, our roommates.
Jane, in terms of an identity goal, would not want Rebecca to see her as inconsiderate
or a slob, and Rebecca wouldn't want to be seen as a nag, and they both want to have
a good relationship to keep a better life together, the living together.
One up would not want to be seen by Carl as some kind of a doormat that he can walk
over, and she doesn't want to think that's what she's looking at when she looks in the
mirror in the morning getting dressed.
She wants to feel like a strong, equal team player.
That's an identity goal in addition to having to do with the relationship.
And notice how all these goals, those three types of goals, interact with each other.
So you want to do some serious thinking this through.
Each influences the other as we move along.
Some are stand-in for others.
Topic goals can influence relationship goals and identity goals, and vice versa.
So we really want to do some thinking here, some critical thinking work, and sort out
what our goals are in terms of at least those three types of goals.
For the process goal issue, we're thinking in terms of a process here that's pursuing
a win-win negotiation, so we know where that one is.
Sort out, do some thinking.
Get clear on what my goals are in this particular conflict.
Once I'm clear on that, I can move to step three.
Step three requires me to make a decision.
I've got to decide whether I want to attempt to resolve this by negotiating with the other
party.
Now, nobody's got a sure formula for this.
Nobody can make the decision for you.
We just know you've got to decide.
We do have some suggestions to help consider how to do it, but you're stuck with making
the decision if it's your conflict.
Question number one would be to consider how the other party is interdependent with me.
The shorthand way of doing this that I talked about back in lecture seven when we talked
about power is to think about my leverage.
What's the other party's interest in my being satisfied with how we work this out?
I want to think about what kind of power I've got in this situation.
Leverage is a good handle to get a hold of that.
Second thing is, consider the context.
What else is going on right now with you and the other party?
Is this a time, a setting where this thing can be negotiated?
Be careful here.
Don't use this to put it off, but make a realistic consideration.
Thirdly, consider the relationship.
What's the nature of the relationship I have with this other party?
Is negotiation appropriate with this person?
Are they really able to negotiate responsibly?
Consider that.
Fourth, consider the risks.
What comes up?
What are the risks I take in bringing this up?
Once I bring something up, it's on the table.
We can't go back to where I hadn't brought it up.
It's part of why we're reluctant to bring things up.
Consider the risks and know what they are so I can decide to go ahead.
Fifth, come straight from Fisher and Urie.
Remember Batna from the last lecture?
The best alternative to a negotiated arrangement?
Think that through.
What would be my best alternative?
I know what my backup is, that this doesn't work.
That really lets me better understand how much power I've got and helps me decide whether
I want to try to negotiate.
Sixth one is this, go ahead and decide.
Actually make the decision.
Don't rush it, but don't linger over it.
Delaying is one of the most common forms of avoidance.
We just have trouble making the decision whether we're going to try to negotiate it so we don't
get in there and get that thing done.
Go ahead and make a decision.
Don't rush it, but don't delay it.
Seventh, once I make this decision, consciously let me assign myself full responsibility.
I made the decision and now I'm going to go ahead and act on it.
If this works out well, I'm going to credit myself.
If it falls on its face, I made the decision.
If I decide not to go ahead and negotiate, which I very well might in a lot of instances,
I've got to remind myself that I'm deciding not to go try to negotiate with this person
to fix it.
It's not that they're deciding to keep bothering me.
I'm deciding not to take the steps to change it.
I want to own the responsibility for that.
It's credit if it works out well.
It's mine if it doesn't work out well.
There are some what ifs to talk about with making this decision.
Like, here's a really common one.
What if, just what if, what if the conflict doesn't seem important enough to trouble the
other party?
Or what if now is not a good time?
A lot of things are too small to bother with.
I got a suggestion about that one to deal with.
If I don't have a history of working through a lot of conflicts with a person, those small,
relatively unimportant conflicts are really good ones to practice on.
When you bring it up with them, you can even say, you know, this is little, but I'd like
to work it out with you.
Because you don't want to wait until you've got a big conflict that just can't be avoided
to try negotiating when you wouldn't have a track record.
It's nice to use those smaller conflicts to do it.
If now is not a good time, try to move it on to identifying a specific time when it would
be a good time.
Now is not a good time, might be a way to do it too.
Be careful not to undervalue your own importance in the situation, you know, you've got needs
and it's easy for us to sell ourselves short when we're trying to decide this.
So it's a good idea to take those small steps in practice, get on with it if you can.
If now is not a good time, identify a specific later when you're going to get to it.
If context and timing allow you to negotiate, then you're ready to proceed.
So where are you?
You've got this step done, you've decided to proceed, you've got an agenda.
But the other person doesn't have this agenda yet.
So now we're at step four.
And what we do in step four is we approach the other person and we try to arrange a meeting
in order to negotiate.
You know, if I've decided I want to negotiate, that doesn't mean I can just go negotiate
with the other person and start the negotiation.
At that point, I've got an agenda, but the other person doesn't have it yet and the other
person hasn't agreed to negotiate with me.
So I really want to take this extra step here and arrange a meeting with them to do the
negotiation.
If we don't arrange a meeting, we just go start a conversation on it, expecting the
other party to cooperate, what would that mean?
I'd be awfully presumptuous to do that, I'm presuming on that person's time.
And I also risk wrecking the negotiation before it starts.
We've all been in this position here.
The other person has a complaint with us and they want to negotiate.
And here they are in our face starting the negotiation.
They may have an agenda to get their problem solved, but if we haven't agreed to negotiate
and we're being surprised by this, our agenda as the receiver of that is just to get them
out of our face so that the thing can go wrong from the beginning.
So this step four is really important.
It's important to get right.
Taking it by itself if you've got nothing else out of the whole course would really
help increase the likelihood that you're going to get a lot of conflicts solved better.
We're going to approach the other person and we're going to try to arrange, try to set
up a meeting for the purpose of negotiating a resolution.
We've got some guidelines for this.
First guideline is this.
Approach the other party directly and privately.
You want to do this face to face if at all possible.
One is next best.
I don't like email for it.
Email has a different kind of element to it.
It's much better if you can do it with a live conversation.
Second guideline, refer to the conflict as a problem.
Remember that when Fisher and Uri said, talk about it as a problem, not a conflict, do
it here.
You don't want to go with the person and say, I've got a conflict with you.
I've got a problem.
Call it as a problem to begin with so we can begin to think about it as something we
can work on together.
Once you've done that, guideline three says, let's state the issue.
Let's state it exactly as we defined it in step one.
State it clearly.
Don't approach them with a fog.
I've got some problem with your behavior.
I wish to discuss with you.
Tell them exactly what it's about.
Tell them what the behavior is.
Tell them why it's a problem.
Tell them what you'd like to do is find a solution to that problem that's really going
to satisfy both parties.
You're telling them the topic of a meeting you want to hold and you're telling them the
purpose of the meeting is to find a solution that both they and you are going to be happy
with.
Having told them that, ask them when is a good time to do it.
Ask for a meeting.
Give them a time frame to choose.
When is a good time today?
When is a good time this week?
When is the next time in the next couple of days?
Give them a little range of timing to choose and ask for that meeting.
Here's an example of doing that.
Rebecca.
Good ol' Rebecca.
She's thought this through a little further.
She's going to approach Jane and ask about working something out to control the noise
in the apartment.
Let's listen.
Hey Jane.
Sorry to interrupt.
Listen, I need to set up a time for us to talk about the noise problem.
Right now I'm trying to study and the TV is really loud.
Other times I can't concentrate because your friends are here.
This happens a lot.
So can we set up a time where we can talk about it tonight or tomorrow?
We have to agree on something that works for both of us.
Tonight's not going to work.
Rick's picking me up in a couple of minutes.
Okay.
How about tomorrow night after you get home from work?
Yeah, that's fine.
Thanks.
Ah, now Rebecca's nicely on track.
She's focused on voluntary behavior that creates the noise.
It's present time forward and she's arranged a meeting to deal with it.
She's on track getting this thing going.
Let's look at another example.
Here's Don.
He's talking to his boss, Dale.
Remember Don figured out how to define the issue?
How would he arrange to meet with Dale to talk about negotiating a change in this territory?
Hey, Dale.
Can we talk sometime this week about my new territory?
I'm concerned because I've been driving so much lately that I haven't had enough time
for my customers.
I'm thinking maybe we can adjust it a little.
Somehow cut back on my driving time and still have it work for you.
Don, I'm always as fair as I can be.
I know, I know.
But maybe if we put our heads together we can think of a better layout for my territory.
You know, it's all about boosting my sales while still cutting back on travel time.
Can we just try to sit down together and figure it out?
This week is so busy for me, Don.
Well, how about next Monday then?
It'll only take a little time and I really appreciate it.
Oh, OK.
OK.
Don, I owe you at least that.
Monday morning, 8.30.
Thanks.
I'll be here.
Oh, good.
Don is right on track here.
He's got it well defined.
He's being persistent, but he's being proper in his relationship with Dale.
He's talking about behavior.
He hung in there and he's got himself a meeting for 8.30 on Monday morning.
We at least know he's going to get himself a hearing with this.
I should think how you might have responded.
If you were in Dale's position, you might have tried to put it off, but Dale doesn't
have a lot of room to maneuver here.
It's pretty obvious that the right thing to do is to sit down with Don and talk this
thing through.
And you might do that even if you didn't particularly want to reconsider the territory.
You'd have felt some obligation to do so.
That's proper in the relationship you've got with Don, so this works that way.
Let's consider some what-ifs in this situation, because the other party's involved now.
What's the other party going to do?
Suppose they claim to be too busy in the time frame.
Well, ask them to check their schedule and then get back to them.
Suppose they want to jump to discussing the issue.
Check with them that we ought to discuss it now and make sure that the purpose of the
discussion is to resolve it.
Suppose they counter by raising some other issues they want to discuss.
Treat that as their approach step.
Agree to talk about it.
Volunteer to talk about it.
Just don't put it ahead of yours on the list.
Why?
Because you asked them first.
So there's one more thing about step four, just to mention here before we get beyond
it.
It's pretty frightening to confront the other person.
This is a place where we might want to check it out.
It's a commitment move.
Once you bring it up, you can't get back to where you were before.
But if it's something you really ought to negotiate, go ahead and do it.
Don't refer to avoidance at this particular point.
You can't make progress unless you step up and go ahead and negotiate the thing.
So even if you're afraid of it, go ahead and do it.
Let's summarize then.
Where are we with this?
Here are our steps.
We did have to mention a step zero for you.
You got to calm down enough to think clearly.
Once you've done that, if that was necessary, here are your first four steps.
Bring that issue in terms of voluntary behavior, not objecting to emotion and not objecting
to character.
Two, identify and clarify your goals.
Get clear on what you're after here.
Three, make that decision.
Do I want to go ahead and try to pursue a resolution by negotiating with this person
or not?
Get a decision made.
And then four, the first thing to do acting on it is go make an approach to the other
person and arrange to have a meeting in order to negotiate a win-win resolution.
There's an assignment for you too at the end of this one.
Defining a conflict issue in terms of behavior can be challenging and especially if you're
in the heat of emotion.
So I want you to go back.
Think of three conflicts you experienced in the last year and consider how the issues
were defined by both parties and consider how they could have been best phrased in terms
of somebody's voluntary behavior with a focus on the present and the future.
Think about it.
Think through what difference that might have made.
That's where we are.
Where are we going from here?
All right.
We've got the first four steps defined.
We've got our meeting arranged.
In our next lecture, what we'll do is go ahead and conduct the meeting and push that
all the way through to following through.
Next lecture, how to do the meeting and get our win-win resolution.
