You know, we spend a whole lot more time listening than we do speaking.
Strange to say, then, we're not really very good at listening.
In fact, even in the very best relationships, when we start out with the best of intentions to work something out,
but we're in a conflict, we find it's very, very difficult to listen.
So this lecture is going to be a lecture about listening, and especially about listening in a conflict.
We need to talk about why it's really hard to listen, especially in a conflict, and it's a difficult challenge.
We need to make some useful suggestions for doing a better job of listening.
But we're also going to flip that over.
You know, good listening really begins before somebody speaks, making a safe environment for somebody to talk.
But listening's made a whole lot easier if the person speaking can make it a little safer and easier to listen.
So we're going to have some suggestions for the speaker, too, that'll help the listener out.
Let's get started.
Why? Why in the world do we need to devote a whole lecture to the subject of listening?
You know, sometimes we approach a discussion about a conflict, we do it with the best of intentions,
and we get in there and we're really trying to communicate, and things go all wrong.
And what we feel most, what we feel most is that we're just not being heard, and we're terribly frustrated about that.
That problem gets illustrated very well in the lyrics of a song that's called Your Meanings.
Let me just say some of the lyrics for you.
It says, you put your meanings in my words, till my words don't mean what they say.
I don't mean you hear just what you want to hear, no, you hear what you think I would say.
And when some of your meanings hurt you, then you get angry at me.
And I put my meanings in your bitter tears, and I hate you for hurting at me.
Pretty intense lyrics.
They get right to that point of the challenge.
We don't feel like we're being heard.
We've all been there.
You're in this conflict, you're trying to communicate, you think you're talking, and you just don't think you're being heard.
Both parties usually are doing that.
It's really hard to listen in a conflict, but we're trying to be heard.
That song lyric goes on, the song goes on to say,
But I only wanted you to know me, to see me and hear me as I feel me inside.
Laughing easy, crying hard, seldom certain, always wishing we could fly.
But you put your meanings in my words, while my meanings stumble and fall.
Our lips are still moving, there's sound in the air, but I don't think we're talking at all.
We're not communicating.
We're not communicating if we're not being heard.
So let's talk about what it takes to really hear one another.
You know, to do that principle negotiating we talked about that we got from Fisher and Erie.
Somebody needs to be listening all the way through, and we need to trade that back and forth.
Hearing physically is not the same thing as listening.
That's just the signals getting in and being received.
That kind of hearing, physical hearing is automatic.
Listening can be really painful and difficult because we're going to hear things we didn't particularly want to hear.
And listening is not passive, it's not just being there, it's an active thing that we got to do.
It requires focus, it requires attention, it requires openness to hearing what we're going to hear,
and it requires communicating back with the speaker.
It's a pretty tricky task.
It's also a complex task.
Let me talk to you about the complexity a little bit.
Most researchers in communication talk about different kinds of messages,
or different dimensions of messages that come at us at the same time when we're talking,
because no communication between human beings is as simple as one strand of message coming through.
The most elegant description of that that I know comes from a British scholar named I.A. Richards.
And Richards talks about it this way.
He talks about it as critical points of view to listen for,
but I just call it messages that are in any communication that takes place.
And there are four kinds of messages in Richards terms.
The labels he puts on them are sense, feeling, tone, and intention.
Let me explain those to you.
The sense of the message, Richards says, is what's on the surface.
It's just what the words say.
If I say, I want you to get this point about listening.
The words said, I want you to get this point about listening.
But the way I say it will give you an additional message, and that's the second one, the feeling.
It turns out we can't say anything to anybody about anything without also sending them a message
that tells them something about how we feel about the thing that we're saying.
So there's a feeling message that underlies that sense message.
If I say it intensely, that's more feeling.
If I say it hostily, that's different feeling.
If I say it like I don't care, then it contradicts the sense message.
Feeling message is there.
Third one he talks about is the tone message.
I love his term for this because it's like, don't talk to me in that tone voice.
Social science scholars looking at it these days are more likely to call it the relational message that's involved.
You can't say anything to another person without also making a claim in the way you say it
about the relationship between you and the other person.
You're speaking as equals, you're talking down to them, you're talking up to them,
you're talking from a close view, a further away position.
You give them some message about the relationship.
And it turns out if the receiver rejects that message about the relationship,
probably not going to process the sense and the feeling of the message.
So that one's there.
You also give them one more message.
There's also a message in there that's the intention.
Why am I saying this?
And the receiver gets that.
So there's four messages at one time, at least in Richard's terms, common at the listener.
And they may match each other pretty well or they may contradict each other.
These things have to be juggled and sorted out.
So it takes a lot of interpreting.
So here we are trying to listen and get this right.
Some of the estimates say we run as high as 75 to 80% of our communicating activity involved in listening,
but we're still not doing very well.
I can appreciate not doing very well.
I want to understand this business of all these messages coming to me at once.
But what would good at it mean?
They say we're still not good at it.
What would good at it mean?
Good at it to me would mean that the message we got as the receiver really closely matched
the message, the meaning, the intention, the speaker sent.
Listening well is difficult.
And that, and get it exactly, is really going to be difficult, especially in a conflict.
There's always going to be some difference between the message the speaker sends
and the message the listener receives.
How hard is it to get them to match?
Well, one good way to get at that is, seen in a model that was developed by two researchers many years ago
named Shannon and Weaver.
They were actually working as consultants for the phone company at the time.
But that model is still in virtually every basic text about communication that you can find.
So it's called the Shannon and Weaver model.
And it works like this.
There's sort of five steps in a communication transaction.
It says there's a source, the person that's the speaker, and the first two steps happen with the speaker.
The speaker gets an idea.
But in order to communicate it, the speaker needs to encode it into words or cues of some sort.
So idea encoding, first two steps.
Then there's a middle step that's between the speaker and the listener.
It's got to go out through some channel or some medium.
If it's spoken, it's through the air and sound waves.
Then it's going to get to the senses of the listener where it can be physically heard.
It's taken in by the listener and there's two steps on that end.
It's decoding and then having the idea and holding the idea in the listener.
So if we take that and we think in terms of that model moving across those five steps,
we could do it with a very simple idea that can be encoded.
Let's say I get an idea I want to communicate and it's tree.
See, I had to encode it even to tell you.
Tree is an easy thing to encode.
We've all seen thousands of them.
I know what they are.
So I've got the idea tree.
I say tree.
It goes through the sound waves.
You hear it.
You take it in.
What you hear physically is the word tree and you decode it and you've got the message I sent.
Just what I sent you, tree.
But what do you think are the odds that your tree is going to look like?
Be as tall as, be the same kind of tree, be the same tree that I sent you.
There's always going to be some variation there.
I can say maple tree, you get it better, but yours will be a different size.
I can add adjectives and get it closer.
We can work together, but they're never going to be the same.
Now, that's difficult just with something like a tree.
What happens then if instead of tree we're talking about an idea like that's not fair or that hurts?
And it's not one thin message of the meaning of a word going across,
but it's all four of those messages in Richard's terms coming at the receiver.
And there's noise in this channel.
Shannon and we've talked about noise in the channel and they were talking about static on phone lines.
But there's physical noise.
There's also psychological noise between these people.
If we're emotionally aroused, we're emotionally upset as we are in a conflict,
there's all of that noise clouding and distorting the message as it comes through.
So getting at the same, really hearing each other, especially in a conflict,
is going to be really, really tough.
And so we need to focus too in here on how the speaker is going to be able to help.
Because when this is about feelings and values and abstractions and everybody's upset, it's going to be a problem.
Okay.
Emotional arousal has us upset.
We're getting painful information.
The speaker's emotional state and nonverbal messages may be adding to the negativity.
This can be so difficult that some recent research says,
you know what, it might be impossible to do what we call active listening when we're negotiating about a conflict.
It may not work during a conflict because the listener is feeling attacked.
What can we do then?
We can make a series of suggestions that will help us to do this better.
The first one is, and I say this a lot, just appreciate the difficulty of the task and credit each other with doing that.
If you're doing that, I say this a lot because it's hard and I want you to credit yourselves.
If that's what you're doing, you're going to be helpful to each other and more understanding.
But then from there, I want to suggest you do these things.
If I'm the listener, I need to assume equal responsibility with the speaker for this transmission.
Notice in that Shannon and Weaver model, half the action is on the listener side.
It's active on both of our parts.
We're working together to try to get a message across and make it match.
Think of it that way.
Next suggestion is this.
Set aside other activities and give your full attention to the speaker.
That can be hard to do.
You want to focus fully on listening, focus on trying to understand any noise, including psychological things, other things that are on your mind, other activities.
Try to get them out of your way.
Show that speaker that you're listening.
If I'm worried about how long this is going to take, sometimes it really helps to agree with the speaker to set aside a time.
I think I can work with you for 20 minutes here.
Will that be enough to work this out so that you know there's going to be an end to it and you can set a free time?
Clear your head and clear the deck so you can focus fully on the speaker to get what they have to say.
As you're doing that focus, then, I want to suggest that instead of listening for what the words mean,
be working to get what the speaker is meaning to say with those words.
Try to get the speaker's meaning, not just the correct meaning of this thing.
To do that, you're going to have to check perceptions.
Ask a lot of questions, try to draw out meaning, and confirm your understandings.
Checking for reception is really important.
Let's look at an example of that.
Let's go to an office setting.
Here we're going to have Denise and Steve.
Denise is Steve's boss.
Steve has been complaining to her about a new sign-off process that she's implemented.
Let's listen in.
Okay, so, Steve, can you help me understand how this new sign-off process is causing such delays?
I mean, what's really bothering you?
I want to figure out a way to fix the problem.
Notice what Denise is doing here.
She's asking questions and she's really aiming at trying to understand and she's telling Steve she's really trying to understand.
And you can hear it in her voice.
Denise is being a good supervisor.
He showed up with a complaint and she's really trying to understand and she appears willing to help.
That's going to draw him out and help the communication take place.
So, that's Denise getting a start.
Now, you want to check whether your interpretation matches what the speaker's message was.
And a really good way to check that is to paraphrase back.
You don't want to feedback the exact same words the person said,
because if you do, you get what communication scholars call a bypass that can happen.
I feedback the same words, then you know I heard the words you said and can repeat them back,
but we haven't checked for meaning.
We've just repeated the words back and forth.
So, if you paraphrase it, kick it back in different words, you'll get a better check on the meaning.
As you're doing this, you want to attend to the nonverbal cues.
And if the words in the body language don't match, you probably want to check for meaning there.
Let's look at another example.
Let's go back to Denise and Steve.
Same setting and see what's happening.
I want to see what we can do to fix the problem.
It's just the idea of having to run around the building to get signatures from all these different people
before my team can move on with their piece.
It's insulting, like my team isn't trustworthy or dependable.
Okay, I'm getting that we have two problems here.
One is the delay aspect, and the other, which looks like it might be more important,
is that the new process seems to show a lack of management confidence in your team.
Am I right on that?
Alright, Denise is checking for meaning now.
She's showing receptivity.
She's picked up on the fact that Steve feels untrusted and insulted.
The word here, the sense message that he led with, led in time,
but that feeling message that came along in the way he said it came stronger.
And Denise has really picked up on that.
So what she's doing is listening for IA Richards' four messages,
sense, feeling, tone, and intention, and she's working with all of them.
And you know, if they don't seem to match, it's a good idea to check for meaning
and help the speaker sort out what he or she means.
So you want to be checking for meaning, paraphrasing back.
Next suggestion.
When you've gotten the message from someone, you need to respond and reciprocate.
We hate it when we tell somebody something and we don't know what they did with the information.
Humans want a response and they want reciprocation.
So you need to show understanding and appreciation,
especially you need to show understanding when you've heard painful things, even if that's hard.
You need to let the speaker know what you're going to do with the information.
Speakers need to know that the communication effort mattered.
They took a risk talking to you. They need to know what mattered.
And we need to communicate back, given the information about yourself,
that's kind of equal to what they gave you.
There's a rule of reciprocity at work here,
that it's true in psychology generally between human beings.
You know, we equalize. You do something for me, I do something for you.
It has survival value.
In communication, if you think of it as information, you give me information about you.
The rule of reciprocity says, I'm going to give you some information back.
Equalize that.
What would reciprocating sound like?
Let's look at an example of that.
Here's Denise following up with Steve.
You busy? Can I come in?
Sure, what's up?
I wanted to get back to you on the new sign-off process.
I have an answer on one problem and a proposal on the other.
OK, what you got?
I checked with Ted about why he set that process up.
He says it's got nothing to do with dependability.
He's just looking for a way to make sure that everybody with responsibility is involved.
That makes sense.
He understands, and I do too, that the way he announced this thing could look like a vote of no confidence.
But that wasn't his intent.
He's sorry about that.
OK, what's the proposal?
Well, Ted realized that having everybody sign-off is too time-consuming and cumbersome,
but he still needs a way to make sure we're all on the same page.
So he wants to meet next week to see if we can all figure out another way to accomplish that,
or at least to streamline the new process so it's easier on everybody.
Sound good?
Yeah.
I should be able to work something out.
Just tell me when and I'll be there.
All right, Denise has gotten back to Steve promptly,
and she's got an answer as best she can get at this point.
The decision wasn't all hers, so she couldn't just decide what to do with it.
So she's reciprocating for herself and for her boss.
She's come to Steve's office, which is a really nice touch.
He came to her in hers.
She's coming to him, to his office.
It's a nice touch, expresses equality, and it reciprocates.
And she's worked this issue.
She's done what she could do with it.
Steve's okay with this for now.
This is going pretty well.
Good listening on Denise's part.
Well, you know, we said that listening is really hard,
might be impossible in a really hard conflict.
And our examples there, Denise did a great job,
but there wasn't a whole lot of heat in that conflict.
There were some hard feelings.
There wasn't a whole lot of heat.
It gets much harder if the emotions are stronger in a conflict.
So if it's going to be that much harder,
we better talk some about how the speaker can help the listener.
Steve didn't do a lot of work helping Denise, and she didn't need it.
But in a lot of conflicts, the speaker's going to need to make it easier for the listener.
So let's talk about guidelines for the speaker.
First thing here, as I repeat often,
remember to appreciate the listener's willingness to listen,
give you time, effort, risk.
Remember when I talked about the seven steps,
I said thank them to begin with.
That's real. You want to feel that.
And I'll say that every time it's relevant as we go through the entire course.
Then the specific suggestions.
The thing to really avoid here is any kind of face challenges,
any kind of demands that you make on the other person.
Do not make demands.
Use statements as in pointing your finger at the other person and saying,
you, this, that, or the other.
I'm not the expert on the other person.
I'm the expert on myself.
So let me make eye statements in the conflict.
Begin with I and tell them how you feel and how you see what's going on.
Don't trick yourself into an eye statement that really is a use statement.
You know, I feel that you are being stupid here is a use statement.
Don't do that. Make genuine eye statements.
And then work with the listener to ensure that his or her intended meaning
is that your intended meaning is getting through to him or to her.
You got to work with them. That's a two-way street.
Working this thing back and forth.
Let's revisit that first scene again with Steven Denise.
But let's have Steve do a better job.
Let's listen to how differently he might express his view.
I want to see what we can do to fix the problem.
So I have two problems with the new sign off arrangement.
One is that getting all those signatures is going to cause delays.
You know how hard it is to track people down around this place.
But second, when I heard Ted's announcement,
I started to worry that you and he maybe had doubts about my team's ability to get the job done.
I'm really concerned.
Much better way for Steve to voice his complaint.
Notice what he's doing here.
He's making it very clear. He's very accurate.
He's owning the feeling himself.
He's making a nice statement and saying this is how I feel.
You know what? If I'm Denise, if I'm the supervisor,
that one's a lot easier for me to work with
than the complaint the way Steve expressed it initially.
It's just easier for the listener to hear and respond
so the speaker can do a lot to make that happen.
Let's talk about some more guidelines for the speaker.
What I want you to do as a speaker is really remember
that just saying something is nothing like the same thing as communicating it.
So often we just assume we said it so it got communicated
and most of the time it didn't.
So if I don't make that assumption, what do I do instead?
I really need to pay attention to the listener when I'm talking
and I need to be watching and listening
and paying attention to the listener's nonverbals
to see if my message is getting through accurately.
And then I need to work back and forth with the listener checking for meanings.
And if the listener isn't paraphrasing back to check with me,
I might invite the listener to do that if I'm the speaker
so that we can check to make sure that we've got it.
So I want to treat myself as a partner with the listener,
especially when the thing is difficult, and work it back and forth.
I'm also going to want to anticipate
when what I say may be about to cause pain or fear
and I want to do what I can to put that listener at ease up front.
I need to be honest, but I want to make this conversation
as safe as I can make it.
Let's look at an example of that.
Let's go back to Denise and Steve.
But in this situation, it's not Steve's complaint.
Denise is revealing a report that Steve and his team have submitted
and there's a little problem with it.
Steve, first off, let me put you at ease.
You've done an excellent job on this report.
Overall, we're really happy with it
and impressed with your team's work.
And we pretty much buy your conclusions and recommendations.
Good. I saw there's notes stuck all over it
and I thought I might have to defend everything in there.
So what's the but? There's always a but.
One problem is with the layout of the data,
but I know we can figure that out.
And then there's some little things we need to go over.
Okay?
Okay. Let's tackle the data layout first.
Okay.
Denise has done a nicely effective job here as the supervisor.
She's made this as safe as you can.
Of course, lots of us, when that would happen,
we might know another she was going to drop,
but she's softened that as much as she can.
Steve knows she thinks it's a good report
and we're talking about minor things
so that's much more comfortable for him to work with.
She made it as safe as she could make it.
One thing counselors suggest for this,
and I think it's a very useful one,
is if you're in an ongoing relationship
and you have to deal with conflicts
that may hurt a lot and difficult things may be said
and it may be hard for people to deal with
or people may not be able to express themselves,
that it's nice to have a signal
that asks for a pause or a time out to stop.
I think about that signaling idea a lot
the way it works with my dentist.
So I go to my dentist and when I'm in the chair
and he's getting ready to drill or something,
he'll say, well, Michael, you know,
I want you to know that you can signal me.
You won't be able to talk, but you can signal me
if it starts to hurt at all
or you just need to take a break
and he tells me to just raise my hand.
So there I am in the dentist chair lying there
and I know that I can just lift my hand up
and he'll stop.
And even if I don't have to lift it up,
which I usually do several times,
I know I can lift it and so I've got to break it.
It's nice to have a way to break it
when the thing starts going in a direction that's problematic.
Very helpful for listening in and for the speaker.
And then finally, long-term, you know,
you're going to want to build the kind of trusting relationship
where it feels generally safe because you know each other
and can predict some that the other person
is going to respond with listening and respect
when you speak up.
That's really going to help a whole lot.
So where have we been in this lecture then?
Let's go try to summarize.
Remember we started out saying that listening
and speaking are among the most challenging things
that humans can do and that it's especially challenging
during conflict.
So the listener and the speaker really have to work together
with the task of communication in this kind of a situation.
There's some critically important things
to remember from this lecture.
For both of you, appreciate the risks
and the efforts that the other is making
and the challenge for doing their part,
both for listener and speaker.
Then the listener should assume equal responsibility
with the speaker.
Check perceptions of meaning with the speaker
as you go along.
Attend to the nonverbal and the verbal cues
as you go along.
As you do this, take in those four messages
Richard's talks about.
Sense, feeling, tone and intention
and compare them and check back
if you need to on those.
And then lastly, if I'm the listener,
respond, check back with the speaker,
respond and reciprocate.
So what about the speaker?
What do we recommend for the speaker?
Speak and I statements.
Not you statements.
Own the thing yourself.
Speak for yourself.
Work with the listener to ensure
that the intended meaning is transmitted.
Work up front if you have to
to minimize any pain or threat
that the message may give to the listener.
It's going to make it a lot easier to listen.
You know in a conflict there's three fundamental strategies
that are obvious.
There's fight, flight and there's communicate.
And those first two fight and flight,
lower animals can do those.
And we can do those too.
But that third one communication,
when you think about this from the standpoint
of speaker and listener together in this situation,
requires taking some risks, requires time, attention,
enduring some pain a lot of times
and hanging in there and getting it through.
But you can do it working together.
You can do it.
A last thing that I just kind of want to end with
about listening is that this is a skill
that's not all that hard to learn.
You got to work at it.
You got to try.
But the suggestions I gave you here in this one lecture,
if you follow those,
if you get about half of them right,
you'll experience a gain right away.
So listening pays off right away.
So it's easy to incorporate
into your repertoire
of communication behaviors just in general
and you can incorporate it into conflict.
So it's not all that hard to learn
what we've suggested in this lecture.
Here's an assignment for you.
Think about the most recent argument
you engaged in that went back and forth
as a real argument with a friend,
a loved one or a work colleague
that really went back and forth.
You might want to write out some of what was said
so you can think about it.
When you've got a description
of how that went back and forth,
consider this.
Did I feel that I was really being heard
and understood when I spoke?
And if not,
and the answer for most of us is probably not,
but if not,
to what extent might the suggestions in this lecture
have helped?
Which suggestions, how might they have helped?
Really try to apply what we said in this lecture
to your last conflict
and see if you can see how that would have helped.
Where are we going to go from here?
All right.
Everything we've talked about up till now
has been about managing conflict
in general and about how handling
specific episodes of conflict.
They would apply everywhere.
But every conflict occurs
in the context of some kind of a relationship.
Some are casual, some are close,
some are work, some are personal.
Two kinds of relationships
are where we have the most conflicts
and where they matter most.
So the next several lectures
are going to focus on how the conditions
and dynamics of those relationships
affect conflict
in conflict management.
The two kinds are close relationships
and then work relationships.
In lecture 14 and in lecture 15,
we're going to talk about conflict
in our close relationships.
