In our last lecture, we focused primarily on the natural ongoing dynamics that are there
in close personal relationships and how those dynamics create natural conflicts that occur.
We tried to get us to where we could understand how seeing those natural dynamics in play can help
us handle conflicts more easily and help us build stronger relationships. What we're going to do
in this lecture is talk about two kinds of things. One, we're going to go further with applying
specific suggestions on how we can make use of those insights and we're even going to reach
back to some earlier lectures and talk about how we can apply the insights from those here in
close personal relationships especially to get better results handling conflicts. That's the
first thing we're going to do and then we're going to turn to a second thing which is going to come
up this way. Any close relationship is going along in a given pattern but life happens. Events can
happen. Major events that change the nature of the relationship and give us all something major
to adapt to. Those are disruptions that occur and we're going to talk about how to deal with those
in what we call critical communication context. Two things to talk about then. So let's move
and get started talking about first the suggestions that we can make. What I want to do is begin by
considering here and making sure we're clear on the two ways in which conflict in these close
personal relationships that are permanent and long term will differ from what happens in temporary
or casual relationships. As we know in the last lecture the stakes are going to be a good deal
higher. It's going to cost more. A conflict that's not handled well in a really close important
relationship can be a major disruption in my life. It can undermine one's self-identity and
feelings. So the stakes are very, very high. So the risk of speaking up is greater and the
risk of listening is greater. So we want to know that about our close personal relationships.
There's greater threat to the listener. We talked about that in lecture 13. So it can be very
difficult listening and especially harder listening when the conflict is occurring in a close
personal relationship because there's strong emotions involved because we care more and those
strong emotions can lead to overreaction, more emotional involvement. So we've got more emotion
involved. The anger can feel greater. The fears can feel greater. So the load, the risk here,
is a good deal higher. That's the first difference in what's different from casual. But the second
way is really more like good news. There's more opportunity here to get the thing resolved and
resolved in a way that works. That caring and identity investment we have in the relationship
make us more motivated, give us more knowledge of the other person. And so we're in a better
position to work through the conflict. We have some existing levels of trust. We know this other
person. So we have stuff to work with building toward a resolution. And even in long-term
relationships, you know, they allow us to go back to that experimentation stage. And if that doesn't
work out, we can try another solution and we can do several rounds of working out solutions.
We have much more opportunity to get good resolutions and make them stick
in an ongoing relationship. So they're different in those ways. And the second way is really helpful.
We've got a better shot. It's harder. It's bigger. But we've got a better shot. We've got more opportunity.
Secondly here, I want to talk about just what we can do in those relationships in terms of making
the relationship a place where it's easier to resolve conflict. Roger Fisher and Scott Brown,
that's Roger Fisher who is in the Harvard Negotiation Project, Scott Brown is too as a
matter of fact, but it's Fisher of Fisher and Urie, did a book some years after Getting to Yes,
which he called Getting Together. And that's about building the kind of strong relationships
that are supportive enough that they make good contexts for good conflict resolution.
Fisher and Brown give us a set of suggestions there that are just extremely useful
in the book Getting Together. They say first, balance emotion with reason. We're two kinds of
beings. We're emotional beings who can reason, let's use both and keep them in balance, letting
either one dominate. Second thing they say is get really interested in learning how the other
member sees things and feels. Remember the lecture about perspectives when we talked about the lens
model? Try to get yourself around to that other partner's lens and see things as they see them
a lot so you understand them better. That's their second suggestion. Third they said, always consult
before deciding on anything that might affect the other person in that relationship and listen to
what you get when you consult. Listen to what they say and work with them. The next thing they say,
and it's a really nice piece of advice, is they say what you need to do is be wholly trustworthy,
but not wholly trusting. Work as hard as you can to be perfectly trustworthy, but don't be wholly
trusting. Don't add that heavy load to anybody because no human being is really up to being
perfectly trustworthy. That would be too much stress. Nice piece of advice. And then they say,
mm, never try to coerce, never try to push too hard, persuade, negotiate, and they say as equals.
And that fits with all that we've seen about managing conflict. And finally they say, you know
what, practice acceptance of the other person. That person is who he or she is. And then when you
have differences, take them seriously and deal seriously with them. That's a set of advice on
how to operate in general in a relationship that will make it a good place, a good atmosphere,
a good context for handling conflict. Now let's go back and pick up some things from
some earlier lectures and bring them through to close relationships and talk about what to do
with them. Remember our lecture five where we talked about emotion? We can apply what we learned
about emotion here in a close personal relationship. Remember in lecture five we said that when you're
having feelings, strong emotions that are relevant to a conflict, they need to be not acted out,
but they need to be expressed. And in order to express them, you need a safe environment and
a willing partner to do that. Bring that forward to the close relationship. Make the relationship
itself a safe environment and try to be the willing and able partner. That's especially important
in a close relationship. Move forward across the lectures to lecture seven where we talked about
power. Remember the fundamental thing I told you that all the research really points to most
significantly about power in conflict. There's always a power struggle no matter how close to
relationship, but the more equal the power, the better the odds. So you really want to work for
equality in that relationship. Now of course there's some exceptions. Parent child, eight-year-old
Johnny wants to bring a snake he caught into the house. Mama can say no and that one can work out.
Our 14-year-old Wendy wants to stay out until after midnight. You can say no, the power shouldn't be
equal in those instances. But in general you want to work toward equal power in relationships.
Let's bring it forward for some earlier lectures. I've got some additional suggestions I want to
point to here and bring them in to this close relationship. One of those is the rule of reciprocity
that I mentioned. I talked about it when we talked about listening to lectures back. You want to give
back information that's equal to what you're getting. As much personal information as you receive
from the other party in a close personal relationship and at the same level of intimacy,
you want to be giving that back. You ought to follow the rule of reciprocity in a close relationship
in the way you communicate. That helps us keep power relatively equal because information,
as you remember when we talked about power, is also an important power base. So it keeps power
equal if information is equal. Each of us knows about the same amount about the other.
That's going to make a stronger, safer place for handling conflict.
It might be that the other party gives you more information than you're prepared to handle or
share at that time. If that's the case, you know what you want to do? You want to tell them. I really
can't go that far with you now. You want to be real with the person about that and be real about
why not because you've got to follow rule of reciprocity and not let it get too far out of
the line and then they can begin to withhold. So that's that suggestion. Here's another really
important one that's extremely, extremely useful. This suggestion says give at least 80% positive
feedback to the other party in that relationship. Well, do I have to tell them good things all
the time? A lot of people think, you know, I don't think, you know, I love you. You know,
I feel good about you. Why should I have to tell you? The research says we need to keep hearing that.
Now, the great psychologist B.F. Skinner, a lot of his research didn't exactly pan out in the long
run, but one finding of his, one assertion of his that keeps panning out in his own research
and in others following up is this business about the need for positive reinforcement,
which is the need for positive feedback. And it translates into a kind of rule of thumb theory
that says, you know, you need at least 80% positive feedback. Humans need that to function at an
optimal level. That's what Skinner showed us. And certainly at an optimal level in the relationship.
But if you take that notion and apply it to our handling of conflict,
if I'm hearing plenty of positive things, I know that what I do that's right and it's good
is noticed and feels appreciated, then I know that I'm doing well in this relationship. And it's
going to be a lot easier for me to hear if now you have to say something negative, which sooner
or later you will. If you haven't said anything positive to your partner, and now you've got
something negative to say, that's not going to feel fair or it's going to feel more threatening.
So you don't want that 80% positive feedback. If I can't find 80% positive things to say to somebody
I'm in a close personal relationship with, there's something wrong here. I don't think I belong in
a personal relationship, at least not a close one with somebody that I can't say at least 80%
good about. So look for the positive things and go ahead and say them. 80% positive reinforcement.
That would be really, really useful. That's an important suggestion. Okay, now let's remove
to talk about the conflict styles and conflict strategies a little bit and patterns in the
relationship. Here what I want to suggest to you is that when conflict occurs, we really ought to
have, as I said last lecture, a conflict style, this collaboration. It ought to be what we do
and as the norm and then we back into other things. We looked at principal negotiation,
we described that in lecture 10 and there's a useful guide there. You've got the seven-step
negotiating process and both of those work for collaboration. They work for getting win-wins.
That's what we always ought to be trying to do first. If this is a close personal relationship
that we value. Now, if accommodation by one party is required and you can't get to that and you
couldn't compromise, you might want to make sure that you take turns accommodating the other and
it's not all one person or the other doing the accommodating. And we ought to make use of what
are the ample opportunities in an ongoing relationship to make sure we follow through,
to track whether the other party follows through. They're closer to us. We can see it and there's
plenty of opportunity to give them positive feedback when they do or to renegotiate when
they're not or when it's not working out for us. We have plenty of opportunity to do it.
So think collaboration is the dominant way that you're going to handle conflicts in a close
relationship. One thing that you can do to help that, and this is another suggestion,
is to create a dependable opportunity that with the social expectation that conflicts will be
brought up and they're going to be respectfully discussed and they're going to be resolved.
A regularly timed dependable opportunity to do that. That would be a situation in which you'd
respect the claims that an individual's time and attention has, but you set a time time to do it.
The way you do that is you schedule a meeting. Counselors often call this a family meeting,
if it's a whole family, a couple's meeting. It's really suggested by counselors a lot as you do
this. You set that meeting up whatever you call it. I don't particularly like either of those
terms. They sound a little soft, but you set a regular meeting up. You give it priority. Everybody
puts it on their schedule and really try hard to honor it. It should be a regular time. It should
be weekly or twice a month, certainly at least that often. These meetings will serve a broader
purpose of communicating. They're not limited to just bringing up conflicts so they don't have to
feel negative coming. They ought to be about telling each other what's going on with this
and how we really feel about what's going on. That way they can prevent unnecessary conflicts
and misunderstandings from arising as well as help us have an opportunity to bring up conflicts
when they occur. It's important to communicate in these meetings so it's really happening and then
how we feel about those events. The general rules in those meetings should be that each person in
the meeting gets a time to talk and the rest of us are going to really try to listen and actively
listening following what I suggested in lecture 13. Questions could be asked, but not to challenge.
You want to hear and understand and if we want a response, we ask for it. If we want to negotiate,
we can ask for that. We can negotiate there in the meeting if it fits or set a time. But if you set
up a meeting that way that's regularly scheduled, you know you're going to have an opportunity and
you can rely on each other to be there. In our busy lives going a lot of different directions
these days, it's a wise thing to get busy and do that so you can ask for solutions to negotiate
and you have a meeting set up in which you can do that and it's a regular meeting.
Now, those were suggestions. That's a set of suggestions that you can follow that really
help. They bring forward what we've been talking about all along and give you some good guidelines
for dealing with conflicts and the ongoing aspects of a close personal relationship.
Now I want to turn to those disruptions that I said I was going to talk about.
What Mary Brown, Mike Peters and I have called critical communication context.
Here's the way these things work and I'll explain as we go along why we call them critical
communication context. You're going along in a relationship and occasionally things happen.
Life happens. Things happen that can seriously disrupt the relationship and really alter the
normal dynamics that are going on and when those things happen they're going to create new conflicts
and they're going to make the conflicts you've got harder to resolve. The consequences of
potential disruptions here can really be major. Now, why does it work this way? In all close
relationships, all of them including couples and families, you can think of them and understand
them very well as systems that are going on as living systems and in a living system that's
kind of a thing is characterized by this tendency. Everything's interacting all the time but the
tendency in a system as it's operating is to seek stability on the one hand, keep it as stable and
as long lasting as you can and on the other the tendency of systems is to adapt as they have
to to solve problems and survive. That's what living systems do in biological systems and in
human systems and families and couples and relationships and organizations. That's what
living systems do. They're looking for stability. How you get the stability is we develop roles
and expectations of each other and patterns of interacting and we've all got roles and we know
our part and we're doing those and we're counting on the other party to do his or hers. We do them
without thinking about it. Most of them haven't really been negotiated. They've been worked out
over time. They've just fallen into those places. That's what's happening in these relationships
but then an event can come along that can change all of that and it can surprise us. We don't have
to have caused it. Like what? Suppose one member in this couple or this family gets a serious injury
or acquires a long-term illness that changes that person's ability to function and participate.
It may even require the other members to step up and take care of that person. Mom, for instance,
gets Alzheimer's disease. It could be a positive thing too. Say you have a member, dad, who's an
alcoholic and he gets help and becomes sober. Well, the family system was running around the way he
behaved as an alcoholic. Now he's sober, he's got a different role and everybody's got to change.
When these things happen, they're very disruptive to the ongoing pattern of the relationship.
I was privileged to work with a couple of really fine scholars in working out this concept,
Mary Brown and Michael Peters and the three of us agreed to label these critical communication
contexts and I'll explain them and explain why we call them that. What happens to create a
critical communication context is one of these destabilizing events happens. It changes members'
self-concepts, alters individuals' ability to perform, and changes the demands of roles,
really threatens the identities of the individuals involved. They make demands for performance
in a new way on people. All the members get distressed. Even if it's a good change,
all the members are going to get distressed. This tends to magnify any sense of personal
consequences and it alters the relationship and it may in fact threaten the relationship that's
taking place. That sets up a kind of perfect storm for relational communication. What do I mean by
perfect storm here? Well, on the one hand, because of all these new uncertainties and even the doubts
about who we are and what we're able to do, everybody's insecure. We're often uncertain even
about our identities and our abilities. We're afraid and some of us are going to be angry about
having to change and step up or what we can't do anymore. We could be just mad at the universe
about what's happened to us. So there's a lot of stress, there's fear and there's anger and
uncertainty all at the same time for all the parties involved. What that does is make communicating
about personal matters on the one hand much more necessary. We've got a lot we need to talk about
and a lot we need to renegotiate because we've got this relationship. The old roles are blown up.
We've got to negotiate new ones. What are we going to do? So it's much more important that we be able
to talk, talk intimately and conflicts will arise from this sometimes on a daily, even an hourly
basis and we've got to talk about them and get real and work them out. But at the same time,
because of all of that uncertainty and all that emotional overload and all of that stress,
it's a whole lot more difficult to communicate directly, especially about conflicts.
Everything is more loaded with more dangerous pitfalls. So what you get is this perfect storm.
On the one hand, it's absolutely much more necessary that we talk constructively and
intimately and personally and handle our tough conflicts and on the other hand,
it's a whole lot harder to do. If we can do it well and get through it, then what we have
is a relationship that's going in a good direction. We can move to a new normal. If we can't do it well
and get through it, the relationship is going to get blown up and destroyed. So we call this
context of getting through this change a critical communication context. It's absolutely critical
that we communicate well, but it's extremely difficult to do at the same time. Tough spot,
critical communication context. Well, what can we do about it? It's not hopeless. What can we do about
it? First thing is just remember that we can't really prevent critical communication context.
We can be careful so we don't get injured and that sort of thing. But life happens sometimes. It
brings surprises, pleasant or unpleasant, that really change things fundamentally. So we can't
prevent them. We do have to recognize once again, we're up against something difficult and appreciate
that for each party. I need to appreciate for the other party how difficult it is. And that's true
if I'm the one who feels like the victim. I'm the one that's sick or from the one that's suffered
the injury. The loved ones around you watching you go through that or going through something
that can be harder than what you're going through. So appreciate the spot that each other is in.
All members, here's what you have to try to do. Even though it's hard, go ahead and talk more,
not less. Even though it's hard, talk more, not less. Second thing I want you to do
is when there are taboo topics that emerge, get those topics on the table. They are going to
need to be talked about. Some of the kinds of critical communication contexts that have been
studied, I know that Michael Peters did some really wonderful work studying the critical
context that's created when the woman in a married couple has breast cancer and has to have a
breast removed. What does that do? Boy, when she comes home with that, you could have a taboo
topic and that couple better get it on the table and talk about it and work through it. Not just
be quiet about it. That kind of thing can happen. So for couples, it could be sex issues. That one
might be related to that. How one feels about the other's mother might be an issue. That could be
taboo. You might need to get that on the table with friends or family members. Whatever's come,
become taboo, get it on the table and talk about it. You want to be honest and clear,
but try to be kind as you're doing that. Next thing I want to suggest is that this is an occasion
where you really, really, really want to get professional help. Counselors really help with
this. You're going through a tough spot. And then finally, I want to suggest that you ought to trust
that a new normal can be achieved. There's a wonderful friend of mine who contracted multiple
sclerosis. He found that he had MS and he found it not long after he'd retired, had a good life
set up for himself in retirement. Everything was good. And then the symptoms began to occur
and he struggled with MS. He had all sorts of wonderful plans for how things were going to go.
And my friend with the wonderful spirit said, Michael, what I'm doing is learning to be comfortable
with the new normal. Well, the relationship you've got when you get through a critical
communication context is never going to go back to the way it was. I can't go back to the way it
was before I had MS. I can't go back to the way it was before this person had this operation.
We can't go back to the way it was before mother contracted Alzheimer's. But we can get to a new
normal if we stick with this over time. That's really going to work out. So that's critical
communication context. It's something we've got to deal with. And the relationship is going to
change. But we can get to a normal when we're finished, if we do it well. If we don't do it
well, a great many relationships are just going to break up over it. One of the things, even with
that good change that I mentioned of, you've got an alcoholic in the couple and that alcoholic
cleans up and gets sober and you've got to change, the fact is that a great many couples don't make
it through that change. They were making it through all the drinking and they had adapted to that.
But the change imposes new roles and they don't get through that. So it's a threat,
critical communication context. And I want to suggest that you be very careful with it,
do what you've got to do, get help and you can get through and trust that you can get to a new
normal. Okay, what have we seen here? First thing, I want you to go back to those suggestions and
let's remember what we talked about. You want to use constructive conflict management to build
and maintain strong personal relationships. And vice versa, you want to build strong personal
relationships to help you with constructive conflict management. First thing is that when a
conflict occurs, you want to go back, you want to address it through collaborative negotiation,
you want to be playing for a win-win, you want to use everything we've talked about in the
lectures up and now and you've got a better shot at doing that. Being creative, working together
to get win-win solutions, you've got a better shot. Fall back on compromise that that fails or
accommodating each other and taking turns to balance it if you don't want to compromise. But
you can do that and you've got a much better chance to follow through on your agreements.
Secondly, I want you to make sure you notice to create some kind of dependable opportunity,
regular opportunities to discuss conflicts where you know you can rely on the other person to be
there in your busy lives. Thirdly, when you're dealing with a critical communication context,
and we went over these a few minutes ago, but they really need to be repeated now,
talk more, not less, and get taboo topics on the table. Secondly, be honest, but be considerate.
Get professional help if you need it or maybe even if you think you might need it or could use it.
Then the other phrase, John Gottman's phrase is celebrate the struggle of surviving this
thing together. Celebrate that you got through something and honor each other for doing that.
That's important and then trust that a new normal is going to come about that that new
relationship can be built. Okay, I've got an assignment for you coming from this one.
The most helpful thing a couple can do that's concrete right now or the parents in a family
can do that's concrete right now that would move me in this direction is to do the thing about
setting up a family or a couple's meeting. I want to strongly suggest that you try this.
Agree to hold a couple meeting or a family meeting or if it's close friends you could do it in some
other relationships too. Agree to do it for one hour or less at a set time, half hour,
45 minutes an hour, a time limited time. I would suggest you do it weekly and stick with it for
four months or excuse me, four weeks. Do it, follow through on doing that. Try it for a month,
four weeks in a row. Follow those rules that I gave you, those guidelines. In that meeting speak
up honestly about what feels good and what bothers you. Do your best to listen without arguing.
Bring up conflicts as they come up and try to work out how to negotiate them as they go.
Do the thing about having a regular meeting. When you're doing those ask for what you need
from the other person. Treat issues like problems raised like a fourth step, follow through and
do that. When you've done it for four weeks determine if that's good for you and if you want
to continue. I think if you try it you're going to find that it's a useful thing and you'll probably
want to continue but you have to make the commitment and be there to honestly try it.
Okay, where are we going to go from here?
We've done close relationships at this point. We looked at the dynamics, we've made a bunch of
suggestions, a good set of suggestions for handling conflicts in them and we've talked about those
disruptions that create critical communication contexts. Now we're going to turn to the other
kind of relationship in which conflicts are most likely to occur and affect us most and that's
conflicts in our work relationships, conflicts in organizations. That's going to be the
subject of our next two lectures.
