Well, we've looked at the dynamics of close personal relationships and how those dynamics
affect conflict and conflict management and how we can do better in those relationships.
We've done that.
Now, in this lecture and the next, what we want to do is turn to that other major context
where conflicts occur and where they matter most, and that's at work in our organizations.
So this lecture and the next, we're going to talk about organizational conflict and
how it might be managed better.
Now, poorly managed conflict makes work life unpleasant.
We know that.
There's terrible cost to the individuals.
It just makes life unpleasant.
But it also affects how the organization functions.
Conflict and how it's managed is going to affect the organization as a whole.
So we really need to talk about it in both of those contexts.
We want to look at those costs and how, what the effects are, and then we want to look
at how the way we structure a conflict and think of it and understand it is going to
affect the way we handle conflict.
That will give us a basis for understanding how we can do it better, which we'll get to
in lecture 17.
We've got to make a preliminary comment walking into this.
As we discussed earlier, this is conflict in organizations.
And way back in lecture three when we were talking about Morton Deutch's studies where
he made that wonderful discovery about win-win, a critique of what he was doing is, well,
he was studying task-oriented groups where they've got shared goals.
Well, you know what?
In organizations, those conflicts really ought to be mostly about task-oriented groups.
They occur in work units, which are teams, task-oriented groups.
The organization is a whole less task-oriented group.
So they really ought to be situations where the members have a lot of shared goals.
And you would think you could get a lot of win-wins, but that's not mostly what happens.
Deutch taught us that all those years ago, but it turns out that most organizations don't
handle conflict very well that way.
They fall very short of that win-win ideal.
So let's try to get an understanding of what's going on in organizations, how the organizations
affect conflict, what are the costs to individuals and organizations that get ourselves set up
for thinking in lecture 17 about what we could do better.
Let's begin with this.
Conflict at work matters to the individual members, of course, but it also matters to
the organization as a whole.
And that's an important thing to understand about it.
It's both the same as and different from conflict in close personal relationships because a
lot of these relationships in organizations are close.
Some of them are even close personal relationships and the conflicts happen there, but the conflicts
and how they're managed there are going to affect the organization as a whole.
That leads us to a kind of definition here.
My favorite definition of organizational conflict is very simple.
It says an organizational conflict is any conflict that occurs in an organizational
setting.
How common is conflict in organizations?
Well, this context rivals those personal relationships as the places where conflicts
most likely to occur and where it's most likely to matter.
The nature, it turns out, of most conflicts in organizations, most organizational conflicts,
is really quite interpersonal.
They're conflicts between people.
A lot of the same stuff that happens in conflicts in relationships.
Some of them are very work related about the project, but a lot of them are very personally
related.
They still affect the organization as a whole.
So even the personal ones are organizational conflicts.
So we've learned about general principles for handling conflicts and a lot of what we've
learned about all those principles should apply in organizations.
Let's think a little bit about those effects, the costs and consequences that occur.
The consequences for the organization as well as for the individual come from how the conflicts
are being handled.
Now the organization is going to affect how conflicts are handled.
And we want to note that.
We're going to pay close attention to that in this lecture.
The organization, by the way it's structured, by its policies, by the way it's managed,
by the culture that develops, the relationships it sets up among its members, will really
have all of that structuring and context, will have a great influence on how members
behave when they're in a conflict.
So that's important to recognize.
Now the costs to these happen to the individual and to the organization as a whole.
For the individual, what is it?
It's time and effort, it's stress, it's pain, it's damaged performance.
I don't feel good about my performance if it's not very good, it's reduced motivations,
it's hindered career development, sometimes it's job loss, so the cost to the individual.
But there's cost to the organization and if we're looking at this from a manager standpoint
that cost to the organization is an important thing, a very important thing to attend to.
In the first place, there are costs involved.
There's time and effort, even a way to handle it best.
There's a direct cost there and there's opportunity cost.
When I'm dealing with the conflict, I lose the opportunity to do what else I would be
doing instead of dealing with the conflict.
What are some of these costs to the organization that occur in addition to opportunity?
There's damage communication, that damages function.
There's damage relationships, that damages report, damages function.
There's reduced employee motivation, which reduces productivity.
There's lower morale, which in turn reduces productivity and increases absenteeism.
There's greater turnover and there's even litigation that comes.
So there's a ton of costs from conflict in an organization.
You know, we can't really measure these costs very well.
A number of people have tried and some people claim to be able to measure the costs of conflict
in an organization and I'm very skeptical of all of the measurements systems that I've
read for that.
But what I do know from the research and especially from some years of working with organizations
is that the really greatest cost is not that one big conflict that was a blow up, but it's
the accumulated costs of those everyday conflicts that occur throughout the organization among
all the people and how they're handled.
Because if they're not handled well, it may not be visible like one big flare up, but
it's a lot of reduced motivation, a lot of people leaving, a lot of loss, a lot of opportunity
cost.
Those things are huge.
I think that's the biggest cost.
I'm very convinced of that.
Some years ago, the American Management Association commissioned a study on how conflict affects
managers and one of the conclusions from that study was the estimate that managers spend
about 25% of their work time giving attention to conflict in one way or another.
It's an estimate.
It could be higher, it could be lower, but I think that estimate's pretty nicely in
the ballpark.
So for managers and supervisors especially, beyond whatever's the personal reason for
themselves functioning to get a conflict result, for the organization, for the responsibility
to the organization, they really want to reduce the costs of conflict that are there.
Now reducing costs is going to require reducing any unnecessary conflict, trying to eliminate
that and improving the conflict management behavior of employees, and that's that conflict
management behavior that happens every day.
Well if we're going to have a shot at doing that, we need to understand some things first.
So that's where we're going to go in this lecture.
What we need to do is we've got two objectives we have to try to accomplish here if we're
going to do this.
We have to understand the basic nature of organizations and then we want to be able
to see how the way we're thinking of organizations and structuring them and defining them sets
up relationships and influences the way we handle conflict.
So let's work on getting those basic understandings.
That's going to start with getting it that organizations are in fact social realities.
What do I mean by social reality?
A social reality, it's a sociologist's term, a social reality is something that actually
exists.
It's a real thing.
It has consequences.
It makes a difference.
But its existence, the nature of it and the fact that it is that thing really depends
on the shared idea that it is and that it is what it is.
My university, the University of Arizona is a social reality.
There are beautiful buildings, it's a beautiful campus, there's an it there.
But that's not the university.
That it's a university depends on the shared idea of what a university is and how that
sets up and what it creates as relationships and we have to agree on that and only when
we agree on that is it that thing.
A state is a social reality.
A marriage is a social reality.
Any organization is a social reality and it exists because we agree that that's what
it is and we agree that that's how it is.
Well if it exists as an idea that's shared then we've got to have ideas about what it
is and that's driven by the sort of management theories that come up for conceptualizing organizations.
So we need to understand what those management theories are that we use to define and create
and structure an organization and we need to get an idea of how those theories may be
affecting the way conflict gets handled.
So I want you to bear with me and walk through some understanding theory here so we can get
to application in the next lecture.
Okay, any theory about organizations is going to rest on the assumptions that are made at
the beginning.
It's going to be a response to the conditions that set it up.
We've developed theory in a certain context.
But the theories of what an organization is, the ideas about it, start with those assumptions
and conditions and then they establish rules and controls and relationships growing from
those theories.
They establish and control patterns and rules of communication that what we think is the
nature of an organization will control those kind of things.
And when you do that you're going to have the intended effects probably but you're also
going to have some unintended effects and some of those effects especially the unintended
ones may be seriously affecting the way you handle conflict.
So now we can look at what theories we rely on to deal with creating organizations and
I want to go through a kind of history lesson on that.
So we've got theories that serve as foundations and what these theories do is influence the
way conflict is going to be managed.
So we need answers to what those theories are and how that effect is.
It turns out that over the course of the 20th century there are four really primary theories
of organization that is general concepts of what an organization is and how it should
be structured and how it should function that really have governed the way we set up and
run organizations.
Those are going to be and we're going to talk about them each classical management, human
relations management, human resources management and then systems management.
Each of these starts from assumptions that were made under certain circumstances responding
to conditions and each of them has advantages and disadvantages when it comes to managing
conflict.
Each changes the way people go about managing conflict in the organization.
Most organizations really these days reflect a kind of mix of these theories but they're
still most heavily reliant because they're structured that way on the oldest of theories
and that's the one we call classical management.
So let's look at that and see how that works.
What are the assumptions that were made and what are the conditions under which classical
management was developed?
If you go to that era when it was developed you're actually starting in the 1880s and
going through the turn of the 20th century.
It's that frame the end of the 19th early 20th century when this thing was created.
What were the conditions people were responding to?
So the industrial revolution had occurred and you had more people, more people you could
sell things to, more people to produce for and the invention of mass production had
taken place.
So now instead of small guilds making things we had big factories making things.
We had many more large organizations and we needed a way to conceptualize these and figure
out how to run them.
And the German sociologist Max Weber stepped up to the task of figuring that out.
He did this mostly in the 1880s, in the late 19th century.
So he set out to come up with a theory of organization that could be used to structure
organizations well and he thought well what we want is a way to structure this that will
be efficient and productive and effective but at the same time have staying power.
How was he going to do this?
Well he thought about that and he said well what I can do is identify looking around what
is the most efficient and effective organization I can see right now among large organizations
and then find the one that's lasted the longest, has the best staying power and I'll just compare
the two and see what they have in common and then I'll base my theory on that.
What he got from that were going to be the concept of bureaucracy and hierarchy.
What do you think the two organizations were?
Efficient and effective, most efficient and effective in Europe in the 1880s.
Easy winner for that was the Prussian Army.
They were being very efficient, they were well organized, they were expanding to create
the whole of Germany.
The Prussian Army was the most efficient and effective organization.
So he said our God used that.
What was the organization that lasted the longest that he wanted to look at?
Looked around and lo and behold what he saw was the Roman Catholic Church.
It had sure been there, had staying power, had taken some big hits in the Reformation
but it was still there.
So Weber set out to see what these two have in common.
As he studied these he could do, for instance, he looked at the organization of the Prussian
Army and that was nicely laid out in a line and box chart.
That idea along with the idea of chain of command was created by a general von Mulchey
and Bismarck was really thrilled with this.
Von Mulchey was really a fiend about order, he really wanted everything ordered.
So he created the line and box chart and Weber could sit down and take his descriptions of
the Catholic Church and the authorities in it and how it was structured and draw a line
and box chart himself.
So he said these we have in common.
That's a principle that can be followed.
In naming it he was actually working in a French hotel when he did that in a room and he looked
across the room and he saw literally a French bureau, a chest of drawers called a bureau
and it had big drawers at the top and then smaller drawers as it went down and he said
aha, I'll call it bureaucracy and he got the principle of bureaucracy and it carried
with it that idea of chain of command.
So he did that.
Now some others, one other major player in this was Frederick Taylor who was actually
an engineer.
He was theorizing about how to structure organizations that built things and he really latched on
to Bismarck's idea that a large organization should run like a well oiled machine.
That was what Bismarck wanted for the Prussian Army.
So Taylor added time and motion studies to work with this and these people developed
the classical idea of how to manage and structure an organization.
Well assumptions wrote along with that and what were those assumptions?
Well the Prussian Army and the Catholic Church had certain things in common.
These were, well the boss who's ever at the top knows what should be done and should rule.
Communication should flow downward was the assumption.
The rules, the assignments, the instruction.
Communication was about telling people lower down what to do.
Top management, the assumption said, should define everything and set procedures and everybody
else should do what they're told, workers work.
Decisions will have to managers and supervisors and officers in the Army.
Also there was an assumption here that position in the hierarchy moving up carried not just
power but social status and that wrote along with it.
Classical management with all those assumptions is really still with us even though we've
done a lot to improve on things since.
It's still effective and efficient.
Other means of structuring organizations have been tried but frankly none of them have really
demonstrated the ability to function and be as solid as that line and box chart bureaucratic
structure so we still have all of that.
No theory's been devised that would replace it and we still have all of its negative effects.
What are those negative effects?
As we saw in lecture seven if you remember the results in managing conflict are much
better if you have equal power and status among the parties so they can negotiate directly.
The bureaucratic structure keeps us from doing that.
The power is unequal and we can't talk directly to a lot of people.
Communications flowing down so you really have these power and status differences and impediments
to any direct negotiation.
That's a major problem.
Conflict resolution constructively would require that a lot of communication could flow up,
down and across.
Classical management still tends to inhibit that so that real communication only flows
down.
Good conflict management should require that people are treated as individuals who really
matter as individual persons not just as members of a category but classical management inhibits
this.
So classical management theory with its wonders of effectiveness and efficiency and stability
really gets in our way when it comes to how we're going to resolve conflicts.
So where did we go from there?
Everything really helped when social scientists got in the business.
We can move on to a next theory that gets developed.
In this next theory we want to talk about what gets called the human relations theory
of management.
This started really in 1928 and began to take hold around 1930.
And what it says in general is that productivity in organizations is going to improve if you
actually treat employees as individuals and treat them in a friendly manner and interact
with them in that way.
How did this one come about?
It's kind of an interesting story.
Elton Mayo, social psychologist, was hired to try to figure out how to improve the productivity
at the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company in 1928.
So he was a good social scientist.
He was going to do experiments to see what would happen.
So he goes and he notices that the lighting is not very good in this plant.
He thinks, well, maybe better lighting would improve productivity.
So they went in a separate section of the plant and they set up an experiment in which
what they did was improve the lighting and then they measured productivity before and
after.
And they found that when they improved the lighting, productivity went up.
Being a good social scientist, though, Mayo went, well, if it's better lighting that makes
the difference for the better, then worse lighting should make productivity worse.
So he tried making the lighting worse in the second experiment and you know what?
Productivity didn't go down.
It went up when you made lighting worse.
So he tried some other things.
He tried a number of things and everything he tried, either making it better or making
it worse, whatever he tried, the productivity always got better.
So he was trying to figure out what was going on here.
And what he noticed that the one thing that was constant across all of these experiments
was that he and his colleagues working with people to do this had to go into the area
where it was happening.
They had to talk to the people.
They had to interact with them in a friendly way.
And he thought, maybe it's the friendly interaction that does it.
And that set him in the direction of developing what becomes human relations theory of management.
And what Mayo had discovered was that human relationships here really mattered.
You shouldn't treat everybody in an objective way like they're automatons.
Treat them as individuals.
Interact with them in a friendly way.
And he said, you know what?
We need a really different metaphor for an organization.
The metaphor we've been using in classical management is that it's a machine.
It should be a well-oiled machine.
No.
The organization metaphor should be family.
A good organization's productive ought to be like a happy family with everybody, employees
included, treated like members.
Well Mayo didn't really question much the basic assumptions of classical management
about how to structure.
It's just that he moved it that we got to talk to people and make friendly treatment
of them in friendly interaction happen.
That's better.
It begins to move us in a direction where we can have better conflict management.
But most of the inhibiting effects of classical management are still very, very much in place.
So Mayo moves us in a nice direction.
We move through human relations.
Let's go talk to the next, talk about the next step.
This is what gets called human resources theory in management.
It's much wider than just one person.
It comes in into play very much in the late 1940s after World War II and the human resources
school of research and theorizing in organizations really moves on through from about the late
40s to well into the 80s.
What happens here with the number of social scientists working with this is that they
make a number of assumptions themselves and then they get to seek to apply really rigorous
social science methods to test those and see what's going to work best.
Here are the assumptions they articulated.
First they said, you know what?
The primary resource in any organization is its people.
And if that's true, they said the next assumption is that motivation is really probably the
key to better productivity.
And then they theorized that motivation is achieved by matching the individual members'
goals with the goals of the organization.
Goal theory, Kurt Lewin, remember that from when we talked about goals and when we talked
about Deutsches research?
They're looking at that, matching the goals, individual and the organization.
And then they said, you know what?
If it's about matching goals, we really ought to be thinking differently.
It's not just a family.
We ought to be thinking that employees at all levels should function as members of
a team and participate in decision making.
And they introduced the idea of what gets called participative decision making.
So they advocated the human resources people, much more open communication, and they really
began to advocate strongly, finding ways to have communication flow up, down and across
in the organization.
And these human resources concepts really made for significant improvements in the channels
and the environment for addressing conflicts.
Still, the classical structure stayed in place primarily.
You can't just overrule it with the human resources approach.
Let's move forward again to the one that's most urgent now, most helpful now, and that
is what systems theory has applied to management.
Actually, the application of systems theory happened very early, and theorists and consultants
went to Japan and the Japanese picked it up before American organizations did.
It really didn't become strong in the United States until the late 1970s and into the 80s.
Key theorists in this, there are a great many of them, but some that especially bear mention.
One would be W. Edwards Deming, who gave us the idea of total quality management, and
he had did that from a systems approach.
Another whose work I have really admired for years is Peter Senghi, who is at MIT.
These people do a wonderful job of applying general systems theory from biology to organizations
and to how to make organizations better and more productive, and what they tell us is
really going to help us understand how we can manage conflict better.
The assumptions they start with are that all organizations, they're like living organisms.
They're systems just like living organisms, and they change when any one element changes.
That change in an individual element is going to affect all the rest.
Everything is moving and changing and interacting all the time.
A change in one affects them all.
An organization, they say, is not some stable structure just like a line in Bach's chart.
It's like a living organism with everybody moving and changing, and you've got to keep
stability, but you've got to adapt and solve problems as you come along.
Along with that, they recognized the principle of ecology.
They understood that there are stakeholders involved, and the organization exists in a
larger system, and it's got to operate in a larger system and interact with it.
They went further, and they understood that sharing and understanding that systems are
only partially built and structured officially, that the system is created also informally
and unofficially, that much of that development and maintenance of the real organization and
what's happening occurs not with the official things, not even spoken.
It occurs by people interacting and working together and changes in the same way.
Each organization, they say, in each unit is its own kind of human climate and culture
that's dynamic with things going on in it.
In that way of looking at organizations, in order to survive and thrive and do better
and better, the decisions are going to have to be discussed and rediscussed and things
negotiated, and that brings us into a way of thinking that makes it much easier to focus
on and talk about managing conflicts, because this has got to take into account the needs
of all the stakeholders, the external ones in the organization, which I mentioned in
an earlier lecture, and the internal stakeholders who are the employees.
The insights here coming from systems theory are really going to help bring us to a point
where we can understand what's going on and we've got a much better opportunity to negotiate
resolutions.
Still, still, most of the systems theorists overlay this on classical management, so as
I said at the beginning, you know, our organizations are mixtures of all these things, and we're
going to need to understand how they work.
So what conclusions can we draw from this for managers and supervisors first?
First is that it's really in our interest, it's part of our job to try to reduce, try
to minimize the cost to my organization that come from conflict and how it's managed, and
I've really got to focus then on trying to understand the way my people are managing
conflict and create the best opportunities for them to manage it well.
If I'm going to do that, I really need to understand how my organization is structured
and operating across all those theories, but I've really got to come into the 21st century
and understand my organization from a systems point of view if I'm going to make it better.
I'm also going to have to make really good use of even the insights from human relations
and the insights from human resources because they are nicely people-oriented in terms of
how they do this, and they really do give us a way to think about organizations with
communication going up, down and across.
As a manager or a supervisor, those are things that I'm going to need to understand if I
want to be doing my job well.
Okay, what have we learned so far in this lecture?
First, the effects of organizational conflict are enormously costly both to the individual
and to the organization.
That is, if the conflicts are not handled well.
Secondly, reducing these effects, reducing the amount of unnecessary conflict and improving
conflict management behavior of all employees is a major interest of managers at all levels
and supervisors.
Thirdly, what I want you to get here is that the nature, the structure, the policies, the
way we manage an organization which are all driven by theories are going to affect the
way people handle conflict in the organization.
So I've got to understand those theories and their effects to understand what's going on.
Fourth, I want us to really understand that that classical management way of looking at
things, which really still provides the fundamental structure of most organizations, really has
effects as good as it is that inhibit good conflict management in several ways.
And then fifth, I want you to get at that human relations, human resources and systems
management theories really provide us ways to at least mitigate that damage and make
it easier for people to deal up, down and across and negotiate as individuals to resolve conflicts.
Finally I want you to note as a summary point here that competent managers and supervisors
really need to learn and make use of the opportunities provided by these newer theories if they're
going to manage in an optimal way.
It's part of my job if I'm the boss.
Okay, I've got an assignment for you from this lecture.
Number one, I want you to stop and think and consider what management theories your organization
or you individually are primarily relying on when you structure and run your organization
or your work unit.
If you're not in charge, whoever structures it, think through how they're handling it.
And secondly, what I want you to do is consider the extent to which you've operated as though
these theories are immutable as they're just facts, the way it has to be because you can
change them and think differently.
That would be a useful exercise at this point.
Now where are we going to go from here?
We've created a foundation here, a basic understanding about theories and what they affect.
But we haven't said very much about specifically what you can do to improve conflict management.
We've really been talking in this lecture about the basic understandings that we want
to draw on to improve conflict management.
So in the next lecture, we're going to go forward with giving you clear ideas about
how management can act in a way to improve conflict management in the organization to
reduce its costs and reap the benefits of good conflict management.
That's lecture 17.
