It should be abundantly clear by now that managing conflict is among the most difficult
and dangerous and challenging things humans have to do.
And especially that's true when we have to learn new ways to deal with conflict, which
increase the challenge, new ways over all of that early learning that we're trying to
overcome.
It turns out that even the most skilled among us find that there are occasions when we could
really use some help managing conflict.
And one really fortunate consequence of all that research and development that's taken
place on this subject is that these days there's lots of competent professional help
that's available.
So that's what we're going to talk about in this lecture.
We're going to talk about where to get help.
We're going to talk specifically about the roles of professional arbitrators, mediators,
ombudsmen, and counselors.
And we'll throw in a little short discussion of an informal role by organizational what
are called priests in organizational cultures.
We'll note the role that each of these plays and how they're different and talk about when
to choose one and what kind of help you get from each kind of helper that's available.
Now let's get started right away.
Let's start with why you really would want to do that.
Why is it important to go get help?
One way to think about that is that the existing ways to get formal help are awfully expensive.
The adversary system, the courts, that's expensive and it's slow and it has bad side effects.
Judges and courtroom staff and juries, the buildings, those are all very costly.
Court calendars get clogged, you can take months or years to get a hearing.
And resolving things through the courts may cost more and require more time than disputants
can actually afford.
Most individuals are unable to fully pursue resolution of a dispute through the courts
because they just can't afford it.
Organizations and insurers even calculate that it's less expensive to write checks,
sometimes six and seven figure checks, than to take a case to court.
Taxpayers of course resist increasing public expenditures for courts because taxes are
high enough and taking matters to court often creates serious collateral damage.
I think when I think about this often of children of couples who take an ugly divorce
to court and the damage to those kids and then there's the lingering hostility that
occurs with people after a judge renders a decision and often when things are fought
out in court, reputations are permanently damaged.
So courts, they have a necessary function, but it's often not necessary to take things
to court.
As Deutsch told us back in lecture three, win-wins are often possible and courts don't provide
win-wins.
Courts only provide win-lose, you know, you think back to the Bible case of King Solomon
trying to arbitrate the dispute between the disputing mothers and there's no compromise
possible or win-win when it's one baby and two pretending mothers.
It turns out though that the mere presence of an objective third party, somebody who's
seen by both sides as objective, really can help in getting a conflict resolved.
Studies show that that fact alone helps cause the disputing parties to become more cooperative,
more reasonable and less extreme.
So there's value in resolving disputes in win-win ways, but we still may need help to
do it.
So we've got some clear guidelines to follow when it comes to that.
One thing is just go ahead and recognize there's a virtual army of trained, skilled
helpers out there that are available.
There are different kinds of help for different situations.
It's going to be a good idea and we'll suggest this again at the end of the lecture to know
what kind of help is available for you and to know what's available locally to you for
seeking help and to know that before you get in trouble and really need it badly.
Then there's this sort of general principle that I want to follow.
I'll do the lecture backwards from the principle, but I want to get it enunciated here at the
beginning.
In general, you want to seek help at the lowest level possible and the least formal level
possible.
The risks are least at that level.
It's easiest to get to win-win.
For this lecture, we need to start at the highest level below the courts and work our
way down to that most desirable kind of help.
So let's start here.
There's plenty of trained practitioners that are available for help.
Many of them are actually attorneys and they've added this kind of competence.
Help for this kind of thing, win-win solutions, has actually been very much promoted by the
American Bar Association here in this country, really seeing that courts are too expensive
and that resolutions without taking it to court and fighting it out are very useful.
So even the Bar Association has been promoting arbitration and mediation and has exercised
some leadership in promoting this kind of thing.
I remember very well a young attorney that I think I talked about in another lecture
when I was talking about win-win and the young attorney on the boat having to read win-win,
how to get him to yes, because he was expected to have this kind of competence when he went
to work for an organization.
And your attorney, if he's a good one, is likely to recommend, if possible, staying
out of court and working out a win-win if possible.
So even the attorneys have moved in that direction.
State and local governments have pushed for not having to go to court, sometimes requiring
that certain kinds of disputes, especially marital disputes, be attempted for resolution
by mediation or something before you actually take the case to court.
Well, the help for this has sort of evolved in two directions, the pushing down from the
formal procedures by the Bar Association and the people who work from an adversarial approach
and then pushing in the other direction through clinical psychology and counseling and moving
toward win-win resolutions to social scientists.
And out of all that, you've got this cadre of professional approaches, several different
ones adapted to certain situations, and there's a broad array of them.
We're going to talk about four in particular.
We're going to talk about arbitrators.
We're going to talk about mediators, about ombudsmen, and counselors.
Each of these professions has its own body of knowledge, although they overlap, a clear
body of knowledge and standards of practice and schooling requirements that they have
to meet in order to practice.
So let's talk about them one at a time.
Let's start with arbitrators.
Arbitrators here and evaluate disputants' cases and then render judgments.
Let me give you a definition.
I want to read it to make sure I get it right.
This is the definition that comes from the American Arbitration Association.
They say that arbitration is a legal technique for resolution of disputes outside the courts
wherein the parties to a dispute refer it to one or more persons who are arbitrators and
by whose decision they agree in advance to be bound.
I read it because it's a long sentence and it's tricky to make sure you get it right.
But there's the point.
And when you read it and listen to it, what does it sound like?
You know what it sounds like to me?
It sounds exactly like those ancient Greeks 2,500 years ago.
Let's get a third person we trust and present our case to that person and let that person
decide and agree to be bound by the decision.
That's the concept of arbitration.
It doesn't have to go all the way to court if we can identify someone that can do that.
Well, in most areas, arbitrators have to be licensed in order to practice and they're
typically licensed attorneys before they get into arbitration.
They need to complete a set of training in order to do that.
And they're tested and certified when they complete that training.
And in some places, they're required to complete additional training the same way doctors and
nurses and other professions are in order to keep up and maintain their certificate.
They have standards of practice and the keys to those standards are this.
They not only have to be, but they have to clearly appear to be impartial in a dispute.
And then they have to conduct any investigation and hearing according to specified rules that
are provided for in that locale or in that organization, there's a set of specified rules
and they have to conduct the investigation and any hearing according to those.
Now, like the courts, arbitration is an adversarial process.
We're not down to win-win yet.
The disputants are fighting it out, but it's a lower level.
It's less costly and less hostile than the courts normally.
This is a quasi-legal process, arbitration.
Students or disputants do present cases orally or in writing depending on the circumstance.
There are rules of evidence required for arbitration, but they're less stringent than the courts.
Attorneys or advocates can participate on both sides, but arbitrators themselves can
question the disputants and the advocates so they can try to get at the answers themselves.
They can ask questions and pursue.
And witnesses, of course, can be presented and they can be questioned.
After hearing the cases, gathering the information and listening to both sides, the arbitrator
then within a specified time renders a decision.
Records are kept in an arbitration process.
These proceedings may have legal status and the decision may have legal weight.
Arbitration is generally much less expensive than court procedures and usually gets a resolution
more quickly, so it's more useful for that reason.
So it may be the best alternative.
When would it be the best alternative?
Well if I need a clear and documented resolution to a dispute that I couldn't get a win-win
on and there's no method that's non-adversarial, no way to get to a win-win resolution that
would do it, sometimes arbitration in that instance is going to be the best answer.
So it's nice to know that it's there and to be able to appeal to it if we need to.
All right, now let's talk about mediators.
What mediators do is assist disputants in negotiating resolutions.
Let me give you a definition of mediation and this one comes from the National Association
of Community Mediation.
They say mediation is a process of dispute resolution in which one or more impartial
third parties intervenes in a conflict or dispute with the consent of the participants
and assists them in negotiating a consensual and informed agreement.
Nice definition, carefully including all the aspects.
What mediators do, as I said, is broader than arbitrators.
They intervene and help with the consent of both participants.
Now mediation is widely available to help with such things as marital disputes and frequently
courts require an attempted mediation before granting a divorce.
So you can be pushed to mediation there.
Mediation is available for family conflicts and that really helps often.
Mediation is often available in organizational disputes and it's often provided for in the
contracts, in the labor contracts.
It's interesting to me that way back in 1934 the National Mediation Board for Labor Management
disputes in railroads was established.
So it goes all the way back that far.
Mediation is available for disputes in the community as well.
So mediators are around, there are many of them, and many of them do excellent, excellent
work.
How do they qualify for what they do?
Well, they need a complete mediation training and it varies with where you're going to be
licensed anywhere from a minimum of about 40 hours up to about 100 hours of training
that mediators go through to prepare.
And then they complete a specified number of hours doing mediation under the supervision
of a licensed mediator, usually around 500 hours.
So if you've got a licensed mediator, that's a person who's been trained and done a lot
of mediating under supervision already.
So that's an experienced person with this.
Of course, then they have to pass a certification test and be certified to function as a mediator.
So you get trained mediators.
What's the mediator's role?
As I said, it's broader than arbitration.
But notice, mediation now is not an adversarial process.
Now we've moved over into the win-win category.
So we're down at a less formal level and we've got a much better shot at a win-win.
And the mediator's job is to assist in a variety of ways to try to get that win-win to happen.
And they can assist in almost any way useful as long as they remain impartial.
Many effective mediators work at this profession and it's evolved in that direction from something
else.
My favorite example of a mediator that I admire a great deal is a gentleman named Kenneth
Cloak.
I first encountered Mr. Cloak when he spoke at an international ombudsman association
conference that I was attending several years ago.
Mr. Cloak started out as an attorney and he was very effective that way.
He then became an arbitrator and he was constrained by the problem of arbitrating and really saw
the value of win-win.
And so he then became a mediator.
He evolved in that direction just the way our learning about conflict management has
evolved.
And he helps resolve conflicts literally everything from couples and individuals and families
up through organizations all the way up through major international disputes.
He literally travels worldwide mediating conflicts.
He directs an organization called the Center for Dispute Resolution in California.
That's just one example.
There are thousands of effective mediators.
What do mediation processes look like?
Mediation process ought to have about five defining characteristics.
Number one, a mediation process ought to be voluntary.
Now sometimes there are exceptions because of court ordered you have to do this before
you can get a divorce.
But generally speaking, mediation should occur with the consent of all the disputants involved.
Secondly, it ought to be collaborative.
We ought to be looking for a collaborative solution that ought to be the style, the conflict
resolution style when mediation is occurring.
And the mediator works to get all the disputants to work together with him or her to produce
a win-win agreement.
Thirdly, mediation processes, unless they're otherwise specified, should be confidential.
These are not matters of any public record normally.
There are exceptions, but normally they're not.
Fourth, mediation processes should be informed.
And I love this the way the mediators talk about it.
People just understand that one of their jobs is to ensure that all the parties in
this dispute have a full set of information that they need to make decisions.
They don't withhold information from everybody.
They make sure everybody knows everything they need to know, that the process and all
they're working with for decisions are transparent.
And then finally, that process ought to be neutral and balanced.
I've never been fully comfortable with the word neutral myself.
I like to tell clients that I work with that I'm equally on both sides.
Neutral might suggest that I'm disengaged.
But that's really what mediators mean when they say neutral.
Neutral and balanced.
The mediator really strives to have all the parties equally helped by his or her service.
Mediators do some great work.
Mediation is a good alternative when it is important for the sake of the relationship
to resolve the dispute.
If it's necessary and you're not getting there yourself, it's very helpful to get a mediator.
Secondly, when the conflicting parties are expressing strong emotions that intervene
with what's going on, when you're feeling a lot of emotions and you're having a hard
time handling it yourself, it's really helpful to have an effective third party who's neutral
in that sense on both of your sides help you work through something.
Mediators are very good with that, even when you're in a conflict with someone you love.
Mediators are also especially useful when there may be third parties like children in
a family or other members in the community or in the organizations who might be harmed
if the thing is not settled in a harmonious way.
Mediators are helpful for that.
Of course, there needs to be a reasonable chance for resolution by this means before
you would move it to something that would more confirm a documented resolution like
arbitration.
You've got to have a shot at getting it resolved.
So that's when you would want to use mediation.
Let's turn now to our third profession and let's talk about ombudsman.
What ombudsman do is provide an informal confidential service to solve problems and resolve conflicts.
The ombudsman's role is wider even than the mediators because ombudsman feel all kinds
of problems that are brought to them.
Ombudsman are appointed to service avenues through which these problems can be identified
and understood and any of us who've worked as ombudspersons and I've done a good deal
of ombudsing over time know that a good percentage of the problems that come to us a clear majority
involve conflicts of some sort.
So they're very much involved with helping self-conflicts.
The term ombudsman began in Scandinavia and it's an appointed problem solver for a community
or an organization.
And the service of an ombudsman is provided to the individual who brings the problem to
that person.
An ombudsman is set up to respond to someone who brings him or her a problem and help them
out.
Organizations and communities on the other, not just that individual benefit, but organizations
and communities who appoint ombudsman and fund that kind of work a benefit by having
this avenue of redress available for individuals.
It really helps getting conflicts resolved in an un-non-costly way.
So let me talk just about one set of ombudsman that's sort of most defined and there's a
consistency about that's a growing area and that's the area of what are called organizational
ombudsman.
These are people who are appointed by an organization and have a role of ombudsman in an organization.
Most of the members of the association called the International Ombudsman Association are
actually that kind of ombuds person.
Ombudsman in this sense have standards of practice that are clearly delineated.
First, they have independence in structure, function and appearance.
And if you think about that for a second, independence within the organization in structure,
function and appearance, they don't want to be down the line somewhere in reporting
up the chain of command because then anybody coming to them can't fully trust what's going
to happen.
So the ombudsman's role really should have kind of a dotted line on that organization
chart that we had from classical management that goes at best to the president, the top
person in the organization, ought to be very high up and ought to be clearly disconnected
so that they can be separate and impartial.
Second standard of practice is rather like the mediator, they've got to be neutral and
impartial.
And here again, neutral means equally on everybody's side.
That when somebody brings the ombuds person a problem, you know, am I going to be neutral?
Yeah, I'm not going to be a triangulation avenue here where I'm going to jump in and
advocate for you.
I'm going to help you work with your problem, but I'm on everybody's side if I'm an ombudsman.
Third standard is confidentiality.
An ombudsman is required to hold all communication in confidence and divulge that information
only if clearly authorized to do so.
Ombudsmen often, if they keep records at all, they destroy them at the end of dealing with
that person.
Sometimes you have to take notes so you can remember, but get rid of them as quickly as
you can.
And ombudsmen often like to avoid communications on email that might go somewhere else because
they're very concerned with confidentiality.
That's important in organizations where there are power struggles and people are afraid
of things coming to them.
The only time you can divulge is when there's imminent risk of serious harm unless you've
got permission.
And that's generally supported legally.
That's the claim they make.
They have a legal right to it, and it's being tested in the court some, but generally holding
up and being supported.
Fourth standard of practice is informality.
And what this means is that the ombuds person is not going to participate in any formal
adjudication.
Not in arbitration, not in court, won't go testify.
It connects with the business of confidentiality.
Now why that?
Because it turns out that a great many conflicts you're going to have people be able to be
free and open and work for a win-win if it's not going on the record, if it can be kept
off the record and kept confidential.
It requires much more willingness of the parties to handle, but it's nice to keep it
off the record.
Now these organizational ombudsmen really constitute a rapidly growing profession.
Lots of organizations are finding that it's much more cost effective to have an ombudsman
on board doing that job than not.
So there are a cost effective way to solve problems and resolve conflicts.
Most of what they do is coaching the individual who comes to them, but they also facilitate.
They do many of the same kinds of things that mediators do.
So ombudsmen are very useful and particularly available in organizations.
They have their own standards of practice clearly delineated.
This is a more recent organization in terms of being defined as a clear profession.
Their training is getting standardized and is somewhat standardized already and certification
is now available through the International Ombudsman Association.
So that profession is growing and developing and many organizations are finding it really
useful.
When would you want to use it?
Best to use an ombuds person when.
You're not certain how to define a felt problem or proceed in a conflict or not knowing how
the information, especially if you need some coaching, that's a person you can go to and
get it and get it without risking triangulation or making trouble.
That's a very useful function for the ombudsman and that's a time when you want to use it.
Once you wish to keep a problem or a conflict confidential and keep the resolution efforts
off the record, ombuds person is very useful for that.
Then two, if you think you may want to escalate later if you can't get this and you don't
want to create a messy piece of record by what you might concede or discuss when you
talk about it, that's a really good use of an ombuds person.
So these are people that are available and they can help and there are really valuable
times to use them.
So you would want to seek the help of an ombudsman if you don't want it to become part of the
official record.
If this approach can be done without jeopardizing, it can be done without jeopardizing a formal
proceeding later and you may want to go that direction, so do that.
Seek the help of an ombudsman if possible and if in doubt go seek the help of an ombuds
person because it's confidential and you're only investing a little time and you may find
it very helpful.
Excellent help in most organizations.
Before we leave that ombuds role, I want to talk about the informal ombuds role played
by people that could be called priests in an organization.
Some years ago, two wonderful management theorists in Deal and Kennedy did a book called Corporate
Cultures and they really helped us understand the informal cultures that organizations
develop in their work and they laid out roles that different people acquire in organizations
in an informal way.
The role that's of interest to us in this case is the role of what they called priests.
A priest, according to Deal and Kennedy in an organization, is someone who's just emerged
in the organization having been there a long time and has built a reputation among others
as being wise and trustworthy and willing to listen and help and to give balanced even
advice.
The priests are someone people really go to often when they're having a conflict and
they don't know what to do.
Priests are most typically not in a line of supervisory authority although they're often
people who were in that role before and once had more supervisory authority.
So priests are people that people often go to for coaching and help.
They over time build a lot of skill in this way and a reputation for handling informal
roles well.
I know several ombudsmen myself who are officially ombudsmen now and we're trained as that who
had emerged as priests in their organization so they were asked to become the ombudsmen.
So they get a lot of the same skills.
They build it over time and you can trust them very often but they don't have the official
level of confidentiality that the official ombudsman provides.
You might have some concern there.
Some organizations have excellent priests who can advise and help you.
One more kind of profession to talk about and this one varies widely.
There are a number of different kinds.
This is the profession of counselors.
They come in a variety of specializations.
There are primary specialties like family and marriage counseling.
There are organizational counselors usually attached to employee assistance programs.
They're called EAP programs.
At the community level there are community counselors and community provide them.
At varying levels of education there are counselors provided for people to help.
There are counselors at the university to help students when they have problems for
instance and employees through the employee assistance program.
Counselors have varying education requirements into training depending on what kind of counselor
you are and what state you're going to be licensed in.
When would you want to go to a counselor?
You do that if a problem appears to be particularly difficult to address.
If it's a conflict that appears to be significantly able to damage a relationship and you're not
safe that you can handle it, a counselor can often help you with that.
Marriage and family counselors do a whole lot of that and some of them do just wonderful
work.
In seeking the help of a counselor though to manage a conflict, here are some useful
guidelines.
It's very important that both of the parties, or if it's more than two, all of the parties
in the conflict agree in advance to work with the counselors.
And then both of those parties ought to participate in identifying and selecting counselors.
It's a good idea to go together and interview several and then discuss and agree between
you before you start working with a counselor on which one the two of you agree is best
to work with.
So that's a really good idea with counselors.
So four different professions then, arbitrators, mediators, ombuds and counselors, lots of
help available.
Let's summarize.
As I say, we've got a virtual army of help out there that's available and it can be
available when you need it.
Arbitrators, you want to seek their help if you really need a documented resolution of
a dispute and there's no less adversarial way to get it.
Mediators, seek their help when a relationship is at stake or when the conflicting parties
are really experiencing very strong emotions about an issue and can't seem to get through
it on their own, mediator can really help you a lot.
Seek their help with a broad variety of problems including conflicts, but especially proceed
when you really want to keep that conflict off the record or when you're considering
escalating to a formal effort later and you want to be free to really try a win-win before
you do that without damaging the case you might present in a formal case.
Counselors, seek their help especially with couples and family and community conflicts.
They are very much available to help you and then of course in organizations, those
organizational priests, if you know a good one that might be the right person you can
go to.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
It's a very good idea to know, as I said at the beginning of this lecture, what help
is available before you need it because when you need it, it's going to be a little stressful
to go looking.
In general, you want to seek the lowest level, the least formal means of help available so
counselor, ombuds, mediation, up to arbitration only if you need it.
Be very careful in your choice of a helper.
Some are actually better than others so seek the best person available, interview people
in advance, check, get advice on who to get, but there's plenty of excellent help out there.
Let's give you an assignment for this time and there's a very obvious assignment that
comes from this lecture with what I've been saying.
I want to suggest that you find out what counseling ombudsmen, mediation, and arbitration services
are available to you in your community and organization.
Know what's available.
You might inquire by phone, go on websites, do a good job of looking to see what help
is available.
Know what it is and have that list.
Nice to have that before you get in trouble and really need the help.
You would ask friends, look for recommendations, get yourself a good set of advice and have
yourself a list of who you'd go to for help.
Now where are we going from here?
Sometimes it's not a matter of my going to look for help, other times informally as inadequate
as we may feel we are, others will come to us and ask for help.
When they do that there's always a risk of triangulation when we're asked, but still there
are times when we could actually help others resolve a conflict and do it constructively
and play a useful role in helping other family members, work colleagues, friends, whoever,
helping others resolve conflict.
So we need to do a lecture on that and that's what we'll do next.
