Well, today's world is radically different from the world of the mid-20th century when
Morton Deutsch gave us the great breakthrough on the idea of win-win.
Today what are we?
We're globally connected.
We have transcontinental communication that's absolutely instant.
We have internet access to almost any information we seek.
We have immediate cell phone access to one another.
We travel across continents in hours.
Our cars have computers in them to manage much of their operation.
Our physical and material lives in many ways are quite beyond what we would have imagined
back in 1950.
But you know our personal and relational lives are radically different too.
We've changed in a great many important ways, some of which have to do with the managing
of conflict.
And those changes are harder to see.
You know we don't have a picture of how our parents dealt with conflict, the way we might
have pictures of our father's cars, relationships, the way we relate are more like the air we
breathe.
They're just there and we don't think about them.
So since Deutsch reported that most conflicts are not competitive and they can be resolved
with a win-win, I want us to note here that we've made major gains in the way couples and
friends and families and work colleagues and communities actually work through conflicts.
And what I want to do in this last lecture in the course is go back to those three examples
that were typical conflicts that we talked about back in lecture one.
And I want to consider what knowledge and skills and what help we would have accessed
today that were not available back in 1950.
I want to observe that we actually need to be more skilled and have more help today in
the managing of conflict because there are more voices at the table.
There is more equality.
There's more awareness of our individual interests and more permission to pursue them.
The truth is that life is more complex today than it was back in 1950 and we need better
conflict skills and more help.
I'm going to conclude with a look at where we need to go from here, what we still need
to learn.
So let's get started here.
Let's go to those three examples.
Remember what they were?
Recall the examples that we had.
We started with two roommates sharing an apartment.
One in graduate school, the other a working young professional and the problem was the
noise in the apartment bothering the graduate student.
The second one was the married couple whose impasse of or whether the husband should take
a job offer in another city.
In the third, we took it to work and the battles in a company over where to set boundaries
of sales districts.
So let's look at those examples and see how they'd be different today from the way they
were back then.
Start with their roommates.
How would they have viewed one another back in 1950 had this conflict arisen?
As we begin to think about this, some interesting observations arise.
You know what?
Jane, the young working professional, would have probably just been a secretary and wouldn't
have had a budding career much back then.
And it's not very likely that Rebecca, our graduate student, would have been in graduate
school.
There were very few women in graduate school then, whereas the majority of graduate students
in the United States today are actually women.
So things are very different.
But back in 1950 and some years after that, these two would probably viewed each other
as wrong, maybe even morally wrong or unreasonable in their positions.
Each would view the conflict through a lens of the other's character or personality.
That would have been much more likely back then, unless they were just prescient and
wise beyond their years.
Having never heard of win-win, which they hardly would have heard of back in 1950, they'd
have thought they needed to endure the problem with one another or at best work out a compromise.
Now how would that be different?
Well some, but not all of course, would view the problem as a matter of behavior that could
be negotiated.
Where might they have learned this?
They might have learned it at home today, young professionals.
They might have learned it through participating in something like mediation programs in grade
school or high school.
They might have learned it in one of several college courses they might have taken.
They might have listened to this course, you have.
So there were a lot of places they might have learned it.
So they might know today, they'd be much more likely to know today how to deal with that
conflict and be able to resolve it.
Let's tune in on our roommates, Rebecca and Jane, and see where they are with that now.
I'm really bad with noise.
I grew up with four brothers and sisters, so it kind of came with a package.
It didn't bother me in the dorms either.
I could study almost anywhere.
And I'm distracted by almost anything.
Having Monday and Wednesdays quiet night should work, but I may still have to ask you to turn
down the TV sometimes.
I'm okay with that.
Anything else?
Well, on weekends I'll still need to study, but I guess I can do that at the library.
Let's stick with it for a month and see how it goes.
And then we can talk again and see if anything needs adjusting.
Great.
That was easy as I expected.
Alright, it's better now.
This is an example, really, that's a common student conflict that I hear from students
at the university, especially for my students taking my conflict management course.
They're people who are learning to live with one another as young adults.
And the problem of noise in the apartment is one of the most common things that they
struggle over.
There's lots of emotion involved.
Somebody needs to study for a test.
Somebody wants to have a good time.
So it's there.
One's frustrated and angry.
The other wants to be able to relax.
You know what most of my college students do with this today?
Of course, they're in my conflict management course, but what they tend to do is take
their cue from the course.
And they set out to negotiate it as a matter of behavior and look for a win-win.
It's marvelous.
I have the right papers applying what they're learning and I get this back in papers.
And what I get back is a success story very regularly.
And they come to me and talk to me and they tell me how easy it was.
Success story, it works in most cases.
Of course, there actually are a few cases where what happens is they don't work it out,
the other student won't cooperate, and they part company at the end of that semester.
But by and large, this is a success story that tends to happen.
Let's go to our second example.
That second example is a little more complex.
Here we've got the married couple, Kate and Ken, in Chicago.
That would have been far less likely to even happen back in 1950.
If we think about then versus now in this conflict, he would probably have made his
career choice.
He might have consulted his wife a bit, but it would have been his choice about his
career and she would have gone along with him to Colorado.
And on one level, that's more simple and on another level, they're not both getting an
equal part in that.
It's simpler, but it's less likely to really get resolved.
Each would have worked to fulfill the roles that had been assigned to them that they thought
were theirs.
Each would have been a little less than fully satisfied.
They might have even been resentful.
There probably wouldn't been anything like a marriage counselor who understood this kind
of thing, who could have helped them work through it.
And of course, Kate probably wouldn't have had a career to work with, so there wouldn't
have been that equality.
These two would probably have loved each other.
Lots of couples did back in the 1950s.
Many a wife moved with her husband to wherever his career took him and tried to do so in
good humor and many made that work.
But there would have been distance and there would have been a challenge to that.
Well, how would this work now if the two had this conflict?
You know, there's a much better chance now that each would explain to the other what
their wishes and needs were.
They would negotiate now with much more equality and try to take into account each other's
perspectives.
They'd be trying to find a solution now much more likely, at least, that would work for
both.
Thousands and thousands and thousands of married couples do this now every year.
If needed, they might very well know that they could get help from a couple or a marriage
counselor or a mediator, someone with professional skills to help them through this and look
for a win-win, and they might go and seek that help.
There's a whole lot less chance that Ken, in this case, would insist on moving to Colorado
to take a job.
It would be much more negotiable in a situation with much more equal power.
That's the way it would come out today.
Now, remember in the example we had for today, Kate's personal power was greater because
she had the career and the career edge taking place at this particular time.
You know, today, there's a much better chance that these two people would find a resolution
that really is going to work well for both of them.
Even though it's more complicated today, they've got a better shot.
Let's think about an example of this one.
Let's go back now and check in on Ken and Kate and see how that works out.
Honey, take a look at this.
It's with a company in Denver.
You know how much I want to get out west.
You know I can't leave Chicago right now.
Not this year, maybe.
Not next.
I know.
You need to stay put right now.
I can't ask you to damage your career.
But I don't want to keep you stuck in Chicago for life.
What if you don't apply for this job, but we work on a long term plan that lets us both
get to where we want to go?
Really?
Yeah, that'd be great.
It won't be easy, but I think we can work it out.
Me too.
And if not, I'm sure we can get some help.
Okay, Ken and Kate.
That example is kind of like what really did happen.
You know I took this example from a couple that I happened to know.
Their names are not really Ken and Kate, and they didn't really live in Chicago.
But the fundamentals of the story are taken right from the lives of my friends.
In the real world case that happened, the husband agreed that it would be harmful to
interrupt his spouse's career at this time, and that there would be more opportunities
for him.
And she agreed that this situation with her career wasn't permanent, and that she would
be very willing to move with him at a time when it could be done without damaging her
career.
So they worked that out.
They got the help of a counselor to do it, and they set about doing it.
They worked that out.
It took four years to get around to where a move could be made, and during some of those
years, the Ken guy actually did shape some.
It wasn't all easy, but they stayed with it, worked it through.
And then what happened is, four years later, they actually did move out west.
They moved to Colorado.
Nobody lives happily ever after exactly, but you know what?
These two persons are happily married.
They're happy with each other.
They moved at a time when it was good for both of their careers, and they both love
where they live today.
So that couple worked its thing out, and it worked very well today beyond what could
have happened then.
So let's go to our third example.
Example three here, if you remember, we have Dale the sales manager and the sales person's
Don and Pat.
And what their problem is is what should be the boundaries of the sales territories.
How would this have looked back in 1950?
Well back then, the Don character, the salesman, who certainly would likely have been a man,
and Pat, of course, would have been a man, too, in that instance back then.
But having gotten his sales territory, if he was uncomfortable with it, he would make
a dutiful appointment with the boss and make his pitch for an adjustment.
And if the boss agreed, the boundaries would be reset.
And if not, the Don character would have been required to cheerfully accept the assignment
as it was, or else go look for another job.
Pat, of course, wouldn't have been consulted, and Pat would probably have been a man.
So that's another wrinkle for this thing back then.
And finally, you know, in the organization where they would have been working, there
would not have been someone like an ombudsperson or anyone who could facilitate in an informal
way to help them resolve the problem.
No one really available to help them with the process.
Well here in the 21st century, that issue is going to be a lot different.
This issue today would much more likely be addressed in a meeting with all the sales
persons present with the boss.
And ideally, that would be Dale's, the boss's, first response when there was a question to
convene a meeting of the sales staff.
So let's check in on these people now and see how that conference is going.
All right.
As the two of you know, I've been trying to rework the sales territory in a way that's
efficient and relatively equitable, and that's proven to be a bit of a challenge.
I figure we've got the best chance of getting it right if the three of us work together.
Now, the final decision is mine, but I want input from the two of you, sort of see what
we can work out.
OK, sure.
Yeah, all right.
OK.
So here's what we've got so far.
We take a look at the list of clients along the left-hand side.
All right.
That's what would happen today more likely.
Not in every case, but if you've got a team leader who's really on top of this issue and
knows what he's doing, that's more likely what would have happened.
So things would be different today if, in all three of these examples, then they would
have been back in 1950, and that's radically different.
It's very different.
Power here in this latest case is not equal, but it's much closer, and the power differences
are much less extreme than they would be in 1950.
So this group would have met.
They'd have created territories that they all agreed on.
In some cases, the boss would have to arbitrate and make the decision, but they would know
that at the time.
And if the conflict proved intractable or difficult, in many, many organizations, there
would be available an ombudsman or a mediator who could steer them toward a win-win resolution.
So it's a better world in these ways today.
All of these folks in these examples, and you and I, have concepts that we can use to
negotiate better resolutions, they're there in the concept of principal negotiation, in
the seven-step process that I laid for you and integrate many of the examples that we've
laid out.
So these comparisons really illustrate that we have come a long way.
At least the term win-win has spread all over the world.
Remember the Russian president Medvedev, after working the new treaty with President
Obama, declared that it was a win-win conversation.
So we're beyond now where we were then in very significant ways.
My experience has documented this for me in a great many instances.
I've been in positions where I could see this happen both in my professional and my personal
life.
You know, I've been able to work with dozens of organizations, public and private and profit
and nonprofit, from bookstores to churches to banks to government agencies.
And I've seen lots and lots of instances where these gains have taken place, where even incremental
changes in the way conflicts are handled make for happier employees and greater productivity.
There are specific conflicts that occur, and you know, most of them are really are very
human, very immediate.
Some of them are small and personal, but all of them matter.
I have some favorite instances among those things.
One of my all-time favorites is the conflict that I call the meal room conflict that occurred.
In this instance, I was actually working with a state agency, and that agency, which was
a very large one, was working on building a new strategic plan, and I was the facilitator
for that process.
Well, we were doing stakeholder engagement, and of course when you're engaging stakeholders,
among the most important stakeholders are employees.
So I was doing focus groups with various groups of employees.
And on the day this came to my attention, I was doing a focus group with the meal room
staff, the group of folks, the very blue-collar folks who worked in the meal room, got the
meal in and distributed and got stuff collected and sent it out.
They filed into the room where I was supposed to meet with them, and I was prepared to get
their input, and all of them sat there stone-faced, and they were not going to talk, and I couldn't
get a response from them, and I didn't know what was wrong.
They just didn't want to talk to me, and they all looked grim.
So I sat with them for a bit, and finally I said, you know what, we've got two hours
to sit here, and this is going to get awfully long if nobody talks.
And then it came to me to say, you know, perhaps I can help you.
What is the trouble here?
Finally one of them broke the silence.
It was a woman in her mid-50s, and she was a very strong blue-collar woman who'd obviously
done a lot of work outside of her time.
And she spoke up with a great emotional intensity, and she told me the story of what had happened
several weeks earlier.
What happened on that day several weeks earlier was that this crew came to work early because
there was a big mailing that had to be gotten on a meal truck that left at three o'clock.
They showed up for work early by agreement.
They worked straight through.
They skipped their morning break.
They skipped their lunch hour.
They worked steadily, and they hustled, and they got everything together, and they got
everything on that truck just in time to have it go away.
They were thrilled with their own performance.
They were successful.
And you know what happened after that?
Just as they sat down then to have their lunch and laugh and talk about it, through the room
came the newly appointed deputy director on her inspection of the place.
The new deputy director saw these people all sitting around laughing and talking after three
o'clock in the afternoon.
This was not break time.
This was not lunch time.
They were sitting around eating.
Her conclusion was these people are loafing on the job.
So she chewed them all out royally, told them they were all getting a letter of reprimand,
went back to her office, and drafted that letter of reprimand, and they all got a letter,
and it went in their file.
They were deeply wounded, and nobody talked.
Well, when they finished telling me that story and the others had chimed in, I then went
upstairs and went to see that deputy director and told them what they told me.
She looked concerned, but I wasn't sure what she was going to do.
I found out later what she did do.
What she did was have those letters taken out of their files, replace them with a letter
of commendation for what they had accomplished, made copies for them, had her own appointments
canceled for the next day, showed up for work the next morning at 7.30 in the morning wearing
blue jeans, and said, I need to apologize to you.
I was wrong.
I didn't understand what you had done, and here's a letter of commendation for each
of you.
I've had the letter of reprimand removed, and I want to stay here and work with you
in this room all day today so I understand your work, and I'll never make that mistake
again.
A beautiful resolution that she made, and a beautiful act of apology and healing, the
kind of thing that I've talked about all the way through, and she certainly had a loyal
mail room staff from then on.
There are some other examples I could point to.
One that comes to mind is an example about the people working in a research laboratory.
They were having terrible problems getting along, and it was a pattern of behavior, and
I suspected that one member was a bully who was deliberately targeting people because
that person seemed to be offending lots of folks.
When we got the issues on the table, that person saw what she was doing and the effect
on them, and we just negotiated ways for the others to signal her when she was being a
problem, she copped to it, apologized, explained it, and those people got to working nicely
together for time after that, and they're still working well together.
There was a very large conflict that I got to deal with on one occasion back in 1990
when the Federal Environmental Protection Agency had discovered that California was
not reducing its pollution levels quite enough, and the EPA, the Environmental Protection
Agency, was looking at how they might go about reducing the smog, and was talking about
requiring California to change the smog check system that the state had.
In that state, what happened is the smog check is not centralized.
You can go to 900 and somewhat different auto repair stations, get the check, and get your
auto repaired if you need it at the same place.
The state had worked out these arrangements with all these private companies to do this,
and now there was the possibility that they might be required to renege on that arrangement,
and these private auto repair people who had invested money and had a business going to
this might be cut out, and there was a great deal of conflict about that.
There was hostility, there was argument back and forth, what were we going to do?
The state agency involved in dealing with them said, you know what, we've got to talk
to these people and listen and see what can be worked out.
So I got to go along with that and help facilitate the meetings with them to do it.
We held discussion sessions in five different cities.
We held a total of 128 different focus groups to listen to those people, and you know what
happened?
When we asked them to brainstorm together to come up with potential solutions that might
work, what emerged from those sessions across all those groups was a real consensus about
what might work.
And it focused not so much on changing where you do the inspections for smog, but it focused
on identifying the cars that are the biggest polluters and getting them off the road.
That information was taken to the governor's office.
The governor's office took it to the legislature, and California argued successfully with the
federal government, stuck by its guns, and a solution was found in what really had looked
like it was going to be an intractable conflict.
It was very nice to be present and witness that as it took place.
You know, there are big organizations.
I'm a small player in that.
I've gotten to see little bits.
I'm not one of the major ones.
Enormous important organizations, the Harvard Negotiation Project is one that sort of tracked
over the years because of just noticing that early work of Fisher and Urie, and they do
a marvelous amount of work.
They do it on a worldwide basis.
They deal with disputes, large, small, everywhere from individuals to organizations to communities
to governments.
They work at this in a number of ways.
Now most of the time when you've got mediators and organizations helping to resolve conflicts,
those things are kept confidential so they don't make the news, especially they don't
make the news when they're worked out well.
But there are marvelous examples.
There was one the Harvard Negotiation Project did that had to do with how they were going
to deal with sewage and who was going to pay for it in New York.
A huge problem.
So that one got worked out very, very nicely.
Another one that they did had to do with cleaning up New York Harbor.
They got multiple players in the game and they helped that work out.
So in addition to the Harvard people, there are other people.
William Wilmot travels worldwide.
I already told you that Ken Clark can cloak travels worldwide.
So there are a lot of people doing this.
There's lots of help available and there's lots of breakthroughs taking place with all
that help.
Now in the majority of those cases, the negotiations are confidential.
So the gains are visible only to the people involved, but we do know they take place.
So what I want to suggest with that is that I've told you a success story here in these
24 lectures.
It's a lot better now than it was back in 1950.
And it's better in several ways.
One is we know a lot more than we did and another is we have more help available and
a third is a lot of us are better at resolving conflicts and we'd better be because a lot
of it is more complex today than it might have been back in the 1950s.
So that's a real success story, but we're nowhere finished.
We're way out in the middle of this.
We have a long way to go.
There are some limitations that are huge that strike me when I think about this.
What are those limitations?
One is that the dissemination of this knowledge is still really very, very limited.
It's been a long time.
It's been more than six decades since Deutsch made that initial discovery, but there are
still people that don't know about it, lots of them.
You're already helping.
I hope you share what you learned in this course with friends and family and colleagues,
but the information needs to get out and I'm very much interested in getting the information
out as best we can.
Secondly, as we become more aware of and willing to speak up for our individual interests,
we actually surface more conflicts and we make it more complex.
But we really need to get better at figuring out how we're going to balance the needs
of the individual for belonging and affection with our pursuit of our individual interests
and freedom on the other.
That's a tough one to balance.
We've still got that tension and we've got a ways to go on figuring out how to just
get that balancing right.
The third thing is that in our major long-standing relationships, there are these perennial conflicts
that surface periodically.
We can get a lot better at learning to accept what it is about the other person that we're
not going to change and how to handle that and be comfortable with it in the relationships
that we have, more work to do on that one.
We also need to learn a whole lot more about how our children learn to deal with conflict,
where they learn about it, and how we can do a better job of teaching them.
We need to pass on what we've learned to them and that's difficult.
There are still some conflicts, especially those moral conflicts that we talked about,
that seem to remain beyond the reach of our best efforts and beyond the best methods of
resolution.
What do we do with those?
We need to learn better how to know whether and when to stand up for a principle and battle
for a cause and when to go look for a win-win.
That's still a tough one.
I've got great examples of success for you, but there is still a lot that faces us that
we don't seem to know how to handle.
We really need to learn more and better ways to tolerate and appreciate the differences.
We're still working on that, so there's a lot still to do relative to conflict.
Finally, though, despite all that we can learn from the research and all the practices we
have for better conflict management, I want to say this.
Conflict remains a delicate art and it's a major challenge.
Back at the beginning of this course, I said this is not going to be a GWIS course where
I can just give you a cookie-cutter solution that you can always apply and be guaranteed
to get the solution you want.
No, we're more complicated than that.
The other persons involved with us are more complicated than that.
We can't always predict what they're going to do.
This is a challenge for individuals.
What we have to do is we've got to tailor how we do it to our individual personalities.
Take what we know and tailor it to that.
While we're wanting and needing to negotiate better together, we need to understand that
we're going to keep creating conflicts as we work on it, and there's still going to
be some that continue to confound us, so we're going to struggle with this stuff.
We are going to keep struggling with it.
I want to strongly suggest we've got a long way to go.
We've come a long way, but we have a long way to go.
As you struggle with it personally, I want you to be patient with yourself and patient
with the other persons.
I want to celebrate the progress that we've made, but be humble about where we are.
Perfection in conflict management is certainly beyond my capacity.
I suspect it's beyond human capacity, so don't ask more of yourself than you can do.
All right, let's summarize.
We know a whole lot more about the nature of conflict and about how to handle it now
than we did all those decades ago.
I want to bring this down to something like 10 fundamental lessons from this course that
I hope you're going to take with you and hold on to.
They start from this understanding that conflict is inherent in human interaction.
We can't avoid it, but we can do these things.
One, we can learn to manage conflict better.
If you work at it, you've got to keep working at it, I do, but we can learn to manage conflict
better.
Two, we can achieve a true win-win solution most of the time.
That was Deutsch's great breakthrough, and he really helped us with that.
Three, emotions and perspective are important internal facts.
Emotions are mixed, they're complex, they're difficult.
We need to report them and take them into account, and we need to see them from each
other's perspective.
That's really important.
Fourth, we're going to have a much better shot at achieving a win-win resolution if
we're aware of our multiple goals.
If we can ID those four types of goals that Wilmot and Hawker told us about, the topic,
the relational, the identity, and the process goals, we've got a much better shot at a win-win.
Fifth, we also have a better shot at achieving a win-win if the power between the parties
is close to equal.
The more equal it is, the better chance we've got, and if we focus on our interests rather
than taking positions and defending them and arguing.
Work to equalize the power when you're in a conflict, and you've got a better chance.
Sixth, we need a broad repertoire of conflict strategies.
We don't want to be stuck with a few default styles.
Remember what we said about conflict styles, avoidance, competition, compromise, accommodation,
and collaboration.
We need them all in our repertoire, and we need to choose based on the situation.
Seventh, we have these useful processes and ideas that we can follow.
Chief among those here would be Fisher and Uri's Four Principles, and the suggestions
that I gathered together for you in that seven-step process that I laid out.
Eighth, I want you to notice here that close personal relationships and our professional
relationships have dynamics of their own.
They're important.
They have a lot of conflict, and we've got to pay special attention to them.
Ninth, often we're going to have to do cleanup and rebuilding and manage the aftermath, so
we've got to do that forgiving and healing work that's necessary.
And tenth, there's good professional help available for working through conflicts, counselors,
mediators, ombudsmen, those kinds of people, so get help when you need it.
Ten, really important lessons.
And you know what about all these lessons?
You don't have to get them all right.
Any one or two of them you apply will help the odds, and these things apply in our everyday
life.
That's what's so important to me about this course.
So where are we?
You know, I can't wish you that you would have no conflicts at all.
Conflicts are inherent in human interaction.
And conflict does point out problems we need to solve.
It challenges us to really fully encounter ourselves and fully encounter the other person
and break through to deeper relationships.
At least it makes life interesting.
But my goal for you in this course is that you'll work with the lessons that I've shared
with you here.
It's been my goal, the lessons that I've learned over the last 35 years, and I've tried to
share those.
What I want you to do is keep working with these lessons, keep trying and keep learning.
That's what I have to do.
So here's your last assignment in this course, and it's also my greatest wish for you.
What I want you to do is keep coming back to these lessons, keep relearning them, keep
getting better and better at managing conflict in your personal life, your professional life,
and in your community life.
