The following are special complimentary lectures from the teaching company. In these specially
commissioned lectures, Professor Jeremy McInerney takes us on a journey back to the Olympics
of the ancient Greek world. Professor McInerney is an associate professor in the Department
of Classical Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. He is also chair of the graduate
group in the art and archeology of the Mediterranean world and one of our most popular professors.
Please feel free to send the link to this lecture to any of your friends who might also enjoy
it. Lecture 2, The Olympics, from Ancient Greece to Athens 2004, Part 2.
Hello and welcome back to the second of our little mini series of lectures on the Olympics.
In the first lecture, I spent a good deal of time talking about the Homeric background
to the Olympic games because I wanted to make the point that the Homeric heroes are really
the model for the Olympic hero and that the Olympics give the Greeks of the eighth and
the seventh century and then later into the classical period the opportunity to behave
in the way that they associate with their models, the heroes in the Homeric poems. And
we talked a little bit about the specific events such as the sprinting and the boxing,
the long distance events and the pentathlon. And then I spent a little time talking about
the equestrian events showing just what chaos and mayhem there must have been going on in
the hippodrome as these chariots and horses were racing around. Now, the Olympics, as
I pointed out, most people believe begin in 776 BC and they continued with very few interruptions
until 394 AD. That's a period of just under 1200 years. We've only just celebrated the
100 years of the Olympics of the modern era, so we've got a long way to go, well over a
millennium before we catch up to the ancients in terms of the longevity of the ancient institution.
But as you would expect in antiquity, just as in the modern Olympics, some events dropped out
and some events were added. One such change involved an arduous race that lasted well into
the classical age, but then seems to have been dropped before the Roman period. This was an
800 meter race that was carried out in armor. It was called the hoplita dromos, which means
the race of the hoplites or the race of the heavily armed infantrymen. In this race, and
we have depictions of this on vases, so we know what it looked like, athletes wore the
bronze helmets that warriors wore in battle, they wore the bronze greaves on their lower
legs as if they were protecting their legs for battle, and they carried the heavy wooden
and bronze shield of a hoplite warrior. It was apparently an incredibly popular event
among the spectators, but it must have been one of the most punishing events on the program,
and I think that the athletes were quite happy when they saw it dropped.
You'll notice that there was no marathon race in the ancient Olympics. We've talked about what
the schedule of events was, and I didn't mention the marathon. The race does have a classical
association, that's to say the modern marathon has a classical association, because it takes
its name from the place outside of Athens, where in 490 BC the Athenians drove the Persian
invaders back into the sea. However, there was no sporting event associated with this
in antiquity. What happened was that on the eve of the Battle of Marathon, a long-distance
runner named Fidipides ran nearly 150 miles in two days from Athens to Sparta to bring
an Athenian request for help against the Persians. The Spartans didn't make it in time, but the
Athenians prevailed nonetheless, and they defeated the Persians, driving them back into the sea
at Marathon. So we used the term marathon to describe a race, but the actual episode in
antiquity was much longer than 26 miles, and it wasn't even a race at all. Now there was
another story told in antiquity, but it's a much later story, and that is that Fidipides
had run from Marathon to Athens to bring the news of the victory at Marathon. According
to this story, he arrived in Athens, delivered the good news, we are victorious, and promptly
dropped dead. It's a terrific story, but it is not in any way shape or form authentic.
The distance of the modern marathon, 26 miles, only very loosely approximates the distance
from the town of Marathon to Athens. In actuality, it's based on the distance from Windsor Castle
to the White City Stadium in London when the marathon was run at the London Olympics in 1908.
So there you have a perfect blending of the ancient and the modern, but with very little
connection to the ancient Olympics. That's only one of the many ways in which the modern
and the ancient games differ. There were no swimming events at the ancient Olympics,
so no chance for Ian Thorpe to win more glory as we all hope he will in the next Olympiad,
no water sports such as rowing or kayaking, no winter sports such as skiing or bobsledding.
A more significant difference, and I don't mean to be facetious by listing these differences,
because they actually do tell us something about the spirit of the ancient games,
but a more important difference is that there were no team sports, whether it be volleyball,
soccer or field hockey. The ancient Olympics were very much a matter of individual athletes
exerting themselves against other individuals. Furthermore, and again this is I think significant,
no women participated as competitors at the ancient Olympic games. In fact, only young
unmarried girls were even allowed in as spectators. Married women were barred on pain of death
from watching these naked men in their athletic competitions. We hear of a woman named Calli
Patera who trained her son after her husband died and who then accompanied him to the Olympics
dressed as a man, but when her son was victorious in her exuberance she jumped over the barrier
snagging her clothes and it was revealed when they fell off that she was in fact a woman.
She faced death, but she was pardoned by the judges because aside from her son, her father,
her three brothers and her nephew were all Olympic victors. A story that tells us not
only that it was exceptional for women to be at the Olympics, but that Olympic victors
ran in families and this is not the only instance where we know of multi generations. In fact,
it was not uncommon for three generations of the same family to compete victoriously at the Olympics.
Unmarried girls could compete in a running race that was held at a separate event and this was
part of the festival in honor of Hera, the Queen of Heaven, but this was kept quite separate from
the main Olympic competition which of course was a festival in honor of Zeus. We have a description
of these female competitors wearing short Amazonian style kites or tunics draped over their shoulder
to leave one breast exposed and even if the description sounds a little odd, we have bronze
statuette from sixth century Sparta that shows a running girl wearing exactly such an outfit and
she's seen striding along hiking her dress up over her thighs to make it easier for her to run.
It shouldn't really come as any surprise to learn that the women's competition at Olympia,
at the festival of Hera, was dominated by Spartan women. At Sparta, the health and the training
of women was prized as much as the training of men after all these Spartan women were destined to
be the wives and the mothers of Spartan warriors. In fact, the only other part of Greece to leave
us any information about what we might call women's athletics is a small sanctuary outside of Athens
where girls went through a coming of age ritual at puberty and it seems that as part of that
rite of passage, while they were at the sanctuary of Artemis, they engaged in running races that
were held in honor of the goddess. But if the vase images that we have of these little girls
from Browron are anything to go by, then these girls were no match for the Spartan rivals who
dominated at Olympia and just a little footnote about Hera and her festival or more specifically
about her temple. If you do manage to go to Olympia and you'll see there the remains of both the
temple of Zeus, the major temple in the sanctuary, but you'll also see the temple of Hera. You'll
notice an oddity about it and that is that it is a temple in which every column and column capital
is different. They're not standardized. It's the only instance that we have of this in the Greek
world and the probable explanation for it is that the temple originally had wooden columns
and that as the wood decayed and they were replaced successively but at different times
with stone columns, the columns were cut separately and individually. So if you see this wonderful
squat archaic temple, look at the columns and imagine the Spartan girls who ran in honor of
Hera and to win glory like their Spartan brothers. Despite the differences that I've been outlining
between the ancient and the modern games, there were ways in which the ancient Olympics were
significantly like the modern games and you may be a little surprised to find what some of these
similarities were. They relate to two of the most common laments that are made about the modern
Olympics. One often hears, for example, that the modern games are overly commercialized.
That's hard to refute. In the blink of an eye, the superstar athletes of today can turn an
Olympic gold medal into endorsements worth millions of dollars for everything from running shoes to
breakfast cereal, but ancient athletes also profited from their success. Technically,
the Olympic victor was only awarded a wreath of wild olive, but in practice it was common,
certainly from the 5th century onwards, for an Olympic victor to be treated as a hero at home
and to profit from his success and by profit I mean financially. In Athens, for example,
victors were voted free lunch at the town hall for life as well as a cash payment
worth 500 drachmas. In today's currency, that would come out as somewhere between 50 and 100,000
dollars. Not a bad reward for a gold medal. Athletes were originally just individuals performing
on behalf of themselves and their family's glory, but as the city-states of Greece grew in size during
the archaic period and as they grew in importance, athletes came to represent their community. Now,
they didn't actually march behind a national flag, but it was as good as and so the same creeping
professionalism that certainly transformed the modern Olympics from Baron de Coubertin's idea
of a purely amateur event to a professional competition, which is what they are today,
was precisely the same transformation that the ancient Olympics underwent fairly early in their
development, so that for probably a thousand years of their 1200-year history, it would be fair
to say that the ancient Olympics were professional, not amateur. The second complaint that's often
levelled against the modern Olympics is that they can be so easily politicized, with states
boycotting for political reasons or using the games as a showcase for the accomplishments of a
nation or an ideology. From the Nazis attempting to turn the 1936 Olympics into a celebration of
Aryan superiority, to American athletes giving a Black Power salute, not to mention the Olympics
serving as a surrogate for the Cold War, we've seen the Olympics used as a political stage
throughout the 20th century. People often assume that the ancient Olympics were somehow more pure,
in fact Avery Brundage of the International Olympic Committee used to say this quite explicitly,
but in fact it's not really true. For a start, Olympia, the home of the ancient Olympics,
changed hands on various occasions between towns who competed for control of this neutral territory,
and when I say competed for control, I'm talking about armed military invasion.
Pisa, not Pisa in Italy, but a Pisa in western Greece, controlled the sanctuary briefly in the
7th century and again in the 4th century. In fact in 364 BC the town of Elis, which was the
traditional controller of the Olympic games, invaded the sanctuary of Olympia to rest control
out of the hands of the Pizzatans. And here's an eyewitness account, this is really quite astonishing.
He's talking here about the actual Olympiad with competitors competing and he says the
horse race had been completed as well as the events of the Pentathlon. The finalists of the
Pentathlon who had qualified for the wrestling event were competing not far from the altar and
meanwhile the attacking troops from Elis came on pursuing their enemy who fell back and fought
from the roots of the porticoes while the aliens defended themselves from ground level.
So there's fighting going on with arrows and spears going through the air and soldiers coming
to blows even in the middle of the actual five days of the Olympiad in 364.
Armed invasions of Olympia were fortunately relatively rare but politics still played a role.
For example even superpowers like Athens and Sparta could get into trouble if they failed
to observe the Olympic truce. In 420 BC the Spartans were fined a small fortune, 200,000
drachmas after they attacked an enemy outpost during the Olympic truce. Now this was not in
Olympia, it was nowhere near the territory of Olympia but the Olympic truce was meant to hold
throughout Greece. No one was meant to fight so that the athletes could make their way and the
spectators could make their way in peace to Olympia. Well the Spartans complained that they had not
received formal notification of the truce but the judges turned their appeal down and when the Spartans
refused to pay the fine they were banned from participating in the next Olympic Games, an
Olympic boycott in reverse if you will. The Olympics were also political in the sense that
the sanctuary was decorated with military spoils dedicated by victors in battles. Shields inscribed
with the names of Greek cities and other Greek tribes who had been defeated by Greek armies.
Imagine this during the Peloponnesian war Brassidas the Spartan general and his allies
at Acanthus up in northern Greece defeated an Athenian army and they gathered up the shields of
the Athenians who they'd driven from the field of battle and they sent the shields to Olympia
where they were erected in the sanctuary with an inscription on them saying Brassidas and the
Acanthians victory spoils taken from the Athenians. Imagine what it must have been like if you were
an Athenian athlete arriving at Olympia at the next Olympic Games. They could travel there under
truce but they still had their defeat being rubbed into the wounds as they arrived at Olympia.
We've been looking at ways in which the ancient and the modern Olympic Games were similar but the
most basic difference between them is that the Olympic Games in antiquity didn't move from place
to place like the modern games. They were always held at Olympia in the western Peloponnes. It's
a pleasant spot located beneath the hill of Cronos and between two rivers the Alphaeus
and the Claudios. All right that's a nice little description but you might want to know why did
they choose Olympia? Why not Athens? Why not Sparta or Corinth? It seems particularly odd when you
consider that Olympia is isolated. It's a long way from anywhere else so that really it's a bit
like putting the modern games permanently in Nebraska and I mean no insult to anyone from
Nebraska. I hope you understand the spirit in which I make that comment. Well I think there are
a number of reasons that the games were held at Olympia and it's important to think about why
the games were located there. The first is that this was a sanctuary of Zeus and the sanctuary
probably predates the games. Zeus is the father of the gods and the Olympic Games were held in
his honor so we should begin with the sanctuary and we should always remember that for the Greeks
the Olympic Games were a sacred event and I don't mean that in any vague metaphorical sense. I mean
it in a literal sense. These games were dedicated to the gods. They were performed in honor of the
gods and a victor dedicated some sort of memorial to the gods in thanks for his victory. This was a
sacred event as were all the festivals of the Greeks that included any kind of games and a
second reason and this may be more important is that Olympia is so isolated. It doesn't lie in
the territory of Sparta. It's far enough away to be outside of the control of wealthy Corinth
and it's certainly beyond the reach of the Athenians and the significance of this is that
Olympia could always remain neutral offering Greeks from all over Greece the opportunity
to compete in a location that was not identified with the political interests of any single Greek
state. The Olympic Games were held under a truce the so-called echecheria that was declared one
month in advance as I've said to allow athletes and spectators time to travel from all over the
Greek world to Olympia and so Olympia as a location and the Olympiad as a time was a respite from war.
The Greeks came from all over the Greek mainland but they also came from the colonies to the west
and from the Black Sea to the north participating in a festival that honored Zeus and brought
athletes personal glory. Now this neutrality and this isolation is not incidental it is very
important you see in antiquity there was no such thing as a Greek nation the different regions
and the city states of Greece remained independent and they only united in times of external invasion
ironically the Persians managed to unite Greece but the Greeks couldn't do it in the place of
political unification which the Greeks never accomplished the Greeks found cultural unity
by sharing a common mythology by sharing a common religion you could worship Athena in Athens but
you could also worship her in Sparta by sharing a common language it had funny accents in different
parts of Greece but nevertheless it was recognizably Greek wherever you went and by having common
cultural practices the way you dressed the way you ate the poetry that you listened to the songs
that you sang all of these combined to establish a common Greek identity and seen in that light
the Olympics were one of the most crucial institutions of the Greeks the Greeks themselves
came to recognize that Olympia captured the spirit of what it was to be Greek because for the Greeks
all life was a contest it was a struggle that they would call an argon a competition this is the
central theme of their drama in which a protagonist literally in Greek the first actor in the argon
or contest battles verbally with the second character and you can think of Medea and Jason
or you can think of Antigone and Creon Greek art is about conflict even their plastic arts can be
sometimes read as a battle if you will their sculpture being a battle a contest between the
urge to depict reality as it is and the human form as it could be in its ideal state the
Greek states were continually at war with each other and this spirit of competition of the argon
infused all life in ancient Greece the Olympic games take that spirit the spirit of competition
and they make it the essence of the Greek identity you compete because you are Greek
and you are Greek because you compete this agonistic impulse as it's been called
is at the heart of pan Hellenism the idea of Greek identity and Greek cultural unity
during the Peloponnesian war when the Greek world was convulsed by internecine warfare
Greeks killing themselves everywhere from Sicily to the Aegean in a massive war between the Spartans
and their allies and the Athenians and their allies Aristophanes lamented the fact that Greeks
could be brothers at Olympia yet enemies on the battlefield and in one of his plays he has a character
say in no uncertain terms I must reproach you both sides and rightly don't you share a cup at common
altars for common gods like brothers at the Olympic games at Thermopylae and Delphi I needn't list
the many many others the world is full of foreigners you could fight but it's Greek men and cities you
destroy this peculiar construction of a Greek identity through competition can be understood
according to the principle of what anthropologists call peer polity pressure according to which
comparable states end up emulating and competing with each other and this can be seen most dramatically
in the archaeology of the shrine at Olympia the sanctuary of Zeus at Olympia and I hope that
perhaps if you haven't been there already after this lecture you may be inspired to go to Olympia
and to look at what's there to be seen on the ground and before discussing the archaeology I just
want to acknowledge here the work of the German archaeological institute that has excavated for
over 125 years at Olympia and has done a splendid job of bringing to light the ancient buildings
in addition to the major buildings such as the temple of Zeus that I've mentioned
and the temple of Hera that I've already discussed and in addition to the hero shrine of Pilops one
of the the great heroes of the Peloponnese and of course the altar where all the sacrifices took
place the northern side of the sanctuary of Zeus was marked by a terrace along which sat a series of
treasury houses these resembled small temples and they were erected to house the dedications made
by the victorious states and their athletes they include a treasury of Gala a treasury of
metapontum a treasury of sirene another for sybaris another for syracuse and a treasury of Byzantium
now the locations not of the treasuries but of the home states that erected them the locations
are very revealing Gala metapontum sybaris syracuse are all in the Greek west they're in
Sicily and in southern Italy Byzantium on the other hand is located at the entrance to the
black sea in the Greek northeast while Cyrene is located in Libya these are all overseas cities
not from the Greek mainland but rather Greek colonies for them for these Greek colonies
having athletes competing at Olympia was a dramatic assertion that no matter where they lived
they were still Greek and the non-architectural dedications at Olympia tell the same story and
again if you went to Olympia in antiquity this is what you saw you didn't just see the Olympic games
you saw the hundreds and thousands of dedications that had been erected as memorials by the athletes
to say thank you to the gods for their victory chariots dedicated by hero and galon from Sicily
a chest representing Ajax of Locri in southern Italy a semicircular pedestal dedicated by the
people of Apollonia from the black sea region a statue of Zeus dedicated by the people of
metapontum in Italy and another statue of Zeus dedicated by three private individuals
Hippagoras Freinon and Ina Cidemus all again from the Greek west so it was Greeks from the mainland
Greeks from the colonies Greeks from everywhere coming to compete in the spirit of Homeric
competition and celebrating their Greek cultural identity in a neutral venue and we shouldn't
forget the other activities that went on connected to the games it may seem as if the idea of a
cultural Olympiad which is now something that we do every four years is a modern invention
but in fact the ancient Olympics also included non-athletic events so for example at Olympia
during the course of the Olympics there would not only be sacrifices to Greek gods and prayers
and rituals that were being copied by every other Greek city but there were poets and musicians
there as well and there were historians too all present composing the works that they had been
commissioned to to create hymns in honor of the Olympic victors or reading their most recent
historical work or performing for an audience and these audiences would be both Thessalian and
Spartan and Corinthian and Syracusan but in addition to that they were Greek
it was that competition that allowed the Greeks to surmount their differences and to become fully
Greek and that's why the Greeks referred to the Olympic games as being Pan-Hellenic they were for
all the Greeks and there was no greater glory than to be a victor at each of the Pan-Hellenic games
the games held at Olympia at Delphi at Nimea and at Ismere a champion who won at all of these was
called Periodonikes a circuit victor victors were celebrated in the kinds of anecdotes that I told
earlier about my about Milo of Croton but the Olympic victors also received a very particular
kind of praise that takes us right back to where we began the Homeric hero because the Olympic victors
were praised by poets like Pindar who in the fifth century composed Olympic Odes and he tells us in
some of these Odes how he understood the task of the poet Ample says Pindar is the glory stored for
Olympian winners thereof my shepherd tongue is feigned to keep some part in fold but only by
the help of Zeus is wisdom kept over blooming in this is kept ever blooming in the soul son of
Archistratus Agassitimus I know certainly that for your boxing I will lay a glory of sweet strains
upon your crown of golden olive and will have in remembrance the race of the Locrians in the west
what happens in the hands of Pindar is that Olympic heroes are being turned into Homeric heroes
and when we turn our Olympic victors into movie stars we are doing the very same thing that the
Greeks did to theirs so the games remained a bedrock institution of Greek life if anything they even
gained in prestige when Greece lost its independence and became a province of the Roman Empire so
that in the second century AD as the Olympics passed their 900th birthday Strabo could write
the glory of the temple persists on account both of the festival assembly and of the Olympic games
in which the prize was a crown and which were regarded as sacred the greatest games in the world
the temple was adorned by its numerous offerings which were dedications there from all parts of
Greece well that was when they were 900 years old and they went on to last for nearly another
300 years let's hope that our Olympic games have the same longevity because well there is enjoyable
today as they were in antiquity we hope you've enjoyed these free lectures on the ancient Olympics
see the list of professor McInerney's courses on this free lecture web page
or visit our website for more courses on the arts history religion science philosophy and
literature available on audiotape videotape cd and dvd it is our pleasure at the teaching company
to provide you with the joy of lifelong learning every day with great professors great courses
and a lifetime guarantee of your satisfaction visit our website at www.teach12.com or call us
at 1-800-TEACH-1-2 thank you from all of us at the teaching company
