Lecture 2, Victoria's Early Rain, 1837 to 61.
Victoria came to the British throne in 1837 at the age of 18. Her predecessors, George
III, George IV and William IV had been unimpressive kings and they had impaired the reputation
of the monarchy. But by her authority and her example, Victoria restored its reputation
and dignity and embodied, represented the era's mood of moral improvement.
Along with her husband, Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, whom she married in 1840, Victoria
made the most of what limited political power and influence the monarchy still retained within
the British constitutional monarchy system and she communicated regularly throughout
her entire reign with her prime ministers. She also bore nine children and enjoyed many
of the advantages of the industrial society in which she was living. Her marriage was
in 1840 and she became very devoted to Prince Albert so that his death in 1861 was a shattering
catastrophe. In this lecture, we're going to follow Victoria from her birth up to that
point. She was born in 1819 and at first didn't seem
very likely ever to become the monarch, the queen. The British system of succession is
that if the king has a son, the son will always take the throne first and only if there are
no direct male heirs will the throne devolve onto a princess. But that's what happened
in this case. She finally succeeded her uncle William IV because none of his legitimate children
survived to adulthood. She herself was the daughter of the younger
brother of King George IV, the Duke of Kent. Her grandfather was George III and because
he'd gone mad for long periods throughout her life, she was terribly afraid that she
also might suffer from madness. Although in the event, she was extremely level-headed
and sensible and down to earth. Her father, Duke of Kent, died before she
was one year old. So in effect, she never knew him. And her mother, who was a minor
German princess, this is in the days when Germany was divided up into dozens of little
principalities, her mother was left with a tiny allowance that the rather grudging British
government had given her. But then, when William IV's children all
died in infancy, it suddenly began to occur to the powers that she was in fact likely
to become the heir. And as that probability increased, so did her mother's income and
the mother's ability to give her a relatively first-class education.
William IV, incidentally, had ten children who did survive, but they were all by one
of his mistresses, and so they weren't eligible for succession to the throne.
Victoria's education was very strong in foreign languages. She was fluent in German and French,
was good at Italian, and wrote a regular diary. So we know that from the age of about ten
or eleven onwards, she was also a fluent prose stylist. One of her music teachers was Mendelssohn,
one of the great composers of the day. And during her childhood, she visited many of
the great aristocratic houses of Britain. So she was already familiar with the kinds
of circles in which she would move when she became the monarch.
But what she didn't have was childhood friends. Most of her childhood was very lonely. She
was constantly in the society of adults, but rarely with other children. Her closest friend
was probably her governess, Louise Laitsen. Louise Laitsen was herself a German woman,
daughter of a Lutheran minister in Hanover, and had very strict standards, and brought
Victoria up to hold herself proudly and to think of herself as a queen. Later on in life,
Victoria wrote a reminiscence of her own childhood, and I'll read you a little passage from it.
It's all in the third person. She often used the royal we, and sometimes wrote of herself
in the third person. The princess, in other words herself, the princess had a great respect
and even awe of her. But with that, the greatest affection. She knew how to amuse and play
with the princess, so as to gain her warmest affections. The princess was her only object
and her only thought. She never, for the thirteen years she was governess to Princess Victoria,
never once left her. It was also Laitsen who taught her not to gossip with the servants
and to set a very high tone in her regal bearing. Now while this is going on, and particularly
once it becomes clear that Victoria is probably going to succeed to the throne, her mother
was scheming with one of her favourite courtiers, an Irishman called Sir John Conroy, to make
him the regent. If she became queen when she was still not of age, a regency would follow,
and the mother and Conroy were hoping to get it, and she herself resented this scheming
very bitterly. Well in the event she was old enough to take on the responsibilities directly
herself, with the result that the mother and Conroy were disappointed. She was notified
early in the morning of June the 20th, 1837, and was brought down in her dressing gown
to meet the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Coiningham, the Lord Chancellor, who had come
to notify her of what had happened, that she was now the queen. And she wrote in her diary
that night, Since it has pleased Providence to place me in this station, I shall do my
utmost to fulfil my duty towards my country. I am very young, and perhaps in many, though
not in all things, inexperienced. But I am sure that very few have more real goodwill
and more real desire to do what is right than I have.
Well she was lucky in having as Prime Minister at that time Lord Melbourne. He was a Prime
Minister from the Whig party, and he tutored her into her duties as queen. He was a widower,
and he had a very stormy marriage. His wife was one of the English ladies who ran away
with Lord Byron, their romantic poet, and had a stormy affair with him, and had been
mentally rather unstable. So he himself had had an unhappy married life. Victoria regarded
him as a father figure, or perhaps even a grandfather figure, because she'd never known
her own father. And she got from Melbourne the kind of sympathetic attention and love
and help that she'd not previously had from a male friend. He trained her to run affairs,
and on days when they were apart, they wrote letters to each other every day, so very very
close for the first four or five years of her reign. Melbourne used to tell her stories
about her own wicked uncles, this shoddy crowd who'd been on the throne immediately before.
And he'd known Lord Nelson. He'd known Napoleon for that matter. He'd lived right through the
Napoleonic Wars, and so was able to pass on great stories to her of the giants of the
preceding generation. He wasn't a very goggly man, and they'd go to church together. He'd
sometimes fall asleep and begin to snore. And although she had high standards, she said,
well, Lord Melbourne's terribly busy, we must be indulgent towards him. Here's a letter
she wrote to her uncle Leopold. He was the king of Belgium, and a man to whom she was
very close. Let me pause to tell you how fortunate I am to have at the head of the government
a man like Lord Melbourne. I've seen him now every day with the exception of Friday,
and the more I see of him, the more I have confidence in him. He's not only a clever
statesman and an honest man, but a good and kind-hearted man whose aim is to do his duty
to his country and not just for his party. He's of the greatest use to me, both politically
and privately. It is to me the greatest pleasure to do my duty for my country and my people
and no fatigue, however great, will be burdensome to me if it is for the welfare of the nation.
That's the letter written after she'd been queen for about a week.
Well, Sir Sidney Lee, and a commentator at the time, said her three predecessors were
an imbecile, a profligate and a buffoon. And so with that low starting point, it was easy
for her to restore the credibility of the monarchy. And she certainly did. As she went
out in her carriage in the streets, people would stop to cheer. She was pretty in those
days and widely liked. However, in 1839, about two years after her accession, Lord Melbourne
had to resign in a political crisis. And the leader of the Tory party, Robert Peel, was
going to become the prime minister in Melbourne's place. One of the things he wanted to do, Peel
wanted to do, was to replace the ladies of the bedchamber, that is the Queen's household
servants. He said, when she became Queen, Lord Melbourne made a group of wigladies, the
ladies of the bedchamber. Now I want to put a series of Tory ladies there. After all, one
set of political sympathies has been well expressed. Now it's time for another set. The Queen
put her foot down and flatly refused. She liked her ladies. She liked the way things
were already. And she absolutely refused to let this happen. This event in British history
is remembered as the bedchamber crisis. It's not quite as interesting as it sounds actually.
But Peel said, if the Queen won't accept that these ladies, I refuse to take office. With
the result of that, Melbourne came back and limped on as a kind of lame duck prime minister
for a couple more years. And the changeover only finally took place in 1841. The system
of switching wasn't quite as smooth as it's subsequently become. This was a pattern which
was set then and continued throughout her whole reign. Whenever there was a change of
or almost whenever there was a change of government, she resented the newcomer at first. But it
wasn't long before she came to like and admire him in turn and to grieve when he had to go.
So Peel, whom at first she didn't like at all, when he had to resign in 1846, she was devastated
and said, I can't imagine how we're going to get on now that we haven't got Peel among us anymore.
Really the only one whom she profoundly disliked was William Gladstone, the great liberal leader
who many people think of as one of Britain's greatest politicians ever.
Well, she found it difficult to accept that she was now only a constitutional monarch,
that she didn't actually have political power. For example, in the late 1840s,
the Foreign Secretary was Lord Palmerston, another of the great figures of mid-19th
century political history. And she didn't like him, particularly because his foreign policy
towards Europe was sometimes antagonistic to states with which she had warm relations,
because her relatives were the monarchs there. She tried to persuade the Prime Minister,
Lord John Russell, to get rid of Palmerston altogether, but she was unable to subordinate
him to her will. Russell and Palmerston both knew that although the Queen had influence,
and although her opinion ought to be solicited, it could no longer be the compelling factor
in policymaking. When Britain went to war against Russia in the Crimea in 1854,
the Queen reviewed her troops and she created a medal called the Victoria Cross,
which from that time to the present has remained the very highest award for bravery that can be
given to a British military person. And she awarded it not only to officers who'd won the medal,
but also to enlisted men, something which had never previously been done by a monarch. She wanted
to get a little bit more directly involved in the lives of all the soldiers. While she married,
in 1840, one of her cousins, Prince Albert of Saxe, Coburg, Gopher, and other of the little
German principalities. But in getting married, and in the early years of her marriage, she was
very keen to show him that although he might be the part of her millias, she was the Queen,
that was the thing which counted most. Albert himself was a very earnest young man,
by all accounts rather humorless. He'd been educated at the University of Bond. He was an
intelligent and very gifted person. And this uncle who I mentioned, the King of Belgium,
King Leopold, had foreseen the possibility of a marriage between the two of them because they
were exact contemporaries. And Leopold himself had in effect trained Albert for the job of
becoming Victoria's husband. It was a gamble, of course, because nobody could be certain that the
marriage was ever going to come off. And at first, Victoria didn't like the sound of it. She wasn't
keen at all. But when he came to Britain in 1839, she began to thaw because he was handsome and had
excellent manners, and was serious and charming, and many of the qualities she might have looked for
in her husband, he seemed to embody. Here's what she wrote in her journal shortly after meeting him.
One of the pleasures of studying Queen Victoria is that she wrote so many diary entries, like
through her life, and so many letters, and so many memorandums, that we've got tens of thousands
of pages of her writing. And whatever the subject is, we can always find out what she thought.
She was also very beautiful. Here's what she said. Albert is really quite charming,
and so excessively handsome, such beautiful blue eyes, an exquisite nose, and such a pretty mouth,
with delicate moustachios, and slight but very slight whiskers, a beautiful figure broad in the
shoulders, and a fine waist. My heart is quite going. It is quite a pleasure to look at Albert
when he gallops and waltzes. He does it so beautifully, holds himself so well with that
beautiful figure of his, and so on, and so on. You can see that she was already getting enthusiastic.
So it wasn't long before she proposed to him. Of course, normally it would be the other way
around, but she was the Queen. And she wrote all about that as well, so let's just carry on with
the diary. I said to him that it would make me too happy if he would consent to what I wished.
We embraced each other over and over again, and he was so kind, so affectionate, to feel as I was,
and I am loved by such an angel as Albert, was too great a delight to describe. He is perfection,
perfection in every way, in beauty, in everything. I felt it was the happiest moment of my life.
Well, there we are. She's carried away, but not to the extent that she's willing to surrender any
of her prerogatives. Listen to a scene among them two or three days after the proposal,
when she's showing that she's in charge, and he can have only a very subordinate role.
Quote, I signed some papers and warrants, etc., and he was so kind as to dry them with blotting
paper for me. We talked a good deal together, and he clasped me so tenderly in his arms,
and kissed me again and again. That was his role, to hold the blotting paper.
Well, in the early years of their marriage, which took place in 1840, at first he was clearly the
subordinate figure. Here's a quotation now from, I mentioned Lytton Strati last time,
he's the man who wrote Eminent Victorians, and then went on to do a biography of Victoria herself,
and it's a very entertaining book. Here's a little passage from it about him.
Albert, brought up in a regime of Spartan simplicity and early hours,
found the great court functions intolerably wearysome, and was invariably observed to be
nodding off on the sofa at half past ten, while the queen's favorite form of enjoyment was to
dance through the night, and then, going out onto the portico of the palace,
watched the sun rise behind St. Paul's and the towers of Westminster.
British people, traditionally, don't like foreigners. There's a long history of xenophobia
in Britain, and the fact that Albert was German made him a subject of suspicion. The queen understood
that, and so did her ministers. In other words, it was necessary, partly as a matter of policy,
not to be too willing to give authority to this man who'd just arrived from Germany.
It wasn't until 1857 that he was given the title of Prince Consort,
and just as the queen's choice of bedchamber ladies had been politically restricted,
so was his choice of companions. He wasn't allowed to bring with him from Germany members of his own
household. Instead, British men were given him as servants and advisors, just as the queen had her
people appointed. At first, he was rather awkward and certainly frosty and difficult to get to know.
Here's another little passage from Strachey. Owing partly to a natural awkwardness, partly to a fear
of undue familiarity, and partly to a desire to be absolutely correct, his manners were infused
with an extraordinary stiffness and formality. Whenever he appeared in company, he seemed to be
surrounded by a thick hedge of prickly etiquette. Well, the queen at first let him have no political
authority at all, but gradually his abilities began to show themselves, and he started to be
admitted into the interior circles of British political life. The first thing he did to get
a good reputation was to restore the conduct of the royal household. The royal household was
run in a chaotic way over the centuries, and accretion of special offices and duties and privileges
and rights had come in, so that the palace was absolutely full of people. Many things had very
little jobs to do, in return to which they got big salaries. For example, there were three different
sets of servants, one to clear out the ashes from the grates, a second set to lay the new fire,
and a third lot to actually light the fire. So not only was it cumbersome, it was also very
difficult to get the fire quickly changed when you needed it, that sort of thing. Well, Prince
Albert took the whole thing in hand, rationalized the administration of the royal household from
top to bottom, got rid of dozens of unnecessary servants and sinecure holders, with the result
that the administration was run better, the household was run better, at far less cost. You
can imagine that the government's enthusiastically asked about anyone who can save it some money,
so it wasn't long before the ministers began to realize, Prince Albert's a real asset, we can
use him. When she was going to give birth for the first time, less than a year after the marriage,
he was admitted to the Privy Council, the group of ministers immediately around the Monarch,
and was named regent in the event of her death. This was a time when death in childbirth was
common. Women often died in their 20s and 30s giving birth, and so the possibility of a regency
re-emerged, and Albert was named. That's a measure of his admission into the favored circles.
Here's a letter that Albert wrote to his father in 1841, after about a year and a half.
I study the politics of the day with great industry. I speak quite openly with ministers
on all subjects, and I endeavor quietly to be of as much use to Victoria in her position as I can be.
And here's a letter from Victoria, again to her uncle Leopold. Albert is indeed a great comfort
to me. He takes the greatest possible interest in what goes on, feeling with me and for me,
and yet I'm staining as he ought from biasing me either way, that we talk much on every subject,
and his judgment is, as you say, good and calm. British politicians of both parties came to
respect him for his hard work and his active conscience and his good judgment, and for his very
high moral tone. When we think about Victorian morality, we may have the idea of a rather
extraordinary stiffness and intolerance. Certainly some of that does come from Prince Albert.
Well, finally, it was he who smoothed the transition from Lord Melbourne
to Robert Peale as Prime Minister in 1841. Peale himself was grateful to Prince Albert and took
him increasingly into his confidence. Victoria and Albert, as the first family in the land,
enjoyed many of the amenities of this new industrial society in which they were living.
They bought and renovated two houses, Osbourne House on the Isle of Wight and
Balmoral Castle in the Highlands of Scotland, both of which you can now go to visit.
They extensively rebuilt them, and they built them in styles, in archaic styles. Balmoral is
Scottish gothic, so at a glance they might look like ancient houses, but actually they're from
the 1840s and 50s, but they took advantage of all the most modern technologies, particularly
iron frame buildings. This is the century in which, for the first time, iron could be extensively
used as a building frame instead of just masonry. They spent a lot of time at Balmoral in Scotland,
both loving it very much, and it was there that Queen Victoria sketched and painted,
rode a lot with her servant John Brown, who was later to mean so much in her life,
and learned Scottish dances. Prince Albert would go out stalking deer,
and he tried to learn Gaelic, the Scottish language, although he didn't make very much
progress. Later on, after Albert's death, Queen Victoria wrote a little book called
Leaves from a Journal of Our Life in the Highlands. It's really just a collection of her pictures
of Scottish life, but it was the book about which Benjamin Disraeli later on was able to say,
oh, we authors, madam, and went a little bit of flattery, because he'd written dozens of novels
and was a real author. Queen Victoria was the first monarch to travel by train in 1842,
while when the Great Western Railway had just been completed, she went from Windsor Castle,
another of her residences, into London. It's only a matter of about 20-25 miles on Brunel's
Great Western Railway, and enjoyed it very much, although Albert thought the train went a bit too
fast, and he told the driver, a little slower next time if you please, conduct her. After that,
she had her own private train built. This also is still visible. You can go to the National
Railway Museum in York and see Queen Victoria's train. And wherever the Royal Family was going,
that's how they'd travel. Obviously, there were no motor vehicles, and railway was by far the
easiest way to get around. Her regular trips to Osborne in the Isle of Wight, to Sandringham in
East Anglia, and to Balmoral in Scotland would go by train. And before each of these journeys,
her secretary would send a note to the railroad company, which would include this sentence,
the Queen travels at 40 miles per hour. In other words, whatever the scheduling,
that's how fast the Royal train was going to go. A Royal yacht was built in 1842,
called the Victoria and Albert, and it used another brand new technology, propellers. You
probably remember that the earliest steamships had paddle wheels, but propellers were invented in
1840-41. And straight away, Victoria and Albert said, yes, let's try this new technology. They
were very up to date. When we think about Victoria and Britain, we think we feel as though we're
looking back on old stuff. But of course, what we've got to do is to get into the frame of mind
of people for whom it was all new. And the Royal Family were enthusiastic about new things.
In 1853, she was giving birth for the eighth time to Prince Leopold, and she decided to experiment
with anesthetics. She was given chloroform, which was just then being developed as an anesthetic,
and successfully gave birth to Prince Leopold. And she loved it. She called it, quote,
that blessed chloroform, soothing and delightful beyond measure. Some of the clergy, some members
of the Church of England, were a little bit indignant about that, because they said,
according to the Book of Genesis, women should suffer in giving birth. It's not right. It's
kind of deviating from your biblical duty to give birth in that way. But she herself said,
oh, nonsense. And when she gave birth for the ninth time to Princess Beatrice, she did it again.
Incidentally, this one prince, the one who was the eighth one, Prince Leopold, was a hemophiliac.
He suffered from uncontrollable bleeding and died early, having led a life of constant
danger and anxiety. There's no connection between the chloroform and the hemophilia.
Well, she didn't like children. She liked children, but she didn't like babies. Quote,
this is a letter from a letter to one of her daughters later on in life.
An ugly baby is a very nasty object. And even the prettiest is frightful when undressed,
till about four months old. In short, as long as they have that big body and little limbs,
and that terrible frog-like action. So, nothing enthusiast for her own babies.
She also suffered from what we now call postpartum depression, because she became intensely
depressed after giving birth. And it happened a lot. And sometimes she'd fly into uncontrollable
rages against Prince Albert. And again, we've got detailed written records of all their arguments.
They'd have intense rouse. They'd fight verbally for a while. And then, eventually,
he'd withdraw. And they'd send letters to each other, many of which also still survive. So,
we can actually trace the documented course of their arguments. His letters to her are rather
condescending. He points out to her why it was that she lost her temper and where her
faulty reasoning was. And eventually, after a week or two, she'd feel penitent and they'd get back
together again and go on. So, although it was a very intense and warm marriage on the whole,
it certainly wasn't entirely trouble-free. One of the problems that they, one of the anxieties
they shared, was that their oldest son, Bertie, who was due to become the next king,
didn't live up to their own high standards. He wasn't as hardworking as they would have liked.
He wasn't as disciplined as they would have liked. He didn't seem particularly interested in
serious matters. He was a bit of a rogue. And they weren't, they worried chronically about Bertie.
Well, in 1851, one of the highlights of their life together took place, when the Great Exhibition
opened in Hyde Park. This was one of the world's first trade fairs, world's fairs,
in a beautiful building called the Crystal Palace, which I'll talk more about later on in the course.
And Albert had been a member of the Planning Committee, which had brought it all together and
made it happen. The Queen opened it on a spring morning in 1851, and at the end of the day wrote
this letter to Uncle Leopold. I wish you could have witnessed the first of May, 1851,
the greatest day in our history, the most beautiful and imposing and touching spectacle ever seen,
and the triumph of my beloved Albert. Truly, it was astonishing, a fair scene, many cried,
and all felt touched and impressed with devotional feelings. It was the happiest, proudest day of
my life, and I can think of nothing else. Albert's dear name is immortalized with the great conception,
his own, and my dear country showed that she was worthy of it.
So you can imagine that under these circumstances, Prince Albert's death in 1861 came as an
absolute catastrophe, a shattering blow from which she never fully recovered. In the short
term, it sent her into a profound depression and withdrawal from society. Now here's how it came
about. Bertie, the prince, had had a sexual affair with a musical actress, Nellie Clifton,
who was common among the members of the upper classes, to have flings with lower class women.
Prince Albert found out about it. He was outraged and he demanded repentance from his son,
and in fact he did get a very penitent letter from Bertie. But of course Prince Albert feared all
the possible consequences. There might be a baby, there might be revelations to the press,
there might be a great public scandal. He himself would never have descended to such things and
was horrified that his son then, about 18, had done so. Well, he was already not well. He had a
lot of anxious complaints, insomnia, rheumatism. Then when he went out to review some soldiers at
Sandhurst, the British Military Academy, he became sick and got rheumatism because it was in the
pouring rain. His condition got worse after he went up to Cambridge, where Bertie was studying,
and had a long walk through the parks in Cambridge with Bertie, reproaching him and
chastising him. It must have been an agonizingly embarrassing scene for both of them.
When he got back to Windsor Castle, he collapsed and in this course of the next few days worsened
and died. Well, for Victoria herself, for the Queen, many things are striking about the scene,
but one is that everything took place in public. As Albert's condition worsened, there were doctors
and courtiers and members of the family, a big crowd in the room. In those days, death tended to
be a very public matter. Here's her description of the deathbed scene. I took his dear left hand,
which was already cold, and knelt down by him. All, all was over. I stood up and kissed his dear
heavenly forehead and called out in a bitter and agonizing cry, oh, my dear darling, and then dropped
on my knees in mute, distracted despair, unable to utter a word or shed a tear. Then I laid down
on the sofa in the red room, and all the gentlemen came in and knelt down and kissed my hand, and I
said a word to each. She's surrounded by people, as this is going on. Well, every day from then
until the end of her own life, which lasted for another 40 years, she had Prince Albert's shaving
gear brought in in the morning. She had his bathrobe ready. They had a double desk where they'd
done their work. She had a new paper and pens laid out on his side of the desk. She often used to go
to bed with a plastic cast of one of his hands, which she'd, she'd hold when she went to sleep.
And in the early 1860s, she refused to attend public functions at all. She became more and more
reclusive. With the result that her, her prime minister at that time, by then it was Lord Palmerston,
was afraid that republicanism might start to gain ground in British politics, as the Queen had
seemingly abdicated her responsibilities. For the whole of the rest of her life, she wore black
mourning clothes. Nearly every public building in Britain that was made in the 1860s is named
after Prince Albert, the Albert Hall, the Albert Memorial. As you go through Britain, you constantly
see Albert Street. It's a very fair guess that it was in the 1860s that they were put together.
So although they'd had, they hadn't had an entirely trouble free life, certainly Albert had been
central to her existence, and his death was an irreplaceable blow.
