Lecture 7, The Working Class Woman
The vast contrasts in Victorian life become apparent immediately when we switch from looking
at this elite of women to the great majority of British women, those in the working classes.
They were often aware of the existence led by the minority, the privileged minority,
and it was a way of life to which they aspired, but economic realities made it essential,
in their case, that they must work.
Why?
Because they lacked money, and very often they had to start working at an early age and
to work at the most menial jobs.
Their pay was nearly always lower than that of men, even when the work was identical.
And they suffered all the hazards which work brought, particularly contaminated workplaces,
the characteristic diseases which tended to afflict people in certain jobs.
And in addition, they had to suffer from two-frequent childbirth and poverty in their home lives.
Their home lives were usually the scenes of great overcrowding, extreme hard work, and
very, very poor diet.
No wonder so many women joined the ranks of prostitutes in Victorian London, of whom
there were thousands.
It was one of the communist forms of women's work.
As a prostitute, you could earn money more easily from less work than your honest, laboring
sisters.
And some people took to the life from choice, others from economic necessity.
Eventually, prostitution among working-class Victorian women became so widespread that
it became a source of national concern and legislation.
And several people, prominent in public life, such as William Gladstone, the Liberal Prime
Minister, took it as a personal job to try to rescue fallen women.
Well, as I said, economic necessity was the primary reason that most working-class women
had to work outside the home and to begin when they were very young.
First of all, the biggest source of women's work was as domestic servants.
It was such a big and complicated thing that I'm going to devote a whole lecture to that
a little bit later on in the course.
So for the moment, I'll shelve that and put it to one side.
But it's important to remember that in every generation, tens of thousands of young girls
were going out as domestic servants.
Second, women and children comprised a large part of the agricultural workforce, the landless
farm workers.
A parliamentary committee which was investigating women's work talked to a girl who said that
she came from the county of Lincolnshire in the east of England.
She said she left school when she was eight years old and joined a traveling farm work
gang that worked 14 hours per day.
Quote, for four years, summer and winter, I worked in these gangs, no holiday of any
sort, with the exception of very wet days and sun days.
And at the end of that time, I felt it was like heaven to me when I was taken to the
town of Leeds and put to work in a cotton factory.
Well, third, a lot of girls and women worked in what were called the sweated trades.
That is usually textile piecework which was done at home.
They'd go to a master clothier and take the work home to their houses.
And here it was very, very hard and grinding work, very, very low piecework rates with
lots of regional variation depending on whereabouts in the country they lived.
Some places it was straw plating to make hats.
Some places it was lace making or knitting or glove stitching, this kind of trade which
was still often done outside of the factories, well into the Victorian period.
Betty Euse-Dale was a child knitter in Yorkshire and she said, we're knit as hard as we can
because the one who knits the slowest gets well thumped.
Very often their parents would drive them to do this work from knowledge that the family
couldn't do without the income that it would bring in.
And the sweated trades, this has remained true in sweatshops right up to the present
and is still common in the third world today.
It required working very long hours in very overcrowded conditions.
One of the early working class radical writers we have access to is Francis Place.
He was a tailor but interested in reform projects at the time and he said, nothing conduces
so much to the degradation of the woman than her having to eat and drink and cook and wash
and iron and transact all her domestic concerns in the room in which she and her family also
work and in which they sleep.
It was common for working class families to occupy just one room.
Overcrowding was very, very widespread.
And home piecework of this kind working at home on textiles was sometimes subject to
regional fluctuations.
For example, in the lead up to Christmas there was often an intense rush as members of society
were getting their ball gowns ready but then there'd be other slack times in the trade
where being out of work was even more dreadful than being in work.
When you were in you had to work very long hours.
When you were out you lost the necessary income.
Well, as the industrial factory system spread more and more women went to work in the factories
partly because in many trades, particularly factory textile trades, it wasn't actually
hard work.
It was mainly a matter of machine-minding, very, very dull and monotonous, often terribly
noisy as well.
And the conditions tended to be unhealthy.
Which occupation had its own characteristic illness?
You probably heard the phrase mad as a hatter.
This is because the hatters who were making hats used mercury compounds which actually
did have a physiological effect and produced a very high level of madness among hat workers.
Girls who made matches, that is, actually had the job of dipping little matchsticks into
the phosphorus compounds which made the igniting match heads were required to sit at the benches
for 12 hours a day and although they had a few minutes off for lunch, they had to stay
at the benches and didn't have the opportunity to wash up properly before they ate.
And so they were actually taking into their bodies these phosphorus compounds which often
led to a kind of degenerative disease of the jaw.
There was an illness called fossey jaw which the match girls tended to suffer from.
The people who worked in Staffordshire in the district called the Potteries where pottery
was made by companies like Wedgewood tended to suffer from lead poisoning because of the
lead that they used in the glazes.
Cotton factory girls often suffered from tuberculosis because the inside of the cotton factories
was damp and full of lint which would tend to aggravate lung complaints.
The lace makers who worked their whole lives often with poor illumination and doing very,
very tiny detailed work suffered from blindness or severely deteriorating eyesight because
of the great eye strain from which they suffered.
So in all these ways, different types of work had characteristic distinctive forms of suffering.
Even when men and women were doing exactly the same work, the women were paid less for
it and it was widely assumed that this was an appropriate thing to do, not among the
women of course but certainly among the men.
Men themselves often resented the fact that women were working in the factories because
they understood that it weakened their own bargaining position.
If only the women could have been taken out of the factories, which they wanted to do
from the point of view of their pride as husbands and providers, it would also strengthen their
bargaining position with their employers, but of course the employers knew all about
this.
Here's an unscrupulous Lancashire textile boss, again giving evidence to a parliamentary
commission in 1844 and he says, I have a decided preference for married females, especially
those who have families at home dependent on them for support.
They are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females and are compelled to use their utmost
exertions to procure the necessities of life.
In other words, he deliberately employed married women because he knew that they were going
to have to put up with the worst conditions and the lowest pay without kicking about it
too much.
Well, in the middle of the Victorian period, gradually reforms started to limit the number
of hours that women and children could work in the factories and particularly the number
of hours they could work in the coal mines.
Partly this was in reaction to a sense of the degradation involved, but it was also often
a matter of sexual anxiety.
For example, a lot of women worked in the coal mines where the heat meant that they
often worked almost naked and the assumption was on the part of the parliamentary reformers
there's probably a great deal of sexual promiscuity in the coal mines when the nearly naked men
and women are working there together.
That seems to have, certainly that dominated the debate about whether women should be excluded
from the coal mines more than the fact that these women were often being required to drag
heavy wagons of coal to the pit head from the actual face where the coal was cut.
Well, some working class women became small scale entrepreneurs, little shopkeepers, for
example, or laundresses.
Now, the laundry business was widespread.
This is, of course, in the days before the invention of electric washing machines and
laundry work was an incredibly hard job to do.
It required, usually, that the laundress would have to go to her customer and carry the laundry
back to her own place and then scrub the clothes without any of the detergents that we've got
today and without any of the labor-saving devices which now surround the doing of laundry.
It's still a pain, but compared to how it used to be, it's nothing.
Most working class people didn't have running water in their houses, so you'd have to go
out to the well and fill up buckets or copper kettles and bring them inside and put the
water over the fire to warm up and then boil the clothes which you were going to launder.
And the starching and bluing process was long and complicated.
And then when they dried, you then had to do the long ironing process.
There were no wrinkle-free fabrics, so the ironing was much more difficult than it is
today, especially with elaborate clothes.
And before the days of electric irons, you'd simply have usually two or three hand irons,
just blocks of iron with a handle, which you'd place on a hot stove.
You'd take one off and iron with it until it began to cool down and put it back on the
stove and take another one and carry on.
Anyway, altogether, a very, very hard job and people who worked as laundresses had a
reputation for becoming very muscular because of the sheer hard work entailed.
Some women became street vendors, peddlers, descriptions of working-class life in London
talk about the fact that the streets were full of people selling things, often very,
very small, what are called penny capitalists, small-scale entrepreneurs, half of whom were
women.
Now, towards the end of the 19th century, slightly more job opportunities began to open
up for working-class women.
I should pause here to say that it's important not to assume that the working class is one
thing.
It's not one entity.
It's subdivided into dozens of groups.
There's all the difference in the world, for example, between respectable people at the
top end of the working class, the so-called aristocracy of labor, that is, people who
come from families with the most dependable and most highly paying working jobs, and those
at the bottom of the working class, with far less opportunities to aspire to respectability.
Again, I mentioned Pygmalion before, and I should mention it again here.
Do you remember that Eliza Doolittle's father is a dustman, and he says, when he comes to
see Henry Iggins, he says, I belong to the undeserving poor.
He makes a sort of aggressive point about his low status within the working class.
Anyway, nursing became a decent profession for working-class girls towards the end of
the century, and once universal education had been specified after the 1870s, more and
more young women, particularly from the upper working class, could be drawn into school
teaching if they themselves had done well in school.
And by 1900, girls were working as shop assistants, as secretaries, as librarians, and as typists.
So gradually, a wider array of work began to open up to them.
But they faced challenges and difficulties at every stage of the life cycle.
They had to go to work often because of economic necessity.
But it's easy to imagine that many girls would have wanted to go to work, because if they
were dependent on their parents living in terribly overcrowded conditions, going out
to the factory must have seemed like a liberating alternative.
A Mrs. Layton told a parliamentary inquiry that in her family, the parents and 14 children
lived in three little rooms, and that they lived in a place which was chronically vulnerable
to epidemics of typhoid and cholera.
They shared the privies with 20 other families.
This is the non-flushing toilets in the backyards.
They had no running water, and they lived in a great cloud of salt and smoke all the time.
Can you imagine that just to get away from such conditions was an attractive option.
Factory work provided young girls with the companionship of others like them, and sometimes
they enjoyed some fun and practical jokes.
It could be very rough, too.
The man who became the leader of the English Communist Party in the early 20th century
was a man called Harry Pollitt, and he remembered that when he was a lad, he went to work as
an apprentice in a Lancashire cotton factory, and he said, the first day, a group of the
factory women, you know, teenage girls, grabbed hold of him, pulled his trousers down, and
quote, doved my unmentionable parts with oil, and then packed me up in cotton waste.
So sort of rough horseplay on the part of the factory girls.
They often had social clubs of their own, really, pubs, places where they could drink
and smoke, and so on, and these places shocked middle-class reformers, Lord Ashley, who was
one of the most severe and upright of the Victorian evangelical reformers, told Parliament
in 1844, 50 or 60 females, married and single, formed themselves into clubs, ostensibly
for protection, but in fact, they meet together to drink, sing, and smoke.
They use, it is stated, the lowest, most brutal, and most disgusting language imaginable.
While marriage customs among the working classes were very different from those among the upper
classes, which we looked at before, there were great regional variations in this as
in everything, but it was quite common for the marriage to follow the announcement of
a pregnancy rather than to precede it.
We know that a premarital sexual activity was quite common.
For example, the historian Joan Perkin, a historian of women, recounts a Cumberland
girl getting pregnant and realizing that, well, because she's pregnant now, she's got
to get married, and she has this conversation with her aunt.
The aunt says, oh, Anna, that's been tasting the soup before it was ready.
And Anna says, yes, and I found a carrot in it.
Now, if the man refused to marry his pregnant girlfriend, that was a source of alarm to
the parish poverty officials, because they became aware that if the girl had a baby without
being married, there was a danger that they'd become dependent on the parish.
So sometimes the overseers of the poor house would coerce the young man to marry the girl.
But working class cohabitation without marriage was also quite common.
Certainly in the cities, very often, a working class boy and girl teenagers would get together.
Sometimes they'd have children that never would marry.
And investigators found that the incidence of wife beating was less among couples who
weren't married than those who were.
In other words, you might have been tempted as a working class girl to not marry the man
from knowledge that you'd probably be treated worse if you did.
The people who suffered most in these situations were working class girls who had affairs with
upper class men, but then were abandoned by them.
Abandonment could be catastrophic.
There are two good literary examples here.
One is Hettie Sorrell, the farm girl in George Eliot's novel, Adam Bede, who has an affair
with a young gentleman who then abandons her.
He goes off with his army regiment.
She has a child and doesn't know what to do, and finally kills the child, and then is herself
convicted of infanticide.
And in Thomas Hardy's Far from the Madding crowd, one of the girls, Fanny, has an affair
with Sergeant Troy, but later he abandons her and goes off to marry Bathsheba Everdeen
and she has to drag herself to the workhouse where she dies giving birth, and she and the
child both die in the workhouse in desperate poverty.
Now infanticide, the killing of children was widespread, particularly when the children
were very, very young.
Giving birth to a child who you couldn't possibly afford to keep.
And juries, when women were put on trial for infanticide, juries tended to be lenient
unless the evidence was incontrovertible that they really had killed the child.
They tend to give the woman the benefit of the doubt.
Very often the woman would say that the baby had smothered in the bed clothes.
Now in places where people are living three and four and five to a bed, it's possible
to imagine that children were sometimes smothered.
And so very often that would be a successful defense against a prosecution for infanticide.
Well as I said, regional variations.
There were areas, particularly in the north of England, where a woman would get pregnant
but decide that rather than marry the father of the child, she'd stay with her own family
and carry on contributing to its income.
Especially if the man in question was willing to pay a certain amount of money for the upkeep
of the child, even though they weren't marrying.
Women would give birth and very often have to go straight back to work almost immediately.
So then as now, childcare was a very immediate and pressing concern.
Very often it was a matter of networks of neighbors and grandmothers and younger sisters,
all the women in a locality, because people tended to stay in the same place.
They tended to have a lot of relatives living nearby and that way they could work out in
formal childcare arrangements with one another.
In the Potter is this area of staff and shear where the ceramics were made.
Very often what would happen is that a new mother would go back to work usually within
two or three days of giving birth, but she'd get one of her slightly older daughters to
bring the baby in so she could breastfeed it during her breaks from work.
That sort of thing.
It was also extremely common to use pacifiers for babies.
Now, that included what we mean by a pacifier, but it could also include bread soaked in
alcohol, gin, or even opium, which was legally on sale in the stores as a way of calming
the baby down and making it less troublesome.
Also, if all these problems weren't enough, women also had to suffer from very, very poor
quality food, adulterated food, milk that was watered down, lime in the flower, elm
leaves in the tea.
There were everlastingly complaints about poor quality food and it wasn't until 1872 that
Parliament began to legislate to prevent or to make it illegal to sell adulterated food
and also to prosecute people who did.
So, as I said at the beginning, this is the background to a situation in which a lot of
women turn to prostitution, either as their primary source of income or as a supplement
to very, very low wages in other work.
Now, Victorian middle classes had an extremely strong taboo about the open discussion of
sex.
They'd be horrified to think that somebody like me a hundred years later was actually
lecturing about sexual matters publicly, it had been regarded as absolutely disgraceful.
But at the same time, a weird double standard operated.
Everybody knew that there were thousands of women out there who were making their livings
as prostitutes.
They took to it for various reasons, usually economic need, but occasionally the sense
that it was actually a desirable career option because you could make rapid upward strides
in society with it.
And the thing to emphasize is how common it was.
Here's an early Victorian visitor from Germany describing what it's like at the London theatres.
And he wrote, the higher classes rarely visit their national theatre.
The reason for the absence of decent families is the attendance of several thousand fiel
disjois, in other words, prostitutes, from the kept lady who devours 6,000 pounds sterling
a year and has her own box at the theatre, down to those who bivouac on the streets
under the open sky.
During the intermissions, they crowd the fairly large and elaborate foyer where they put on
all their effrontery unrestrainedly on show.
It goes on to such an extent that often in the theatre one can hardly ward off these
repellent priestesses of Venus, especially when they are drunk, which is not infrequently
the case, at which time they almost beg in the most shameless fashion.
One of the places from which we know a lot about the prostitutes subculture is from an
amazing book called My Secret Life.
It's a multi-volume book published anonymously and there are still competing theories about
exactly who it was who wrote it.
A recent historian called Stephen Marcus read the whole book and published his own study
of it called The Other Victorians and it's about the great Victorian sexual underworld.
This man himself, the author of My Secret Life, he had sufficient income that he could
devote his whole life to sex and he travelled around Europe and all over Britain and had
sex with literally hundreds of different women but wrote a lot, not only about their erotic
books but also great books of social commentary because he talked with the girls he had affairs
with and they described to him the circumstances which had led them to go into this life.
He often has flings with servants or he casually picks girls up on the street and he finds
that their factory workers are working as seamstresses but this is for them an opportunity
to earn a little bit more money from him.
So here's a little passage from his book on the advantages of having an occasional love
affair with a servant, alright not a lover, a sexual affair.
He gets tired of the prostitutes for a while, he says I'm going to try a servant instead.
Quote, I was tired of the prostitutes lies, their tricks and their dissatisfied money grabbing,
money begging style.
I wanted a change so I began to look out for a nice fresh servant.
I've now had many servants in my time and know no better companions in amorous amusements.
They've rarely lost all modesty, a new lover is a treat and a fresh experience to them
even when they've had several and few have had that.
They only get a chance of copulating once a week or so, they're clean, well fed, full
blooded and when they come out to meet their friend or give way with a chanced man on the
sly they are ready.
So I longed for a servant and soon found my chance.
I suppose all men do if they set their mind upon a woman.
Anyway, there's about nine volumes of this, it's a rich and interesting source.
Some young women clearly chose to become the mistresses of upper class men as an avenue
to gaining wealth of their own and the luckiest ones were definitely those who could get themselves
kept and they could become a kept mistress of a man who was in the highest ranks of society.
In the early period this was very, very common.
I mentioned earlier that King William IV, although his legitimate children died, had
ten children by his mistress, an actress called Dorothy Jordan, most of whom survived.
In the mid-Victorian period a few mistresses were great public celebrities, one of them
was a woman called Catherine Walters, her nickname was Skittles and when she went riding
in Hyde Park crowds would gather to actually watch her putting on a magnificent show.
She was very, very beautiful, brilliantly well dressed and had a flock of admirers around
her all the time.
She was friends with the Prince of Wales, one of his many indiscretions and the Prime
Minister, Gladstone, Prime Minister a little bit later knew her very well.
The Marquis of Hardington, this is a man who was going to become the Duke of Devonshire
after his father's death, one of the richest and grandest of the aristocrats in the land,
was madly in love with her and wanted to marry her but his father squashed that plan.
And finally the Marquis of Hardington gave to her an income sufficient to generate, capital
sufficient to generate an income of £2,000 per year and in other words he made her a
rich woman even though they weren't allowed to marry.
She left at the ripe old age of 81 and had a fascinating and varied career.
Now of course in Victorian melodrama there were fallen women and in the plays they always
come to a bad end, a sticky end, any woman who loses her virtue in the literature tends
to suffer for it but of course in reality many of them make enough money that they could
set up legitimate businesses of their own.
Some women were forced into prostitution if they were abandoned by their husbands or if
they were widowed or if sickness prevented the family breadwinner from going to work.
All kinds, in the days before there was any sort of welfare system all sorts of contingencies
could suddenly make a family penniless and women sometimes turned to prostitution as
a way of overcoming it.
Now of course I don't mean to diminish the fact that there was a very great social stigma
attaching to it but respectable people always hated and dreaded and feared this possibility
but nevertheless you can see the temptations when you hear this evidence a London investigator
called Henry Mayhew said he was talking to a girl and she said that she used to work
making shirts and would earn four pence in a day but if there was a prostitute she could
get five shillings a day, that's something like 15 times as much even though she was
just a very poor street walker.
The lower down the social scale he went the greater the dangers, venereal disease was
extremely widespread, the danger of predatory pimps, non-payment by clients and pregnancy
because contraception was so bad in those days.
Brothels were very common all through the cities.
A survey in 1838 estimated that there were 5,000 brothels in London alone and when Jack
the Ripper committed his famous murders in 1888 the police said they knew of 62 brothels
just in that area, Whitchapel, where the murders took place.
Now eventually the government got involved in the attempt to regulate prostitution and
they passed a law in 1864 called the Contagious Diseases Act.
The idea was in towns where there was an army barracks or a navy base they wanted to try
to prevent the soldiers and sailors from getting venereal disease and their way of doing it
was to give regular inspections to women who they suspected of being prostitutes and if
the women were found to be suffering from the disease they were sequestered in a locked
hospital until they could be treated with various mercury medicines and make a recovery.
The legislation was bitterly controversial and a campaign to repeal it was led by a middle
class woman called Josephine Butler.
She said that she was campaigning for its repeal on the grounds of the double standard.
It was unreasonable that the women should be locked up in hospital but their clients,
the men, should be completely exempt from the force of the law and many other middle
class women gathered her.
Of course a woman could be suspected of prostitution wrongly but once she'd been arrested and brought
in the stigma of having been a prostitute would attach to her even if it was false.
So here's Josephine Butler speaking to a Royal Commission in 1871.
We claim that laws should not be made which teach in an indirect but subtle most effectual
manner that impurity of life is not a sin but a necessity.
Neither can our moral objections to these acts be met by assurances that a certain number
of women are reclaimed by their operations.
I ask where are the men who are reclaimed by them?
As the mothers of sons we demand to know what the influence of these acts is on young men.
It is vain to restore fallen women to virtue on the one hand while on the other you stimulate
the demand for these victims.
Prove to us if you can that these acts promote chastity among men for that is what we are
concerned about.
In other words, don't have this legislation regulating it because the legislation is premised
upon the assumption that it's going to continue to happen.
She's aspiring for a higher sexual ideal in which people of both sexes will achieve
a condition of chastity.
And she goes on.
Men of every class she says go to the prostitutes and they ought not to.
All legislation hitherto has been directed against one sex only but we insist that it
should be directed against both sexes and whereas it has been directed only against
the poor, we insist and the working men insist that it should also apply to the rich profligate.
It cannot be said that there is no such thing as seduction of young girls by gentlemen of
the upper classes.
It cannot be said that there is no such thing as profuse patronage of houses of ill-fame
by rich profligate men.
Well finally under this kind of pressure Parliament decided to act.
In 1886 it repealed the contagious diseases act and by legislation of 1885 tried to stamp
out the operation of brothels.
It was a very, very difficult thing to do because they were so widespread but gradually
more and more people in the middle classes became convinced that this was the right thing
to do to try to stamp it out or force it more and more underground.
The early work of the Salvation Army was dedicated to this.
One of the most quixotic examples we have is that of William Gladstone throughout his
life and even when he was Prime Minister he'd go out onto the streets and accost prostitutes
and try to persuade them to give up the life and he'd say I can find a place for you to
live instead.
I can find you some honest work to do.
Some of them even went to live on his own estate in North Wales, Howardan.
Now his diaries show us that sometimes he was aware that he was sexually attracted to
them and on those occasions he draw a little whip in the corner of his diary which we think
means that he flagulated himself as a way of trying to repress these sexual demons which
taunted even him.
Anyway, you can see from all this that there is an enormous contrast between the lives
of the upper and middle class women on the one hand and the lives of working class women
on the other.
