Lecture 14 Progress and Optimism
Over the last few lectures, I've said rather a lot about suffering and misery and hardship
and the depressing aspects of British life in the 1840s.
I want to try and elevate the mood a little bit in this one by talking about some of the more exuberant and optimistic aspects of British life in the 1850s.
Now, an event which is often taken as a symbolic centerpiece of Victorian life quite rightly is the Great Exhibition, a trade fair of 1851,
which is held in a wonderful new building called the Crystal Palace in the centre of Hyde Park.
It was an event which exhibited Britain's industrial and commercial supremacy and expressed the hope that the modern world, led by Britain,
would beat swords into plowshares and cultivate the arts of peace with business leading the way.
It marked an era where living standards were beginning to rise at least slightly and a period where of intense idealism,
and reformers and utopians of various kinds anticipated that Britain's commercial achievements and the inventiveness of the society were going to lead to a better and better future.
So also in this lecture I'll glance at various progress-minded writers and inspirational individuals like Samuel Smiles, William Lovett and Titus Salt.
But first of all, the Great Exhibition, an exhibition of science and industry.
It was designed originally as a showpiece of British industrial progress, and the committee led by Prince Albert was organized to promote it.
They invited designs for a big building to house the exhibition itself, but after reviewing 245 designs, they concluded that none of them was quite right.
Everyone had objections of various kinds.
They also couldn't decide on a site for the exhibition at first, but eventually came to the conclusion that the best place was Hyde Park,
because it's right in the centre of London, close to the west end, where many of the Gentry and aristocracy had their London houses.
Or for some of the upper classes, this was an unpopular choice because Hyde Park was where they would ride every day,
and the construction work was going to disrupt their usual pattern of exercise.
The London Times editorialized that the place would become a bivouac of all vagabonds, and it went on to say,
we can scarcely bring ourselves to believe that the advisors of the Prince cared to connect his name with such an outrage to the feelings and wishes of the inhabitants of the metropolis.
So at first, some resistance.
Eventually they came up with the right designer, and it was a man called Joseph Paxton.
He was the estate manager at Chatsworth House in Derbyshire.
Now, if you've read Pride and Prejudice, you'll know that Mr Darcy has got a magnificent house, which I think is called Pemberley.
Is that right? Well, Pemberley is based upon Chatsworth House. It's the home of the Dukes of Devonshire.
The Duke of Devonshire was interested in tropical plants which were brought in from abroad, and Joseph Paxton designed for him a special greenhouse in which it could be properly cultivated.
And his design for the Crystal Palace was an enormously magnified version of one of these greenhouse designs.
It was all to be comprised of prefabricated sections of iron frames and plate glass so that it would be enormously light and airy inside.
These are both new technologies at the time, which are only just being used in buildings for the first time.
The design of Paddington Railway Station two years previously by Brunel, who we talked about earlier.
Again, big glass arches on steel frames showed that it could be done using these materials.
As usual, there were people who doubted the whole thing and thought it all sounded very rash and unwise to them.
After all, if there was a hail storm, wouldn't the hail shatter all the windows?
The building that big made of iron would be like an enormous sail, and the pressure of the wind would surely blow it over.
So there were various mutterings, not only about the site, but also about the building.
And the Committee had to advance in the early stages against a great deal of public criticism.
One Tory Member of Parliament, called Colonel Sibthorpe, said that the exhibition was going to bring nothing but foreign assassins and venereal disease to London.
It was the greatest trash, the greatest fraud, and the greatest imposition ever attempted to be palmed upon the people of this country.
The object of its promoters is to introduce among us foreign stuff of every description.
A lovely little glimpse of the backwards Toryism of the old gentleman.
Well, nevertheless, it was built and it was massive.
It enclosed a million square feet of ground and was nearly 2,000 feet long.
The prefabrication meant that it could all be built elsewhere at the foundries and then brought in and erected quickly.
The whole place was built in six months.
Actually, the kind of pace of construction to rival even the most modern ones, even though they had no sophisticated construction technique,
and it was mainly done by muscle power and horses.
A crew of 2,600 men put it together, and it was big enough to completely enclose several fully grown trees in the park.
Now, what was really revolutionary about it was the glass.
Plate glass is something that we're so familiar with.
It's hard to remember how intensely exciting it was when it was first invented.
Always previously, to be indoors had meant to be in relatively dim circumstances.
But suddenly now, a building the majority of whose surface area was glass was very exciting.
And so there's an almost religious enthusiasm about plate glass.
Listen to what Lord Reedsdale said when he went to visit it.
The crystal palace was so graceful, so delicate, so airy, that its translucent beauty remains graven on my memory as something which must defy all rivalry.
When I first saw it glittering in the morning sun, I felt as if a lad in and the genie who was the slave of the lamp must have been at work on it.
No mere human hands and hammers and builder's tools could have wrought such a miracle.
The general effect of beauty and airy grace together with the delicate framework and the brilliancy of the whole structure was indelible.
So an enormous impact that the place itself must have made.
Duke of Devonshire said, fancy one's gardener having done all this.
And only a little glimpse of class assumptions there that the gardener had come up with this magnificent design.
Well inside the building there were 14,000 exhibits altogether, about half of them British and the other half from various different parts of the world.
The United States was very well represented and already American manufacturers were getting a good reputation.
Among the things in the building were the newest and brightest and most powerful steam locomotives.
This is the time when the railway building is in full, going on at full pace.
There were models of various daring designs for new bridges.
There were various trip hammers, photographic gear.
It was in the 30s and 40s that photography was developed by Fox Talbot and others.
And that was another of the exciting new technologies which captivated the imaginations of the Victorians.
Early experiments in electricity.
It wasn't yet usable as a practical thing, but already the possibilities were beginning to occur to people.
There were some great lumps of gold there.
This is two years after the California Gold Rush and one year after the Australian Gold Rush.
But along with that there were lots of domestic design items, Victorian Gothic furniture.
And now there, their design was very complicated.
One of my favorite historians is an engineering historian called LTC Rolt.
I want to read you a little bit from his book called The Victorian Engineers, published in 1970.
He was a man who loved the building and hated the stuff in it.
He says, today browsing through old engravings and photographs of the exhibition,
one is immediately struck by the extreme contrast between the engineering exhibits
which shared with the building which housed them a clean, functional beauty of line and proportion
unmarred by any excess.
And the gallery is devoted to arts and manufacturers.
For the latter, for the most part, resemble some vast lumber room
where a jetson of miscellaneous objects, some pathetic, some ludicrous,
but all representing a prodigal misuse of labor and ingenuity, lie together gathering dust.
It is the great paradox of the Victorian era that the same people who set a steam-powered girdle
around the earth should carve for their queen's palace at Osborne a garden seat out of a block of coal,
admire a statue made of zinc, or wear cuffs spun and woven from poodle fur.
And there are other things he didn't mention but could have done.
For example, a collapsible piano was one of the things on display there.
A stuffed frog for holding umbrellas.
An alarm clock which actually threw the occupants out of bed when the appropriate moment had come.
Lots of crazy inventions which for a moment seemed as though they might be a good idea
but which very quickly passed away into the oblivion of time.
One of the issues that the builders had to deal with was the fact that
because the building was warm inside, like a greenhouse,
and because it enclosed the trees, there were thousands of birds, thousands of sparrows inside,
and before the exhibition even opened, the question was,
aren't these sparrows dropping that's going to marr and blemish all the exhibits?
Well, by this time the Duke of Wellington was very, very old.
He'd been a famous man in British life in nearly half a century by then.
But there's an apocryphal story that the Queen said to him, to the old Duke,
what are we going to do about the sparrows?
And Wellington's poster said, Sparrow hawks mom.
Bring in some birds of prey and we can soon clear up that problem.
Well, now the Queen herself was very enthusiastic about this project.
She visited regularly before the Crystal Palace was finished.
It was she who did the great opening ceremony.
And she went back 10 or 12 times during the summer of 1851 to admire the exhibition all over again.
It certainly vastly exceeded even the promoter's original hopes.
It was very, very popular.
And one by one, all sorts of people who originally had been lukewarm about it became very enthusiastic.
Six million visitors came altogether.
That's including people who came more than once.
In other words, it wasn't six million different people,
but it may very well have been as many as five million.
Large numbers from overseas and people coming in from all the different English provinces to look at it.
They have special days for working class visitors where the entrance fee was less.
And special trains were arranged.
I mentioned earlier that in 1844 Parliament had passed legislation to guarantee cheap trains or relatively cheap trains.
So special excursions from the provinces were brought into London to watch.
Because British life is so regionalized, for vast numbers of people,
they were making their first ever visit to London.
It was common throughout the Victorian and into the 20th century for people never to move more than a few miles from their home.
That the Great Exhibition was such a radiant exhibit that it brought people in from elsewhere.
Now, I mentioned earlier Tory fears that it was going to bring in assassins and trouble from abroad and government unrest and so on.
But it didn't.
The days on which working class visitors were invited were days when they were all in their best behavior.
They put on their church going clothes and they're extremely decorous as they went around.
So the danger of chartist or revolutionary disorder quickly dissipated.
The Great Exhibition embodied the gospel of peace and the gospel of work.
Two of the great pillars of mid-Victorian respectability.
This idea which was so widespread that free trade was going to bind the nations together
so that they would no longer fight against one another as they had done time out of mind in the past.
Here's quick Victoria herself.
Writing in her diary, some of the inventions were very ingenious, many of them quite utopian.
It has taught me so much that I never knew before.
It has brought me in contact with so many clever people I should not otherwise have known.
And with so many manufacturers whom I would scarcely have met unless I traveled all over the country
and visited every individual manufacturer which I could never have done.
When the Great Exhibition came to an end, the building was sold to a company
which dismantled it in sections and carried it off to Sydenham which is in South London.
And it was re-erected there, still as the Crystal Palace,
and it continued to be a place where shows and exhibits would go on.
It became a pleasure garden, concerts, exhibitions,
some of the very earliest full-scale models of dinosaurs were put on display there.
But sadly it was destroyed in a fire in 1936, so it's no longer available for us to see,
although we do have plenty of pictures of it.
The profits of the Great Exhibition had amounted to £200,000, free and clear.
And that meant that after the exhibition had finished, this money could be invested
in other buildings which were designed to perpetuate the spirit of the exhibition.
Imperial College was built on the proceeds, the Victoria and Albert Museum,
the Museum of Natural History, the Albert Hall itself,
that whole area of Kensington in West London, if you're familiar with it.
Most of it was built on the proceeds that came from the profits from the Great Exhibition.
And after that, other British cities emulated London by having shows of their own.
In 1857 there was a comparable exhibition in Manchester.
Gradually, of course, they became famous throughout the world.
There was a great one in Chicago in 1893 and so on.
Well, mid-Victorian writers and manufacturers, many of them were imbued with the idealism of progress.
The idea that the future is going to be better than the present, both materially and morally.
And things which always have been a problem until now will be so no longer.
One of them was Samuel Smiles.
And he was the English writer who eulogised the hard-working, self-helping, common man.
He began as a lecturer to working men's groups in Leeds.
Artisans who were eager to improve themselves and to learn more.
And then as an author, he wrote biographies of some of the great inventors and entrepreneurs of his own day.
I read to you from his biography of George Stevenson, the man who built the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
And he wrote a biography of Wedgwood, the man who set up the great China factories in the Pottery's District.
And he was a great believer in the inspirational example of these entrepreneurs.
His most successful book, published in 1858, was called Self-Help.
And it was a book which argued for the necessity of hard work and thrift.
All the disciplines which come together in industrial society.
In the preface, he said that the book aimed to re-inculcate those old-fashioned but wholesome lessons,
which cannot perhaps be too often urged.
That youth must work in order to enjoy.
That nothing creditable can be accomplished without application and diligence.
That the student must not be daunted by difficulties, but conquer them by patience and perseverance.
And that above all, he must seek elevation of character, without which capacity is worthless and worldly success is nought.
Well, he begun life as a social radical, arguing the imperative need for working-class people to educate themselves.
And he said to them, you've got to rely on yourself.
You can't rely on being bailed out by somebody else.
You must take responsibility for your own situation.
Of course, that's consonant with his view of the great entrepreneurs.
And here's a quotation from Self-Help.
Some call for caesars, others for nationality, and others again for acts of parliament.
Whatever is done for men and for classes, to a certain extent takes away the stimulus and necessity of doing for themselves.
No laws, however stringent, can make the idle industrious, the thriftless provident, or the drunken sober.
Search reforms can be affected only by means of individual action, economy, self-denial, and by better habits rather than greater rights.
But this didn't mean that he was an absolutely unquestioning believer in laissez-faire.
In other words, he recognized that there were realms of life where government initiative and government regulation was necessary,
particularly in things like public health, which was becoming more and more of a scandal, as the cities were repeatedly swept by epidemic diseases.
So here's another beautiful passage from Samuel Smiles.
When typhus or cholera breaks out, they tell us that nobody is to blame.
That terrible nobody, how much he has to answer for.
More mischief is done by nobody than by all the world besides.
Nobody adulterates our food.
Nobody poisons us with bad drink.
Nobody leaves towns undrained.
Nobody fills jails, penitentiaries, and convict stations.
Nobody has a theory, too, a dreadful theory.
It is embodied in two words, laissez-faire, let alone.
When people are poisoned with plaster of Paris mixed with flour, let alone is the remedy.
When people live in foul dwellings, let them alone.
Let wretchedness do its work.
Do not interfere with death, blistering sarcasm there, of a kind of Dickensian intensity, isn't it?
Now, it was an immense bestseller.
It outsold even the novels of Charles Dickens in the late 1850s and early 60s.
In some way, Smiles was the English counterpart of Horatio Alger.
But unlike Alger, whose heroes in the end always have a stroke of amazing good luck
and become very wealthy and marry the boss's daughter or something like that,
there's not the same golden conclusion for Samuel Smiles.
With him, it's much more a matter that the hard work is its own reward.
If you live a godly and industrious and thrifty life, you will prosper,
not in a magnificent way, but in a moderate way.
He's really a great apostle of moderation.
It didn't only sell well in England, it was a great bestseller in America,
and it was translated widely and sold all over the world.
One of the great surprises was that even the cadaver of Egypt,
that is the man who was the governor on behalf of the Turkish Empire in Egypt,
read self-help and loved it and had passages of it inscribed in Arabic
around the walls of his palace.
Isn't that a marvelous image of the way in which it's traveling to unlikely places?
Let me say a word now about Titus Salt.
Titus Salt was a textile manufacturer in Yorkshire.
In 1834, he developed a blend of cloth called Alpaca Worsted,
that is using the wool of the Alpaca, a South American animal,
and blending it with various other kinds of fabric.
The great thing about Alpaca Worsted was that it looked like silk, but it wasn't.
It was much cheaper to make and it was much easier to care for.
It was one of the innovations in fabric of the time.
His mastery of this trade gave him a very secure place in the textile business.
He set up a factory in the town of Bradford and Thrive became very, very wealthy from it.
But he was aware that Bradford itself, in many respects, was a very odious place
for his factory to be sited.
It was incredibly dirty, very, very smoky.
The workers' housing was terrible.
It was recurrently prey to epidemic diseases.
And so he imagined and conceptualized a model community
which would be built out in the countryside
and in which a fully integrated factory would be at the center of the community
and that around it would be built workers' houses
so that they'd be within a short walk of the factory
and the houses themselves would be decent.
They'd be built well instead of shoddily.
They'd be properly drained, a very unusual thing then.
They'd have running water of their own
and they would provide an entire way of life to the people who went to work for him.
Well, he was wealthy enough that he was able to make good on this vision
and he actually built the model community of Salt Air.
It's built on the banks of the River Air and his name was Titus Salt.
It's just combining his name with Salt Air.
It began in 1850 and over the next 20 years worked on it steadily until it was complete.
Now, like a great many of his contemporaries, he was a temperance man.
He believed that alcohol was one of the great destroyers, as it really was.
And so as you enter into Salt Air, there was an archway
and the inscription on the arch was,
Abandoned beer all the year you enter.
Eventually there were 850 houses in the community
and altogether they would hold about 4,500 people.
Big concern.
And the size of the house you had in Salt Air
depended on the level of skill you exhibited in the works.
In other words, you'd start out as an apprentice with a little house
and gradually as you rose to positions of greater seniority,
greater benefits in the forms of housing would come along as well.
All the houses had running water.
Very unusual in working class housing at the time.
And he installed mains gas so that you could have gas lighting.
That again was a great improvement over oil lamps or candles.
Now, Salt Air is still there.
And I do counsel you all on your visits to Victorian Britain,
not only to visit the 4th Bridge in Scotland
and the Lifesteam Museum in Kew Gardens,
but also Salt Air in Bradford.
By now, it's become a highly desirable place for middle class people to live.
The value of the houses there is very great
because they were well built 150 years ago and they're still good.
The factory itself was the world's first fully integrated cotton mill.
It concentrated every aspect of the work in the same place,
which was then an innovation.
Like Samuel Smiles,
Salt believed in hard work, sobriety, punctuality and thrift.
And even when he'd become very, very rich,
he continued to work extremely hard.
He was nearly always the first man on the premises.
He made sure that everything went smoothly.
Workers could come and see him.
He wanted to make sure that aggravated class tensions
didn't develop within the workforce and so on.
He became the mayor of Bradford in 1848
and created a drainage scheme to discourage cholera
and help destitute families in the area to emigrate to America.
He'd contribute to a fund to send them off
in the hope that they could find a better life in the new world.
In 1859, he was elected to Parliament.
But he hadn't been there very long before he realized it didn't suit him.
The members of Parliament made fun of his strong Yorkshire accent.
He was away from the factory.
He was in a community whose way of life he didn't thoroughly approve of.
The ledgered classes who mainly sat in Parliament.
So he gave it up after a couple of years and went back.
And for the rest of his life, carried on there at the factory itself.
He believed very strongly in a harmony of interests
between the workers and the owners.
And was very sharply opposed to trade unions.
After the 50s, trade unions began to grow rapidly
and began to intensify the strife which was characteristic of many workplaces.
But Salt himself was able to prevent that from happening.
Another of these interesting mid-Victorian figures is William Lovett.
He was one of the chartist leaders who I mentioned earlier,
campaigning on behalf of increased political rights for working people.
After the failure of the Chartist movement after 1848,
he became particularly interested in working men's education and self-improvement.
He'd even been in prison in 1840 for the radicalism of some of his chartist activities.
He was a great believer in democracy.
He regarded America as an inspiring example.
And he believed that you shouldn't have to be a property owner
to enjoy the benefits of political participation,
which was then, as you know, an unusual idea.
And he too was a temperance advocate.
His ideas about education were far ahead of their time.
I'm going to talk about education later in the course,
and it's giving nothing away to say that flogging played a very large role
in British educational methods.
Lovett wasn't like that.
He believed in kindness and humane educational techniques.
He said, kindness and reason should always be employed
to urge children to their duties, coercion and anger never.
The schoolroom should become a little world of love,
of lively and interesting enjoyments.
Lovett himself wasn't a particularly effective teacher.
He was too gentle.
But, nevertheless, he was much better.
He was much more influential in spreading the idea
of humane and generous classroom conduct,
which was a certainly necessary corrective at the time.
What he really hated was gothic complexity.
For him, the word gothic was meant as an insult.
For many Victorians, that was a good thing, but for him it wasn't.
He said, we're living in a world full of unnecessary complications.
The church is full of elaborate language and ritual,
which is designed to screen out the ordinary man.
The legal profession is deliberately obscuring its language and its methods.
Doctors, they've got an elaborate secret language of their own.
Let's get rid of all this complexity.
Simple people, ordinary people, can understand these matters.
And we ought to have a society which promotes their understanding.
Most of all, they hated the aristocracy.
To him, they were parasites.
They lived on the work of others and despised them for it.
And they contributed so little back to the society,
he hated their manners and their etiquette and so on.
Now, he's a contemporary of Karl Marx,
but very different in the sense that he didn't believe in class conflict.
Marx himself fled to England from the European revolutions of 1848
and spent most of his life in Britain anticipating a proletarian revolution
that in the end the English working class would rise up and overthrow the bourgeoisie.
Love it wasn't like that.
Love it anticipated a peaceful resolution of conflict.
He thought that once working people were properly educated,
in an orderly way they'd displaced the bourgeoisie,
they'd get rid of aristocracy, which was so clearly, in his view,
parasitic on the rest of society.
While numerous other Victorian writers expressed utopian hopes for the future,
I'm going to read you a little passage from Winwood Reed's book
called The Martyrdom of Man from 1872.
He was particularly infused by the way in which science, science and technology
advanced society. Listen to this.
The God of Light, the spirit of knowledge and divine intellect
is gradually spreading over the planet and upwards to the skies.
Virtue will descend from heaven surrounded by her angels,
and reign over the hearts of men.
Earth, which is now a purgatory, will be made a paradise.
Hunger and starvation will be unknown.
And the best part of human life will no longer be wasted
in the tedious process of cultivating the fields.
Disease will be extirpated.
The causes of decay will be removed.
Immortality will be invented.
And then, the earth being small, mankind will migrate into space
and will cross the airless Saharas
which separate planet from planet and sun from sun.
The earth will become a holy land
which will be visited by pilgrims from all quarters of the universe.
Finally, men will master the forces of nature.
They will become themselves the architects of systems,
manufacturers of worlds.
Man will then be perfect.
He then will be a creator.
Well, that's high hopes, isn't it, for scientific progress.
Amazing anticipation of space travel in 1872.
George Henry Lewis, a much more level-headed man
and a distinguished philosopher in his own right,
was also so impressed by the way in which science and technology
appeared always to be moving forwards
rather than covering the same ground.
He said, the problem with philosophy is that any amount of intense logical thought
still in the end just leaves you with a set of ideas.
But science and technology actually give you something new for the first time.
So here's a remark from Lewis.
Instead of perpetually finding itself after years of gigantic endeavor,
return to the precise point from which it started,
science finds itself year by year, almost day by day,
advancing step by step,
each accumulation of power adding to the momentum of its progress.
Onward and forever onward,
mightier and forever mightier rolls this wondrous tide of discovery.
Well, that's also a little bit exuberant, although not so much as the previous one.
Well, ironically, this positive upbeat mood,
which is so distinctive of the 50s and 60s,
didn't altogether persist.
And it certainly didn't assure positive results.
These utopian,
the utopian hopes were always going to be disappointed
and this set of them were no exception.
In the subsequent decades, Britain began to lose its leadership of the industrial world,
the Germans and the Americans caught up and surpassed Britain clearly by 1900.
And what's particularly striking is that after Brunel and Stevenson,
the great railway builders,
engineers never again caught the public imagination in the same way.
You'd have to know a lot about it to even name British engineers of the late Victorian period,
even though earlier they'd been such luminous characters.
So idealists like Smiles and Salt and Lovett certainly had a profound effect on their generation,
but none of them was going to live to see any of his most cherished ideals realized
and certainly not a generation of powerful God-like men.
