Lecture 19, The British in Africa, 1840 to 1880.
The African coastline had been explored by the time of Queen Victoria's reign, but much
of the interior of Africa was unknown to Europeans, called the Dark Continent.
British explorers in the Victorian period criss-crossed Africa and traced the course
of the major rivers and got a sense of the principal geographical features of the interior
of Africa.
They had various motives for doing so, one simply was to acquire new geographical knowledge,
some of them were very eager to spread the Christian gospel, others wanted to suppress
the Arab slave trade which was still thriving inside Africa, and others again hoped to develop
worthwhile commercial possibilities and create new colonies for the British Empire.
Well in their conflicts with the Africans and sometimes with the Arabs, once again they
were nearly always successful because of their technological superiority and the superiority
of their military discipline, but what they didn't have was sufficient medical resources
to deal with the extremely unhealthy climate so that the fortune of many of the explorers
was to die of tropical diseases.
The British public followed their exploits with great interest and several of the explorers,
particularly David Livingston, who was the most famous of all of them, became great heroes
back in Britain itself, and certainly the British public of the later Victorian period
was very enthusiastic about colonizing Africa.
But before the 1880s at least, the British government, particularly when the Liberals
were in power, was cautious about becoming too heavily committed to Africa.
It wasn't really until the period from 1880 to 1900 that the scramble for Africa, the
very rapid colonizing of the continent, began.
One of the first big challenges was to find the source of the River Nile, and this was
funded by the Royal Geographical Society that was founded in 1830.
Back in 1770, a Scotsman called James Bruce had found the source of the Blue Nile, one
of the major tributaries in Ethiopia, and in 1795 another Scotsman, Mungo Park, had
traced the course of the Niger River in West Africa.
But he had a very difficult expedition, and he found that the chiefs through whose lands
he passed along the way all demanded what was called Hongo, that is, presents, gifts
from the explorer to be allowed to go forward, and gradually he was stripped of absolutely
everything he possessed until he was a nearly naked wanderer in the African wilderness.
He was able to stay alive partly because he had the knowledge to repair muskets.
Already the slave trade, particularly, had led to the scattered incidents of firearms,
which the Africans could use, which they couldn't repair.
His ability to do so probably kept him alive.
So after Mungo Park, the Orthodox view was that if you wanted to take an expedition into
Africa, you had to take a lot of supplies with you and gifts to distribute to the chiefs
whose lands you'd pass.
In 1858, two British explorers set off to find the source of the River Nile, Richard
Burton and John Henning Speak, and this was the expedition which discovered Lake Victoria,
the massive internal lake, from which, in fact, the Nile originates.
Richard Burton was probably the most intellectually adventurous man in Britain at the time.
A brilliant linguist, in the course of his life, he mastered about 26 languages.
He was a very prolific writer and had a really voracious intellectual appetite.
He loved to study things and to learn things.
Burton was the very first Englishman to visit the Islamic holy city of Mecca.
He went in disguise and spoke Arabic well enough that he could get away with it without
being discovered, even though, from the Islamic point of view, it's a sacrilegious act.
He was a terrific collector of exotic forms of pornography.
He was a great sexual experimenter with women whom he met all over the world.
He was the first translator of the Arabian Knights and was a very good amateur anthropologist.
There are many fine biographies of Richard Burton because he's such a larger-than-life
character.
Now, John Henning Speak, his companion, was a man he'd met in the Indian army for a while.
They'd both been British officers in the army in India.
He was a big game hunter but, in other respects, was less suited to an expedition of this kind
than Burton.
He was poorer at languages and, on his many trips to Africa, never really became familiar
with any of the African dialects whereas Burton learned them very quickly and had far less
of a natural curiosity about the lands and the peoples that they were encountering.
They traveled in from the African East Coast from Zanzibar, moving westwards into the interior
of Africa, rather than going from Egypt up the river Nile.
This was then a dreadful area infested with Arab slave traders who would periodically attack
African villages and chain together all the people who survived their initial attack and
then carry them off in slave caravans, usually sometimes to be sold over into Arabia itself.
Burton wrote a book about Zanzibar, the place from which they started, as a stinking and
disgusting place, packed with people suffering from syphilis and elephantiasis and yellow
fever and very aggravated forms of malaria and where the slave markets were scenes of
mass suffering and privation.
And Burton wasn't, he wasn't squeamish, he'd seen the worst of suffering and poverty in
Britain and India but even so was horrified by Zanzibar.
Well, his expedition took very heavy loads.
Here's some of the things they had with them.
A portable boat, beds, chairs, tables, pots and pans, books, carpentry tools, scientific
instruments and a rain gauge.
All this stuff was carried by 130 native people whom they'd hired, bear and native bearers
as they were called, and 30 donkeys.
But the donkeys were all killed, either by attacks from hyenas or by the bite of the
tsetse fly, which was one of the many predators to which they had to end year.
The local kings, through whose lands they passed, charged a high price for passage and
many of their 130 bearers deserted taking the supplies with them.
Sometimes they'd wake up the next morning and find one group had left and some of the
vital supplies had gone too.
Speak himself as a teetotally, he was a temperance man and was shocked by Burton's conduct.
Burton drank, he experimented with local drugs and he certainly experimented with sex with
the local women.
So each one of them began to dislike the other and to find the other an unsuitable companion.
Burton was annoyed that Speak wanted to stop to hunt big game at various points along the
way.
Well, eventually they got to Lake Tanganyika and by then Burton was so sick with malaria
that he was unable to carry on.
So Speak, advancing on his own, actually came to the banks of Lake Victoria and was
the first Englishman to witness this massive lake.
He named it, he gave it the name Lake Victoria and claimed this lake is the source of the
river, the River Nile, but he didn't actually see the river Nile leaving it.
So although it was a plausible guess and actually turned out to be an accurate guess, he didn't
then have evidence sufficient to confirm that view.
He wasn't able to circumambulate the lake because he himself was also very, very sick.
What had happened to him was that a beetle had started to burrow into his ear, so agonizingly
painful.
And he tried to gouge it out with a pen knife.
He was aware of a creature living inside his ear passage.
The sufferings they endured, all of which they wrote about afterwards are so graphic
and so horrifying, you're amazed that they kept going at all.
Well Speak went back to Africa in 1859, but this time with a new companion called James
Grant.
They travelled in from the interior along a different route and became the first Englishman
to go to the area which we now call Uganda.
On the way they met one of the local kings, Rumanika, his name was, and his kingdom was
called Karagwe.
Now this king had a harem of wives and it was a group who believed that feminine beauty
was expressed in extreme fatness.
And so he force fed his wives to fatten them up with a mixture of beer and honey.
Until they were so big they couldn't stand up.
So the wives were literally these enormous women who wallowed around on the floor drinking
beer and honey out of troughs, a fascinating and strange encounter.
Later on they met another king called Mutesa and they discovered that when Mutesa had ascended
his throne the first thing he'd done was to have all his brothers, 30 of them, burned
alive because they were potential rivals to his kingship.
And this king himself walked very stiff-legged and on tiptoe because he was supposed to be
a lion and this was his way of representing the walk of the lion.
On this expedition, the Speak and Grant expedition, Speak confirmed his view that the Nile originated
in Lake Victoria and this time he actually saw a big river flowing out of the lake over
a series of waterfalls which made his original gas all the more plausible.
The whole course of the river still hadn't been traversed at this point so a potential
doubt remained and one of the people who doubted that this really was the Nile was Richard
Burton himself.
Burton felt that he'd been betrayed by Speak because at the end of the first expedition
Burton had remained in Africa while Speak went home and although Speak had promised
not to tell the press and to tell the geographical society about their findings, in the end he
changed his mind and done so.
So in Burton's view Speak had betrayed him and gone beyond the evidence.
In a book of his own Burton said that Speak was no good as a scientist, he didn't have
any scientific training, he'd got no linguistic training, that he, Burton, had done all the
real work but that Speak had taken the glory for it.
Well in the end the Royal Geographical Society promoted a debate, the two of them would meet,
this is at the city of Bath in 1864 but the day before it happened, the day before the
confrontation between these men who'd now become enemies, Speak died in a mysterious
shooting accident.
There were rumours that Burton had killed him although we know that's not the case.
In fact it looks as though he'd committed suicide from shame at having pre-empted Burton
after promising not to.
Well the best known of the African explorers was David Livingston and he blended idealistic
missionary work with exploration.
He was born and raised in Glasgow in Scotland and as a boy it worked in a cotton factory
sometimes for shifts as long as 14 hours but was also an enthusiastic self-educator
who'd learned everything he could.
He went to medical school in Glasgow with the intention of becoming a medical missionary
in China but when a recurrence of the opium wars prevented him from going to China he decided
he'd go to South Africa instead and it wasn't long before he realised that he wasn't cut
out for converting Africans to Christianity.
He found it far more difficult than he'd expected.
This was the common experience of British missionaries all over, it was certainly in
Asia and in Africa that conversion proved far more difficult than they'd anticipated.
He described in his diary for example how he would gather a group of the Africans around
him and sing them psalms in the expectation that they'd be impressed by this beautiful
music and that they'd start thinking about Christianity.
Actually they just roared with laughter and thought it was one of the funniest things
they'd ever heard which to him was dismaying.
So increasingly he switched his attention to geographical exploration and he was the
first European to cross the Kalahari Desert in 1849.
He was also the first European to cross South Central Africa from coast to coast in 1856.
He hoped that the Zambezi River, one of the great rivers flowing east through South Central
Africa could become a route way of great commercial possibility.
In other words free trade could make its way up the river and valuable commodities could
be brought down the river and meanwhile European settlements and Christianity and an enlightened
form of government would take place there.
And he was encouraged in this view by a group of the Macalolo tribesmen whom he befriended
and who also were aware that ivory was becoming a valuable commodity so they also hoped to
create contacts with traders on the coast.
In 1855 it was he, Livingston, who discovered a massive waterfall on the Zambezi River and
he named it the Victoria Falls.
Again you see it's no coincidence that the lake and the waterfall both named after Victoria
because it was during her reign that these British people I should say discovered them.
The Victoria Falls is a very beautiful thing but also a terrible obstacle because it means
that it's impossible for a ship from the coast to go far into the interior.
Livingston took pride in travelling light and in being able to withstand fearsome hardships.
He did travel light and he said quote, I could drink water swarming with insects, thick
with mud, putrid with rhinoceros urine and buffalo dung but he like the others was actually
regularly very very sick with malaria and dysentery and other forms of tropical sickness.
But he had a magnetic effect on at least some of the African tribesmen whom he met some
of whom remained very loyal to him right throughout his life.
He was a charismatic figure, he infuriated some people but they're magnetized others.
On one occasion for example after his expedition had been plundered by the local tribes through
which they were passing they were destitute.
He was determined to go on anyway and at first his followers said we can't go any further
we've got no more supplies but he writes after using all my powers of persuasion I declare
that I would go on alone and went into my tent.
I was soon followed by one of the men who said we will never leave you do not be disheartened
wherever you lead we will follow.
Others told me with the most artless simplicity of manner to be comforted they were all my
children they would die for me.
Well these explorations made Livingston's name a luminous one in Britain and he'd go
back to Britain periodically and write about his experiences and lecture to fascinated audiences
particularly he was attentive to the Arab slave trade which he thought was such a disgrace.
He was much less anthropologically sensitive than Richard Burton who had already had the
idea that although native customs might seem strange and barbaric to English people nevertheless
they had a kind of internal logic and that really to understand them that's what you
needed to get a sense of Livingston was much less sensitive to such matters.
Well after Burton's speak and grand it was he Livingston who was the next to continue
the search for the Nile to clear up residual uncertainties and his expedition was funded
in 1866 by the Royal Geographical Society.
He detested Richard Burton as a person because he thought of him as profligate and promiscuous.
He says quote a beastly fellow a moral idiot whose bestial immorality is a disgrace and
he was similarly contemptuous of grant and speak he tended to fall out of all the other
Europeans with whom he traveled with the result that many of his expeditions there were no
other whites except him.
He had a theory that the river called the Lualaba River was actually the Nile and this was his
mission in 1866 to test the validity of that scheme.
Well once again he's in a situation where so many of his native bearers desert the expedition
but finally he was in the humiliating position of having to join an Arab slave caravan because
it alone could conduct him through the country and keep him alive its leader had a certain
knowledge of medicine and would help him.
These deserters said that Livingston had died and so after he'd been in the interior of
Africa for four years and hadn't been heard of at all for more than two an American newspaper
had the idea of trying to send an expedition to find him.
This was a man called James Gordon Bennett editor of the New York Herald he didn't believe
that Livingston had been murdered he'd read the stories he knew that Livingston was very
resourceful and would find a way to survive if he possibly could and so he asked one of
his journalists Henry Stanley to go and search for Livingston.
Now Stanley's an interesting person too he'd been born and raised in Wales but had emigrated
to America and during the early 1860s had fought first for the Confederacy and then
later on for the Union in the Civil War he'd changed sides as the war went on.
Well with the backing of this powerful American newspaper Stanley undertook one of the most
imperious of all expeditions into darkest Africa.
He had 150 bearers and six tons of equipment and he knew what to expect I mean after reading
about the previous explorers he knew he might encounter mutiny and theft and all the rest
of it so he didn't think twice about flogging deserters if he could recapture them he hanged
a thief in his own retinue and he made war on a chief who wouldn't let him pass.
Finally in the interior town of Ujiji he caught up with Livingston and there's a wonderful
passage in Stanley's own book of him walking forwards and seeing this now very frail and
elderly European and saying Dr Livingston I presume became one of the most famous questions
of the late 19th century this is in 1871.
Well Stanley gave to Livingston some more supplies so that Livingston's search for the
source of the now could continue on the Lua Laba River but it was there that finally in
1873 Livingston's brave heart gave out and he died.
One of his faithful African servants Susie buried Livingston's heart and he eviscerated
him he took out his intestines and buried them there but then dried and then barmed
Livingston's body and wrapped it in a kind of cylinder made of canvas and bark and then
carried it all the way back to the east coast of Africa so that Livingston's body could
be returned to England.
About five months this great walk out took and it's a marvelous example of the loyalty
that he'd inspired at least in this servant.
They took over the job of clearing up these residual uncertainties and between 1874 and
1777 launched a massive expedition.
It circumvented it circumnavigated Lake Victoria and Lake Tanganyika so for the first time got
good charts of the whole of the lakes and then sailed down the Lua Laba River.
He went with four other white men they had this expedition had 350 porters and eight
tons of stores each one was more massive than the previous one.
All his white companions were killed along the way by encounters with cannibals and wild
animals and cataracts and snakes and killer insects and again there's a terrific book
by Stanley about every lurid moment of the trip but he was to prove conclusively that
the Lua Laba was actually the Congo River which changes its course dramatically along
the way and that then flows out in the in the central west coast of Africa out into the
Atlantic Ocean.
Well British explorers regarded Stanley as a bit of a vulgar American but there's no
question that he was effective and no question that he knew how to tell a good story about
his exploits after the fact.
African adventure was one of the great recurrent themes of the Victorian period.
Most of them were men but there's also a famous woman explorer called Mary Kingsley
and she showed the same kind of daring and resolution as her male counterparts even though
she went wearing the traditional heavy black dresses of Victorian ladies.
Mary Kingsley she was a Victorian spinster who spent her twenties nursing her parents
both of whom were invalids and in 1892 they died within a few weeks of each other when
she was 30.
She then set off to Africa and spent much of the rest of her life collecting flora and
fauna and anthropological artifacts and encountering different tribal people mainly in the area
of Gabon.
She idealized one tribe she met there the Thang people and she called unadulterated Africans.
She was one of the people to point out that Africans who came in contact with the Europeans
usually picked up the worst of their habits particularly violence and alcohol and so
she hoped to get far enough into the interior of Africa to meet what she called the unadulterated
Africans who hadn't yet been contaminated by contact with civilization and back in England
she was a regular on the darkest Africa lecture circuit and popular.
There was lots of African adventure story fiction as well.
Henry Ryder Haggard was the author of King Solomon's Minds a wonderful popular story
of the time about a group of plucky English explorers who cross a great desert and nearly
die of thirst over a vast mountain range and come across a secret kingdom full of great
African warriors.
They participate in a mighty African tribal war.
They discover the minds which had been left in biblical times by King Solomon.
They have desperate hares, breadth escapes and so on.
Wrackling good yarns and these are the kinds of things which English school children would
eat up enthusiastically as they got ready for their role in the imperial mission.
Well the British Empire became more attracted to the possibilities of Africa as the century
went on.
They wanted to exploit not only the coast for trade purposes as had been the case previously
but also potentially the interior.
The completion of the Suez Canal in 1869 suddenly made the North African coast in particular
the area of Egypt much more strategically significant than it had been earlier and later on Britain
was going to devote a lot of time, money and attention to that.
The first large-scale British colonial war in Africa took place against the Ashanti kingdom
inland from the Gold Coast in 1874.
A British general called Garnet Walsley, who was the youngest general in the British army
then aged only 40, led an expeditionary force to overwhelm the Ashanti and he succeeded after
encountering Kumasi, the Ashanti capital which was the scene of ghastly human sacrifices
on a massive scale.
The Imperial historian James Morris says this,
If the British were an imperial people so were the Ashanti.
Their military record was as proud as that of the British.
The British generals might have their gattling guns and rocket batteries but the king of
Ashanti went into battle hung all over from head to foot with infallible jujus forming
a kind of spiritual chain mail and fastened so thickly to his person that his face scarcely
showed through the magic tufts and fragments.
And when he moved the whole silhouette of his presence rippled menacingly.
Well despite an enormous numerical superiority on the part of the natives and despite their
greater immunity to local diseases they were annihilated by British firepower.
What something which happened again and again and again in these colonial wars.
Walsley was able to smash the Ashanti army while losing only 18 men in the battle and
he burned this city to the ground and returned to Britain a hero.
British policy also extended into the interior of South Africa and in doing so laid the foundations
of events which are still transpiring around us today.
The earliest white settlers of South Africa had been Dutch Calvinists and French Protestants
Huguenots the ancestors of the people who are known today as the Boers.
When the British came into the Cape Colony in the early 19th century their initial motive
was to safeguard the routeway from England to India by ship and South Africa became a
way station for ships on the long voyage to India.
But they came into friction with the Boers particularly after 1833 when slavery was abolished
in the British Empire.
The British authorities in South Africa ordered the Boers to free the slaves and accept blacks
and whites as equals.
The Boers were determined not to do so and in order to get away altogether from British
influence they undertook what's called the Great Trek.
It's a much mythologised event in the history of Boers South Africans.
Starting in 1837 and through the 40s Boer caravans moved off into the interior of Africa
under the leadership of Pete Ratif and there they founded the independent states, the Orange
Free State and the Transvaal.
Pete Ratif himself was treacherously killed by a Zulu king called Dingan after being welcomed
to his village.
But the Boers had their revenge at the Battle of Blood River the next year in 1838 by killing
3,000 Zulus without loss through disciplined rifle fire.
Now once again I'd like to make a parallel here.
This is a group of religiously inspired individuals going far off into the interior in the 1830s
and 40s.
It's very striking to me that it happens at the same time as the Mormon Trek of 1846
after Salt Lake City, people with an intense religious mission going off into the wilderness
and being willing to displace the native peoples who lived there along the way.
Well at first the British were content to have the Boers far into the interior.
They certainly themselves believed, the Boers believed that they enjoyed God's blessing
and that's why their colonies had thrived.
But the discovery of diamonds in the area in the late 1860s made it potentially of greater
value.
In 1877 the British Empire followed the Boers and annexed the Transvaal, that is brought
it into the British Empire.
The man who wrote King Solomon's Minds, Ryder Haggard, was the secretary to Sir Theophilus
Shepstone, the man who actually carried out this coup, so he was not only a story writer
who was involved in African politics directly.
Benjamin Disraeli, the Prime Minister in 1877, had heard that the Boers were planning to build
a railway into Portuguese East Africa, the place we now call Mozambique, and he was partly
hoping to be able to forestall the railway from being built.
Now at first the Boers put up with it because they were threatened by a resurgence in Zulu
power.
Chetaweo was the Zulu chief in 1879 and the Zulus were a warrior society, ferocious and
feared by other African people.
They enforced salibacy on their young men until they'd killed or wounded an enemy in
battle.
And the Zulu armies were capable of running great distances at high speed.
The British commander who led an expedition against the Zulu power, Lord Chelmsford,
underestimated their power.
In 1879 half of his expedition was overrun at a place called Isandal Wana.
He divided his force and half of it was destroyed.
20,000 Zulus attacked the British and killed nearly a thousand of them.
All but 55 were killed and the bodies horribly mutilated.
One of the survivors wrote, they cut everyone up and took his heart and laid it on his breast
and then put his right hand in where they took his heart from, so kind of ritual dismemberment.
Well the British certainly took their revenge.
First in the resistance at Rauch's Drift, the event which became the scene for the movie
Zulu, and then later on at the Battle of Ulundi where a massively outnumbered British
army nevertheless won through disciplined firepower and killed more than 4,000 of the Zulus.
Well the success of the British in the Zulu war after this initial defeat at Isandal Wana
had paradoxical consequences because once the Boers were no longer afraid of Zulu power
they no longer wanted the protection which the British were offering them and it once
became eager to throw off the British from whom they'd previously been so eager to escape.
They'd expected that when Gladstone came into power in 1880 he would revoke
Disraeli's annexation of the Transvaal.
They'd certainly been led to expect that from Gladstone's anti-Disraeli rhetoric in 1789 and 1880.
But in fact that didn't happen.
Gladstone decided that the British army was going, the British presence was going to remain.
So at that point Paul Kruger, the Boer leader, led a rebellion to throw the British out of the Transvaal.
And in 1881 the Boers won a great victory over the British at Majuba Hill,
killing 300 of the British soldiers for the loss of only one.
All these battles tended to be very lopsided usually because the attacker either had firepower
superiority or an element of complete surprise.
Now the Boer leader Kruger had been with Lord Chelmsford at Isandal Wana two years before
and had warned him not to divide his force and had warned him to fortify his camp.
Advice which Chelmsford had neglected to follow.
His success had also neglected to follow this advice Sir George Colley at Majuba
and paid very very dearly when his men were overwhelmed and killed.
Now the Prime Minister Gladstone had to decide what he was going to do and his decision was
to at least for the moment to abandon the Transvaal.
It didn't then seem vital to British interests and so to the horror of the Conservatives
but to the pleasure of the Liberals who believed that Britain had no right to be meddling far
into the interior of Africa where no immediate national interest was at stake.
The British withdrew from the Transvaal but they left the assertion that they had
suzerainty over the district.
That is they had ultimate political authority over the fortunes of the Transvaal.
The place was going to become very politically volatile in the next 20 years
because of massive gold discoveries in the Johannesburg area
and so this ambiguity in the early 1880s left open the avenue which would eventuate in the Boer War.
