In 1859, Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
This was the book which outlined evolutionary theory and it had an immense impact not only on science but also on religion and on various aspects of society too.
Darwin was building on the work of a generation of very talented predecessors, Thomas Malthus in Demographics, Charles Lyell in Geology and so on.
But what he did in his book was to create a new picture of the nature of life on Earth.
It was so convincing that most of the British scientific community fell in behind it,
accepted that his reasoning and his use of evidence was too powerful to refute.
But a few, chiefly for religious reasons, refused to switch over to the Darwinian view of the natural world.
They too, of course, were aware of the great prestige which science had for the Victorians.
And so Darwin's critics also said that they were resisting him for scientific reasons.
Now it's important to emphasize how glamorous the idea of science seemed in the 19th century,
because particularly when it was linked with technology, it seemed to be improving the world so rapidly.
Science, technology and progress, together they were making the world better in every way or so it seemed.
Industrialization required scientific knowledge.
At first it was very ad hoc. People like George Stevenson and Humphrey Davy were simply tinkering with devices
and finding ways to make it work better. But gradually that had to give way to the more systematic study of chemistry and physics.
The Victorian era witnessed the invention of an enormous array of devices.
So there's anybody whose early life was spent in the 1820s and 30s and who was elderly by the turn of the century,
in Victorian herself, witnessed hundreds of inventions which would transform everyday life.
We've looked at a few of them and there were many more.
The railway, the telegraph, the telephone, refrigeration, motor vehicles by the end of the period,
chemical dyes, the mass production of steel and plate glass, first gas lighting, then electric lighting.
All these things, one after the next, were changing the world.
So it was very easy to believe that science and technology were making the world better
and that science itself had got a vital role to play in all this.
Also, because it was a period of great exploration of other parts of the world,
that when the interior of Africa was being opened up and much more was coming to be known about South America and Asia,
far more animals and plants were being discovered previously unknown
and giving a fuller and fuller appreciation of the incredible complexity of the natural world.
So this is the environment in which Darwin himself went to work.
The intellectual background to his achievement was derived particularly from the work of Lamarck, Lyell and Malthus.
Let me now say a word about them.
Lamarck, first of all, was a French biologist who himself had the idea of evolution
but thought that evolution happened quickly by the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
That is, a creature in one generation would acquire a certain characteristic
and by repetitive action would somehow code that action and be able to passage onto its successes.
So, for example, he explained the length of giraffe's necks
by the fact that giraffes spent a lot of time stretching their necks upwards to try to reach high leaves.
In other words, in Lamarck's vision, it could all happen in the space of a few generations.
But he did make a very important conceptual breakthrough, Lamarck,
by realizing that all living creatures were interconnected, parts of a continuous process,
and that species names were the names that people gave to divisions.
In other words, they weren't something intrinsic created by God or nature itself.
No, they were human distinctions imposed onto the natural world.
Thomas Malthus was an early economist and also an early demographer.
And it was he who established the relationship between food supplies and populations.
He pointed out that most species, including the humans,
can reproduce at a far greater rate than they can increase their food supply.
In other words, it's possible for a human couple to have 15 or 20 children,
which means that you've gone from two people to 22 people in the space of one generation.
But it's very unlikely that you can get an 11 times increase in the available food supply in the same period.
So he said, we've actually got checks in the natural world which prevent most of the offspring from surviving.
Starvation and disease winnow out the great majority of each new generation,
only a small handful of which can survive in both human and animal populations.
And of course, the implication is that it's the weak and the sick which go to the wall and the strong which survive.
The idea of the survival of the fittest is based on that insight.
Charles Lyell was the man who worked out with great geological rigor,
the fact that the earth was far older than had previously been assumed by most people who thought about it.
And also that it developed by slow uniform processes.
He was a lawyer, an English lawyer, but loved geology and was much more interested in that.
When he started to do his work, the reigning expert on geological matters was Cuvier
who believed that catastrophism was possible.
In other words, events could happen suddenly, but when Cuvier looked at a mountain range like the Alps,
he said, this is the outcome of a vast convulsion.
Lyell said, no, it may look like that at first glance, but actually it's a very, very slow process
taking place infinitesimally over an enormously long period of time
to make sense of it. Obviously, he needed far longer for these events to happen.
But Cuvier also is a very important person.
He was really the founder of paleontology who understood better than anyone previously
the relationship between form and function in creatures which made it possible
when you recovered just a fragment of an animal skeleton to say, ah, this is clearly a jaw bone
and the nature of the jaw bone shows us that the creature must have been carnivorous
and the size of the bone shows us that it must have been able to move in a certain way.
There was detective work based upon fragmentary evidence.
It was the early 19th century when the first dinosaur skeletons were being recovered
and that in turn forced educated people to deal with the fact that extinction does happen.
Right up to the end of the 18th century, it was intellectually respectable to think
that extinction didn't happen.
After all, Thomas Jefferson in notes on the state of Virginia says somewhere
there are some people who say that the mammoth is extinct, but no, it's not.
There aren't any around here in Virginia, but I met some Delaware Indians
and they told me they saw one up by the Great Lakes
because he couldn't believe that God would be so inefficient as to first create a creature
and then take it away again.
But already by the 1820s and 30s, the accumulating evidence is too powerful.
Yeah, it clearly is the case that extinction happens.
Well, Charles Lyell wrote a book called Principles of Geology between 1830 and 33
and it created a great sensation.
It argued that when you looked at fossils and when you looked at the strata of rocks
which sometimes are laid bare in cliff faces in the mountains,
each stratum of the rock represents millions of years in the Earth's history
and that by studying the fossil systematically,
you can work out the history of the different types of creatures
which had lived in these different ages
and that you could become quite familiar with the fact
that each creature had a kind of period during which it was capable to exist,
after which it ceased to exist, to be replaced by others.
That in fact extinction, far from being peripheral or impossible,
was central to the development of life on Earth
and that the fossil record gave us a stratified picture of how that had taken place.
Very important to Lyell was that all these things happened slowly.
He was what's called a uniformitarian.
He didn't depend upon sudden convulsions.
No, it all took place gradually.
And it didn't depend upon divine intervention.
Naturalistic forces could explain it all.
Much earlier on, incidentally, Leonardo da Vinci himself
having found fossils on mountaintops
had speculated that land which was now at the top of mountains
had once been part of the seabed
and had concluded that the Earth's surface itself must be in motion.
This is a point which obviously was going to be confirmed much later on
by plate tectonics.
Well, Lyell was appointed professor of geology at King's College London
and Darwin read Lyell whose work had an enormous influence on him.
Well, now Darwin himself now.
His grandfather was Erasmus Darwin, a scientific writer of the 18th century.
His father, Robert Darwin, was a successful doctor
and his mother was a daughter of Wedgwood, the China entrepreneur.
So he came from a very distinguished family on both sides
with an enormous amount of intellectual fertility.
He began his studies as a medical student in Edinburgh
and revolted by watching surgical operations being performed without anesthetics.
So he decided to switch careers and went to Cambridge to study for the church.
But even there he spent far more time on natural history
collecting plant and animal specimens than he did in studying theology.
And in 1831 he joined an expedition, a Royal Navy expedition
to South America, South Africa, and the Galapagos Archipelago.
He got the job because at Cambridge one of the teachers he'd studied with,
John Henslow, was a talented botanist who recognized that this is where Darwin's real skills lay
and recommended him to the Navy as a suitable scientific observer to go along on this expedition.
Darwin's parents were disgusted by what they thought of as their son's lack of appropriate direction.
But some of the Cambridge scientists already recognized his great promise.
Well the HMS Beagle was on its voyage between 1831 and 1836.
It was a five-year voyage.
It visited South America, Australia and New Zealand, South Africa,
many of the Pacific Islands, and the Galapagos Archipelago.
Darwin himself wasn't a good sailor and was seasick almost every day of the entire expedition.
But as soon as they reached land he cheered up and went about his explorations very vigorously.
And he read Lyell en route on the way he was reading Lyell's Principles of Geology.
He did very extensive geological studies of his own in areas geologically quite different from England.
For example in areas where earthquakes were common to show that at least in some places there are convulsions like earthquake.
He studied corals and rock stratification.
In the Galapagos Island one of his most famous observations was of the dozens of varieties of finches
that the birds, the finches, they were all very similar.
And yet on each island a different variant of the finches had developed.
And he speculated that surely these birds although distinct must have a common ancestor.
Back in England in 1838 he read Malthus on Population
and realized that competition within populations was leading to the survival of stronger variations within each particular species.
And he had this insight as well that whether you're strong doesn't depend simply upon muscularity.
It also depends on what you're strong for.
In other words in different environments different virtues will be rewarded
or different fortuitous qualities will be rewarded.
Which is why on the different islands different versions of the birds have gradually developed.
Because in one island environment slightly different qualities were most valuable to survival by comparison with that of another.
In other words it's the relationship between the environment and the what we now call the fortuitous genetic variations
which led to a good fit, a good ecological niche.
Another of the books which he'd read and which had impressed him very strongly
was William Paley's book Evidences of Christianity.
This was a book which said a very common argument in the late 18th century and early 19th.
And a very plausible one as well.
If you look at how brilliantly all the creatures in nature, all the plants and animals fit together
you have to be convinced of the existence of God.
Because only God in his infinite wisdom could possibly create such an intricate pattern as this.
In other words all the evidence of the workings of nature intensifies our faith in God.
But now of course Darwin had begun to speculate, no, no, it isn't God's design which makes these things fit together.
It's the outcome of a competitive struggle which makes them fit together.
It's the successful competition of species, most of whom, or most of the members of which fall along the way
leaving only the best to survive because they're perfectly adapted.
You see the difference?
In other words, God's no longer necessary to set this thing up beforehand.
It's all naturalistic instead.
Darwin's generation was familiar with the fact of selective breeding that farm animals, for example,
could be crossed-bred in such a way as to emphasize high milk-giving capacity in cows or speed in race horses and so on.
In other words, they knew that you can modify generations of animals.
And he said, just as a farmer can select consciously by encouraging the breeding of some and restraining the breeding of others,
in a way nature is doing the same thing, albeit in a much more wasteful way.
There's no need for Lamarck's inheritance of acquired characteristics.
Now the thing that, one of the things that Darwin worried about was that he didn't know why there were variations.
Why is it, for example, that when a creature has ten offspring, why are they all slightly different from one another?
Why is it that some do have qualities which are going to make it better able to compete strongly?
Because he was working before Mendel, the man who developed the genetic theory to explain variations.
And he was aware that that was one of the weaknesses of his theory.
Well, he finally summarized all his research on the origin of species, which was published in 1859,
twenty-three years after the Beagle had finally come back to Britain.
And he brought together evidence from diverse sciences, that's the point, from demography and from geology,
as well as from biology, to make sense of this complicated phenomenon.
He was also afraid of scandal.
He recognized that the book posed a challenge to traditional Christianity.
It made it impossible to believe literally in the Genesis story of creation,
because the world is vastly older than the Bible implied, and it made it clear,
Darwin's work made it clear that God didn't create all the species distinct.
They were themselves the products of evolution.
He was aware that another biologist, Alfred Russell Wallace, was coming to similar conclusions,
and eventually his friends encouraged him to go ahead and publish,
rather than let Wallace make the claim that he was the great synthesizer of all this information.
Well, now, the impact of the Darwinian Revolution would be hard to exaggerate.
The historian of science, Thomas Kuhn, calls it a paradigm shift.
He says, these are very rare moments in the history of science,
where suddenly the basic assumptions about what the world is like are completely changed.
Scientists have long periods of theoretical stability,
and suddenly paradigm shifts which jolt the entire enterprise into a new direction.
It's comparable, for example, to Copernicus realizing that the Earth isn't the center of the universe.
For a long time that had been a viable theory, and all the evidence had seemed to support it,
but eventually Copernicus had said, no, no, it's a heliocentric universe.
The Earth revolves around the Sun rather than the other way around.
And then every other piece of information has to be adjusted to make sense of that new insight.
I mentioned in one of the earlier lectures that almost straight away some churchmen were horrified about this
and tried to fight against it.
Thomas Henry Huxley, who was Darwin's great defender,
met the Bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce, in the Science Museum at Oxford to debate this in 1860.
And the bishop had on his side Richard Owen, one of the premier British scientists of the day,
and one of the men who was most reluctant to follow Darwin in accepting this new theory.
In fact, it was Owen who wrote a harshly critical review of The Origin of Species in the journal called The Edinburgh Review.
Huxley vindicated Darwin's view in the debate in Oxford, but nevertheless,
even some of Darwin's friends, although they admitted the cogency of the research he'd done,
were still horrified at the conclusions to which he was led.
For example, his old geology teacher at Cambridge, Adam Sedgwick, wrote this,
If the method of the origin was correct, humanity would suffer a damage that might brutalize it
and sink the human race into a lower state of degradation than any into which it has fallen
since written records tell us of its history.
In other words, if we weren't made in God's image right from the start,
if we're simply the fortuitous product of evolution,
we've no longer got the distinctiveness and the beauty and grace and godliness,
which we've always thought we might have.
It's degrading to us.
Now, in the first book, Darwin had avoided the question of human origins.
But in 1871, he went on to publish a second book called The Descent of Man,
where he is quite explicit about the fact that mankind is involved in this process.
He's talking not just about the lower plants and animals, but about humans as well.
However, Darwin himself was, he was a Victorian.
He was caught up in this spirit of science that I mentioned at the beginning,
which was very optimistic.
Science is making the world better.
And Darwin himself appears to have been able to link, at least most of the time,
to link evolution with the idea of progress,
that somehow, even though in purely theoretical terms, it all seems completely random,
nevertheless, it's all part of an upward trend somehow.
He describes in The Descent of Man how qualities like honour and nobility
might themselves be the products of evolution.
Listen to what he says.
Although a high standard of morality gives but a slight or no advantage
to each individual man and his children over other men of the same tribe,
yet an advancement in the standard of morality and an increase in the number of well-endowed men
will certainly give an immense advantage to one tribe over another.
There can be no doubt that a tribe including many members who, from possessing it in high degree,
the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy,
were always ready to give aid to each other and to sacrifice themselves for the common good,
would be victorious over most other tribes.
And this would be natural selection.
At all times throughout the world, tribes have supplanted other tribes.
And as morality is one element in their success, the standard of morality
and the number of well-endowed men will thus everywhere tend to rise and increase.
You see, that's an adaptation by Darwin of the idea of natural selection
with all its gloomy connotations to the idea that the world's becoming morally more exalted
because it's itself a survival mechanism.
Well, religious opponents faced a daunting array of evidence.
The thing about Darwin's work is that it's so powerfully argued and so persuasive.
One of the great holdouts against Darwin was a scientist called Philip Goss.
And his son, Edmund Goss, has written about this in a wonderful book called Father and Son.
It's the story of Edmund's own childhood.
Philip Goss was a biologist who specialized in very, very accurate drawings of biological species.
This was important, of course, in the days before scientific photography was developed.
And the father had actually identified various sea creatures and done accurate drawings
and named them as distinct for the first time.
He was a member of the church called the Seventh Day Adventists, a puritanical Protestant sect.
And they were biblical fundamentalists.
Now, Philip Goss looked at Darwin, he knew Darwin, and was very impressed by a lot of Darwin's work.
And he said, it's very, very impressive.
But of course, it can't be right because it contradicts the Bible.
And Darwin's work is the product of a fallible human mind.
But the Bible is God's work and it's infallible.
The Bible can't lie. That was Goss's point.
And so when some of the evolutionary biologists said to him,
but look, what about the fossil record?
These fossils show us that there have been thousands of species no longer living
and that there's been a constant development of one species out of the next.
Surely this is evidence which is going to force you to change your mind.
And Goss said, I think God's put the fossils there to test our faith.
In other words, it certainly does seem reasonable to assume
that they represent evidence in support of the evolutionary hypothesis.
But nevertheless, it can't be right because God tells us in the Bible in a more dependable way.
It's a brilliant book, Father and Son.
There's another lovely story of how the boy, Edmund, says to his father,
if the boy wants something, he says to his father, the father says,
well, let's kneel down and get some divine guidance
and they'd fall to their knees and pray.
And then it wouldn't be long before the father said,
I'm afraid God's told me that you can't do that.
And eventually the son catches on to this and he wants to go to a tea party.
And the father says, well, we must pray.
And after a while, the son says, God's told me that I should go to the party.
There's a marvelous book, Father and Son.
Well, now Darwin himself never had an academic job.
He was never a professor.
He lived quietly at home in a village called Down in Kent.
And he never went traveling again after the voyage of the Beagle.
In fact, he was sick.
He'd acquired some sort of disease in the Andes and suffered.
He was a hypochondriac throughout his later life.
He was constantly worried about his own health but was genuinely sick as well.
He was very upset about the religious furor he'd caused.
He wasn't temperamentally the kind of person to be provocative and confrontational at all.
And in addition to his great work, he wrote 17 other books on a whole array of important subjects,
the sex life of flowers, the nature of worms, a great book on the nature of coral,
books on geology, even studies of things like the human emotions.
So he was a very prolific and gifted author with a ravenous capacity for intellectual work.
He found out later in life that his scientific absorption was so great
that he'd lost interest in literature, which as a young man he'd liked.
And he wrote at one point,
For many years I cannot endure to read a line of poetry.
I've tried lately to read Shakespeare and found it so intolerably dull that it nauseated me.
It is a horrid bore to feel as I constantly do that I'm a withered leaf for every subject except science.
Well now evolutionary ideas were applied not only to biology, but also to society.
The general name given to this phenomenon is social Darwinism.
The idea that just as there's a struggle for existence in the natural world,
so there's a struggle for existence in the social and political world.
And the man whose name is most closely associated with this is Herbert Spencer.
In his day he was regarded as an absolute intellectual giant, one of the greatest minds of the age.
Even though today his work is almost entirely discredited and forgotten.
In fact it was Spencer who coined the phrase survival of the fittest.
And Darwin later picked it up from Spencer, although it did apply it very closely to the Darwin's own work.
He also blended a belief in evolution, a belief that everything happens gradually and slowly, a uniformitarian,
with a sense of collective improvement.
Here's his definition of evolution, Spencer.
An integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion,
during which the matter passes from an indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity,
and during which the retained motion undergoes a parallel transformation.
You can see from this he was a turgid writer.
He was much parodied as well.
Here's a parody by the Reverend T.P. Kirkman.
Evolutionists had changed from a no-howish-untalk-about-able-all-alikeness
to a some-howish-and-in-general-talk-about-not-all-alikeness
by continuous something elseifications and stick-together-ations.
Well, what Spencer was trying to do seriously was make evolution a master theory
to cover every conceivable form of activity.
There was not just biology, but everything else as well.
He was an intense believer in laissez-faire, that is, competition in business,
because he thought it echoed exactly what was going on in the natural world.
And he opposed trade unions, for example, because he thought that they were attempts
to prevent a natural process, competition, by offering an alternative model
which violated natural principles themselves.
And he certainly regarded socialism and all forms of utopianism as absolutely hopeless,
because they violated the principle of gradual, steady, competitive, forward struggle.
So there will be progress, but it will be slow.
And human efforts to speed it up are virtually bound to fail.
Of course, the trade unionists could use an evolutionary metaphor as well,
and they did. They said, when we do the geology and look at the fossil remains of ancient species,
which species do we find which are very, very successful?
The ants and the bees.
They're some of the winners in the evolutionary struggle.
Why? Because they're socialists, and they collaborate.
After all, if a trade union does become mightier than the boss,
well, they've won a natural struggle. They've won through cooperation.
And there was this idea common at the end of the 19th century.
The dinosaurs went extinct, because although they were great armor-plated monsters,
they were constantly at war with each other, and eventually they extincted each other,
whereas the cows and the bees survived, because they were collaborative and peaceful.
So in other words, what's interesting is that evolutionary language gets into both sides of a lot of these debates.
Everybody starts using it.
It spreads widely throughout society, and it's applied to all sorts of things,
which at first glance didn't seem particularly relevant.
Karl Marx certainly his theory that you have first what he calls the stages of primitive accumulation,
and then you have the stage of capitalism, and then you have the stage of socialist revolution,
and finally the state withers away in a perfect socialist nirvana.
That also, it's a Victorian theory using these developmental ideas.
Marx is a great admirer of Darwin, and actually sent him the manuscript of Das Kapital to say,
can I dedicate it to you?
But Darwin said, now I'm afraid not, I've antagonized the Christians enough already,
I don't want to make matters worse.
So evolutionary ideas get into the, they're in the environment all around.
Francis Galton was a relative of Darwin.
He was one of the first scientific eugenicists.
He had the idea that eugenics, which is the self-conscious manipulation of human populations,
can be developed to accelerate evolution.
In other words, to deliberately restrain the unfit from reproducing,
and to do everything you can to stimulate the reproduction of the most fit.
So he had the idea that the reproduction, particularly if the mentally impaired should be forcibly prevented,
and so on.
Of course, we living after Hitler are aware of some of the uses to which eugenics can be put.
Hitler was himself a kind of fanatical eugenist.
But in Galton's day, it all seemed very enlightened.
Well, evolutionary ideas sometimes stimulated very, very acute anxiety.
I want to read you a few verses from Tennyson's poem in Memoriam,
where he's suddenly coming to terms with the fact that life may not be an arena set up by God,
but it may just be part of a terrifying, massive struggle of all against all.
Our God in nature then, at strife, that nature lends such evil dreams,
so careful of the type she seems, so careless of the single life,
that I, considering everywhere her secret meaning in her deeds,
and finding that of fifty seeds she often brings but one to bear,
I falter where I firmly trod, and, falling with my weight of cares
upon the great world's altar stairs that slope through darkness up to God,
I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope, and gather dust and chaff,
and call to what I feel is Lord of all, and faintly trust the larger hope.
In other words, the confident days of faith are going.
This terrifying vision of the natural world doesn't give the support and reassurance
that earlier generations of faith had done.
Now he says, I stretch lame hands of faith, it's getting out of our control.
Let me just finish by quoting from Huxley, Darwin's friend, who also admitted
that there's something very frightening about the theory.
The consciousness of this great truth weighs like a nightmare, I believe,
upon many of the best minds of these days.
They watch what they conceive to be the progress of materialism in such fear,
and powerless anger as a savage feels when, during an eclipse,
the great shadow creeps over the face of the sun.
The advancing tide of matter threatens to drown their souls.
They are alarmed, lest man's moral nature be debased by the increase of his wisdom.
That was the great fear, material and scientific improvement, and moral degradation.
