Lecture 32 – Later Victorian Literature
The late Victorian years witnessed an immense concentration of literary talent and a series
of controversies about the nature and morality of literature. Authors and critics debated
whether sexuality and the inner workings of marriages, unhappy marriages, should be depicted
in literature and made public on the stage. Hendrick Ibsen and Thomas Hardy each found
savage detractors and eager champions. The aesthetic movement of the 1890s, which
influenced both art and literature, sidestepped this dispute by denying that art had anything
to do with morality at all. But its best known practitioner, Oscar Wilde, found that in his
personal life, if not in his art, a lack of discretion could have very immediate and severe
effects. The British Empire at this period found its great literary champion, Rudyard
Kipling, in the 80s and 90s. And yet, when Lord Tennyson died and it came time to choose
a new poet laureate, a second-rate mediocrity, Alfred Orston, was the man chosen. Perhaps
most ironic is that the most durable literary figure of all from that time was a man who
started out as a penny-dreadful bit of entertainment, that is Sherlock Holmes, the creation of
Arthur Conan Doyle, who is probably the most famous literary creation of the 1880s and
90s. Well, some influential writers believe that more elements of human life ought to
be portrayed in fiction and drama than had been typical in the mid-Victorian period.
When Hendrik Ibsen, the Norwegian playwright, when his plays were first put on the London
stage, they generated intense controversy. For example, when Ghosts was first performed
in 1891, the Daily Telegraph called it, an open drain, a loathsome sore unbandaged, a
dirty act done publicly. Another magazine, Lloyds, said, morbid, unhealthy, unwholesome,
and disgusting story, a piece to bring the stage into disrepute and dishonor, and dishonor
with every right-thinking man and woman. On the other hand, its champions were incredibly
excited to see this kind of fascinating exploration of the reality of women's lives there on
stage. An early feminist called Edith Lees, the woman who later on married Havlock Ellis,
the English sexologist, wrote this, How well I remember after the first performance of
Ibsen's Doll's House in London, when a few of us collected outside the theatre breathless
with excitement. We were restive and impetuous and almost savage in our arguments. This was
either the end of the world or the beginning of a new world for women. I remember that
I was literally prostrate with excitement because of the new revelation, so it had an
electrifying effect. George Bernard Shaw, who was to become a very influential playwright
and literary critic, lectured about Ibsen to the Fabian Society, the moderate socialists,
in 1890. And here's a little bit of what he said. Ibsen's message to you is, if you
are a member of society, defy it. If you have a duty, violate it. If you have a sacred tie,
break it. If you have a religion, stand on it instead of crouching under it. If you have
bound yourself by a promise or an oath, cast them to the winds. If the lust of self-sacrifice
ceases you, wrestle with it, as with the devil. And Ibsen, in spite of all, you cannot resist
the temptation to be virtuous, go drown yourself before you have time to waste the lives of
all about you with the infections of that disease. Here at last is a call to arms that
has some hope in it. Well, I'm wonderfully paradoxical rendering there from Shaw. And
he went on to argue for a much more intellectual content in the theatre, was sure enough he
was to provide in the coming years. Probably the most famous novelist in Britain after
the death of Dickens in 1870 was Thomas Hardy. Hardy had been born back in 1840 in rural Dorset
in the south west. And apprenticed as a Dorsetshire builder. Later on, he became an
architect's assistant in London and participated in the restoration of old churches in the
neo-gothic style. He published his first novel in 1871 and made a great hit with Far from
the Madden Crowd, which was published in 1874. And Hardy was masterful at evoking a rural
England, which is undergoing great changes as the agricultural depression sets in in
the face of American competition. And as farming itself from being an ancient rural craft starts
to become mechanized, he charts these changes very cleverly. For example, in Far from the
Madden Crowd, the foreground plot is is accompanied by a sort of Greek chorus of the yokels, the
peasants in the background, and the regular scenes at the malt house, the old pub, where
these yokels who've lived their time out of mind, and their fathers, and their fathers all sit
around together. Nothing seems to be changing on the surface. And yet their conversations
always have a little edge to them as new developments are coming into the community. Let me
do a little passage from Tessa the Derbavilles and other of his great books, where he talks
about how a new steam-powered threshing machine is being used in the harvest for the first
time. By the engines to the dark, motionless being, a sooty and grimy embodiment of tallness
in a sort of trance, with a heap of coals by his side, it was the engine man. The isolation
of his mammoth and color lent him the appearance of a creature from Tofett who would strayed
into the pollucid smokelessness of this region of yellow grain and pale soil, with which
he had nothing in common to amaze and discompose its aborigines. What he looked, he felt. He
was in the agricultural world, but not of it. He served fire and smoke. These denizens
of fields served vegetation, weather, frost, and sun. So the two are coming together, the
steam-powered industrial world with all its smoke and the old farming world.
Part of these two novels, Tessa the Derbavilles, this one from 1891, and then even more, Jude
the Obscure from 1896, were as savagely criticized, or even more so, as the place of Ibsen had
been. Several publishers refused to refuse Tessa the Derbavilles altogether on the grounds
that it was immoral in its sympathetic depiction of what was called a fallen woman. And when
the graphic, one of the serializing magazines, finally accepted it for serialization, they
cut the plot so heavily that readers who read it in that form complained they simply couldn't
understand what was happening and what it was about Tessa, which made her objectionable.
Well critics were angered by his condemnation of marriage, which is portrayed very bleakly
indeed in Jude the Obscure, and for his excessive frankness about sex. The Palmal Gazette called
it a work of dirt, drivel and damnation. Incidentally, this criticism was equally severe on both sides
of the Atlantic. Here's a little snippet from the New York Bookman. Many scenes recall the
spectacle of some foul animal that snatches greedily at lumps of putrid awful. It was
a tough time in which to be a painter or an author, because you could expect very frank
criticism indeed. Hardy himself hated being criticized, and he himself never wrote book
reviews, even though he was constantly being asked. And he was so hurt by the criticism
of Jude the Obscure, which he wrote in his mid fifties, that he never again wrote any
more fiction. He brought his fiction career to an end. For the rest of his life, he lived
for about another 30 years, he wrote only poetry, a great loss. But at the same time,
now the thing about adverse reviews is that the more spectacularly bad they are, the more
they intrigue some people to see what the book's all about. And so you shouldn't get the impression
that Jude the Obscure sank without trace. Quite the opposite, it sold 20,000 copies
in three months. It was the equivalent of a New York Times bestseller. This in turn
shows the rapid expansion of the reading public. More and more people were buying books and
taking an interest in this kind of thing. In one of the very few essays that Hardy himself
ever wrote about literature, it's called Candor in English Fiction. He tried to justify
his new frankness about sex and he said, life being a physiological fact, its honest portrayal
must be largely concerned with, for one thing, the relation of the sexes. He said he regretted
that Britain had no magazines, quote, in which the position of man and woman in nature, the
position of belief in the minds of man and woman, things which everybody is thinking
but nobody is saying, might be taken up and treated frankly.
Well, the aesthetic movement, this was the movement, the movement whose catchphrase is
art for art's sake. They were eager to deny that the primary function of artistic productions
of all kinds, including literature, was a moral function. Walter Pater in England and
Taylor Field Gaultier in France influenced the movement with their own theorizing about
it. And Gaultier in France said, nothing is really beautiful unless it is useless. Everything
useful is ugly, for it expresses a need and the needs of men are ignoble and disgusting
like his poor weak nature. The most useful place in the house is the lavatory. That was
his view. Well, the most influential English literary exponent of the aesthetic movement
was Oscar Wilde. Oscar Wilde is a fascinating person. He was one of the first great celebrities
who was famous for being famous. He was already a famous person before he really had any literary
achievements at all. And he was a deliberate debunker of Victorian gravity and solemnity.
He was Irish, born in Dublin in 1854. He made a great success of his studies at Trinity
College Dublin and won a scholarship to go to Mordellin College, Oxford when he was there.
He got a first-class degree in the classics and won the Newdygate Prize for poetry. And
while he was at Oxford, he joined up with a lot of aristocratic young men who helped
him get an entree into London society. And he went into London society wearing the most
outrageous clothes he could possibly find, the sort of thing that everybody else would
wear at a costume party. He'd be wearing clothes that were already 90 years out of date. For
one period he dressed up as Prince Rupert, the man who'd been the commander of King Charles
I's cavalry forces in the English Civil War of the 1640s. He was famous for wearing knee-length
britches when they'd totally gone out of fashion and white silk stockings. In other words, he
looked very remarkable. He'd have an orchid. And he was madly high-spirited. Apparently he was one
of the most wonderful companions you could possibly imagine. Nearly everybody who met him
found him mesmeric, delightful to be with, very witty, high-spirited, good-natured, and just a
wonderful friend to have. And this kind of dandyism, and especially his great talking, made him
famous. So when he was only 26, he became thinly fictionalized in one of Gilbert and Sullivan's
operas, Patience, which came out in 1881. And he's the character called Bunthorn. Now the
Doiley Cart Opera Company, which produced Gilbert and Sullivan, went on tour to the United States.
And Doiley Cart himself said to Wilde, why don't you come along as well? You can give some lectures
on the afternoons of the evenings that we're going to perform the opera. And he said, oh yes,
that's a great idea. So he made this early lecture tour in his mid-twenties of the United States.
And very often the character Bunthorn would appear on stage. And the Wilde himself would come in,
dressed in exactly the same way as we have underlining to the theatre audience that it was meant to
be him. Well, he loved literary paradox. Listen to the preface to his book, The Picture of Dorian
Gray from 1890. Actually, the preface is really just a series of little aphorisms, but they're all
contradictory to the standard wisdom of the time. There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral
book. Books are well written or badly written. That is all. And no artist has ethical sympathies.
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style. You could hardly imagine a
more flagrant violation of the Dickensian idea about what literature was for. He wrote a super
little essay in 1889 called The Decay of Lying. And one of his characters, Vivian, talks about how
you can't find a good liar anymore. And it's no easy matter being a good liar. Here we are. Listen
to this. People have a careless way of talking about a born liar, just as they talk about a born
poet. But in both cases, they are wrong. Lying and poetry are arts. They require the most careful
study, the most disinterested devotion. As one knows the poet by his fine music,
so one can recognize the liar by his rich rhythmic utterance. And in neither case will the casual
inspiration of the moment suffice. Here, as elsewhere, practice must precede perfection.
Feel a very dead pan about how to practice to become a really accomplished liar.
Well, he became a significant literary figure in the early 90s with the production and performance
of a series of great plays. Lady Windermere's Fan, A Woman of No Importance, The Ideal Husband,
and then, above all, The Importance of Being Earnest, which came out in 1895, and ever since then,
has been regarded as one of the great comic masterpieces of English theatre. Well, I mean,
it would be very easy to just stand here and read the whole thing, but I can't do that. So just
let me give you a little couple of samples from it. The most ferocious figure in the play
is Lady Bracknell, whose daughter, Gwendolyn, Jack Worthing, wants to marry. And so there's
a conversation between Jack Worthing and Lady Bracknell to see whether he's really deserving
of Gwendolyn's hand in marriage. Lady Bracknell says, do you smoke? And Worthing says, well,
yes, I must admit, I do smoke. And she says, I'm glad to hear it. A man should always have an
occupation of some kind. There are far too many idle men in London, as it is. Then a little bit
later, Lady Bracknell says, I've always been of the opinion that a man who desires to get married
should know either everything or nothing. Which do you know? I know nothing, Lady Bracknell. I'm
pleased to hear it. I do not approve of anything that tampers with natural ignorance. Ignorance
is like a delicate, exotic fruit. Touch it and the bloom is gone. The whole theory of modern
education is radically unsound. Fortunately, in England at any rate, education produces no
effect whatsoever. And then a little bit later, he describes how he was an orphan, and he'd been
found in a shopping bag on one of the London Railway stations. And so, and Jack says to Lady
Bracknell, yes, I'm her lost both my parents. And she says, to lose one parent, Mr. Worthing,
may be regarded as a misfortune. To lose both looks like carelessness.
Who was your father? He was evidently a man of some wealth. Was he born in what the radical
papers called the purple of commerce? Or did he rise from the ranks of the aristocracy?
You know, another lovely reversal there of class positions.
Well, one of the reasons he was writing all these plays, this great burst of creativity,
was because you've got a very expensive boyfriend. He was a homosexual and his boyfriend was Lord
Alfred Douglas, whom he called Bozy. They met in 1890 and became very, very close friends.
Bozy was being blackmailed after a series of extremely indiscreet homosexual love affairs,
which it was strictly illegal at the time. And it was Bozy who introduced wild to the
London underworld of gay prostitutes. Now, Bozy's father, the Marquis of Queensbury,
knew what was going on and hated Oscar Wilde, bitterly, whom he regarded as perverting his son.
And so the Marquis sent a series of insulting letters to Wilde,
one of which accused him of being, quote, opposing sodomite.
Well, in reaction, Wilde sued him for criminal libel. This is in 1895, the year that the
importance of being earnest had come out. Wilde apparently didn't realize the seriousness
of a prosecution of this kind. The Marquis of Queensbury hired very, very high-powered legal
talent, a man called Edward Carson, who later wants to have a big British political career.
And Carson began collecting evidence from these teenage boy prostitutes to find that, in fact,
Queensbury's allegations could be substantiated. The trial hadn't been going on for many days
before Wilde's own counsel said to him, you must drop this case, because evidence is now
accumulating, which is going to lead to your conviction, not his. And sure enough, Wilde
was then arrested and charged with acts of gross indecency between males. That was the charge.
He's often been depicted by his sympathizers as a martyr. In a way, that's true, but in a way,
it's not, because the legal system was a little bit reluctant to hold a trial of this kind.
They notified him in advance that they were going to arrest him, and then they gave him some time
to escape to continental Europe. And there had been several previous cases where this had been
the pattern they followed. In other words, they didn't really want to arrest him and put him on
trial. But when he refused to move, eventually they went ahead and did it. His first trial,
ended in a hung jury. And again, there was a decent interval in which he was, in effect,
notified, if you want to go to Europe, you may do so. But he didn't. He stayed. And the second
time he was convicted and sentenced to two years in prison at hard labor. And went first to Pentonville,
one of these model prisons I mentioned earlier, and then to Reading Jail, where he wrote the poem,
The Ballad of Reading Jail. He came out of prison after two years and then spent the
remains of his life living in France, in exile, and died young in 1900.
Totally different in mood and manner and style was Rudyard Kipling, who's now remembered as the
great literary exponent of Britain's imperial mission. Kipling was born in 1865 in India and
was sent back by his parents to England to have a schooling, which he hated. He found it terribly
depressing and miserable. And was delighted to get back to India again at the age of 16,
where he started working for one of the English newspapers in India. When he was in his early
twenties, he published Plain Tales from the Hills, which very quickly made him a great literary hit
in both Britain and America. And like Lord Salisbury and like Cecil Rhodes and many of the
imperialists of his generation, he believed very strongly in what he called the white man's burden.
And in fact, that's the title of one of his poems. The idea that because we are the most
favored race in the world, and because God has given us this responsibility and duty to overcome
the earth, to conquer the earth, we must take seriously that it imposes a duty on us. It's
not a gift, it's a duty, the white man's burden to bring civilization to savage peoples. Here's a
little, a couple of verses from it. Take up the white man's burden. Send forth the best you breed.
Go bind your sons to exile, to serve your captives need, to wait in heavy harness on
fluttered folk and wild, your new court sullen peoples, half devil and half child.
Take up the white man's burden, the savage wars of peace, fill full the mouth of famine,
and bid the sickness cease. That's the idea that the colonial peoples are fluttered,
folk and wild, half devil and half child, and that the British and American imperial responsibility
is to provide them with a civilization which on their own they can't accomplish. In fact,
this poem was written in 1898, just after the American war against Spain had begun, and there
was a debate in America about whether to become a colonial power in the Philippines and in Cuba,
and Kipling was urging this branch of the Anglo-Saxons to do exactly that.
Kipling warned, however, that Britain must trust in God. It mustn't trust solely in its own technical
prowess. It must trust in God. Otherwise, this empire, like all the great empires of the past,
would soon be nothing. Another of his most famous poems is called Recessional, written in 1897.
And in fact, it appeared in the columns of the Times the day after Queen Victoria's Diamond
Jubilee, the day she celebrated 60 years on the throne of Britain. And it's called Recessional,
it's got a very sober mood. God of our fathers, known of old, Lord of our far-flung battle line,
beneath whose awful hand we hold dominion over palm and pine. Lord God of hosts, be with us yet,
lest we forget, lest we forget. Far called, our navies melt away on Dune and Headland,
sinks the fire. Low, all our pomp of yesterday is one with Nineveh and Tyre. Judge of the nations,
spare us yet, lest we forget, lest we forget. Acclaimed for its evocativeness, this idea the
empire itself can fade away if we lose our trust in the God who governs over all of it.
He was the first British writer to win the Nobel Prize for Literature,
which he got at the age of only 41 in 1907. Well, now, it's very odd and strange that
in the midst of this period, which was one of great literary creativity,
the poet laureate ship should go to such a minor figure. The post of poet laureate had once been
a relatively minor affair, but in the 19th century, two giants had occupied the position,
first Wordsworth and then Tennyson. And so when Tennyson died in 1892, there was a very great deal
of interest about who was going to take over the position next. Glanston was in office when
Tennyson died, but didn't appoint a successor. And when he retired, his successor, Rosebury,
also failed to do it. So when Lord Salisbury came back into office, it was up to him to decide who
would be the next poet laureate. Now, most of the best poets in Britain were unsuitable either
because of their political ideas or because of their religion or because of their known homosexuality,
where Algernon Swinburne is widely regarded as Britain's best poet by many people,
but he was known to be homosexual. He was more discreet about it than Oscar Wilde,
but it was a kind of open secret anyway. Oscar Wilde was deliberately provocative and iconoclastic.
Kipling was then only 27 and hadn't yet done most of his great work. William Morris was an
outspoken socialist. He'd have been a good choice, but he wanted to overthrow capitalism, so that
didn't seem quite right. Three other logical figures were Coventry Pat Moore and Francis Thompson,
but they were both Roman Catholics. And another of the most brilliant poets of the era,
Gerard Manley Hopkins, had not only converted to Roman Catholicism,
he then became a Jesuit priest as well. So he was out of the question. One after the next,
the candidate seemed wrong for some reason. So Lord Salisbury appointed Alfred Orston.
And when astonished contemporaries said, why on earth did you appoint him for? Salisbury said,
well, he seemed to want it. He was a minor Tory journalist. He'd founded a journal in 1883
called The National Review, and it was a dogged exponent of the Tory point of view on every
question. Very often he took it upon himself to say, here's what Lord Salisbury is thinking at the
moment. Here's why he's, he's acting in the right way. And he was friends with the Prime Minister,
and it was clearly a favor done back to him. He was five feet tall, much, much smaller than the
Prime Minister, absolutely confident that he was the right man for the job. And he had lobbied to
get it and completely humorless. There are lots of anecdotes about how Orston never got the joke,
especially if it was at his own expense. And he saw his own job as being to, to sort of churn
out patriotic verses in large quantities and to shore up the patriotism of the population
whenever they might be sliding backwards a little bit. He once said that his idea of heaven was to
sit in a pretty garden getting telegrams, which ultimately announced British army victories
and British navy victories. That's the perfect life for himself. Now his very first poem as
Poet Laureate was just comically bad. I talked last time about the Jameson Raid, this, this
abortive attempt to stimulate an uprising among the, the, the British ute landers in South Africa,
which, which failed. And you need to know for this, that the, the countryside of South Africa is
called the Velt. See if you can anticipate it when the rhyme gets there. Here's the poem he wrote
about the Jameson Raid, justifying it. Let lawyers and statesmen abble their pates over point of
law. If sound be our sword and saddle and gungear, who cares one straw? When men of our own blood
pray us to ride to their kinfolk's aid, not heaven itself shall stay us from the rescue they call
a raid. There are girls in the gold reefed city. There are mothers and children too. And they cry,
hurry up for pity. So what can a brave man do? If ever we win, they'll blame us. If we fail,
they will howl and hiss. But there's many a man lives famous for daring a wrong like this.
So we thwarted and galloped forward as hard as our beasts could pelt.
First eastwards, then trending northwards, right over the rolling velt and so on. It goes
thundering along all the way to the defeat of the Jameson Raid, which you regard as a terrible
thing. Well, Punch Magazine, after each new poem, wrote a hilarious parody of it. And because the,
because both he and Tennyson had had the same first name, they, they took to calling Tennyson
Alfred the Great and him Alfred the Little. Well, the, as the reading public got bigger,
as more people were able to read and wanted to read, more niches were established in the,
in the literary market. And it was in the late 80s that Conan Doyle created the Sherlock Holmes
phenomenon. He was Scottish and he was a struggling young doctor living first in, in Portsmouth on
the south coast and then moving up to London. But like many aspiring doctors, he didn't really
have enough patients. Very often he'd, he'd while away a day waiting for the patients to come and
they didn't. So in the meantime, he passed the time by writing fiction. And in the late 80s, in 1886,
he wrote the study in Scarlet, which is the first of the Sherlock Holmes books,
and he sold it outright to a publisher for 25 pounds. The Holmes character was based on one
of his Edinburgh medical professors, Dr. Joseph Bell. And Joseph Bell had specialized in simply
looking at somebody and being able to tell from how they appeared, what their job was,
and where they came from and where they'd been recently. And of course, you probably know,
Sherlock Holmes elevates that skill to preternatural heights. But for example, the very first time he
meets Dr. Watson, he says, ah, an army doctor who's just been in Afghanistan, I see, and Watson's
astonished at this incredibly accurate reading of his own character. Holmes represented the triumph
of scientific criminology, the idea that if you investigate minutely with your looking glass and
your little chemical experiments, you can get much further than the police do with their traditional
methods. The London police, by then, they'd already had a lot of failures to their credit,
failures to make the appropriate arrest, partly because the police mainly responded on knowing
who was doing what in the London underworld. And the idea of Holmes' detection, of course,
is that he goes underneath the obvious to look for little clues, which give him crucial information
about the actual culprits. So Lestrade is the regular policeman. He's never quite good enough,
and Holmes is the one who gets to the bottom of these matters. He studies the history of crime,
looking for parallels to each new one. One thing he says to Watson is, there's no such thing as
a new crime. They just go around again and again, look for the parallels, and you'll find the perpetrator.
He's supposed to have written a monograph on 140 types of tobacco, which you can recognize by scent
and chemical analysis. He's moody. He's a violin player, a cocaine addict who goes into big
depressions between cases, and then comes surging up again. Of course, Watson himself, the bumbling
but plucky sidekick, is a masterpiece, and much of the fun of the stories comes out of the conversations
between the two of them. This was just the period in which fingerprinting was being developed,
and Holmes himself is a great advocate of fingerprinting, which, of course, did become
a standard police method. Well, it wasn't long before Conan Doyle, well, first of all, he was
delighted by the success of Sherlock Holmes. The first series, he was given 35 pounds per story
once the phenomenon started to catch on, and The Strand Magazine offered him 50 pounds per story
when at first he was a bit reluctant to write another series. And at the end of the second
series, he killed off Holmes altogether. Do you remember? He's wrestling with Moriarty at the
edge of the right and back falls, and they both plunge into the river and are lost. Well,
his audience was horrified at the loss of their great hero, because you know what it's like when
you're reading a hero story, the hero doesn't die. That's the first principle. And finally,
he was offered such an enormous financial incentive, and American Magazine offered him
5,000 pounds per story. This is after he sold the original one outright, the novel for 25 pounds.
So with that kind of incentive, Holmes came back. He hadn't really died there in the river after all.
Altogether, he wrote four novels and five sets of these short stories. And in 1897,
a stage play based on The Holmes Adventures, and of course, it's become a staple of movies and TV
since then. Conan Doyle was very widely admired, and he did real sleuthing work of his own. People
with mysteries of various kinds would often consult him, saying, tell me, as the creator of
Sherlock Holmes, what do you think is really happening? And occasionally, he was able to
sort out mysteries. He also became an advocate for people who he thought had been wrongly condemned
either to prison or to death, and was able to achieve some reprieves for wrongly convicted men.
Well, so there we are. You see, it's strange and so typical, isn't it, that what at first looked
like an extremely ephemeral literature ended up having a great staying power right up to the
present, which none of its contemporaries, including the author himself, could possibly have foreseen.
