Lecture 34, Domestic Service
Domestic service was the single biggest employer of women throughout the 19th century.
In an age before labour saving devices, of which we have so many,
servants were necessary to middle and upper class families,
which wanted to be clean and well dressed and surrounded by luxuries,
the kinds of things their money could buy.
And to have servants was a very important mark of status,
so that even the members of the upper working class families,
the very first luxury they would get, if they could possibly afford it,
would be a girl, so-called a servant, to help them with the hard work of everyday life.
And there were a few families, again the aristocracy particularly,
which hired literally hundreds of servants.
But the vast majority of women who were servants in Victorian Britain
were in clusters of two or three, a small number in little households.
They worked very long hours, had low pay,
weren't supposed to have followers, that is boyfriends,
and were vulnerable to sexual exploitation by their employers.
But nevertheless, it was a way of life which did have some very distinct advantages.
Domestic service, it was the biggest employer,
and it was one of the relatively few employment options available to working class women.
As the century progressed, some of the forms of work that they had done earlier
were closed off to them.
Legislation made it increasingly difficult for women to work in the mines, for example,
because factory legislation limiting the number of hours they could work in the textile factories
made it less attractive as an employment option for the employers themselves.
But domestic service was always available as the great fallback position into which they could go.
As standards of social decorum for the upper classes increased in the later Victorian period,
the need for servants increased as well, as households became more elaborate,
as putting on a show in society cost more and required more elaborate stuff.
So did the number of people or family would have to hire to look after them
and to look after this way of life.
And the British Census of 1891 found that 1.3 million girls and women worked as domestic servants.
They were usually recruited between the ages of 10 and 13 after they'd been through some elementary schooling,
and many employers hoped at least that the servants they hired would at least have some elementary literacy and numeracy.
That was difficult to get in the 50s, but by the 80s and 90s with the spread of universal education,
it was becoming more a more realistic expectation.
If you went to work for a middle class family or upper class, you'd usually have to go and live in the house
where you were working.
If you were working for an upper working class family, it was more likely that you'd live at home
and simply migrate over every day to do the work.
But wherever you were a servant, the hours of labor were very, very long.
And the times when you'd have to work hardest were often the holidays where everybody else was having the day off,
because usually then, Christmas, for example, the family for which you worked would be having a big party or a big dinner,
and you'd have to work hard to get it all ready.
That's one of the reasons why Boxing Day, the day after Christmas,
is a day traditionally for giving presents to the servants, boxes to the servants, hence the name.
Well, Rose Ashton, she was a Lancashire girl who was a servant on a farm nearby,
and she described to a historian in the early 20th century who was collecting oral testimony from servants
what her work was like, and she described Christmas Day.
We had a nice Christmas dinner, and I washed up all the dishes,
and then she'd come out to me and said,
Have you finished, Rose?
I said, Yes, Madam.
She said, Well, there's a bowl of string there, and there's a big needle, and there's a heap of papers.
I wanted to go down to the paddock.
Now, the paddock was their toilet.
I had to sit there and tear those pieces of paper into pieces like you have on a toilet roll.
And then I used to thread them and hang them on the back of the toilet door.
Well, I think I shed a bucketful of tears.
That was my Christmas day.
It was hard doing this rather grim work on Christmas Day.
The pay was very low.
Because most servants lived in, their employer's attitude was,
Well, we're giving them what they'd used their money for.
Anyway, we're giving them a home and keeping them.
For example, in Brighton, one of the seaside towns,
a middle-class family's scullery maid would earn about 10 shillings a month in 1890.
That was the cost of one dinner at one of the Brighton hotels.
So, a big disparity, obviously, in incomes and their disposal.
The job had a lot of disadvantages.
First of all, if you're a servant, you're under constant scrutiny.
And yet, at the same time, you're subject to a very rigid form of apartheid.
You're living very close to the family, but you're constantly being reminded
that you're not a member of the family.
Most employers felt that they had a right to look through their servant's belongings,
that it was entirely appropriate for them to go through the servant's chest or drawers
and make sure they hadn't got anything which the employer objected to.
And it was suitable to deny them the right to decorate their rooms.
Books of advice to housekeepers, that is, to the middle-class wife,
are full of instructions about how you've got to keep a very, very close watch
on the servants to make sure that they're acting right.
It was legal to beat your servants until 1860 without any redress.
It was legal to order them to accompany you to church.
And when they got there, they'd sit at the back in a segregated section.
Advertisements for servants could specify that they must be Church of England
or that they must be Presbyterian.
And very often, columns of advertisements in the papers would say,
no Irish need apply.
As the Irish population in England rose, they weren't frowned on.
Servants were often told to make themselves as nearly silent and invisible
as they possibly could.
And it was quite common to have a certain name associated with a certain job.
In other words, the scullery maid is called Mary.
And so if you hire Gwyneth, you call her Mary anyway because she's the scullery maid.
So you couldn't even depend on maintaining your own name for the purposes of your working life.
We've got a great deal of historical evidence to show that young female servants,
many of them girls in their teens and early twenties,
are vulnerable to the sexual advances of men in the households where they worked.
So they're constantly having to rebuff these advances or to accept them.
There's certainly plenty of evidence that sometimes they accepted them
because the man at the house or his son would give the girl treats
if she'd go along with them.
And they often felt lonely, especially servants who were the only one in the household
or one of just two or three.
But of course, if you accepted your boss's advances,
there was the constant fear of pregnancy.
And there was intense fear also that the mistress of the household would find out
and blame you rather than the Philandering husband.
So a classic reason for being fired as a servant
was because you'd had sex with one of the men in the household.
I mentioned earlier on this book called My Secret Life,
the 11 volume series by the great sexual adventurer of Victorian England.
And he explains how he was initiated into sex as a teenage boy himself
by the servants in his family's middle-class home
and how most of them liked it, he says, anyway.
And later on, he says, quote,
I've now had many servants in my time
and know no better companions in amorous amusements.
They've rarely lost all modesty
and you love her as a treat and a fresh experience for them.
Well, later on, he himself gets married
but hates his wife and some of the bitterest passages
are the intense conflict between he and she.
And he describes the way in which he'll have an affair with one of the servants
but then his wife will hear about it
and he says, it was the mistress's custom
to coax the facts from the poor devils in a kind way
but then to kick them out mercilessly.
Middle-aged married women are always hard upon the young
in matters of copulation.
Well, if you were working as a servant
in a relatively constrained family,
in other words, a family which didn't have very much money to spare,
you couldn't even depend upon being given enough to eat
and there are plenty of stories about servants
who were constantly malnourished.
And the point to emphasize is that that was a lot of them.
It was very common for a family to be only just barely afford to
spend any surplus money at all
but what they would spend it on would be a servant
who would sometimes get the worst of everything.
If as a servant you became sick, you'd got no job security.
You could be turned out by the employer
and annoyed by the fact that you often weren't available to do the job.
And of course, if you lived in,
you tended to be remote from your own family and friends.
Often you'd be living in an alien class environment
and employers didn't want close contacts
between the servants and the servant's own family.
They certainly didn't want the servant's family trooping in
and they didn't really want the servant going off
to spend time with their family.
Many of them insisted on no followers.
That was the word for boyfriends, followers.
But of course, it's very difficult to prevent an entire category
of the population from having boyfriends,
especially the teenage girls, which is what this is mostly about.
So that encouraged deceit.
The girls had looked for ways to have at least some contact with boys
and that in turn would make the employer feel
that the servants were untrustworthy
and that would make them think,
you hear it so hard to get good servants.
In fact, it was very common for the girls to work in their teens
and early twenties and then leave to get married,
usually to someone of their own social class.
So it was relatively less common for women
to spend their whole working lives in service,
although a fair number did.
Now being a servant didn't have advantages as well.
We mustn't only emphasize the downside.
First of all, it gave you the chance to live in grand surroundings,
far, far better places to actually pass your working life
than you otherwise would ever have gone.
Every working-class person in London, for example,
was aware of the workhouse as the place you could go
if you fell destitute.
The constant hazards of falling into prostitution,
the enormous number of homeless people,
and the fact that even people who were housed
lived in conditions of chronic overcrowding.
50,000 London families lived in single rooms in 1890.
So if as a servant you had an attic
or you shared an attic with another servant,
it wouldn't look like much to us,
but it was a great thing.
If you had a good employer,
you could have at least a limited sense
of membership in the family.
Some families clearly were very good to the servants.
And in a way, the servants were in the same position
as the children.
This is the age when children were told
that you must be seen but not heard,
and the servants were in the same situation.
Excluded from the grown-ups' activities,
kept quiet, forced to be obedient and docile,
it's a parallel way of life.
And this is what it was about
written by people who grew up in the Victorian era,
saying how closely they associated with the servants
when they were children,
and how remote they felt from their own parents.
Winston Churchill's book My Early Life is a good example of that.
He had a nanny who he was very, very close to indeed,
but never had any kind of close relationship
with his parents whom he regarded as remote figures
who didn't have very much time for him.
Incidentally, this nanny must have been a fascinating person
because having first looked after him,
when he got old enough,
she went off to work for a different family,
the Ackley family,
and the boy she looked after then was Clement Ackley,
who became Prime Minister immediately after Churchill
in the late 1940s.
So she looked after two future Prime Ministers in succession.
Well, a historian called Frank Dawes
wrote Not in Front of the Servants.
This is an oral history book written in the mid-20th century
talking with women who by then were old
but who'd been servants as girls in Victorian households.
One of them said to him, a lady called Elsie Raum said,
I always respected my employers.
In fact, if I had despised them,
it would have been degrading to work for them.
At the risk of being called old-fashioned,
we all had our place and we knew it.
And as a result, the world seemed a happier place.
There we are, defensive of a hierarchical society
from somebody at the very bottom of it.
And that's how the things were supposed to be,
an attitude you'd quite often find.
If your employer had a good sense of responsibility,
you'd get the benefit of your employer's protection.
Listen to a speech that Prince Albert made
to an organization called
the Servants Provident and Benevolent Society.
Prince Albert says,
who would not feel the deepest interest
in the welfare of their domestic servants?
Whose heart would fail to sympathize with those
who minister to us in sickness?
Receive us upon our first appearance in this world
and even extend their cares to our mortal remains
who lie under our roof, form our household,
and are part of the family.
So clearly, at least with him, there is a sense
that you've got a responsibility towards the servants
and that you must take their welfare very seriously.
A servant who died in the 1880s named Elizabeth Gaye had this.
When she died, her employer looked after the funeral
and actually engraved a headstone.
And here's what the head engraved on the headstone.
In memory of Elizabeth Gaye,
who, after a service of 40 years,
finding her strength diminished
with unparalleled disinterestedness,
requested that her wages might be proportionately lessened.
Again, an incredible story really.
First of all, that the family should have
all these very long words engraved on the tombstone.
And second, that the one thing they should think worthy
of singling out to commemorate her entire life
was the fact that she'd asked for a pay cut
because she was aware that she was becoming a little bit unsteady.
Well, here's the point to emphasize.
We've got far less need of servants than they did
because we've got so many labor-saving devices.
All the things which make our lives convenient
were missing for them.
They didn't have electrical gas-fired stoves.
They didn't have vacuum cleaners.
They didn't have refrigerators.
They didn't have easy care fabrics.
They didn't have washing machines.
In fact, middle-class Americans today
have got hundreds of servants,
but in mechanical form,
we don't have to worry about the emotional lives of our washing machines.
There's no question there's a lot to be said for that.
So a lot of labor, of intense labor was necessary then,
which no longer has to be done.
There were some advantages.
For example, it was very common for the tradesmen to visit the family.
The baker and the butcher and the milkman
would all come to the family's door
and deliver goods which the family needed.
This was one of the ways in which the servant girls
would at least have some contact.
The butcher's boy would come around and he'd be 16
and he'd outflirt with the servant girl
who was 15 at the door for a little minute.
But of course, the food that they got
wasn't prepared in the way it is now.
Again, we can go to the supermarket
and get food which is ready to cook,
but they couldn't.
Here's a boy who worked on a big aristocratic estate
and he said that one of his jobs was to pluck the chickens.
Dead chickens were just delivered at the door.
His name is Arthur Lark.
I had to pluck a dozen or so pairs of poultry every week,
sent in from the home farm.
Chickens, ducks and game in season.
The chickens were usually alive with fleas
and so would I be by the time I had finished them.
The laundry work all had to be done by hand.
Very, very time-consuming
when there was no easy source of hot water
except by actually heating the water over a big stove,
where the irons were simply these primitive iron blocks
which you had to heat up on the stove.
The iron blocks were simply heated up on the stove
so that the chicken would be cooked
and the chicken would be cooked.
The iron blocks which you had to heat up on the stove
and so on.
And it required a lot of scrubbing
and then grinding them through the mangle
to get the water out and so on.
Again, jobs were spared.
One of the worst jobs
done by the lowliest of the servants
was the fires.
There was no central heating until the very end of the period
and then only in a few houses.
It was much more normal to have coal fires.
And the servants would have to get up
usually when it was still dark
and go and clean out the ashes from the grate
from the fires of the night before
and then black the grate
to make it shiny black.
Later fire, which usually required
rolls of newspaper
and then little sticks of wood and then coal
because the coal won't ignite straight from newspaper.
And then get the fires going
so that when the family got up
it was already nice and warm inside the house.
The British climate isn't very cold
but it's often pretty cool and gloomy
so in two-thirds of the year
they would have to have coal fires.
And this meant
that one of the jobs they were always doing
was lugging coal and ashes
up and down the stairs in the houses.
Normally
London Townhouse Design
and in the other cities too
was to have five or six floors
and the servants would live at the very top
and work in the basement, the kitchen
and would constantly be going up and down stairs
to take care of their employer's demands
in the meantime.
They would carry
tubs of hot water for baths
in the days before running water was very common.
The basement kitchen
usually had a flagged stone floor
which had to be scrubbed to be kept clean.
And again I mentioned earlier that every job
tended to have its characteristic
disfigurement or ailment.
Housemaid's knee obviously
is the name
for the health problem
which comes from spending a lot of time on your knees
on fire, scrubbing the floors and so on.
In these big houses
fire was a constant danger.
You'd have fires
burning sometimes in several rooms
a big fire down in the kitchen.
The light in the early Victorian period came mainly
from oil lamps or candles
and later on from gas jets
but everybody surrounded by naked flames
and the hazard of death from burning
was far, far higher than it is today.
Can you imagine
how anxiety
inducing it must have been to leave the house
when there were fires burning?
How frightening it must have been
thinking about the children getting their clothes
accidentally caught on fire.
And madly and practical, especially when the women
are wearing the big crinolines, so easy
just to catch your dress on fire
and then to go up in a flash of fire.
So the owners of big homes tried to make sure
that the home was never unoccupied.
There was always somebody there, one of the servants
on fire watch.
They had to do a lot of sweeping and a lot of cleaning
and a lot of polishing.
There was a Victorian mania for bric-a-brac
if you look at Victorian living rooms
they're full of stuff
and it all has to be polished and dusted
partly because the fires are generating
soot and smoke all the time
so the interior of the domestic rooms
is much dirtier than where you used to.
You'd have to dust regularly to get rid of all that.
They didn't even have things like
premixed compounds
for cleaning the brass and the silver
so the servants would have to work it
coming up with appropriate
mixtures of chemicals to brush the silver.
In a hundred ways, everything was laborious
which is now done economically.
Employers were encouraged
by the books of advice to test their
servants' honesty. One standard trick
would be for the lady of the household
to hide some coins under the carpet
to see whether the servant
in cleaning the carpet
was going to lift it and notice them.
If the coins had gone
that meant the servant had stolen them
but if the coins were still there
she hadn't cleaned thoroughly enough.
What she was supposed to do was find them
and take them to mistress and say
I found some coins here which you must take back.
Large households
had lots of servants
the aristocracy sometimes had incredible numbers.
Let me just read a list to you
of the servants
at Wellback Abbey. This was the home
of the Duke of Portland.
The kitchen staff consisted
of a steward, wine butler,
under butler, groom of chambers,
four royal footmen,
two stewards room footmen,
master of the servants' hall,
two page boys,
the head chef, the second chef,
the head baker, the second
baker, the head kitchen maid,
two under kitchen maids,
sundry vegetable maids
and scullery maids, the head still
room maid, the hall porter,
two hall boys, the kitchen
porters and six odd job men.
The Duke also employed
a head housekeeper, a valet,
a personal maid for the Duchess,
his daughter's personal maid,
the head nursery governess,
where am I, the tutor,
the French governess, the school room footmen
and 14 in-house maids.
There were six engineers
and four firemen to look after the steam
heating, a telephone clerk
and assistant, a telegrapher
and three-night watchman.
It's just the ones who are inside the house.
There's also a big staff in the stables
and 30 gardeners.
In other words, an enormous array
of people constantly living around
and looking after a family of just
six or seven people.
Now, the head servants
in an establishment like that
were themselves very important people.
The butler was usually the man who was the head
of all the male servants
and the housekeeper was in charge
of all the female servants.
There was a black silk dress
and the butler would wear morning dress,
a tailcoat.
If you've seen the film Remains of the Day,
obviously it's set in the 1930s,
but it gives you a little glimpse
of the kinds of people and the kinds of status
they enjoyed within the household.
Here's a quote to you now
from a butler's handbook written in the 19th century.
Like the footmen,
the butler has to perform
many duties in small families,
not generally considered as belonging
in his position in large establishments.
But in all establishments
it is his duty to rule
in large establishments more particularly
this exercise of judicious power
will be greatly required
for under-servants are never
even comfortable, much less happy
under lax management.
So in other words, for everyone's welfare
it's necessary to be tough, a disciplinarian.
In big establishments
there were slight variations
in the servant's dress.
The dress would denote their kind of work
or if they were dressed similarly
they'd have little badges of differentiation.
Among the highest of the female servants
were the ladies' maids
often there were people who had been
apprentice dressmakers or milliners earlier.
And the very lowest were the ones who did the fires
and washed the dishes
and washed the clothes, the scullery maids and so on.
Now at Wellbeck Abbey, which we know a lot about
the lower servants were forbidden
even to speak to the higher ones
who were not exactly addressed
except at the annual Christmas party
when the rules were off for a day.
This is the day after Christmas boxing day.
And the Duke of Portland took a great interest
in the good conduct of the servants
and would sometimes promote lower servants
to higher positions if they'd shown
that they were responsible.
So it's a highly hierarchical society
even below stairs, as it was called
in other words in the servants' quarters.
Now the rule about male servants
is they're trouble.
They're much less obedient.
They tend to be difficult.
They often leave suddenly.
They flirt with the female servants.
As far as possible you should have the women working inside
and the men in the stables and the gardens.
From the point of view, let's switch over now
and look at all this from the point of view of the employer.
From the middle and upper classes point of view
the servants were never good enough
and there's an endless literature of lamentation
about how bad the servants are.
If you were going to hire a new servant
you'd require that they'd come with
what was called a character, a letter of recommendation
from a previous employer
or from the school
out of which you'd been brought straight to service.
There was always the temptation though
that if you wanted to get rid of a bad servant
you'd give her a good recommendation
so that someone else would take her on.
So you couldn't always be confident about those letters.
If the girl had become pregnant
usually you'd throw her out and give her no character at all
and that was one of the classic ways
of falling into prostitution
when no other legitimate
work was available.
Dishonest servants
did have enormous opportunities
to steal from their employers
and again from the employer's point of view
you're in a difficult situation.
If you want to keep up appearances
you've got to have the servants
and you've got to entrust them with all your own belongings
in the hope that they won't steal from you
because if they do they can often get away with it.
And as I mentioned earlier
in talking about Victorian crime
it was quite common for criminal gangs
to deliberately plant one of their own servants
in the household if they could
or to try to suborn one of the servants
already working in a place,
a disgruntled housemaid
could give you a copy of the key
could let you in when he came to rob the house
and so on.
So there's necessarily a profoundly ambivalent
attitude on the part of the employers
about the servants. They're vital
and quite trustworthy. That was the belief
which is why when you did get a good servant
you'd hang on to her as long as you could
because they were so precious.
If you were dismissed
you could avenge yourself against your dismisser
by giving or selling information
about the household to potential
servants, to potential criminals.
And I mentioned earlier the nicknames
of all the different people in the underworld
and their specialities. One of them was a group
called Scrivers and a Scriver
was a person who'd write you a fake testimonial
letter as a servant to get a new job
and he'd been dishonorably discharged
from one place.
Obviously shrewd employers would try to
check up on the reference,
but it wasn't always easy to do so that
for example a Scriver would write you a letter of reference
saying that you'd been a governess for a family
in France or in a distant
part of the country where checking up was a little bit more
complicated.
A valet called Francis Courvoisier
murdered his master Lord William
Russell in 1840
and was hanged for it.
That sent a great shock of
horror through the whole of
the upper and middle classes. Everybody who hired
servants, certainly the possibility
that the servant might murder you.
Well, let me
read to you a little bit from the sermon
that was preached the day after the
Sunday after the hanging
by the Reverend George Clayton. He took
a text from Psalm 19.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous
sins. Very good choice under the
circumstances. And here's part
of the sermon. These words have been
selected with a view to the instruction
and improvement
of a numerous and interesting body of persons
in society, those whom divine
providence has placed in the condition of servants.
Not economic circumstance,
divine providence has placed them there.
Some are exemplary,
but there are those who are a grief and a disturbance
to the families where they live
and who are often the means of bringing both
grace upon themselves and dishonor among
their employers by their censurable
and unworthy conduct.
Another favorite Biblical passage was from
Ephesians 6, 5 to 6.
Servants be obedient to them that are
your masters according to the flesh.
With fear and trembling
in singleness of your heart
as unto Christ. Not with
eye service as men please us,
but as the servants of Christ
doing the will of God from the heart.
Philanthropists became interested
in the plight of particularly
sick and elderly servants
who were being put out of service.
The Metropolitan Association
for Befriending Young Servants
was a middle class women's group
which helped to place
orphan girls and girls who had been growing up
in the workhouse into households
and was to make domestic servants of them
which was regarded as a fairly
basic but decent way of life.
And it was called the Mabies Metropolitan Association
for Befriending Young Servants Mabies.
The girls themselves nicknamed it
Mind and Behaviourselves.
In other words, they didn't like
the censorious members
of the society coming to check on them
in the new houses where they worked.
And Mrs Townsend created
the Girls Friendly Society
and it was a social club
where the servant girls on their day off
could go somewhere decent
where they weren't exposed to the pubs
or to the hazards of seducers and so on.
And by 1885, it had 100,000 members
so it was a popular group
looking after servants' interests.
There's a famous example of a
middle class man who married his servant.
This was Arthur Munby.
He was a barrister and in fact
he wrote a book about servants' life
and illustrated it with good photographs
showing the various jobs that servants do.
Very unusual for a man in his status
to take an interest in what the servants were doing.
Well, he fell in love with his own housekeeper
and asked her to marry him
and she was shocked
because of the enormous disparity
of class positions.
He said to his father
when he was himself in his 30s
that he wanted to marry the servant
and the father was so horrified
that he made the son first of all promise
that he wouldn't and second promise
that he'd never mention it again.
So for about the next 18 years
Arthur lived up to his promise
finally his father died
and then he renewed his request
she agreed and they married in 1873
and lived together as husband and wife until 1910
but throughout that entire period
she carried on working as a servant
so when anybody came to the house
they didn't know that he was married
to the housekeeper and when he finally
died in 1910 it was a source of great
astonishment and sort of nationwide
sensation that Munby had been married
to the housekeeper.
Among the middle classes there was an endless lament.
Good servants are so hard
to find these days.
I'll just end by reading you
a lament from the Spear magazine
of 1890.
The present condition of friction
between mistress and maid
is one totally destructive of domestic peace.
Home is rapidly becoming the place
that one seeks only when it's impossible
to go elsewhere.
The servant who takes an interest in her work
seems no longer to exist
and in return for high wages
we get but superficial service.
There is the maid to be found who takes pride
in the brilliance of the glass used
upon the table or remembers
of her own initiative to darn the damask.
Every sort of contrivance
now lessens her labor.
Carpet sweepers, knife machines,
bathrooms, lifts
but in spite of these the life
of a housewife is one long
wrestle and failure to establish
order.
Good servants are so hard to find.
It remained a very common way of life
for most women right into the early 20th century
or increasingly as new avenues
of potential employment opened up.
Most women who had to go to work
would prefer to take one of those other avenues
rather than stay in service.
