A
good strategy is a process, dynamic, and emergent.
A bad strategy is a static plan, little more than a thoughtless checklist.
Throughout history, we see average thinkers enter the world of strategy making with a
flawed preconception of what constitutes great strategy.
They sometimes search for a secret strategy when the real secret is thinking strategically.
They search for a secret external to them when the secret is within them, perhaps.
Strategy is no simple schedule, it's no formula in a manual.
This perspective on strategy has informed the best military commanders of history and
it continues to inform the best leaders of today, wherever they compete.
So in this lecture, we'll learn strategic lessons from five of the best military commanders
and thinkers in history.
As we do, try to come up with ways that these lessons can be relevant in your own life and
work.
These lessons must be adapted to your own situation.
Remember, the person who merely follows a checklist will always lose to the rival who
knows when to abandon the checklist.
The ancient world learned this lesson painfully, again and again, only with the spilling of
much blood.
But the meaning and importance of strategy eventually became crystal clear, at least
to a few, and it's the hard-won clarity of the ancients that we should strive to acquire
as thoroughly as possible.
The first steps towards strategic thinking are the most precarious, so you may want to
pause the lectures in this course several times to think hard about your own professional
or personal challenges.
For this lecture in particular, learn from the challenges these thinkers met, then try
to apply the principles you learn in this lecture to improve your own strategic thinking.
So let's examine the origins of strategy in the ancient world, with a focus on a handful
of the most influential thinkers and practitioners.
Well, they aren't the only great strategic figures of ancient times, of course, but each
of the figures we consider represents a fundamental turning point in the development of strategic
thinking.
Just as important, although military affairs were the crucible for their insights, what
they have to offer can inform our own efforts at strategic thinking in many areas of life,
whether in business, as parents, or in the community.
Let's begin in ancient Greece in 5th century BC, an aristocrat by the name of Thucydides
fought in a great war between the Greek city-states of Athens and Sparta, which lasted 27 years,
from 431 to 404 BC.
Thucydides carried the rank of Stratigos, or general, and he penned the history of the
war until the year 411.
His masterful history of the Peloponnesian War offers insights about causes and effects.
It focuses on the behavior and motivations of the two sides, and it excludes references
to the acts of gods and goddesses.
It is, what might be called, scientific history, and it carries much of the character of a
modern historical account.
Nearly 2,500 years later, this ancient treatise serves as the starting point for the field
of international relations, the foundation for a school of thought called political realism,
and our earliest account of strategic thinking in action.
Thucydides wrote clearly, concisely.
In fact, his work exhibits a coolness in detachment, and it conveys skepticism about
concepts such as justice, especially in this short and famous passage from a dialogue between
the Athenian military and inhabitants on the Aegean island of Milos in this so-called
Mellian dialogue.
The Athenians forthrightly asserted their superior armed might as the only arbiter required
to exact Mellian cooperation.
Quote, you know as well as we do that right as the world goes is only in question between
equals and power, while the strong do what they can, and the weak suffer what they must.
In this one key passage, notions of fairness, of justice, of reason, even of intervention
by the gods, were swept away.
Ancient Greece in the time of Thucydides was a squabbling group of city-states that constantly
aligned and realigned themselves into different coalitions when they weren't uniting to battle
with enemies' external degrees.
Now in modern terms, these cities sought a balance of power so that no city-state could
grow strong enough to dominate its neighbors.
So here is our first lesson.
Thucydides wrote about power, and the Mellian dialogue presents us today with an archetype
for power politics or realpolitik.
In your own professional life, what's a situation where power remains paramount?
Is there a market or competitive field where overwhelming force or vicious competition
is not only the most effective strategy, but the only logical one?
How can you leverage your organization's advantages to score an overwhelming victory?
But here's something surprising.
Despite the fact that the generals of Athens were called Strategos, there wasn't a lot
of actual strategy in use.
In fact, you might take it as a rule of thumb that the longer a conflict drags on, as the
Peloponnesian War actually did, the more likely it is that one or both sides lack an effective
strategy.
So when we want to see strategy at work within the Peloponnesian War, we find ourselves looking
at an apparently insignificant battle that featured none of the leading generals from
either side.
This was the Battle of Delium in 424 B.C., where the Thebans defeated the Athenians.
Historian Victor Davis Hansen has said this.
What went on for about an hour or so in that nondescript plane changed the life of ancient
Greece and the nature of European civilization itself.
The consequences of this battle, according to Hansen, included a transformation of philosophy
Socrates fought in the battle, an artistic renaissance, and the creation in the west
of infantry tactics.
On the surface, this astonishingly important battle seems like every other ancient blood
letting.
During this time, the engagement of hoplite infantry was a standard and sanguinary affair.
Some soldiers wore heavy armor, some not.
Multiple hoplite phalanxes totaling thousands of armored soldiers would crash into each other.
They would slash with edged weapons until one side or the other would be literally pushed
off the field of battle, leaving thousands of dead and dying behind.
In such a melee, general's ship was hardly needed.
The Greeks prized personal courage, and the leaders of both sides joined their troops
in chaotic battle.
But this battle at Delium unfolded very differently.
We're not quite certain how or why, but an obscure Theban general by the name of Pagandus
exhibited a radically new mode of combat.
Pagandus was the Theban general who led his people to victory over the Athenians.
We know almost nothing about Pagandus, except that his brilliant moves at Delium meant a
tremendous breakthrough in the science of tactics.
He not only assembled his resources differently, positioned them differently, and maneuvered
them differently, he commanded them differently as well.
The stakes of this battle at Delium are obscure.
There was in fact no reason at all to have the battle in this particular place other
than the two sides elected to fight it.
No key features of the terrain that made this stretch of territory inherently valuable.
There was nothing urgent at stake.
The course of the battle was straightforward.
The Athenians marched out to the valley near Delium with 20,000 troops.
They turned back after their supporting troops failed to appear.
Rather than allow the Athenians to flee, General Pagandus urged the Thebans to pursue and close
with them.
In this move, Pagandus developed the principles of forward defense, later embraced by Vigetius,
and the principle of preemption, striking an enemy that poses a long-term threat, rather
than an immediate threat.
The battlefield itself was rippled with gentle slopes, able to conceal bodies of troops.
A ravine to the left and a ravine to the right marked the boundaries of the field, and channeled
the forces toward each other.
Pagandus and his Thebans defended a vigorous attack on their left while attacking on their
right.
This was standard as both sides traditionally posted their finest troops on the far right
flank.
The battle raged for an hour, and as the Athenians pressed their attack on the Theban left, they
sensed victory.
But then, a specter appeared, charging the Athenians from over the nearest hill.
It must have been a terrifying sight, fresh companies of Theban cavalry held in reserve
now attacked in concert with the infantry.
They must have been conjured from the air itself.
General Pagandus had ordered them forward at the moment of greatest peril.
This was unheard of.
This was extreme.
This was the first recorded use of deliberate reserves joining an attack, and integrated
with horse cavalry.
It was psychologically devastating to the Athenians, who panicked.
Their ranks shattered, and they fled.
Four incredible things had occurred at once.
First, General Pagandus had maintained a reserve force of cavalry, and he had maneuvered them
out of sight to his extreme left.
Second, at the moment of seeming Athenian triumph, he ordered his cavalry forward to
surprise, to disrupt, and to cut down the Athenian infantry.
Third, unlike his Greek counterpart, General Pagandus was not at the forefront of the fighting.
Instead, he monitored the situation and controlled his forces from a distance, much as a modern
general might do.
And fourth, he had deepened the ranks of his own right wing to give added weight to his
flank and ensure superiority at that point.
Pagandus was also responsible for other innovations.
He created a unit of shock troops with a select band of 300 called the charioteers and foot
soldiers.
This is the first use of what we call today an elite corps or special forces.
Delium also saw the first use of a flamethrower, which Theban forces used to scourge the remnants
of Athenian troops who had taken refuge after the battle in the precinct of Apollo at Delium.
And so the battle of Delium counts as the birthplace of a science of western tactics.
It is here, at Delium, that the abstract knowledge of how to manipulate forces on the battlefield
to overcome enemy numerical superiority, unfavorable terrain, or inadequate training
and weaponry began.
The old checklist approach had been replaced.
Just crashing and slashing into one another with all one's might had been replaced.
The arrival of tactics meant that forces could appear at special times, have special abilities,
use special formations, and place the commander in a special location.
So here we come to our second strategic lesson for today.
Surprise innovations can often turn the tide of an evenly matched struggle.
So here's your task.
Where are you stuck fighting a battle with traditional tactics?
Can you think of a completely new way to fight?
One that will catch your opponent or competitor off guard?
Just as General Pagandas outmaneuvered the Athenians through innovation?
Roughly contemporaneous with the internecine Greek wars of the 5th century and halfway
around the world, another civilization was spawning another influential contributor
to strategic thinking.
China offers us one of the most well known examples of strategic theory, the art of war
popularly attributed to Sun Tzu.
Some scholars have suggested the work might have several authors, or even that Sun Tzu
might be wholly mythical, but a majority of scholars now think that the author was an
actual historical figure, a military general named Sun Wu, who served under King Helu
of Wu in and around 512 BC.
This work was perhaps expanded by others in subsequent centuries, and it greatly influenced
military thinking in Asia and it impacted western military thought beginning in the
19th century.
Sun Tzu's brilliance lay not in providing a checklist of how to wage war or to compete
against one's enemies, but in his recognition of the fluid nature of reality and how any
practitioner of strategy must constantly adapt to that reality.
In fact, Sun Tzu enunciated his principles so that they can apply in several arenas,
from the battlefield, to public administration, to planning, to diplomacy and international
negotiation.
Key to Sun Tzu's thinking and the lesson of his work for our own strategic thinking
is his realization that all plans are temporary.
Sun Tzu knew that a plan can become obsolete as soon as it's crafted.
He said that the decision to position your forces in competition depends on two major
factors.
The decision must be based first on objective conditions in the physical environment, and
second, the subjective beliefs of your competitors in that environment.
Here, Sun Tzu originates a view shared by elite strategic theorists all the way to the
present that the most brilliant plans are those that spring into being in the dynamic
of action and response.
In hindsight, the plan can appear foreordained, however brilliant, but it is really the result
of decision and counter-decision in the heat of the moment by those trained to think strategically
and tactically.
This action-response dynamic infuses Sun Tzu's writings with power, and it confers on those
writings their relevance today.
Sun Tzu thought that strategy was not mere planning in the sense of working through an
established list.
Instead, strategy requires rapid responses to changing conditions based on sound judgment
and principles.
Sure, planning works in a controlled environment, but in a rapidly changing environment, competing
plans collide, and this collision creates unexpected situations.
It is our response to those unforeseen situations that mean the difference between victory and
defeat.
Sun Tzu's approach to the study of war elevated the activity to the realm of philosophy.
Digging a deep foundation for what, to some, might appear the work of the artisan, of the
craftsman.
For Sun Tzu, the activity of war was too pivotal in the lives of men to lead to the whim of
mere practitioners.
He said this,
Warfare is the greatest affair of state, the basis of life and death, the way, the Tao,
to survival or extinction.
It must be thoroughly pondered and analyzed.
Again, let's pause and think.
How can you apply Sun Tzu's lessons to your own life?
Where do you rely on an outdated plan?
Think like Sun Tzu, figure how and why your plans will arise and how that understanding
can help you correct course.
Hannibal Barker was a Carthaginian general who plagued the Roman Republic from the third
century into the second century B.C.
He fought the Romans to a great victory in 216 B.C., a victory that has forever stood
as the archetype for a crushing annihilation of an enemy.
Hannibal fought outnumbered in the enemy's homeland, and he still won.
He succeeded in this thanks to his different approach to battle.
In 216 B.C. at the Battle of Cannae, Hannibal triumphed over the numerically superior Romans
thanks to his revolutionary manipulation of the forces at his disposal.
This new approach to battle earned him the title Father of Strategy by one of his biographers,
Theodore Aralt Dodge, himself a courageous veteran of the American Civil War.
At the time, the standard tactics dictated that formations of soldiers would line up
abreast of each other in a phalanx, march forward, collide, and do battle with much
pushing and shoving.
It was thought that numerical superiority was the key to victory.
Hannibal was outnumbered badly, so he should have lost, but armed with fewer resources
than his Roman enemies, Hannibal configured his forces differently.
He didn't follow best practices of his day and line his soldiers up in the usual way.
Instead, he maneuvered and outmaneuvered and outsmarted his Roman enemy with a battle
plan that turned the Romans' own tactics and tendencies against them.
It was Hannibal's bold way of thinking that yielded his success in battle, not the following
of a checklist of the contemporary strategy.
Hannibal's forces were outnumbered.
Estimates vary.
Maybe 80,000 Romans versus 40,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry.
In the conventional military thinking of the day, this meant a Roman victory should be
inevitable.
Hannibal's forces were a motley collection of mercenaries from Africa, Spain, and Gaul,
and they were more poorly armed than their Roman counterparts.
But the Carthaginians had the advantage of superior strategy and tactics under superior
generalship.
Here are the ways that Hannibal upended the conventional thinking of his time.
Opposing Hannibal was the Roman army under two consuls, Paulus and Varro, and they rotated
command of the army each day.
Paulus was cautious, and Varro was impetuous.
This Jekyll and Hyde leadership arrangement meant discontinuity in execution.
In fact, Hannibal knew the hotheaded Varro was commanding on the day of the battle, and
he counted on Varro's fervor to lead the Roman army to its destruction in a series of blunders.
First, the Romans marched forward in a narrow and deep phalanx that matched the front of
Hannibal's smaller force.
The Romans could have easily extended their front to either side of the Carthaginians.
That maneuver alone might have saved them from eventual destruction, but they did not.
The Romans presented a narrow front, and this alone greatly negated the Roman numerical advantage.
Of what use are superior numbers if the vast majority of them cannot reach the enemy?
Second, Roman training dictated that they pursue a fleeing opponent, so when the Gauls and
the Spaniards to their front appeared to break and withdraw, the Romans pressed forward.
This left the African infantry to the Roman flanks, where they were most vulnerable.
Third, the Romans were taken unawares at a change in cavalry tactics.
Since Hannibal's cavalry had driven off the Roman cavalry, his horsemen did not pursue
the Romans as was customary.
Instead, the horsemen fell upon the rear of the masses of Roman infantry, which became
more tightly packed by the minute.
The envelopment of the Romans was complete, their destruction inevitable.
Hannibal achieved the greatest and most complete victory in the history of warfare by utilizing
not superior numbers and strength, but by superior strategy and extraordinary tactical
execution to envelop a superior foe and completely destroy it.
50,000 Roman soldiers died that day, not from lack of equipment, not from lack of numbers,
not from lack of courage.
They perished because of superior strategy and flawless execution.
And that is Hannibal's lesson for us.
When faced with superior competitors, you can use your knowledge of their habits and
their weaknesses to outsmart them.
Pause now.
Survey your own competitors.
Which ones have quirks or weaknesses that you know about?
How can you invert commonplace thinking and outmaneuver them when they're falsely feeling
most confident?
The most brilliant of strategic contributions are often those we take most for granted.
The world at large has largely forgotten the man called Vigetius, and this is because
his brilliance has become our commonplace.
Vigetius was a Roman administrator who lived in the late 4th century AD.
During a period of Roman decline, in fact, the empire disintegrated a year later.
At the request of emperor Valentinian, Vigetius prepared a treatise called Epitoma rei militaris,
or a summary of military matters.
With the Roman Empire in decline, emperor Valentinian wanted to know how his own ancient
Romans had organized their military matters so successfully.
The result was Vigetius' summary, which became the most popular military handbook for more
than 1,000 years after its publication.
It became, in fact, the military Bible of Europe until the Napoleonic era.
George Washington carried a copy with him and even made his own notations in the margins.
Open a copy and discover a list of seemingly pedestrian topics, the selection of recruits,
their training in arms, and the training in battle formations, organizational topics of
unit division, promotion and pay, auxiliary services, legion battle tactics, and the use
of fortifications and of naval power.
A layman might ask, how does this detailed and mundane prescription for the organization
of a Roman legion link to high concept strategy?
Where is the theory?
Where are the secrets of battle?
The keys to victory.
The key, as we shall see time and again, lies here, in our own minds, in our celebrations.
The triumvirate of strategy is intentions, capabilities, and resources.
The whole of Vigetius' work addresses how the military may develop its capability to
achieve the aims of strategy.
The dominant theme running throughout Vigetius' work is built around the development of superior
military capability prior to battle.
He hammers home the quartet of thorough training, strong discipline, hard work, and sound planning.
These are the elements of strategic preparation that form the heart of strategic capability.
Key among his directives was an emphasis on need for strategic reserves, and he was
quite specific as to their use.
Vigetius wrote this,
It is much better to have several bodies of reserves than to extend your front too much.
Reserves should be posted in rear of the wings and some near the center to be ready to fly
immediately to the assistance of any part of the line which is hard pressed, to prevent
its being pierced, and thereby to keep up the courage of the soldiers and to check the
impetuosity of the enemy.
Here in Vigetius we find echoes of General Pagandas centuries earlier at Delium who first
exercised the use of a reserve force to decisive effect.
Vigetius codified this notion and many others.
The work of Vigetius was too late to resuscitate the failing Roman Empire, but his prescriptions
guided military thought and organization for ten more centuries.
Few ideas are that durable.
You probably have strategic reserves in your own business conflicts.
Stop.
Write out all the areas where you feel that your own company has uncommonly strong reserves.
Where can you hold off deploying all your resources to lure your competitors into a
false sense of confidence?
How can you spring these resources on the competitor suddenly and with overwhelming
effect?
As in so many other areas, the Renaissance saw flowering of political theory and strategic
thought.
Niccolò Machiavelli is one of the most important political theorists in history.
He is a bridge from the ancient to the modern.
The world of Machiavelli, the time of the Renaissance which began in the Italian city
of Florence in the late 1300s.
Machiavelli was born in Florence in 1469 and he received an excellent humanist education.
He worked in several government positions as civil servant and diplomat and he grew
increasingly distressed by the inability of Italian city-states to resist the increasingly
bold incursions of France, Spain and the Holy Roman Empire.
In 1512 the government of Florence was overthrown by a Spanish army and Machiavelli was put
in jail, tortured and exiled to his farm outside of Florence in 1513.
It was there he began to reflect and to write.
His most famous work, The Prince, has cemented his place in history but we're equally concerned
with Machiavelli's lesser known work, The Art of War, published in 1521.
Prior to Machiavelli, much writing and instruction emphasized moralizing and divine guidance.
In The Prince, Machiavelli advocated a more coldly-reasoned line of behavior to maintain
a monarch in power, a ruthless pursuit of self-interest.
The Prince, in fact, was a manifesto of guidance that Machiavelli prepared for the Italian ruling
family of the Medici's.
In The Art of War, Machiavelli extended this amoral reasoning to the battlefield.
In the welter of political advice that Machiavelli crafts, he offers to us two key concepts
worth our consideration.
Virtue and Fortuna.
Virtue and Fortuna represent the internal and external elements of strategic thinking.
Let's look at each in turn.
Virtue is not, as we think of it today, virtue.
The notion of living life is a good and pious fellow, someone imbued with moral excellence,
far from it.
As was so much of the analytically rich writings of Machiavelli, virtue is a word freighted
with substance and nuance.
It incorporates many qualities in combination, flexibility, foresight, individuality and
ability, energy, political acumen, prowess, vital force.
Virtue is a skill you can develop, sharpen, just as you might practice the professions
of Weaver or Blacksmith or Taylor, each with its own vocational requirements.
Machiavelli says this, a ruler must be half lion and half fox.
A fox to discern the toils, a lion to drive off the wolves, merciful, faithful, humane,
religious, just, these he may be, and above all, should seem to be, nor should any word
escape his lips to give the lie to his professions.
He should, if possible, practice goodness, but under necessity, should know how to pursue
evil.
Coupled with Virtue is the notion of Fortuna.
Conventional thinkers of the time treated Fortuna as a mostly benign goddess, as the
source of human goods as well as evils.
In contrast, Machiavelli conceived fortune as a malevolent and uncompromising source
of human misery, affliction and disaster.
An unpredictable and destructive force, and Machiavelli therefore counseled that the good
general must beat and maul fortune into submission, so as to rule or be ruled.
Machiavelli believed that one should meet the external forces of Fortuna aggressively
when cultivates Virtue to overcome the destructive caprice of Fortuna.
Machiavelli put it this way, fortune is still a fickle jade, but at least the half-hour
will is free, and if we are bold, we may master her yet.
Machiavelli's metaphors lack our enlightened view of gender, but following his advice is
not about being evil.
Instead, this is what we today would call a bias toward action.
It's a call for boldness, decisiveness.
The impetuous and active ruler is rewarded.
In the Art of War, Virtue describes the strategic prowess of the general who adapts to different
battlefield conditions as the situation dictates.
Quote,
In a word, he must realize and face his own position in the facts of mankind and of the
world.
This is what Virtue provides.
The ability to respond to fortune at any time and in any way that is necessary.
This joining of actor with the environment is an early formulation of the concept of
emergent strategy.
Since we cannot predict what Fortuna will hand to us, we must focus and develop the internal
qualities and capabilities that enable us to meet those uncertainties in the best manner
possible.
So this is your last challenge for today.
Ask yourself, do I have Virtue?
Have I developed the flexibility, the foresight and energy to outwit even unpredictable fortune?
This isn't an easy question to answer honestly.
Think back to an unexpected situation that overwhelmed you in the past.
Have you learned from it?
And if not, how can you?
The ancients of strategy provide us not only enjoyable tales of long ago battles, but of
actual modes of thinking and practical guidance that we can use right now.
First, start with tactics.
Any area, no matter how dominated by thoughtless effort, can be transformed by the application
of tactics.
Try to have special forces used at special times in special ways.
Second, plans must change.
Learn to recognize the fluid nature of reality and how any strategy must constantly adapt
to that reality.
The most brilliant plans are those that spring into being in the action response dynamic of
the moment.
Third, prepare, prepare, prepare.
Strategic preparation is the heart of strategic capability and this has been true ever since
the Roman Empire.
Whether you're running a household or a billion dollar business, training, strong discipline,
hard work and sound planning are the foundation of strategic reserves, which are necessary
for many kinds of strategic maneuver.
If you have no reserves, you have no strategy.
Fourth, know your opponents.
You can gain astonishing leverage if you know the preparations and capabilities of your
opponents.
A combination of surprise and superb tactical execution can allow you to defeat an opponent
with twice your strength.
Fifth, boldness.
You can seize your fortune.
The greatest challenge in strategic thinking is getting started.
The long and ory tradition of strategic thought is already struggled with the issues we face
every day.
That's why it's a natural gateway to strategic thinking in our own lives.
We can learn from ancient strategic ideas, but even more important is to learn from their
example to have strategic ideas of our own.
