Every firm, every organization must have a core, a sense of mission.
This is different from strategic intent, which we talked about in our last lecture.
Mission and organization that lacks strategic intent must have a reason for its existence.
What we talked about last time is where you want to go, your vision.
This time we're starting with the core of who you are and how that core sense of mission
can also inspire and inform the entire process of strategic planning.
Google for example says its mission is organize the world's information and make it universally
accessible and useful.
To identify a core mission, it's not enough to point to a process or to the firm's activities
as the reason for its existence.
That's tautological.
That's like saying we deliver a speech for the purpose of being heard or jogging for
the purpose of saying that we ran.
No, each of us must have a core mission in this life for strategic thinking to make any
sense at all.
Likewise for firms or sports teams or for armies to have a meaningful and effective
strategy.
For that strategy to have any purpose at all, they must have one or more core ideas or values.
Better yet, a founding myth that encapsulates that core and fires the imagination.
From that core mission, we can then talk about planning to achieve specific objectives.
Planning as a management tool for business began in the 1920s at Harvard and it blossomed
after World War II into strategic planning.
But planning has been an integral part of military operations for hundreds of years.
For an example, let's go to Mexico in 1863 and at that time most eyes were on the east
coast of the United States.
There a titanic struggle between two great armies was playing out in the American Civil
War at a place called Gettysburg.
But here, along a dusty Mexican road between Veracruz and Palo Verde, few people in the
world knew or cared what was happening, even as a legend was being born that would carry
half a world away and inspire subsequent generations of warriors.
Mexico was ruled by the French under an appointed emperor, Maximilian.
The French were fighting Mexican nationalists under Benito Juarez.
On the morning of April 30, a column of French foreign legionnaires went on patrol to guard
a convoy of gold and munitions traveling to the town of Puebla.
The column consisted only of 62 soldiers and three officers.
It was commanded by Captain Jean D'Anjou.
This band of soldiers was attacked suddenly at 7 a.m. by a superior force of Mexican infantry
and cavalry.
The legionnaires fell back under the Mexican onslaught to a little walled hacienda called
Cameroon.
More Mexican cavalry arrived and their ranks swelled to 2,000 men at arms.
They outnumbered the French 30 to 1.
As the casualties mounted, the French retreated to a farmhouse and they fought room by room
as ammunition dwindled and they fought with bayonets and minute by minute unknowingly
with their bravery they began constructing a legend, a powerful, larger-than-life myth
that would serve as the unshakable core of their organization for more than a century.
When only three legionnaires were left standing, the Mexican soldiers swarmed over them, ready
to club the three of them to death, but the Mexican commander, Colonel Milan, stopped the
battle and with tears streaming down his face pleaded with the remaining French to surrender.
And the three remaining Frenchmen agreed, if they could tend to their wounded and to
their fallen commander and to receive safe passage home.
Colonel Milan's response reflects the respect that men at arms have for each other in the
almost mystical bond of shared near-death experience for men who fight from sense of
honor.
Colonel Milan spoke these words.
What can I refuse to such men?
No.
These are not men, they're devils.
This became the founding legend of the French foreign legion, forged in battle and seared
into the consciousness of all who joined the legion étrangère.
Once perceived as a band of brigands, ruffians and criminals in hiding at its founding in
1831, the legion was suddenly transformed.
Its real beginning came at Cameroon.
Its values and missions spring from this beginning and are reflected in its motto,
honor et fidélité, and its code of honor which every legionnaire must memorize.
Legionnaire, you are a volunteer serving France with honor and fidelity.
Each legionnaire is your brother in arms, whatever his nationality, his race or his religion
might be.
You show him the same close solidarity that links the members of the same family.
Respectful of traditions, devoted to your leaders, discipline and comradeship or your
strengths, courage and loyalty or your virtues.
The mission is sacred.
You carry it out until the end and it's necessary in the field at the risk of your life.
The French foreign legion became a sacred warrior band bound by honor and fidelity.
Now that is a founding myth and every company, every firm, every organization ought to have
a founding myth that exemplifies its code or its mission.
Perhaps not one as extreme as that of a warrior band, but one that's substantial, inspiring
and captures the spirit of the organization, one that breathes life into the dream.
Think of Apple Computer's founding myth of two guys in a California garage starting the
computer revolution in 1975, where Henry Ford's can do attitude and his drive to make
a car for the common man early in the 20th century.
The myth should inform the company mission statement, a founding myth should inform your
personal mission statement as well.
It's from this statement that your strategy grows, the mission statement anchors your
strategy and it serves as the basis for your strategic intent.
The mission statement is bold and lofty and inspiring.
For example, here's the declared mission of Coca-Cola, to refresh the world, to inspire
moments of optimism and happiness, to create value and make a difference.
But mission statements can be mundane, uninspiring, routine, forgotten.
When a company becomes lodged in its routine, its heritage is lost, its environment sterile,
devoid of emotional power.
Look hard at the mission statement before you think more about strategy.
If the statement is laden with jargon, if it's dull, if it talks about increasing shareholder
wealth, if it talks in vague terms about market leadership, if you can't even tell what the
company does by reading the statement, well, there's a tremendous problem right there.
The founding myth and the mission is the wellspring from which planning emerges.
It sets the direction and the tone for the objectives.
One of the great strategist academics of the past 20 years is the iconoclast Henry Menzberg
at Canada's McGill University.
Menzberg has a healthy skepticism about the ways of strategic planning and the ways it
can go wrong.
And he has a special place in his heart for the elegant, the different, and exciting strategy,
a strategy that doesn't bore.
Menzberg once said that thinking about strategy shouldn't make you reach for the snooze button,
but in the world of strategy, everybody's become so serious.
If that gets us better strategy, it's fine, but it doesn't.
We get worse ones, predictable, generic, uninspiring, and dull.
Strategy has to inspire.
So an uninspiring strategy is really no strategy at all.
The most interesting and most successful companies are not boring.
They have novel, creative, inspiring, sometimes even playful strategies.
By taking the whole business strategy less seriously, they end up with more serious results.
And they have some fun in the bargain.
Now, here's an example of an inspiring mission statement.
The product is coffee, and the company is equal exchange.
Based in Massachusetts, this little company charted a unique course in marketing in 1986.
They sell a variety of products, but their core business is coffee.
The essence of their vision and mission is fairness to farmers, a closer connection between
people and the farmers we all rely on.
They didn't just want to sell coffee, they wanted to change the world with how they sold
coffee and they wanted to do it in a way, an inspiring way, with mission in hand.
They took the next step and laid out a series of achievable objectives.
Help farmers and their families gain more control over their economic futures.
Provide high quality foods to nourish the body and the soul.
Put company control in the hands of the people who did the actual work.
Encourage a community of people who believe that honesty, respect, and mutual benefit
are integral to worthwhile endeavor.
This is a brilliant exposition of mission and the establishment of objectives.
All of Equal Exchange's marketing carries its message.
Look at a package of Equal Exchange coffee.
Everything about it speaks to the company's mission, whole being, organic, mind, body,
and soul.
Now this is mission focus at its best, a superb example of defining a mission that supports
strategic planning.
Now we can begin to locate the beginning of strategic planning in the military, the marshalling
of resources, the training of soldiers, the arming of soldiers, their maneuver on the
battlefield.
All of this requires forethought and planning.
Prior to the Napoleonic Era, planning was the province of the general or the monarch
with advice from his trusted confidants.
The development of military staff planning saw its beginnings in Prussia during the Napoleonic
Era.
This was the beginning of the most famous military planning staff, the Prussian General
Staff, which came into being in 1807 at the order of King Frederick Wilhelm III.
This became a full-time body guiding the Prussian army, and it was established by law in 1814.
This was the first general staff in history.
Now it was at this juncture in history, it was recognized that preparatory staff work
was just as essential to wartime operations as was battlefield leadership.
The idea of formal planning made its way slowly into the business realm after World War I,
and there were early efforts in the 1920s at Harvard University with what was called
the Harvard Policy Model.
This was a planning method that was more of a general call to action than an actual methodology.
Although it amounted to a little more than a general at-a-boy approach, it did lay important
groundwork, and it charted a direction in thinking that would be joined later with military
methods of planning in the post-World War II era.
Harvard Motor Company was in financial trouble after World War II, and was in administrative
chaos.
The head of the company was Henry Ford, Henry Ford II, and he knew something new and radical
was needed to change the fortunes of the company.
His company had been producing vehicles for the military throughout World War II, so he
looked to the military.
Ford thought quite reasonably that if the United States Army could conduct a successful
invasion of Normandy, race across France and defeat Hitler's Germany, defeat Imperial
Japan with all of the titanic logistical operations involved in fielding an army of 12 million
men, well surely there was something in military methods that could help Ford Motor Company
overcome its management problems.
Ford looked to the U.S. Army Air Force Office of Statistical Control.
He hired 10 former wartime officers who became known as the Whiz Kids.
They brought with them advanced planning, organization, and management control systems,
and they imposed fiscal and process discipline.
The man who emerged as the leader of the Whiz Kids was Robert McNamara, and he was quickly
tapped as a future leader of Ford.
He started as manager of planning and financial analysis, and he advanced through a series
of top-level management positions, and by 1955, McNamara was the general manager of
Ford Division.
These managerial methods stopped the company's losses and brought order to Ford's administrative
chaos over the next 15 years.
And perhaps wittingly, the Whiz Kids charted the course of American strategic business
thought for the next 20 years, let's call it the rise of strategic planning.
But American corporations began to base their strategic plans primarily on financial data,
collating the financial figures from the previous year, preparing their spreadsheets, making
forecasts based on those figures, and then setting the budget.
Planning had become little more than a budgeting exercise conducted once a year, all with the
illusion of precision.
The planners began moving farther and farther from the mission of the company, and they
focused on budget numbers as a substitute for engagement with reality.
But the problems with planning at this point were really hidden.
They were hidden by the dominance of American productive might.
In the post-war world, America had few competitors.
American industrial supremacy served to hide whatever defects planning had on into the
1960s.
Now, flush with success at Ford, the Whiz Kids went to Washington at the beginning of
the 1960s.
Robert McNamara joined the presidential administration of John F. Kennedy, a secretary of defense.
He determined that strategic planning would be elevated to the highest organizational
levels of government, and he created a high priesthood of planners who reported directly
to him, Daniel Ellsberg, Alain Enthoven, Charles Hitch, and Adam Jarmalinsky.
McNamara's model of strategic planning has been applied to many other public sector organizations
over the years, and it does seem to have a kind of internal logic to it.
It appears to work, though only if you exclude many crucial variables.
Now, through the 1960s, the gospel of strategic planning spread and became embedded in the
American corporation as a standard management tool in virtually every Fortune 500 company
and many smaller companies as well.
Now, firms would create complex and meticulously wrought plans based on elaborate forecasts
of company performance in the economy and in specific markets.
Early strategic planning ignored more than it encompassed.
It yielded distorted results.
In the decade of U.S. industrial dominance, it didn't matter as much, but as the 1970s
dawned and complexity imposed itself, the challenge of the Japanese and the power of
the Arab oil states revealed the poverty of the current planning model.
Among other things, it ignored human irrationality and decision making and the actions of other
players in the great games of politics and commerce.
President McNamara in later years recognized the flaws in his early form of planning and
that even the best plan, the most securely rooted in data and rational calculation, may
prove useless in the face of the inevitable irrationality of human behavior and the unpredictability
of the external environment.
If we recognize the pitfalls in early strategic planning, perhaps we can correct and build
a better model.
Henry Minnsburg identifies three fallacies that have worked against planning since this
inception.
First, the fallacy of predetermination.
We believe that we can know the future and this leads us to the predict and prepare line
of thought.
But, of course, we can't predict the future and, basing our plans on this single line
of thought, it can be disastrous.
Second, is the fallacy of detachment.
This refers to the tendency of planners to remove themselves from the scene of the action.
This is strategic formulation detached from its implementation.
Third, is the fallacy of formalization.
This is the ossification of strategy in a binder mentality.
The strategic plan is in a binder and we put it on the shelf and there it stays.
It begins detached from reality and as the days and weeks go on, it becomes even more
even less of a representation of what the company actually does.
The more elaborate the plans, the more elaborate their failures.
So, this leads to an obvious question.
If strategic planning has such an ignominious track record and seems fruitless in hindsight,
then why do we speak of it except as an unfortunate historical hiccup?
Just this.
Beginning in the late 1970s, the best business thinkers began to actually, well, they began
to think about strategy and how they actually made decisions and they began to connect
this process of thinking to the real world where the strategy is played out.
Marking this new thinking was the publication of a powerful article in 1978 by McKinsey
and Company, the global management consulting firm.
McKinsey article was called The Evolution of Strategic Management and it traced the
evolution of effectiveness of strategic decision making.
McKinsey identified the phases of ineffective planning that had plagued American industry
and left it vulnerable to new challenges.
This article called for changes in the way we think and the way we conceive of planning.
Let's look quickly at these phases so that we can understand how we reached our present
point.
The first phase was the 1950s whiz kid phase, the financial planning phase.
Now this viewed planning is almost a purely financial problem and was conducted as an
annual budgeting exercise.
We've seen how this is inadequate and yet this focus lingers on in some businesses because
it's easy.
Now the second phase was forecast based planning which recognized that deeper thinking is necessary
about resource allocation and the development of key issues.
The third phase was externally oriented planning.
This kind of planning was even better because it looked outward to how the firm interacts
with the external environment of competitors and other businesses.
The final and highest phase was strategic management itself and here we aim to weld
strategic planning and management into a single process in pursuit of that lodestone,
the linking of strategy conception with execution.
This means diffusing the ability to think strategically throughout the entire organization,
a worthy goal.
But this of course is easier said than done.
This is rarely accomplished because of natural inertia, the distribution of power and the
unity of effort that's needed.
So this brings us to the state of strategic planning today.
For our purposes, the strategic planning process offers incredible benefits if we pursue it
correctly and here I offer a six step strategic planning process, six steps to the crafting
of competent strategy.
Here we learn the steps in constructing a competent basic strategy.
How to develop a strategy in building block form.
Now this strategic planning process is one version of planning.
It's not the only process.
Every competent firm has its own version of this process.
It may be five steps, it may be seven steps, but these are the main steps.
Two of them we've covered in this lecture.
The remainder we'll be covering in later lectures.
These are the mission, the objective, the situation analysis, strategy formulation,
strategy implementation and control.
First your mission.
I began this lecture with a dramatic call to action.
Your mission is your core that guides you to find your mission now.
Can you do it in a few short sentences or even one sentence?
You'd be surprised how many people take this for granted in both their personal and in
their professional lives.
Entire companies can take this for granted.
Never looking to their mission to guide them in the setting of objectives.
The second step is the setting of objectives.
You choose these based on some notion of wanting to fulfill your mission.
They should be clear, concise, achievable and in some sense they should be measurable.
You want to see progress towards your mission.
You can measure your progress and the effectiveness of your strategy.
Number of meals served, number of satisfied clients, average test scores increasing, market
share targets are met, revenues are increasing, the hill is taken from the enemy, you complete
med school, you complete your first tour in the Peace Corps.
Now the third step is pivotal for most firms and it is the most involved.
This is the environmental scan.
We look at the environment in which our firm functions, both the external environment and
the internal environment.
On a personal level we evaluate the external factors that impinge on us with respect to
our objectives.
We devote several upcoming lectures to the scanning of our environment, what to look
for and how to look for it.
It's common sense that we should develop knowledge about our own capabilities and resources
and then evaluate them against the outside environment to see if we can actually do what
we intend to do.
But as we saw in our discussion of strategic planning's history, common sense isn't all
that common.
Now the fourth step is the actual formulation of our strategy.
We decide what we will actually do to get from where we are to where we want to be.
We decide the when, where and how much of our plan.
We allocate resources and we connect our management decisions with the folks who actually implement
the plan.
The fifth step is implementation of our strategy and here is where many companies fail in their
strategic efforts.
The military has a dictum for its officers when directing the soldiers, supervise and
refine.
This means not to simply issue orders and then assume they'll be carried out as issued.
This shows us that too many dissonant factors can disrupt even the best of plans.
The variables can wreak havoc on our work.
We must constantly supervise and refine during the implementation phase and this leads us
to the final step of the strategic planning process.
Control.
Control is just what it sounds like.
We develop a control mechanism to evaluate if our plan is actually working.
Is our plan getting the results we want?
If not, why not?
We're already familiar with control mechanisms.
They're all around us.
In university classes, the control mechanism is regular examinations to verify that both
learning and teaching strategies are working.
In manufacturing, the quality control department is the method of control and evaluation and
this helps the firm discover systemic deficiencies.
The Japanese concept of kaizen or continuous improvement is a form of control.
Now, when our control or monitoring system tells us that something is amiss in our strategy,
we can then circle back to our environmental scan to discover if the relevant environmental
factors have changed.
As we think about our own strategic planning process, we should remember to remain rooted
in our purpose, our mission, and we should remember what constitutes a good strategy.
We don't want to do things just like everyone else.
We don't want to be yet another me too offering in the marketplace, undifferentiated in any
meaningful way.
We are not filling out a checklist.
We want to remember our definition of strategy from Michael Porter.
It means doing things differently.
This is one of the most incredibly useful takeaways that the world of strategy can offer us and
it comes from his powerful 1996 article in Harvard Business Review.
What is strategy?
What does it take to be different?
Creating different products or producing old products in unique ways.
It means taking resources largely available to everyone and then assembling them in a
way that yields competitive advantage.
It also takes time.
In Michael Porter's view, the proper timeframe for strategic planning may very well be a decade
or more.
Maybe that seems impossible.
Maybe for your organization, looking five years ahead is all you can do.
The point is that the timeframe of a single budget or planning cycle is typically not
enough for a strategy to be successful.
Remember the plan recommended to President Kennedy for beating the Russians in space?
Beating the Russians took literally a decade.
Planning far in advance has other advantages as well.
As Porter noted, a long-range plan fosters improvements in individual activities and
the fit across activities and allows an organization to build unique capabilities and skills tailored
to its strategy.
As we enter into the strategic planning process, this idea of seeking competitive advantage
by doing things differently should inform us every step of the way.
Strategic planning has its inherits, adherents, and its detractors.
It takes time, and it can take too much time, especially if the plan is never executed.
Used mindlessly, the process can ignore far more than it reveals, perhaps nothing more
than an annual budget exercise.
Like any process, strategic planning is not perfect.
But if we recognize its strengths and stay cognizant of its weaknesses, we can make use
of the technique for our own benefit.
What we have discussed in this lecture is an overview of strategic planning, plus with
specific attention to the core mission.
We'll cover the other steps of strategic planning in later lectures, but for now, be aware that
anyone can develop a competent and effective strategy with this basic strategic planning
process, whether for business or for the accomplishment of personal goals, if there is a core sense
of mission.
Near the beginning of this lecture, I presented to you the example of the French foreign legion
as an organization with a superb sense of self and mission derived from a conflict on
a dusty battlefield 150 years ago.
What are the foreign legion today?
Each year, the French foreign legion publicly reiterates its mission and links its current
legionnaires to its founding traditions.
Every April 30th at its headquarters in Abagné near Marseille, La Ligeon étrangère celebrates
the Feast of Cameroon in a solemn ceremony that commemorates the founding legend of
the legion.
It serves as a major source of its operational effectiveness, its ability to disseminate its
strategy to all levels of the organization, and a splendid example of how to link those
who make the strategy with those who execute it.
