Copperfield's books was founded in 1981 in Northern California and at first it seemed
to be doing everything right.
Copperfield's was doing what an independent bookstore ought to be doing, popular, profitable
and growing.
It enjoyed 13 straight years of growth, in fact.
There seemed to be no reason to change the winning formula.
From the perspective of the internal workings of Copperfield, everything functioned smoothly
and well.
But in the outside environment, consisting of competitors and customers and market forces,
the world was changing rapidly and radically.
In 1995, stagnation set in and Copperfield books saw its profits begin to decline.
It was forced to close stores.
It still offered the same product and the same superb venues, but apparently something
had changed.
It was the outside world that had changed.
It is this changing environment and how we respond to it that we focus on in this lecture.
The business world is always changing, evolving in unexpected ways.
I like to view the business world as a great wheel that turns slowly.
This great wheel of business constantly turns and it brings change, slow change, sudden
change, many changes.
Now we can't ignore this great wheel of business.
We can't pretend that it doesn't affect us.
It falls to us to determine what changes are important to us and to our business.
It falls to us to figure out how best to cope with those changes.
We began with the tale of Copperfield's books, emblematic of the independent bookstore in
modern America.
But this bastion of Americana was about to face its greatest challenge in the mid-1990s
as the book retailing industry was to undergo tremendous upheaval.
Such upheaval that Hollywood even made a feature film about the book business.
The changing character of the book business in the 1980s and 90s was told in cinema in
the film You've Got Mail that featured Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan.
This 1998 film tells the story of a small bookstore being forced out of business by
a big box bookstore similar to Borders or to Barnes & Noble.
The film depicts the great wheel of business as it turns and forces people and companies
to adapt to the external world.
One new feature of this changing competitive environment was the arrival and continuing
expansion of Borders, which itself began as a used bookstore in Ann Arbor, Michigan in
1971.
Borders reached its peak in 2003 with 1,200 stores each filled with thousands of new
titles.
Borders was a heavyweight of the book selling industry, rivaled only by Barnes & Noble.
Although Books, on the other hand, was one of many small and medium-sized independent
bookstores, these stores faced dramatic changes in the competitive environment that threatened
their very existence.
Suddenly, people had alternatives to buying books at Copperfields that could go to the
newly arrived megabookstore chains offered by Borders and Barnes & Noble.
People could buy books on the internet with a new online firm called Amazon.com.
Books could be delivered to their doorstep more cheaply and from a much wider selection.
If this wasn't enough, suddenly something appeared on the horizon called the e-reader.
This meant that the actual physical product that Copperfields sold might begin to disappear.
To survive these powerful new external forces, Copperfields would have to change the way
it did business, the product mix it offered, and the selling experience itself.
It would need to look beyond whatever strategic planning it might have done previously and
engage instead in a strategic analysis into how to survive and prosper under new conditions.
Strategic thinking means setting aside our impressionistic view of the world and thinking
rationally about causes and effects, actions and reactions, and then making our way successfully
to our goals while others drift and bob on a sea of chaos.
This means imposing order on what we see.
It means filtering out static and letting in information we can use in an orderly, logical
fashion.
Let's start thinking about the world around us and how we can best assess and marshal our
capabilities to take advantage of the opportunities that present themselves.
The business world has developed numerous tools of analysis that aid business people
in making sense of what they do, how they do it, when they do it.
We can use those tools for ourselves and our personal lives and in achieving our professional
goals.
Today we learn about four tools of strategic analysis, what they do, how to use them and
how they benefit us in crafting prudent strategy.
The tools are pest analysis, five forces analysis, value chain analysis, and finally
looking at all our strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats taken together
and analysis known in business schools as the SWAT.
First, a scan of our external environment known as PEST, well PEST P-E-S-T, is an
acronym and it stands for political, economic, social, and technical.
Attention to all four ensures the most comprehensive evaluation of the factors that may impinge
on us, the pursuit of our goals.
Through PEST we discover if factors in these four realms help us or hinder us.
We discover opportunities that we can seize, we learn of threats we must deflect, threats
and opportunities we would otherwise have missed.
One caveat, we cannot do a meaningful pest analysis without our mission and objectives
in mind.
We must anchor our analysis in what it is we are and what we want to achieve.
Only with this analytical anchor will the analysis take on meaning.
For instance, take our book selling example.
The book selling industry faces a variety of economic and technical pressures that differ
dramatically from the types of political pressures faced by say the automobile industry or the
pharmaceutical industry.
Consequently, a pest analysis for Copperfield's books would be focused accordingly.
Our political environment affects all of us in ways we may not even suspect.
In a large macro sense, that environment, our nations, our states, or our local government's
leadership and bureaucracy.
In a personal sense, it describes the web of power relationships we deal with in our
lives at work and at play.
With our mission and our objective in mind, we explore the power relationships that impinge
on us.
We ask the question, what power relationships hinder me?
Which ones can assist me?
What are the legal regulations that affect me, everything from business zoning in local
neighborhoods to tax laws to protection of intellectual property?
For example, physical bookstores may face different tax policies than online booksellers.
And later, a common policy may be imposed that treats both, the same.
The political climate is like a powerful tide that shifts first one way and then the other.
For example, new medical instruments for surgery may be regulated as stringently as
pharmaceuticals and subject to a very long waiting period for government approval.
Or they may be less regulated.
It makes good sense for us to ascertain which way that tide is shifting and when.
And it makes sense for us to craft ways to swim with the tide instead of against it.
Now we conduct our business within an economic environment and this supports what we want
to do or not.
If we want to start our own consulting business, we should ask basic questions such as, are
there enough customers out there willing to pay my fee?
Questions like these may give us pause and clarify our thinking with a dose of hard-nosed
reality.
How much capital do we need to achieve our needed capability?
Does the economic environment favor me over my competitors or the converse?
Now, what trends and fads are in play in the social and cultural environment?
What substantial and rooted long-term cultural factors must I consider?
Can I identify tomorrow's trend based on today's indicators?
Am I looking over the horizon at tomorrow's implications over what is happening today?
The technological environment.
Does the tech environment support what I want to do?
Or are there threats I have to consider?
Now in Copperfield's case, longer-term threats that might have given pause were the increasing
popularity of online book-selling and taking a longer perspective, the advent of the e-reader.
Now let's move to a tool of analysis that focuses on our own industry.
One of Michael Porter's most famous contributions is his technique for analyzing the forces
that impact competition within an industry.
This technique is called the Five Forces Model.
We can use this model with minor tweaking to evaluate the impinging forces of virtually
any competitive situation from the computer industry to our personal occupation, even
to personal romantic relationships.
The five forces of competition are firepower, supplier power, the intensity of rivalry,
the threat of substitutes, and the threat of new entrants.
These forces compel us to answer a series of questions about our industry and our place
in that industry.
How much power do our customers have over us?
How much power do our suppliers have over us?
How intense is the rivalry we have with others in our industry, in our field?
Are we forced into constant battles with them that affect our profit margins?
How easily can our buyers switch to substitute products, say, orange juice instead of apple
juice, the electronic books and other electronic media instead of physical books?
What is the danger of new entrants into our industry?
The books was faced with the challenge of powerful new forces in the competitive environment.
These forces threatened the position of not only Copperfield, but of other brick and mortar
booksellers as well, even the big ones.
So how did Copperfields and Borders contend with the five forces of competition?
Let's take a look.
First, the power of buyers, the bookstore customers.
Customers had tremendous power at the time.
They could purchase identical books from a wide variety of retailers.
Price was a major consideration and there was not much loyalty to stores offering similar
products in a similar format.
Next, the power of suppliers to bookstores, the major publishers.
Both Copperfields and Borders obtained books from publishers, but the big change could
order in massive volume and receive big discounts that were unavailable to independents.
The power of publishers exerted a disproportionately negative impact on independent bookstores
such as Copperfields.
Next, the intensity of rivalry among the players in the retail book industry.
This is a hotly contested market.
There was lots of rivalry.
There was a surge of megastores in consolidation, but it is basically a mature industry with
very low growth rates.
What about the threat of substitutes?
Books can get their books in many places, in libraries, online, online from libraries,
and in many stores that don't specialize in books, and books face increased competition
from other forms of entertainment, television, radio, internet, computer games, movies and
such like.
If books get too expensive, people switch.
Finally, the threat of new entrants.
There was little or no room for new players in this market.
It requires much capital, and to be frank, it is an unattractive industry with low profit
margins and low growth rates.
This analysis of the industry would have told Copperfields that it was time to consider
a change of business model to cope with these exogenous variables that seemed trending in
a negative direction.
The correlation of forces was moving against the undifferentiated little bookshop around
the corner that offers a limited selection of high priced books and nothing else.
The five forces analysis tells us clearly that we must change something in the way we
do business or we won't be in business much longer.
Value chain analysis is a tool that can tell us a great deal about our own internal strengths
and weaknesses.
The value chain is a method of analysis that takes apart the firm, divides the firm into
its value producing activities, and the point is to evaluate what makes our firm strong
and what makes it weak, as it say, manufactures a product.
We call this a chain of activities because it's a series of processes, all of which add
value to a product.
We can apply this type of analysis to most any fairly complex series of activities.
We can say disassemble a football team, an automobile company, an army platoon, or our
own series of activities, and we can evaluate how each part contributes to the whole.
Let's take as an example a football team.
The overall performance of a football team is captured in its one loss record and in
the final scores of games that it plays.
If other teams score 7 to 8 touchdowns per game against us, and we score 7 to 8 touchdowns
as well, we can observe that our defense is terrible and our offense is great, but this
does not tell us anything specific.
In fact, scores of games and overall record can hide the contribution of the components
that actually provide team strength or team weakness.
If we analyze the separate activities of the offense and defense, we begin to get a clear
picture of the team's strengths player by player.
Many fans already do this type of value chain analysis with their favorite sports teams.
Sophisticated fans don't stop with the one loss record or the scores of games.
These fans delve deep into the issue to discover the impact of other factors.
Without even knowing it, these fans are conducting a type of value chain analysis.
They disassemble the team and the staff and they look at their contributions, the contributions
of the players, whether tight ends, wide receivers, running backs, the backfield defense,
the generalship and strategy and tactics of the coaches and quarterback, the personnel
decisions, the scouting reports for the games, they search for the root causes of dysfunction
in their favorite team.
Could it be the offensive line, the defensive line, what about the head coach, the general
manager or the owner, and what about the fans?
Each of these factors we evaluate according to our own internal calculation.
When it's done formally, we can call it value chain analysis.
We assess the contribution of the processes that make up the whole and we do it with the
mission and objectives in mind.
We want to win the championship.
We want to score points to prevent the other team from scoring.
Now another example of a value chain is your personal value chain, the things that you
do to accomplish your self-defined mission.
What are these functions and how well do you do them?
We're fortunate in an advanced economy that most of us specialize in pursuing our goals
while living fairly comfortable lives.
Contrast this with the value chain of a U.S. pioneer in say the early to mid 19th century.
Such pioneer men and women living on the frontier survived in a much different and a simpler
economy than we enjoy today.
Rather than enjoying the wide variety of goods we take for granted, a primitive and much
less communal lifestyle meant that, well, mere survival occupied the value chain functions,
building shelter, making clothing, obtaining food, providing security, and all of this absorbed
time.
It also led to a lower standard of living in that people simply do not possess top-notch
skills and all the value-producing functions that yield the necessities of life, things
like clothing, shelter, food, security, and just as we cannot do everything well, neither
can business firms.
Both firms and people outsource the functions that they cannot do well and retain the functions
that constitute core strengths.
For instance, Borda's bookstore had added some cafes inside its bookstores but later
decided to approach Starbucks about operating those cafes instead.
Now, we as individuals outsource functions such as clothing manufacture and the farming
of vegetables so that we can concentrate on our strengths.
So we can see how value chain analysis can be quite revelatory, zeroing in on what we
must change and what we should continue.
Now here is where we match our internal analysis with our external analysis.
The value chain assesses our strengths and weaknesses.
The five forces in our industry in a scan of the broader pest environment show us our
external threats and the opportunities.
We can now list these strengths and our weaknesses and match them against the external opportunities
and threats.
Do our strengths match the opportunities available?
Do our weaknesses make us vulnerable to the most salient threats?
The tool for bringing these together is called the SWAT, which stands for strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats.
Think of the SWAT with respect to our original example, Copperfield's books.
The changing external environment meant that an old strength of the brick and mortar bookstore
had been transformed into a weakness, a relative lack of choice.
In the retail book industry the external threats loomed large and attacked Copperfield's weaknesses.
The opportunities all seemed to be in favor of the big box bookstore and the almost simultaneous
rise of online book selling, which together spelled the end of the independent bookstore
as we knew it in the late 1980s.
The changing external environment ensured that Copperfield's books would ultimately
fail if it did not alter its business model.
This clear example shows us what happens if we focus only on what we do, to the exclusion
of what others do, and to the exclusion of macro factors that change the various assumptions
that support our strategy.
And so borders, barns and nobles and amazon.com seem to win as hundreds of small bookstores
closed their doors for the last time.
The great wheel of business turns and it does not care if we cope with the changes.
It turns inexorably and it is up to us to figure out what changes are afoot and how
to best cope with those changes and chart a new strategic direction.
The obvious move for Copperfield's was to offer book buyers something attractive in
the store that they could receive no other place.
And so Copperfield's nimbly crafted a persona that was uniquely local in flavor and that
offered local book buying and socializing experience to its clientele.
Borders that were unavailable either online or in the mega bookstores.
Copperfield's survived.
Meanwhile, the great wheel of business continued to turn and the same factors that assaulted
the independence like Copperfield's books soon began to undermine the powerful borders
chain.
Borders had been the apparent victor in the 1990s and was seemingly unstoppable.
But borders did not respond to further changes in the external environment.
Borders committed serious strategic errors, errors that its fraternal big box competitor
Barnes Noble largely avoided.
Let's see what happened to borders.
First, borders failed to recognize its vulnerability to the internet.
Borders refused to embrace the new technology.
Instead of recognizing the potential and adapting to the new wired and connected world, borders
outsourced the sale of many of its books online from 2001 to 2008 to Amazon.
By contrast, Barnes and Noble had experience with mail order sales dating back to the 19th
century.
They recognized an opportunity to transition from mail order catalogs to online selling.
Borders also missed the growing importance of the e-reader.
While Amazon introduced the Kindle in 2007 and a second generation in 2009, Barnes and
Noble introduced the Nook in 2009.
And Apple entered the same market space with its iPad in April of 2010.
Borders ignored the threat.
Until, well too late, it partnered in 2010 with Kobo, a bargain e-reader whose majority
owner at the time was the Canadian big box retailer Indigo Books and Music.
It was a me too effort, almost an afterthought.
So first, we saw how the big box retailer displaced the little independent bookstore.
And in the same dynamic, the online booksellers later began to displace the big boxes with
the largest selection of books at lower prices.
Perhaps Borders was still consolidating its position and looking to shorter term goals
like growth and excellence.
Borders neglected the one advantage it still carried as a brick and mortar bookseller,
a place for people to gather.
Big box was a place where you could go, where you could sit, where you could sip great coffee
and meet others of like mine.
Borders did not recognize this aspect of the brick and mortar bookstore as a crucial life
and death source of advantage as it turned out.
Now this lack of perspicacity was evidence when it lost a Starbucks contract to Barnes
and Noble.
Instead of signing Starbucks, Borders ended up with Seattle's Best, which is the wholly
owned subsidiary of Starbucks that focuses on coffee without the full coffee house experience.
Anne Lowry is a business writer for the New York Times and she captured the essence of
the issue and how Barnes and Noble's response differed from Borders.
It's very, very hard to compete unless you're offering a very boutique experience.
Barnes and Noble at least has built a business that recognizes the trends in bookselling
toward the internet, toward e-readers, toward a more boutique retail experience and away
from big box stores.
Borders had locked itself into a big box.
Borders had opened too many stores, it had signed too many long-term leases and this
meant that underperforming stores could not be closed.
Borders was trapped in an unprofitable and ultimately a self-damning situation.
Borders says that a host of factors led to its demise including the turbulent economy,
the move away from brick-and-mortar stores to online retailers, and the rise of e-readers
like Amazon's Kindle, Apple's iPad, and the nook of rival Barnes and Noble.
But every bookstore faced competitive pressures, the same competitive pressures.
It's the response to those pressures that mean success or failure.
The changes in the industry in the mid-1980s into the 21st century have challenged booksellers
of every type.
New technologies and new ways of doing business meant that bookstores would have to evaluate
how they did business.
No, it did not automatically mean that the traditional bookstore would go out of business.
But it did mean that the traditional bookstore would have to reinvent itself as something
special.
To survive, it would have to find a new business model to sustain itself on into the 21st century.
It would have to recognize that the brick-and-mortar model of bookselling would have to offer something
more than books.
It would have to offer unique products and a unique customer experience.
As for the independent bookstores that were supposedly doomed back in the 1990s, a substantial
number of them are still doing quite well, but only because they adapted.
Many have diversified into selling things like coffee and alcohol and rare books as
well as offering regular talks, book groups and classes, all to provide tailored services
to a distinct clientele.
They have differentiated themselves in ways to provide a distinctive service.
Now, in the end, this is what Copperfields did and what Borders did not do.
Another turn of the business wheel has left Borders a memory and a case study for thousands
of MBA students to learn how not to craft and implement strategy.
The mega-bookseller that threatened Copperfields could not survive in a world with new and
multiple channels for book delivery.
Borders went bankrupt in 2011.
And Copperfields?
Ironically, it survived Borders and it has grown to seven stores in Northern California.
Copperfields' books remade itself into a unique place that transcends the bookstore as simply
a location to purchase undifferentiated stock off the shelf.
It offers rare and antiquarian books.
It offers author events, writing workshops, the purchasing of used books from customers
and online access to book buying.
Late, but not too late, Copperfields adapted its internal processes to accommodate the
changing external environment.
We've seen how the tools of strategic analysis can give us the crucial intelligence we need
to evaluate our strategic direction and to change that direction if need be.
This willingness to adapt to external realities has revealed to us by our analysis.
This is the key to business success and in some cases to very survival.
