When we craft strategy, we try to impose order on a chaotic reality.
But even with a superb strategic vision and the formulation of prudent strategy, the best
laid plans can go awry.
Let's start with an example that seemed like a good idea and on paper carried a strategic
elegance full of daring in a line to propel it forward.
It was September of 1944 during World War II and Operation Market Garden, it seemed
like the right plan at the right time, especially to the man who conceived it.
The Allies had raced across France and were right at the German border, poised to make
the final push and end the war.
But the Allied offensive against Germany had run out of gas, literally.
Supplies were scarce, and so British Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery conceived of Operation
Market Garden.
Montgomery wanted all fuel supplies given to him for his plan.
The operation was to flank the Germans to the north, where Belgium meets Holland.
He wanted to cross the lower Rhine River in Holland going around the German line of defenses
opposite the Maginot line, and he wanted to thrust into Germany.
An exciting plan, a neat reversal of how the Germans had gone around the Maginot line
itself at the beginning of the war.
But Operation Market Garden was freighted with a built-in disadvantage that dooms even
the best of plans.
The plan required everything to go right, and that's just not going to happen.
The second law of thermodynamics tells us that if left to themselves, all systems tend
towards entropy and disorder.
Systems tend to break down and return the status quo to chaos.
When our strategy becomes more and more complex, when we set up a complex system to execute
our plans, it incorporates more and more variables.
This means that more and more things have to go right for our strategy to work.
The popular wisdom of Murphy's law is not a bad guide when we consider how our strategy
might go awry.
Whatever can go wrong will go wrong, usually in the worst possible way.
And thus it was with Operation Market Garden.
It sounded good.
Airborne troops would parachute in to seize a series of six bridges behind enemy lines,
all the way up to the final bridge over the Rhine at the town of Arnhem, more than 60
miles away.
There were six water obstacles the allies would have to cross, and all six bridges
would be seized simultaneously.
Four divisions of airborne troops would be dropped to seize these bridges, and the last
bridge at Arnhem would be seized and held by airborne troops for four days until the
ground forces could fight their way through to them over a distance of 62 miles through
enemy territory.
How does this sound to you so far?
For the ground attack, the allies would advance their tanks along a single highway that was
two lanes wide and it was raised above the flat terrain around it.
The ground on either side was too soft and mushy to support vehicles of any kind, and
it was crisscrossed with dykes and drainage ditches.
Tanks and trucks couldn't even leave the road.
What about intelligence on the enemy?
What could we expect from the enemy?
Well, it seemed to the allies high command that the German resistance had broken.
It seemed that most of the enemy troops were fleeing, and it seemed that they had no tanks.
Montgomery, in fact, was convinced that the allies would face limited resistance on their
route up Highway 69, and the German defenders would be spread out over the entire length
of the road, trying to fight pockets of airborne forces.
The allies didn't know, and later, would not believe, was that two powerful SS Panzer
divisions were just assigned to the area to rest and to refit, one of them right at the
ultimate objective, the town of Arnhem.
But Montgomery, while he dismissed intelligence reports about the 9th and 10th SS Tank Divisions,
he refused to change plans for the drop of the 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem, right
on top of a waiting SS Panzer Division, one of the most powerful formations in the German
Army.
Now, a British intelligence officer, Major Brian Urquhart, questioned the plan.
He believed the plan was critically flawed, and he tried to persuade his superiors to
modify or to abort the entire operation.
Both aerial reconnaissance and the Dutch resistance confirmed that the German tanks
were there.
He was ignored.
In fact, he was ordered out of the country on sick leave.
Well, what did the Germans know about Operation Market Garden?
Well, not much, until quite early in the fighting when the Germans recovered a copy of the entire
Market Garden plan from a dead American officer who should not have been carrying it in the
first place into combat.
Now, the plan was complex, and it led to blunders.
Instead of landing near the bridge at Arnhem, they were dropped eight miles away.
Insufficient transport meant that the force could not be dropped all at once, and they
would be brought in over three days, feeding them into the battle in penny packets.
Air to ground radios did not work, and so the Allies could not even be resupplied.
After nine days of battle, the Allies withdrew, evacuating the troops they could rescue.
It was a catastrophic defeat, a disaster.
Of the 10,000 soldiers dropped into Arnhem, only 2,163 escaped.
Why?
How could smart, experienced, war-seasoned veterans bungle so badly?
The Allies underestimated German capabilities, and they overestimated their own capabilities.
Based on these estimates, they created a plan that was too tightly wound, with too many
objectives, too many moving parts, too much necessary coordination, and a heavy dose of
wishful thinking that blinded the planners to red flags.
What did Field Marshal Montgomery have to say after the bullets and shells had stopped?
It was a bad mistake on my part.
I underestimated the difficulties of opening up the approaches to Antwerp.
I reckoned that the Canadian Army could do it while we were going for the Rur.
I was wrong.
And yet, even after this defeat, Montgomery stubbornly held to his incredibly flawed plan.
As is the case with human nature, Montgomery evoked the if clause.
He offered this.
In my prejudiced view, if the operation had been properly backed from its inception, and
given the aircraft, ground forces, and administrative resources necessary for the job, it would
have succeeded in spite of my mistakes, or the adverse weather, or the presence of the
Second SS Panzer Corps in the Arnhem area.
I remain Market Garden's unrepentant advocate.
In other words, if everything had gone according to plan, the overcomplicated plan would have
worked.
In the business world, consultants tasked with strategy can claim the same thing.
The strategy I offered would have been fine, but the company failed to execute properly.
Operation Market Garden is an example of overreach.
Overreach occurs when our capabilities and our strategy, they just don't match.
They don't align with each other.
Overreach is one of the pathologies that can interfere with the implementation of our
chosen strategy.
Much of what goes wrong in strategy occurs because of bad planning and poor execution.
If you had to choose, which would you rather have?
A well-executed bad plan?
Or a good plan, poorly executed?
Even with crisp execution and follow-through, a superb strategy may still fail due to reasons
outside our ability to predict or to adapt to.
Classwits call this friction.
But often we find a disconnect between strategy formulation and its execution.
This is common in politics, for example, where the general policies are often created
by people with no connection to the implementation.
At other times, the separation of planning and execution is a more artificial distinction.
Much of the strategy might be executed by the folks who plan it.
Either way, we can find a continuous spectrum of activity that takes us from the situation
room to the battlefield.
And regardless of whether you're facing a distinction between strategy and execution
that is large or small, there's enough of a sameness to failed strategy in all walks
of life to discern some patterns of failure.
Five main causes of strategic failure we can consider here are omission of responsibility,
overreach, breakdown of communication, poor intelligence, and inertia.
Let's look at each of these.
First, the omission of designated responsibility.
When strategy, nothing happens when no one is responsible.
This is like many other things in life.
This is as much a part of failure of strategic leadership as it is a disconnect between strategy
and its implementation.
Some people have difficulty making the connection between planning and executing plans.
A former business colleague of mine had this problem.
He was a former high-ranking military officer, but apparently one who applied his trade on
the staff side of the house rather than as a leader of troops.
His modus operandi exemplifies this common disconnect in strategic implementation.
He spoke well.
He knew all of the Pentagon jargon.
He seemed personable enough.
He would hold a meeting that held all the trappings of a real meeting where bold initiatives
would be discussed, and then nothing would happen.
Nothing happened because he shrank from the most obvious duty of strategic leadership.
He refused to connect planning to the assignment of responsibility, and this meant de facto
that he refused to accept the mutual responsibility of assigning specific tasks.
With his fingers crossed, he hoped that something good would happen, and if it did, it was hit
or miss, and it sprang from the initiative of other people.
This is a defensive and a damaged limitation mode of faux leadership.
This most obvious manifestation is the gap between planning and execution, the omission
of designated responsibility.
This utterly crucial step is left to happenstance.
For the military in time of peace, or businesses without severe external threats, this type
of pathology may be tolerated, but in time of war, or whenever survival is at stake, it
can become fatal.
A second is the pathology of overreach.
We saw how the British overreached an operation market garden in 1944.
They had ambitious goals, clearly articulated objectives, but they did not have the capabilities
to carry it off, and they compounded their problem by not accurately assessing the German's
capabilities of interfering with the strategic plan.
In fact, it was almost as if the strategy was to be crafted and executed without German
interference, as if the Germans would play a passive role, powerless to interfere with
British aims.
Another example of overreach occurred just three months later in the Ardennes Forest
in what became known as the Battle of the Bulge.
In December of 1944, Germany was on the brink of defeat in World War II, or so she seemed.
The Russians were closing in in the east, and in the west, Americans were debating weather
while the war might be over by Christmas, but in Germany, the view was different.
Germany planned a breathtaking offensive in the Ardennes Forest of Belgium that sought
to gain strategic military and political objectives.
The intent was clear.
The operation was called Watch on the Rhine.
Three powerful German armies were to blast through the Ardennes Forest, just as they
had done in 1940.
The offensive would split the American and British lines, seize the strategic port of
Antwerp, and it would buy the Germans time for the Anglo-Russian alliance to crumble.
No one can accuse the Germans of timidity.
It was a bold plan.
But again, just as with the British and Operation Market Garden, the plan required everything
to go right for it to succeed.
The Germans needed bad weather to keep the influence of Allied air superiority to a minimum,
and they needed to succeed before Allied reinforcements could arrive.
And on December 16, 1944, the Germans hurled the last of their strategic reserves into battle.
Three great armies of a quarter million men, powerful, yes, but not powerful enough to
accomplish the bold objectives within the necessary timetable.
After initial success, the lack of sufficient capability and a vigorous American counterattack
stopped the offensive and rolled it back.
And as with Market Garden, the Germans did not have the wherewithal to accomplish their
bold objectives.
Like Market Garden, the plan underestimated the enemy capabilities to interfere with the
execution of the plan, and it failed.
Overreach, lack of responsibility.
Now the third pathology that can doom execution of a strategy is the breakdown of communication
and of coordination.
Generals themselves do not execute strategy.
Their junior officers and soldiers execute the plan.
But even with the best intent, even with plans clearly articulated, constant communication
is critical, especially in executing a plan with many participants and many moving parts.
We sometimes think of poor communication as a euphemism for two people who just can't
get along.
Often that's true.
And it can cascade.
It can cascade into an implementation of our strategy where coordination is upended.
And sometimes the exact opposite of what we intend happens.
In the following example, poor communication and execution leads to a grotesque inferno
on the battlefield, such as the buckle that it is immortalized and versed by Great Britain's
poet laureate, Alfred Lord Tennyson.
Now when they compose poetry about your strategic failure, you know it's boneheaded.
You know you have a candidate for the strategic Hall of Shame.
Here I talk about the example of the charge of the Light Brigade during the Crimean War
in 1854.
The location was the port of Balaklava on the Crimean Peninsula.
The British were fighting the Russians, and the overarching strategy of the units involved
was to support the siege of Sevastopol and to seize Balaklava, a nearby port.
The tactics designed to execute this strategy seemed sound.
In fact, the British performed admirably in their land operations, but it was in their
execution of this action that incredible failure followed.
It's failure that led to a famous poem, and several films by the same name, The Charge
of the Light Brigade.
As the British pursued the retreating Russians, the commander, Lord Raglan, looked over the
battlefield from a good vantage point on a low mountain.
He gave an order that was scribbled in pencil by General Richard Ari and given to an eager
messenger.
This messenger, a Captain Nolan, galloped down the mountain and excitedly rode up to
Lord Lucan, who was commanding the Heavy Brigade and the Light Brigade.
The order was vague.
It stated that the British cavalry should sweep the cannon from the ridge.
But it did not say which ridge, and the cavalry on the field itself below, they couldn't see
the cannon.
Here in fact is the exact order, the exact order.
Lord Raglan wishes the cavalry to advance rapidly to the front, follow the enemy, and
try to prevent the enemy carrying away the guns.
When Captain Nolan rushed up to Lord Lucan to present the order, he added his own urgency
to the message.
He urged the cavalry to attack immediately.
Well, when Lucan asked Nolan which guns?
Nolan responded with a wide sweep of his arm, gesturing at the massive Russian guns at the
end of the valley, a mile away.
And this is how the 600 lancers, dragoons, and hussars of the Light Brigade formed up
at the valley mouth and rode at a trot down the valley floor for a mile, with Russian
cannons on the heights to either side, blasting them, and cannons awaiting them at the end
of the valley.
They accelerated to a galt through a storm of shot and shell.
A journalist on the scene, William Howard Russell, he described it this way.
They swept proudly past, glittering in the morning sun, in all the pride and splendor
of war.
And we could scarcely believe the evidence of our senses, surely.
That handful of men were not going to charge an army in position.
Alas, it was too true.
Their desperate valor knew no bounds, and far indeed was it removed from its so-called
better part, discretion.
Up on the mountain, Lord Raglan and his staff, they looked down in horror as the scene unfolded
below, as the Light Brigade went the wrong way.
It plunged into the valley, and into immortality.
Rarely has the execution of strategy been so publicly short-circuited by miscommunication.
The actual order that triggered this debacle now resides in the National Army Museum in
London, a mere note of eight lines, and a vivid reminder of how small a fatal breakdown of
communication can be.
The fourth pathology that hinders our execution of strategy is poor intelligence.
Let's look at a strategic failure from 1942 that isn't emphasized much in history books.
Certainly, the British would rather forget this horrendous fiasco as well.
I cite this British raid on the French port of Dieppe as an example of strategy poorly
executed because of faulty intelligence and poor counterintelligence.
But the Dieppe raid in August of 1942 across the English Channel can just as easily serve
as the example for a number of other strategic pathologies.
This operation shows much of what is wrong with strategy that is based on an unclear
objective, sabotaged by loss of institutional control, and supported by poor intelligence.
For this very day, the point of the Dieppe raid is still not quite clear.
In hindsight, the operation was a signed admission ostensibly to, well, to learn lessons in
how to conduct an amphibious invasion.
But at the time itself, the strategic purpose was vague.
Planning for the operation was lengthy and sporadic.
The British High Command, they canceled the raid scheduled for July 5th because of bad
weather and of the loss of surprise.
But the raid, well, it had taken on a life of its own.
It quickly became a prestige project to serve the ambitions of a single man, Vice Admiral
Louis Lord Mountbatten, then Chief of British Combined Operations.
Lord Mountbatten resurrected the plan and he called it Operation Jubilee, and he pushed
it forward as a personal project without authorization.
He had neither permission nor access to enough resources, nor access to intelligence.
Because it became Mountbatten's personal project, his planners were forced to utilize
intelligence that was months old, and that intelligence on the area was poor and unreliable.
The British knew nothing about hidden German gun emplacements on the cliffs.
British planners had assessed the slope of the beach and whether tanks could use it by
closely examining holiday snapshots.
The planners completely misjudged British capabilities in executing the attack.
In the attack itself, tanks sank into the soft, pebbly beach, and few could even breach
the high sea wall.
Only 15 tanks made it off the beach, and these were quickly repulsed.
Naval support was completely insufficient, and for political reasons, the British had
elected, well, not to bomb the German positions, so as not to alienate the French with civilian
casualties.
While British intelligence was seriously flawed, German intelligence, on the other hand, exposed
the operation early on.
After the fact, veteran memois and many accounts of interrogated German prisoners, German captors,
and French citizens all show that the Germans had been preparing for the anticipated attack
for weeks.
The Germans were on high alert for the attack on August 19th, and well prepared to defend
against it.
The British assault began at 5 a.m., and after just six hours, such disaster loomed that
the Allied commanders were forced to call a retreat.
The Germans who defended Dieppe were outnumbered 5 to 1, and yet they achieved a great victory.
Of 6,000 men attacking, the Allies lost 3,300 killed or captured.
German casualties were approximately 600.
The Dieppe raid deserves detailed study to understand how a plan can spiral out of control
and be negatively influenced by a host of factors, many of them controllable.
The raid, despite all of the shortcomings that were recognized at the time, continued
to move forward as if it were preordained and beyond the power of human beings to stop,
even if human rationality concluded that it should be.
In fact, the Dieppe raids rigidly inflexible qualities lead us into the final pathology
that causes poor strategic execution.
We next examine the pathology of inertia, or more colloquially, throwing good money after
bad.
We think of inertia as the tendency for a body at rest to stay at rest.
It's the tendency for the status quo to remain in place.
Inertia is resistance to change.
But inertia is also the tendency for a body in motion to stay in motion in a particular
direction on a fixed course.
Employees can stay on a particular promotion track merely because of organizational inertia.
Strategy can be like this, paradoxically.
Bad strategy, in particular.
There are good reasons for this.
Strategies are so difficult to craft and even more difficult to implement.
Any investment that goes into a major strategy, adoption and implementation, the impetus
for a firm and people to involve is to stay the course.
This is especially true where egos and careers are invested in a course of action, even if
the strategy is failing.
It's not human nature to just let go of what economists call sunk costs and focus only
on prospective costs to come in the future, even though it's only the prospective costs
that we still have any ability to influence.
For example, in 2008 the investment bank Lehman Brothers refused to change course for months
after the bankruptcy of Bear Stearns had made clear that a continued strategy of high leverage
reliance on mortgage backed securities could be punished most severely by investors.
Lehman Brothers went into bankruptcy that same year.
When lives are directly at stake, changing course becomes an even more urgent matter
and the pathology can sometimes take on horrific proportions, as it did in 1916 in the Battle
of the Somme.
The Battle of the Somme during World War I began with a British offensive on July 1st
and was designed to stirrow the Germans and to break the stalemate of trench warfare,
to break through, to open ground.
The plan called first for a crushing artillery barrage to obliterate the German positions,
destroy barbed wire entanglements, and to demolish the German artillery.
The British would simply walk in to occupy the newly won territory.
But none of this happened.
A seven-day artillery barrage gave the enemy adequate notice of what was to happen, but
the German defenses proved incredibly durable and they remained almost intact.
This fact was known to the British.
It was obvious that the preconditions for the successful execution of the British strategy
had not been met.
So the commander of the British 4th Army, General Sir Henry Rawlinson, was faced with
this decision to pursue a strategy that vitally depended for its success on the destruction
of enemy defenses.
When these enemy defenses were left almost intact, inertia took over.
Rawlinson let Bravado carry the day.
He gave the order for the attack.
The British emerged from their trenches and they marched slowly over open ground under
machine gun and artillery fire, and by the end of the day they had suffered 60,000 casualties.
This was 20% of the entire British force that attacked that day.
Military historian Jeffrey Reagan described the bloody battle this way.
Rawlinson must have known that this would happen and that he could prevent it, but this
would have called into question the whole strategy on which the British plan was based.
Instead, he let the attack go ahead even though he knew that the plan had already failed,
that the strategy had failed.
When the horrendous casualty figures came in, Rawlinson ordered his staff to destroy all
the notes that he had issued as a guide to the officers leading the attack.
Suicidal inertia, faux leadership that fails to assign responsibility.
Reach, communication breakdowns, and acting on the basis of unreliable and outdated intelligence.
We focused on military examples to highlight possible consequences of these pathologies
as clearly as possible.
And recognition of these difficulties is only halfway to their solution.
The rest of the solution is to be found in control.
We must create a control mechanism so that we may massage the strategy to successful
completion.
For example, Jack Welch, the CEO of General Electric, he famously devoted an entire week
during each of his 20 years as CEO to reviewing the operating plans of each of his company's
units for that year.
Strategy is not like an aircraft autopilot.
We cannot publish our strategy, put it on a shelf, and then sit back to wait for good
things to happen.
We must follow through.
We must assign responsibility.
We must avoid overreach, maintain clear communication, nurture effective intelligence, and reject
inertia in the face of new information.
In short, we must remember that strategy is a process, not a single event or a single
decision.
This means that identifying the specific action steps of a strategy cannot be omitted from
the strategic process.
A decision will not take effect unless action commitments are built into the decision from
the very start.
If a decision is no one's specific work and no one's specific responsibility, that's
likely that nothing will happen.
Grand strategy must be translated into the proper action steps at the lower unit level.
This doesn't happen on its own.
It happens with follow-through and checks and balances and control.
Bold leadership includes execution, and it should include some informal management by
walking around.
Execution is ultimately a function of strong and bold leadership.
It propels it to take responsibility and a system of control to bring the strategy to
completion.
Conversely, strategy, even at the very highest levels, is ultimately a function of thoroughgoing
execution.
We can move forward with successful strategic execution by recognizing and avoiding the
pathologies that plague us every step of the way and by following through with the action
steps of our plan.
