For aficionados of military history, surprise and deception can hardly be separated from
strategy and tactics.
Deception in fact is a routine part of life.
If information is power, then disinformation and deception can confer upon us even more
power.
In sports and politics, business and war, it's a virtue to surprise your adversary.
From the Trojan horse to Pearl Harbor to MacArthur's sudden landings at Incheon to
General Schwarzkopf's famous left hook during the First Gulf War in 1991, surprise and deception
have played major roles, sometimes decisive roles, in conflict.
Strategy and surprise have been a part of war since there have been wars.
Surprise is a bedrock principle of war of every major military establishment in the world,
and rightly so.
The strategy is called upon in wartime, not as an end in itself, but as a means to achieve
that much sought goal in tactical warfare, the surprise.
But no other principle of war can multiply combat power as effectively as a surprise,
well planned and well executed.
Every country does it, and every country has its own name for it.
The Russians call it desinformatia, the French call it lose de guerre, the British and Americans
call it stratagem, and it also goes by other names as well, diversion, demonstration.
The great commanders, Hannibal, Alexander, Caesar, Genghis Khan, Marshal de Saxe, Napoleon,
Stonewall Jackson, all of them incorporated stratagem into their battle planning, and
they did so with the objective of achieving surprise.
Deception in fact has been called the bodyguard of surprise.
Until the rise of general staffs in the early 19th century, the source of surprise was the
intuition and imagination of the great general.
Stratagem and surprise were almost exclusively the province of great warrior minds, and then
there came a period of time when stratagem and surprise fell out of favor among the leading
generals.
From the dawn of the 20th century until World War II, surprise and deception was simply
not part of the repertoire of what generals did.
The initiation of surprise and deception was the exception.
The leading generals of the day did not do surprise.
The author of a great book on stratagems, Barton Whaley, laments that, well, the commanders
appointed to send the big battalions to glory, Joffrey, Nivelle, Faulk, the young Bolki,
Faulkenhayn, Robertson, Hague, neither used nor understood surprise, much less deception.
It was never part of what then passed for grand strategy.
There were however exceptions.
Contemporaneous with these conventional World War I generals was T.E. Lawrence, one of history's
great strategic theorists and practitioners, and a decidedly unconventional leader.
He is better known as Lawrence of Arabia from his leadership of the Arab Revolt in 1916-1918.
Lawrence knew that the generals of the time disdained surprise.
For the ordinary general of the time, deception and the resulting surprise were not part of
the repertoire of battle.
Lawrence captured this air of disdain with a famous observation from his masterwork,
the Seven Pillars of Wisdom, said Lawrence.
For the ordinary general, deceptions were just witty hors d'oeuvres before battle.
Another unconventional leader of the time was Winston Churchill.
Churchill is known for his bulldog countens, his ever-present cigar, his steadfastness
in the face of the Nazi onslaught in 1940 as Britain's wartime prime minister.
But Winston Churchill also loved surprise.
He was one of the few great practitioners of surprise in war in the first half of the
20th century.
Churchill was a deep thinker and an aficionado of one of the most powerful techniques in strategy,
the deception operation.
It's otherwise known as the stratagem.
He was fascinated by technological advances and their potential for epic turns in the
tide of war, the tank, the artificial harbor, mulberry, commando strikes and wizard warfare,
deceiving the enemy by broadcasting deceptive radio traffic.
Now let's take a moment to note our distinction between strategy and tactics.
Both strategic and tactical surprise contain the same elements, but strategic surprise
consists in attacking and successfully disrupting an enemy's mobilization, his deployments
and his grand strategy.
But achieving surprise at the strategic level, now this is much more difficult than at the
tactical level, primarily because of the scale of operations, the multiplicity of variables,
the time involved and of course the greater chance of discovery.
A failed strategic surprise can still retain value as a tactical surprise, although with
of course considerably less impact.
In fact, the difference in impact can change the course of conflict.
Here's an example.
In 1916, the British had a superb opportunity to break the trench warfare stalemate on the
western front with a strategic surprise, the mass introduction of a super weapon, a game
changer that could have altered the outcome of World War I, the tank.
Lieutenant Colonel Ernest Swinton was the central champion of the tank and the tactics
that would maximize its impact, and he urged their use en masse to break through the
enemy lines, to strike quickly and deeply at the enemy's artillery.
In his very words, tanks should not be used in drivelets.
The fact of their existence should be kept as secret as possible until the hull are ready
to be launched together with the infantry assault in one great combined operation.
But the opportunity for a strategic surprise was frittered away.
The commanding generals were oblivious to the power of deception and surprise to multiply
the force of an attack, and the generals ignored Swinton.
In fact, General Douglas Hague apparently had no sense of the incredible strategic significance
of the tank coupled with its shock value.
He demanded that the few tanks available be fed into the attack immediately on arrival,
squandering any chance for them to be used en masse in a surprise to break the stalemate
once and for all.
Instead, a paltry 32 tanks were used in a September 1916 attack at the Battle of the
Somme.
Tanks were fed into the line across a broad front and piecemeal, or in penny packets to
use the term of the day.
The effect was to achieve technological surprise and a bit of local panic as a minor tactical
success.
Later, writing in his classic treatise on tank warfare, Actum Panzer, the armoured warfare
theorist, Heinz Guderian, he was incredulous at the British blundering.
Guderian set this.
A very large number of machines was available and yet no attempt was made to use this force
against a single objective.
For their own part, the Germans had blown their chances at a powerful surprise in 1915
when they'd used poison gas for the first time.
Now, with the tank, it was the British turn to squander an almost unassailable advantage.
You have only one opportunity to use a powerful and novel new weapon for the first time and
this example of the tank demonstrates exactly how not to do it.
An angry Colonel Swinton had this to say, with the example before us of the stupendous
mistake of the Germans in first releasing gas over a short sector, we, sixteen months
later with our eyes open, committed a similar error.
We threw away a surprise and it was not until a year later that the British mustered a mass
tank attack utilizing new tactics at Cambrai.
With 324 tanks, they achieved a tactical surprise and breakthrough and gains that superseded
in one day, all that had been gained in the previous four months of the bloody battle
of Passchendaele.
But the opportunity for a powerful strategic surprise had already been lost.
The Germans had already developed countermeasures and were beginning to produce their own tanks.
The secret of the tank had been revealed to no good end and for a minor tactical purpose
a year earlier.
Surprise was forfeited along with the opportunity to decisively alter the course of World War
I.
Now, your dictionary of choice offers benign descriptions of surprise.
To encounter suddenly or unexpectedly, an unusual or unexpected event, but it's not
that simple, within those mundane words lurks power.
We should consider the rich possibilities offered by surprise in all situations of conflict
or of competition.
Surprise is the gap between what we expect will happen and what actually does happen.
We want to close that gap.
Our enemies want to widen that gap or, conversely, we want to widen the gap for our surprise
and our enemy wants to close it.
In short, mine the gap.
Strategic surprise is not merely the unusual or the unexpected.
It is the gap in expectations that you or an opponent create and exploit quite deliberately.
Uncertainty is already one of the greatest worries, whether in business, in the military,
or in politics.
How awful, then, to discover that our enemies are doing their very best to increase our
uncertainty.
Worse still, our enemies will use deception to give us false certainty, to raise our false
expectations, to make us look in one direction and then surprise us in the worst possible
way from the opposite direction.
We're all familiar with this technique.
In fact, I know you're already cognizant of it in one of history's most famous instances
of surprise, coupled with deception, designed to gain a military advantage.
The Trojan War occurred sometime in the twelfth or thirteenth centuries B.C. in what's modern
day Turkey, and it was played out in Homer's Iliad and other ancient works of poetry.
At the end of this ten-year-long struggle between the Greeks and the city of Troy, the
Greeks appeared to admit defeat.
They burned their camp and they left a magnificent wooden horse dedicated to the goddess Athena
with the inscription, The Greeks dedicate this thank offering to Athena for their return
home.
Well, the Trojans brought the horse into the city and they celebrated their victory.
But the horse was hollow and filled with soldiers, Eruz de Gheir, devised by the Greek warrior
Odysseus.
That night, the soldiers emerged from the horse, they slew the guards, and they opened
the city gates to admit the army of Greeks that had returned in the night.
The city was burned and its population massacred.
While everyone knows the story of the Trojan horse, the larger deception is just as important
as the ruse of the hollow horse.
The Greeks engaged in a great and elaborate deception.
They were pretending that they were leaving the scene of battle to create false expectations
in the minds of the Trojans.
For many strategists, the notion of surprise now holds a place of honor as a circumstance
to be greatly valued and highly sought.
For some strategists, it holds almost mystical properties.
If you can surprise your opponent tactically, you reap rewards all out of proportion to
the energy expended.
And at the strategic level, surprise is much more difficult to secure, but the rewards
of successful strategic surprise have potential to win not only the day, but for the longer
term as well.
Surprise performs a valuable function in strategy.
It can rescue a seemingly lost position from defeat.
It can act as a force multiplier.
Surprise is really a combination of factors working in tandem with each other synergistically.
The gap between our expectations and what actually happens can be wide or can be narrow
depending on a number of discrete factors of the unexpected that yield 5 types of surprises.
All five of the surprise types are linked to expectations, intention, time, place, strength,
and style.
Each of these types of surprise can be linked to deception that creates the wrong expectations.
In general, deception is an amplifier of surprise.
Other tactics can also help generate a surprise for us, including stealth and ambiguity.
But overwhelmingly, deception is the preeminent cause of surprises, of place, time, and strength.
Let's look now at our five types of surprise and how deception has been used in history
to create or to amplify an advantage.
The first element of surprise is intention.
Does our enemy intend to strike us at all?
This is a yes or no gateway decision that makes possible all of the following types
of surprise.
It's a precondition that undergirds the four other types of surprise.
What is the enemy intention?
Will the enemy attack?
The second type of surprise is that of timing, striking when the enemy does not expect us.
Here's an example of strategic surprise that illustrates both.
One of the most infamous examples of surprise in combat was the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor on December 7, 1941.
This attack on the Hawaiian Islands attempted to destroy the United States' naval striking
power in the Pacific, and it brought the United States into the war on the side of the Allies.
The term Pearl Harbor has become synonymous with treachery.
And yet Pearl Harbor stands as the classic example of successful strategic surprise.
It involved deception at both the strategic and the tactical levels.
At the very time that Japan's Imperial Fleet was steaming toward Hawaii, the Japanese ambassador
was seeking further negotiations in Washington with Secretary of State Cordell Hull.
The Japanese successfully deceived the United States, for instance, in believing that no
attack was imminent.
Japanese deception was evidenced by entries in the official war diary that, quote, our
deceptive diplomacy is steadily proceeding toward success.
In other words, the deception was the cultivation of normalcy and continued peace negotiations.
But in fact, the Japanese deception extended to their own diplomats in Washington, Nomura
and Karusu, who continued negotiating in good faith.
But at home in Japan, the discussions at the Imperial Liaison Conference was cold and cynical
and calculating.
Here's what a member of the Imperial Liaison Conference had to say.
Our diplomats will have to be sacrificed.
What we want is to carry on diplomacy in such a way that until the very last minute the
United States will continue to think about the problem, we will ask questions and our
real plans will be kept secret.
Japanese timing was impeccable.
It came at a time of least preparedness for the defending forces at Pearl Harbor.
The attack began shortly before 8 o'clock on a Sunday morning.
The Japanese intentionally took advantage of the American custom of the weekend when
most ships were in port and most sailors were on liberty.
Now while there had long been expectations of a conflict of some sort between Japan and
the United States, when that conflict would occur was unknown.
In this case, Japan seized the strategic initiative and struck at a propitious time.
The attack achieved partial strategic surprise and total tactical surprise.
There are other sinister examples as well.
In France of 1307, King Philip IV devised a surprise operation that led to the mass
slaying of the Knights Templar.
Philip was in deep debt to the Templars.
His solution was to have all of them arrested in a comprehensive surprise operation.
They were then tortured into giving false confession and burned at the stake.
A 20th century example, just as violent, was the 1934 Night of the Long Knives in Nazi
Germany.
This was Adolf Hitler's surprise purging of the leadership of his SA stormtroopers,
which had become too much of a threat to his political power.
Sometimes the timing of a surprise is such an important component of the surprise itself
that it can even acquire a nickname.
The timing of the surprise is so well known that it becomes part of the description of
it.
So we find a paradox, the expectation of a surprise.
And in this case, the surprise is not the timing.
The most prominent example of this is an American presidential politics, and the event is called
the October Surprise.
This term entered the lexicon of American politics after a famous example of it in the
1972 presidential campaign between Richard Nixon and George McGovern.
Twelve days before the election, in October of 1972, U.S. National Security Advisor Henry
Kissinger announced in a White House press conference that peace was at hand.
He referred, of course, to the Vietnam War.
The timing of the announcement just two weeks before the election was perceived as a political
maneuver to enhance Nixon's already high chances at reelection.
Since that time, the October Surprise is the expectation that news with the capacity of
affecting the presidential election outcome will be released in October.
The tactic is to provide as little time as possible for a competitor to respond.
While the timing of a surprise is obviously important, the place of a surprise can be
equally so.
This refers to the point of attack, or the direction of attack, striking where the enemy
does not expect us.
In mid-1944, the war in Europe had reached a pivot point.
Everyone knew that an invasion of Nazi-occupied France was imminent.
In the East, the Soviet Union was beginning a mighty push against Germany, and along the
French coast facing the English Channel, the Germans prepared for an Allied invasion.
Where would it come, and when?
The Germans didn't know.
The Allies wanted to achieve strategic surprise, which is difficult in an era of modern warfare,
and so they helped the process along.
The Allies took active measures to create a set of false expectations in the minds of
German intelligence.
These measures took the form of a vast deception campaign called Operation Bodyguard.
The point was to convince German intelligence that the invasion of France would be launched
at the Paris Calais, which was the shortest route across the Channel.
But in reality, the real target was Normandy, while in the deception Normandy was presented
as a diversionary tactic.
In addition, the deception also aimed to convince the Germans that the real invasion would arrive
later than it actually did.
The result of the deception was to shape German expectations according to Allied designs,
and just as importantly, to help the Germans believe what they wanted to believe.
The Allies successfully manipulated the German response in the most advantageous way.
More recently, in the First Gulf War in 1991, the Allies used deception against Saddam Hussein's
million-man army to pin them in their defensive positions.
This deception fed into Iraqi fears of an amphibious invasion by 8,000 U.S. Marines, an invasion
that never came.
The warships Missouri and Wisconsin had shelled Falakha Island early during the war to reinforce
the idea that there would be an amphibious assault attempt.
This was supported by an early visible amphibious raid on the Kuwaiti coast, and by actions
to destroy Iraq's navy.
The press unwittingly helped in this misdirection by reporting amphibious training, the buildup
of troops just south of Kuwait, and then by anguishing over the prospect of World War
I trench warfare.
Meanwhile, the Marines waited on ships to land on the beaches of Kuwait City to make
it appear that the main attack would be launched into Kuwait from the sea and then directly
into Iraqi defenses.
The threat of invasion pinned the defenders in place while General Norman Schwartzkoff
conducted his now famous left hook, a sweeping maneuver through the desert to cut the Iraqi
lines of communication and supply.
Oftentimes we may know that an event will occur and we may know where, but we are surprised
by its magnitude, its strength, and its direction, striking in greater strength than is expected.
Throughout history, armies have used the technique of masking the size of their forces to confound
the enemy.
The Mongols, under the Khans in the 13th century, used this element of surprise often and effectively.
This consisted in exposing only a part of their forces and formations designed to convince
an enemy to attack an apparently smaller force.
The Mongols were particularly adept at luring enemies into vulnerable positions by showing
themselves from a hill or some predetermined location.
They would then disappear into the woods or behind hills to draw an enemy forward.
In essence, they were maneuvering the enemy into position for the most advantageous attack.
Mongol troops strategically positioned would appear suddenly from the flanks or from their
rear to complete the surprise of size and of direction.
Conversely, Mongol formations would sometimes make themselves appear fewer in number.
More often, they used deception to make themselves appear more numerous.
They would feed into the intelligence collection efforts of their enemy scouts and spies.
They would light numerous campfires at night to make their force appear five times larger
than it was.
They would drag foliage behind their horses to create dust clouds, characteristic of larger
forces.
Since each Mongol traveled with at least three to four horses, they would let prisoners and
family members ride them so as to appear more numerous in the distance.
The fifth and final type of surprise is one of style, striking in a way that is unexpected.
This is a catch-all category that encompasses a broad array of unexpected weapons, products
and tactics.
The style of an attack or a defense can be the source of advantageous surprise.
We surprise the enemy by using something new or by doing something not expected of
us.
Technological innovations of weaponry and innovations in tactics can yield a decisive
advantage when coupled with their surprise use.
We saw this in the previous example of the tank at the Battle of Cambrai and we've seen
how the introduction of new tactics were decisive at the ancient battles of Kanai and of Delium.
The most powerful example of this type of surprise is the use of the atomic bomb on
August 6, 1945, against the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
Now while we most often think of surprise as connected to offensive operations, after
all we do call it the surprise attack, it's possible to achieve defensive surprise as
well.
The British conducted one such successful defensive operation in World War I in its war against
Turkey.
In December of 1915, the stalemate on the Gallipoli Peninsula had become intolerable
for the British and the difficult decision was reached to evacuate.
Now this decision was taken with full knowledge that such a withdrawal under fire could lead
to horrendous casualties as the troops would be almost defenseless during what is now called
a retrograde operation.
But its deception was planned, one of the few of the war, from December 8th to the 20th,
more than 80,000 men and hundreds of big guns were evacuated onto ships over the course
of many nights until only a few hundred men were left manning the trenches.
Ironically, the Turks believed the indications of withdrawal was the actual deception.
They refused to be deceived that the British were withdrawing.
I've talked extensively about surprise in combat now, but sports offers opportunities
to gain advantage from surprise as well.
In fencing, in wrestling, in soccer, the faint has always been used at the individual level
to surprise an opponent and to throw him off guard.
In team sports, deception plays a major role in strategy.
Professional and college sports have reached such a level of sophistication that scouting,
reconnaissance, film study and statistical analysis are just as much a part of the game
as the practice field and the weight room.
Students pour over the tendencies of team behavior in every scenario imaginable, searching
for weaknesses and a key to competitive advantage.
I witnessed an exciting example of this when I was in college and it has stayed with me
all my life.
I was a young football fan at the University of North Carolina and we were playing a surprisingly
tough Miami of Ohio team in our season opener.
The game wasn't going well for my hometown, North Carolina squad.
Things appeared to get worse.
Our quarterback, Bernie Minipais, kept the ball on a run to the near sideline right in
front of us home fans.
They forced him out of bounds and he was slow to his feet.
He gripped his side and he limped back to the huddle.
A collective sigh deflated the crowd and we all set back to await the next play.
Maybe a timeout for an injury.
The officials set the ball on the near hash mark, near the home team fans.
What happened next hardly anyone in the stands expected.
Many of us missed it.
Our team casually sauntered toward the line, not yet obviously lining up.
Our quarterback still nursing a parent injury.
Suddenly the crowd gave a mighty roar.
Something was happening.
No one seemed to know what.
Something down on the field is inexplicable.
There was chaotic and confused movement and suddenly as if by some divine intervention,
North Carolina running back Mel Collins was streaking down the far sideline for a Carolina
touchdown.
The Miami team was the victim of a trick play, the swinging gate.
In this play the entire offensive line is on one side of the ball while the quarterback
and the running back are on the other side.
And in this case the swinging gate formation had been combined with an additional element.
It had been a masterpiece of deception and surprise set up earlier in the week.
Officials on the field for the game had even been alerted so they wouldn't be inadvertently
rule against the surprise that was legal.
Here's what had happened.
In watching film of the upcoming opponent, the Carolina coaches had noticed an odd procedure
of Miami's defense.
The defensive huddle faced away from the ball with only the defensive captain facing the
opponent.
This was a critical piece of information.
The Miami tendency to huddle a certain way suddenly became a possible liability and the
feigned injury of the quarterback lulled the defensive captain into a false sense of security.
Deception, a surprise with style and flawless execution of a trick play created a maneuver
that won the game.
Surprise and deception go hand in hand and can serve as powerful weapons.
Surprise multiplies the effectiveness of our capabilities and can yield incredible short
term competitive advantage.
Surprises of intention, of timing, place, strength and style can sometimes win the day for us
in one major surprise blow.
Deception multiplies the effectiveness of surprise.
At the same time, we have to remember that surprise is a two-edged sword.
We must be on guard against those self-same types of surprise in case they're used against
us.
A knowledge of the types of surprise can help us prepare so that surprises are not used
against us.
Deception and surprise are two of the most effective tools we can use as we continue
honing our ability to think and act strategically to gain lasting competitive advantage in the
challenges that we face.
