It seems unlike the game 2.
I give you Carl Benjamin, very good.
I feel a little bit out of place considering the quality of the speakers so far, so I will
do my best with what I have.
The one thing I wanted to try and do with the time that I have is come away from the
world of abstractions because I feel that speaking entirely in the abstract has a kind
of narcotic effect on political action.
We sit there and we say, well, for the last thousand years this has happened and therefore
this is going to happen somewhere else, not where we are and there's not really a lot
we can do.
It produces a kind of fatalism into the right, which I think the right has been laboring
under for quite some time, at least the duration of my entire life, if not my father's life
as well.
I would like to move away from that kind of perspective and think about what we can actually
do here and now while we are alive and able to move.
Just to quickly identify why the previous speaker said he doesn't understand why they
are doing the things they are doing, I actually spent a couple of years just studying all
of what they could call in sectionality, what you call woke, which is what is currently
degrading and destroying our civilisations and there is a short answer, there is a much
longer answer, but it is basically just a communist insurrection against liberalism
to destroy our countries and to degrade you as a people and every mechanism that they
can find to do it, they use against you, they are attacking your gender, they are attacking
your identity, they are attacking of course the homogeneity of your communities, they
are attacking the borders of your countries, they are attacking the concept of law and
order itself to make you live under a reign of what someone, I can't remember who was
who coined this, as an anarcho tyranny, where you are punished for any crimes you commit,
especially any kind of possibly higher crimes, speech crimes, thought crimes, all that sort
of thing, but of course the person who stabs someone else to death in the street is given
a lot of leeway and so this is all a part of reducing you, the project of reducing you
because the ultimate expression of, what I am going to describe as liberalism but there
will be people who take exception to this, is the abolition of any kind of boundary
border and that is what they are aiming for because it is only through boundaries and
borders that good things can be accrued, the distinction between the good and the bad is
itself a border and they seek to eliminate that entirely, this really is what we have
to be conscious of defending because it is under attack everywhere and they have to do
this because if we were to use terms like freedom, freedom in a sort of traditionalist
sense has a very right wing bias actually and we see this everywhere, look at the Norwegian
gender paradox, oh you are free to make any choices, great what happens, well men become
more manly, women become more feminine and they self segregate into masculine and feminine
roles of society and it is the same when anyone has the freedom to say move to a place where
they want, they call this white flight or whatever else, freedom tends to create kind
of ethnic homogeneity, makes people fall into habitual roles in society because actually
most of your daily life is kind of unconscious really, you get up, you have breakfast, you
don't really think about what you are going to have for breakfast, you just pour the milk
in the bowl, you choose a cereal, you use fancy eating, you get up, you go to work and
you haven't had a rational thought so far, you are just operating on habit because this
is just your life and there is nothing wrong with this, this is good, this is a safe place,
if you have got to start making rational decisions at 7 o'clock in the morning that means something
has gone horribly wrong and there is a catastrophe and now you have to figure out what you are
going to do about it, right? So this predictability of life is what people will always aim for
and this is why any concept of freedom we hold has to be the antithesis of the concept
of freedom that they hold, they will view this habitual life as a form of oppression
and frankly punishment. So anyway, I am going to dare to drag the conversation down into
the theatre of Kabuki politics that we all play in and we watch and stand us on the stage
that I have been reliably informed is not really where the decision is being made which
undoubtedly is true but it is a place of power that actually we could have access to and
so this is one of those things where we have been in the wings for such a long time, we
assume that these things are forever locked off and out of our reach but actually I think
that might not be the case for the very much longer. Before we start though, I think it
is worth just pointing out that things are really grim, you know, not to directly repudiate
a good friend of mine but there are actually lots of people suffering, I mean physically
suffering, somewhere in England right now a young girl is being raped by a Pakistani
man, yeah, it is not you but somewhere, someone is really suffering because of this, I have
seen too many videos of gangs of Asians hunting down an English boy on his own and beating
him, I have got sons, I have got sons of that age and so I am, yeah, we are not directly
personally under attack right now but there are these people and I cannot help but notice
the quality of the accents in this room maybe renders these people invisible to you but
my family do not come from prestige, I was the first person on my mum's side of the
family to ever go to university, my uncle Christopher was the first person on my dad's
side to go to university, we are the poor men of the Shires and actually I think things
are a lot worse than we might realise in such a glorious room like this, next time maybe
we should hold this in Bradford, maybe I am not joking, I am not joking, things are
really terrible at the moment, England in particular I think is in a very dark place
and I think I would implore you please stop saying the word white, like we are not talking
about the Scots, we are not talking about the Germans, we are not talking about the
French or the Poles, we are talking about England and the English when we talk about
London and the people who have been displaced, there is a lot of depth to the word England
because I do not consider myself to be a white man but I am an Englishman and actually
that is what I am really concerned about talking about and so we are trapped in the typical
Blair paradigm that we have all grown deeply accustomed to, the stultified, sclerotic,
straight jacket of British politics that we all feel we cannot escape and I can see
it in everyone's faces, this is I think why we retreat to positions of abstraction and
why we in fact, I recently had a trip to America and one thing I noticed was in the circles
of British right wing thought, British traditional thought, we have actually advanced ourselves
to a position far ahead of the Americans and I think that is the case because in America
things happen on the right, whether you agree with what happens or not, they are at the
forefront of some kind of motion whereas in Britain of course we are sat on the benches
all the time and it is really insufferable and so all we can do is think in the abstract
because nothing is really happening in front of us but I like to do things, I like to put
things in motion, I like to make things happen so for the last three years we have built
www.notices.com which has turned into a kind of privately funded traditionalist think tank
where we have been trying to figure out exactly why all these things are happening, which
is why I can tell you exactly what essays are the genesis of critical race theory and
in sectionality and how they explicitly say this is a Gramscian attack on our civilization
and the structures of our civilization and how they are going to bring together the coalition
of gays, of Muslims, of women, of whoever to attack everything that we hold dear. I
know these things because I have gone through and studied them in detail, it was insanely
boring basically, really boring but this has been a long march that has been on for quite
some time and we have to be aware of their intent. So let's begin from the position
that we are in and look around because something has happened in the last week that actually
has given me some hope. To attempt to liberate the stage from the stage master requires a
kind of conscious effort of will to understand that the stage is controlled by the stage
master and to be able to move in such a way that even if certain lines are violated that
it doesn't destroy us. I think in a way Britain has an advantage here of being not really
a European country because I can imagine that in France or in Germany or in Austria or wherever
where you have essentially full spectrum dominance of liberal ideology then you are going to
be the most popular political party in the country and rendered illegal as a terrorist
group as the AFD are staring down the barrel of. That thankfully isn't likely to happen
in England, in Britain. So actually this gives us a bit more freedom to act than we may have
imagined. We actually are kind of insulated in a way from this kind of aggressive liberal
politics because we are such an old country, because we are at heart a very traditional
country. The only things that are valuable in England are the things that are old. Anything
that is old intrinsically gains value here and we can take advantage of that actually.
However, I am not trying to unreasonably give you optimism of course. The country is falling
apart around us. The British people writ large don't have a political voice in Westminster.
I saw on LBC the other day two Indian women arguing about what it was to be British. Fascinating.
Tell me more. What have you learned studying us? Things are dire but like I was saying
in the beginning we are not dead yet. So as I said last week I believe I perceived a glimmer
of light that something may be changing. Because I think that if there is one thing
that UKIP and Najafaraj have proven is that there is no path around politics in the two
parties that we have. If UKIP couldn't break through to mainstream acceptance while getting
four million votes then it can't be done. I think. Because they had the one trump card
that will always stir the hearts and minds of the Englishmen. I tell you look at a map
of Brexit and where voted for Brexit and of course it is England. It is old England.
Because sovereignty is the first and highest principle of English radicalism. It has always
been the sovereignty of the country. And if on that most powerful trump card UKIP or the
Brexit party can't become the largest and most secure party then on nothing can it be
done I think. So we have to I think accept that our path to our goal is not around it
has to be through. And so the question is which one of the uni party do we want to try
and take over? And that's what we have to be thinking about. I know you don't like it.
But what are you going to do? Go door knock for reform? Hang on. I'm not asking the question
seriously. I'm rhetorically asking. Because no one is going to do that. And even if you
do you're not going to break double digits. Because for some reason the British public
are just like that. They have demonstrated that under the first pass the post system
they will only vote Labour and Conservative in significant numbers. It's not ideal but
it is what we have to work with. This is the circumstance that we're in. And like I said
I don't like it either. I've joined third parties. It doesn't work. I can't see it working
anywhere. So like the great adversary of Rome Hannibal we either find a way or we have to
make one. However this time when we win we are going to march on Rome. A bit of history
lore for you there. But luckily for us it seems that the pieces are aligning in such
a way that I think such a manoeuvre may be possible. Now I'm happy to be told that this
could be a flight of fancy. That nothing could come of this or will come of this. And it's
entirely likely that nothing will. Tomorrow we wake up things are all exactly the same.
In five years time we wake up things are all exactly the same. In ten years time we wake
up and we're being stabbed to death by an immigrant. But I would like to at least try
something because I think that the political structures in this country are not as actually
stable as they appear and actually if we just start beating on them maybe the established
consensus will collapse. Because I think that we can see that the moral legitimacy of Blairism
has died. Has anyone recently had an argument with a leftist where they've given you the
again rhetorical question. I assume that you argue with leftists because they're everywhere
presumably in the Conservative party. And you'll notice that their attacks on you and your
arguments just fall flat. They're totally toothless. Now they're appealing to a past consensus
that held when the world was different to how it is 20 years later. Because I mean it's all the
same arguments that are being had. You can go back and watch debates and statements and things like
that from the late 90s and early 2000s. And it's just the same rhetoric. But the world has changed.
The world has moved on. And we should move on with it. Because while they have been stagnating
actually we have been honing and sharpening our rhetoric and being more clever and nimble than
they are because we've been forced to actually. So I'm speaking of course of 9 to 4 hours going
to the Conservative party conference. Now before I go on can I get a show of hands? Who is a member
of the Conservative party in here? You know this is fascinating. I expected at least one hand.
I expected half a dozen hands. Not one person in here is a member of the Conservative party.
So there isn't one. Well, but perhaps there isn't one. It is a consequence of nobody being part of
one. So in previous years it was unthinkable that 9 to 4 hours would be allowed to the Conservative
party conference. Now I don't want to try and imply that 9 to 4 hours is perfect or anything like
that. But I think with politics you have to work with what you have. You have to begin in the
position you are and use the clay that you have to mould what you're trying to build. So 9 to 4
hours I think is the closest that we have to a proper Conservative person who is a prominent
figure and politician. Jacob Riesmog maybe but Jacob Riesmog frankly I see as being a bit spineless
actually. I don't see him having the fortitude. So I think he's concerned about his own career
first and his own reputation at dinner parties perhaps which fine. I'm not judging but of course
that means we can't look to him for anything. But I think 9 to 4 hours is the closest we have
and I think this was displayed when for some reason the Conservatives allowed him to go
to the Conservative party conference in his office as a journalist. Now I don't think
Nigel Farage is a journalist. And evidently the Conservative party members didn't think that
either because he was received like a rock star in the Conservative party. Like there are videos of
people Charlie's age swarming around Nigel Farage to shake his hand to get photos with him
to just bask in his presence because he has been the only successful pro-British voice
that has on almost every issue I care about been totally unbending on this. I mean he is the only
one. I saw him on Good Morning Britain yesterday saying no legal immigration is the problem.
Illegal immigration is essentially irrelevant because it kind of is. It's only 50,000 people a
year. My god can you imagine if 50,000 immigrants a year was the sum total of our immigration problem?
Can you even imagine? Like that was what it was in like 1990. Like why in London was an English
city. Like when things that happen now didn't happen. And so as he put it on Good Morning Britain
half the party loves him and half hates him. And you can tell there's a distinct demographic
difference between the love and the hate. And that's interesting because it's the young people who
love him. He himself also had an interesting response to I mean the whole thing was fascinating
because everyone around us like Nigel everyone here loves you. What does that mean when the ruling
party is full of people who think that you one of the most prominent political activists in the
last 25 years is beloved? It's scary for a bunch of the people at the top of the Conservative
party because they're like hang on a second. This man could eat us up if he wanted. If this I mean
when he just arrives as a journalist he is a whirlwind and the most impressive thing,
he's all any of them spoke about. I mean can anyone remember a single word of Rishi Sunak's
speech? No of course not. No one cares Rishi Sunak is obviously a middle manager and it was
interesting to have Rishi Sunak's response to Nigel Farage being there because I mean what is
his position in this? Okay I'm a purportedly the leader of the party but of course he's the puppet
of the stage managers behind. But it's hard to believe that Nigel Farage would be the puppet of
the stage managers because he's been such an outspoken and brash man in his past. So Rishi Sunak's
put in a bit of bite. Oh look the people I rely on to go knocking on doors and to do the dog the
dog work of politics all love Nigel Farage. Oh well I mean the Conservative party is a big tent
isn't it? All of a sudden even in previous areas he never would have come and I think this brings
us to what is likely to happen in the near future and what we can learn from what has happened in
the recent past. So Jeremy Corbyn should be an instructive lesson for us actually. Jeremy Corbyn
actually showed that you can lead an insurgency in a political party, one of the main political
parties. All you need is a kind of will and enough people who will just sing your praises. Essentially
a chorus to follow you around and do all of the things that need to be done for you so energetically
apply for positions of power. Because one of the things that I think a lot of young people don't
realise is that a lot of institutions and I mean like local parish councils, county councils,
things like that, they're run by old people and they are thrilled. And I learned this first hand
when my wife decided to appeal applied to the local parish council and she came home and was like
yeah I got it, I was like oh well done. She's like yeah I think I got it because I was just the
youngest person in the room and I think they were thrilled that there was someone under 50 who turned
up to do the work and so now she's essentially leading the local parish council because she's
prepared to actually get involved. Because a lot of these are aging institutions.
And I wonder, I wonder how they feel about this sort of thing in a conservative party.
So Corbyn showed us that you can do this and this is how he took over the Labour Party.
It was about a third of the party became Corbynite insurrectionists and after various defeats
the Labour Party was in a bit of a crisis of conscience, conscience. They didn't really know
what to do but Corbyn came forward and he had a plan. I've got a plan, I mean don't be wrong,
this plan is evil. It's weird that you can have an entire party this. I mean we've got the super
villain there so I guess he's he's promising to destroy everything that we love but at least
he's got an affirmative plan that moves us forward because otherwise we had nothing.
And Corbyn as you know was a non-starter for the British people because he was a terrorist
sympathiser and effectively leading a communist jihad against this country. He was going
distinctly against the grain and this really was the failure of Jeremy Corbyn and you heard
it from the activists when they were on the doorstep. Oh I'd love to vote Labour but I hate
Jeremy Corbyn. Why do they hate Jeremy Corbyn? It's actually if you sit down and talk to him,
not that I have but you can tell that if you sat down and talked to Jeremy Corbyn he'd be very
polite, he'd be quite genial and probably crack a few jokes. He actually seemed kind of likable
to be honest. You could hang out with him, have a beer. As soon as you start talking about politics
you realise oh my god this man's going to have me killed. But until that point Jeremy Corbyn is not
intrinsically an unlikable man but the British people could sense he obviously had such deeply
ingrained anti-British views that he elisted a disgust response from the average person on the
doorstep. And even with a candidate that flawed, I mean like is there a terrorist on earth that
Jeremy Corbyn doesn't have a picture next to him? I mean it, I'm literally curious right?
Even a man that bad could become the leader of a party and be the wave of a political movement.
And so we can learn a simple lesson from Jeremy Corbyn. The procedure is quite possible because
it turns out that people in Britain don't really care about the internal factions of a political
party. They don't. I mean it's literally you put a red rose on a pig and they'll vote for it right?
So they literally don't care who's running the party unless that guy obviously is like look I'm
just going to ruin you and take all your money. So the lesson that we learn from Corbyn is simply
this. Do not have a platform that the British public despises. It's literally that simple right?
Almost I mean even Tony Blair's platform which is I'm going to ruin you and kill everyone you love
just really slowly manages to pass the sniff test with the British public. Okay what if and this is
again you see this with the conservatives. Oh god we're down in the polls. Quick throw out red
me. Okay but think about this. What if the platform was red me? All the time full spectrum we're going
to do what you like all the time. My god imagine where the conservative polling would be right?
But of course no single conservative can have this thought because of the previous gentleman's
explanation of the control of the stage master. Then let's go on to Stammer very quickly. Stammer
is utterly uninspiring and his platform is exactly like him. He's just promising more
Blairism, more social contract society, more of the same just without the idiotic incompetent
excesses of the conservative party. So Kier Stammer will probably get net immigration down to half a
million rather than a million. Wonderful, wonderful. I can't wait to vote for him. I went to KierStammer.com
and had a look at his 10 pledges. Number one, economic justice. Oh thank god. Number two,
social justice. Brilliant. Number three, climate justice. Number four, promote peace and human
rights. Oh thank god we need more human rights. We just need more. Number five, common ownership.
Okay, Conny. Number six, defend migrants rights. Defending. Like so, moreover, where are your
rights? What's the difference between a human right and a migrant right? Do you come into this
at all? Number seven, strengthen trade unions. Number eight, radical devolution of power,
wealth and opportunity. I mean, I don't want someone devolving my wealth any further. It's
already devolved. I mean, I pay a lot in taxes and I don't earn that much money. Number nine is
just equality. And number ten is effective opposition to the Tories. I mean, I thought this
was the Tory manifesto when I was reading through it. But the point being, how does this address
any of the issues we actually face? Like, what is he trying to solve? Like, what would any of this
actually solve? It wouldn't change anything. It's not going to make the trains less crowded. It's
not going to bring down the cost of housing. It's not going to make your pound worth more in your
pocket. It's not going to make your street safer. None of this applies to the real world. This is
all liberal ideology that blends into communist ideology, the more abstracted away from reality
it becomes. But again, Starmer has some instructive lessons for us. He's actually shown how to bring
about, how to bring back a party from the brink of destruction. Because of course, Jeremy Corbyn
left the party, the Labour Party on the brink of destruction. And so all Starmer did is take over
the party with quite clear mandate. I wonder if Nigel Farage would have a clear mandate if he
took over the Conservative Party. I mean, I think he might. I think he might become the
Conservative Party leader with quite the majority. If there were two thirds, we're going to vote for
Liz Truss. And he'd come on. Farage would just, and they know it. And then, then Keir Starmer took over
and just ruthlessly purged the left entirely. 170,000 members left Labour. He ejected a few
hundred Corbynite NEC members and then rejected 100% of their appeals. 100%. They're all like,
oh, I don't think that's true. Get out. And then he blocked any further Corbynites from advancing.
According to one ex NEC member, as reported by Urban Democracy, they say, quote, is the party
purging the left? Absolutely. I don't know how anyone could pretend that's not happening.
Well, that's what the Conservatives need to do as well. Okay, that's what someone
with great influence and power in the Conservative Party would need to do.
Because as I said, people don't care about the factional infighting. Keir Starmer is at
about 45% in the polls at this point. People don't care about factional infighting. They just care
that the party looks sensible, looks serious, and has really message discipline. You come out with
the one thing all the time from all of the people in the party and you say, look, we're just going
to fix the country because we do this, this, this and this. And if your message is in line with
generally what the people of the party, the country would like and think that it's in their interest,
then you're on to a winner and you're going to go up in the polls. It's literally that simple.
Even the manifesto doesn't really seem to matter, frankly, because I mean, like,
when was the last time the party cared about the manifesto process? And so this brings us to
today, where if you look at the polls and you look at what is likely to happen in the future,
you realize that the Conservative Party has never actually had such an existential crisis as it is
having now. This is actually historically unique in the 200 years of the, or so, of the
Conservative Party's existence, because they are facing a complete wipeout to a cardboard box
known as Keir Starmer. I can understand how John Major lost Tony Blair, because you can say whatever
you like about the Dark Lord, but to say that he's not a brilliant and charismatic politician would
be wrong. You can't say those things about Keir Starmer, because that would also be wrong.
And yet, it is likely that this, if current trends hold, the Tories will receive the most
crushing defeat in British history. So just to lay out the current state of play out of the 650
seats in Parliament, the Conservatives have 352, which means they could do anything they wanted,
Labour 197, and the other parties have 101. If a general election was held tomorrow,
the various election predictions would have the other parties having 84, the Conservatives having
148, and Labour having 418, and that's just the sort of middling prediction. There are predictions
as high as the Conservatives having nearly 200 seats, or as low as 55 seats, depending on just
how hard the ball is dropped. So, and just to be clear, that is, when John Major was defeated
by Tony Blair, he had 165 seats. So it would be a more catastrophic defeat. Brutal for the Conservative
Party, but brilliant for us. I mean, this would be the best thing that could happen to the right-wing
movement in Britain for literally generations, because it would put the Conservative Party
into that crisis of legitimacy. The people running it ran it into the ground, and then
you have a lot of strings you can pull on. For example, the Conservative Party, whether you
like it or not, is 200 years old. It's a venerable institution. That's how the people inside of it
think of it. Now, like I said, I don't think of it that way, because for my lifetime, it's just been a
series of stabs in the back from the Conservatives. Well, they smile at my face, and I'm like,
right, okay, thank you. Yeah, I appreciate it. Okay, at least Labour are stabbing me in the front,
you know. But either way, you're getting stabbed, right? So I don't think well of the Conservative
Party, but it's important to remember that the Conservative voters don't tend to vote Labour
in great numbers. They just tend not to vote, and they don't vote because they're not interested
in being stabbed in the back anymore. They'll just, okay, we'll just sit this one out and let you
give the party over to the Communists, give the country over to the Communists,
and we'll just get stabbed in the front, at least dishonest.
And so, Farage would seem to be the only person in a position to do something about this. But
actually, it looks like the stars have aligned, and maybe something could actually be done.
I apologize. I'll hurry it up. So he's the only one with political chops for this. He seems to be
the only one I think we can see as a genuine track record of being on the right side of the issues
from our perspective. And he was a rock star, of course, in the party. And soon next seems to be
amenable to him joining. But as Farage himself tweeted, the Conservative Party doesn't actually
believe anything. Well, that's actually a real advantage if you do believe in something. Because
that means that we're going to, you know, if we would say, move into this space, we would be
engaging with people who literally didn't have a thought in their head. Well, that's easy,
because then they can be persuaded of anything, right? So we can lay the groundwork for a series
of affirmative beliefs that the party themselves can stand on, which would be great. And we would
have a person there who was able to articulate these well to have a public reputation that is
generally positive, and someone we could rely upon to be against the globalist order. I mean,
Nigel Farage was on stage with Donald Trump. Like, if anyone's not one of their guys, I think it's
Farage, actually, I think he's the only one we've got. And as I said, the ruling elite of the
Conservative Party are about to enter into an existential crisis of legitimacy. So right now,
we should be laying the groundwork in order to undermine and overthrow them. Because actually,
it might well be possible. We've doubtless got allies within the Conservative Party. As Farage
said, he thinks half of them are his men on his side, half of them despising, okay, well, then we
should really be trying to support those people who support him, because he supports what we believe,
and we would like to win. Because I think that's really what this all comes down to. We have to
win. It is an existential fight for the future of our country. I have four children. So hearing
about the average demography of the various countries, I was like, well, I'm doing great.
I've done my part, right? But I would like them to have a future worth living in. And so we have
to win. Because I don't know whether anyone knows this, but it looks like England's dying, actually.
It looks like it's dying a slow death, and I can't stand to see it. And so I would rather spend what
energy we have left battering the crap out of the wet Conservatives until they literally feel bullied
out of their own party. And so Prime Minister Farage can come out of number 10 and start doing
whatever the hell he wants to do, then watch them just continue to murder us. I would rather do
something. So we need collectively, the right needs to start thinking, how are we getting power?
And I think that might have to mean, I really hate to say this, it might have to mean joining
the Conservative Party. I can see you've done them very enthusiastic. But it seems to be the
only choice we have left. And I think that if we follow the sort of Corbyn patterns, I think
that actually, we probably could muster quite a number of people. So the Conservative Party is
not that big. It's only something like 200,000 people, which I mean, that sounds like a lot.
But actually, it's kind of tiny, considering we get 2,500 views a day on our website, on our
YouTube channels, and websites, and all that sort of thing. In fact, we're more than that.
So actually, I think we might be able, if collectively, to spread the word of mouth,
to actually start bringing a lot of people on side into this party, especially for us,
does join the Conservatives. I mean, that's going to be a massive windfall for our side.
And so who knows what we would have to do. Now, the Conservative Party is a very strange and
mysterious beast. It seems that nobody actually understands how the party works. Nobody really
knows who's pulling the strings. Basically, it'd be difficult to point at someone and say,
Faraj, you have to purge them, right? But purge Faraj would have to. When he was giving control
of the party, assuming that it's even possible, he would have to just purge the Blairites. They
would all have to go. But like I said, the public wouldn't care. And in fact, maybe they'd applaud,
to be honest, because I mean, who wants Penny Mordent in your party? Anyone who writes a book
that's endorsed by Bill Gates out, out, out. Again, if it is the board of the Conservative
Party that actually rules the party, well, we've got to start thinking, how do we get our guys on it?
Right? We need to make sure that we have an affirmative, conscious view on how to get
where we want to be. And everyone has to do their part. And the thing is, the worst part is,
I can't really do any of this myself, because I'm a controversial figure, right? And I wouldn't
want to burden them with me. But I think that I can show that actually, we, the influencers,
have done what we can do. Because in 2019, there was polling done that I was given access to,
that 14% of 18 to 25 year olds are going to vote UKIP in this country. It's kind of wild,
isn't it? Like, a fifth of, nearly a fifth of young people, like, yeah, I'm voting UKIP. Well,
it's because I watch our channels. That's because they, and I can see lots of them
in the audience here. It's because we were doing what we could to bring people on the side. And
actually, I think that the response to Farage at the Conservative Party Conference has shown,
that if nothing else, at least there is an appetite that has been generated by the media that we
have been producing. So we've done what we can do. And there's also another interesting thing,
which is the reaction of a left to Farage going to the Conservative Party Conference. They are
the most afraid I've ever seen them. Do you ever see the news agents clip? Oh my God,
it was like being at a Brexit party conference. Good. Like, of course it should be, they're meant
to be the party of Brexit. They took it on themselves. It should be that the left should
feel threatened by the right. Like, they should feel really afraid of us. But they're not. They're
afraid that we may gain control of the Conservative Party. And it may happen. And this leads us to
how they kind of treat Farage. So I watched a Good Morning Britain clip of Nigel Farage discussing
him being at the Conservative Party Conference. And it was so strange because they didn't interrupt
him or talk over him. They didn't call him names. In fact, they seem to treat him with the moral
legitimacy of someone who already was the leader of the Conservative Party, but also the Prime
Minister. There was a weird aura around him because he was just completely in his element. He knew
exactly how to handle them. And he just dealt with everything. And they treated him like he
was the legislator, which was so weird because he's not even a member of their party. I don't
think they give that kind of respect to Rishi Sinak. So what we need to do is properly organise.
We should be disciplined, alert, and we should start doing this. We should assess our strengths,
start making inroads into these parts, into the party where we can, be active and vocally attack
the David Cameron wing of the Conservative Party. Damn their memory and make it clear to all that
is Blairism that is killing the party. That has to be the, if we're going to talk about message
discipline, Blairism killed Conservatism. Blairism killed Conservatism over and over. It's killed the
Conservative Party. It's why you're dead in the polls. It's why no one's voting for you. You guys
have to go, right? That has to be the message discipline. And then what Farage should do,
now again, I'm a big fan of pie in the sky thinking, but Farage could use an organised
elite of his own who he can rely upon in order to get things done. If he joins the Conservative
Party, what he should do is fold the entire Brexit Party into it and make all of the Brexit Party
MEPs, candidates, bring his administrative apparatus of that party and start inserting it
into the Conservative Party. Now, like I said pie in the sky, I'm sure there's loads of reasons
this won't and can't happen, but this is what you should be aiming for, to make sure the party
becomes his machine, his beast. He has structural organisation experience a lot of these things.
And what's interesting is Farage is only 59. Now, he's been smoking and drinking for many years.
I thought he was a bit older than that actually. No, no, no shade Nigel. He's only 59. So five years
is actually not that long time awaits. So maybe when he's 65, it'll come to the election after
the next one and we'll have the leader of the Conservative Party Nigel Farage possibly vying
with Keir Star for who gets to be in control of this country. It is, I appreciate, it is possible,
I'll wrap up now, it is possible that there could be a Prime Minister Farage. Now, like I said,
I'm not saying it's likely. I'm not saying it's going to happen. What I'm saying is there are
things we individually can do and those things would actually involve small amounts of money and
not that much effort during the local Conservative Party, go to their meetings, do small things,
post on social media, all of those things. I hate to say that this has got to be the path,
but I think it has to be the path. But on the plus side, the arguments from the right have never
been stronger. The arguments from the left have never been weaker. They can't fix the problems
of the country, whereas we actually could. So really, we need to start thinking about actually
moving rather than just living in theory. Unfortunately, that means engaging with the
Conservative Party. Thank you.
