Sir Isaac Newton is one of the most recognized and recognizable characters from the history of science.
He's often seen as the culmination of the scientific revolution and the prototype of the modern scientist.
In this lecture we're going to look at some of Newton's better known interests and also some of his lesser known interests.
Try to fill in a more rounded, more balanced picture of this extremely interesting and equally enigmatic character.
Newton did draw together several strands of physics, mathematics, cosmology and astronomy as well as other fields together into what's been called the Newtonian synthesis.
A synthesis which gave the basis for classical physics and which explained and put a foundation under many of the other discoveries, theories of the 17th century.
He did devise and employ some important techniques which are familiar to modern scientists.
On the other hand, when viewed in his entirety Newton remains or begins to appear as foreign to the idea of the modern scientist as any other 17th century natural philosopher would be and perhaps in some cases even more so.
As far as being a culmination of the scientific revolution there is some truth to this in the idea of the Newtonian synthesis but we have to realize that the progress in the history of science or the development in the history of science has been accelerating for quite some time before Newton
and after Newton it doesn't actually slow down. This rapid development to this revolution if you want to keep using that term is still ongoing today.
Our speed of development of science and technology is still extremely rapid and probably certainly more rapid than it was in Newton's own day.
Well, let's start with some of the details about Newton's life. It turns out that many of the seeds of his most important discoveries were actually planted and began to germinate very early in his life.
Newton was born on Christmas Day in 1642, the same year that Galileo died. His childhood was by no means a happy one. His father died before Newton was born and his mother remarried very quickly, left the family home, left young Isaac in the care of her parents.
Now, by all accounts, Newton and his grandparents did not like each other. His grandfather pointedly omitted Isaac Newton from his will and Newton never mentioned his grandmother except on one brief occasion.
Apparently he didn't like his stepfather very much either, but at least the stepfather had the goodness to die when Isaac was 10 years old and leave Isaac's mother a fairly wealthy widow.
Now, Newton's mother thought that she would send her son off to school. She sent him off to Grantham where she hoped he would learn enough to come back and manage the family funds, which he did for nine very unhappy months before he left home again.
Went back to Grantham, finished his education and then enrolled in 1661, the age of 19, at Trinity College, Cambridge.
Well, at Cambridge he was taught the traditional curriculum, which in this time was still predominantly scholastic and Aristotelian.
Remember, we keep hearing our famous figures declaiming against Aristotelian learning, declaiming against scholastic method, declaiming against the universities, but the universities are still, to a considerable extent, using the scholastic philosophy, using Aristotelian sources,
and most of our characters are actually trained in that, at least originally. But within three years, by 1664, he had begun studying the so-called new philosophers, that is Descartes, Gassendi, Boyle, and others.
The first subject he turned to with enthusiasm was mathematics, and he later recalled having gotten hold of Descartes' geometry, reading it very, very slowly, many times over, until he mastered the whole thing, without getting any help from anyone, according to his later recollection.
During the years 1664 to 1666, he worked out the fundamental bases of both integral and differential calculus.
Now, he didn't publish or publicize any of this work on the invention of calculus, and so later on in his life he was involved in a very bitter priority dispute with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, a slightly younger contemporary.
Leibniz did also discover the calculus, integral and differential calculus, and did publish it. Now, since Newton didn't tell anyone about the calculus, we have no way now of adjudicating this controversy, who really did discover it first.
It was probably, well, we will never really know. What ends up is that today when you learn calculus, you actually learn Leibniz's notation, rather than Newton's notation. Leibniz's notation is slightly better for some purposes, and we actually do in some cases use a Newtonian notation, but only rarely.
Well, even if Newton didn't tell anyone about the integral and differential calculus, his knowledge of mathematics, his proficiency in mathematics were clearly well known at Cambridge, because the first holder of the Lucasian chair of mathematics by the name of Isaac Barrow,
resigned in 1669 to go to London to take up another post. He resigned in 1669 in favor of Newton, and Newton had been his protégé in many ways. So here is Newton at 26 years of age, being now a professor at Cambridge, the second holder of the Lucasian chair.
At about the same time, this is in the 1660s, Newton moves on to kinematics, studying both rectilinear and circular motion, and the acceleration of falling bodies, and make some very important contributions in that area. We're going to come back to that in a moment.
Again, not something he told people very much about.
Where he initially got his scientific notoriety from was his experiments with optics, and Newton's experiments with optics cover two particular areas, that is, color theory and a theory of what light is.
Well, those of you who know something about modern physics know that there's this issue of the wave versus the particle nature of light, and light seems to have some properties of each one. This distinction between particles and waves actually goes back to the 17th century.
Newton was an advocate of the idea that light is a particulate emanation. So he, Boyle, Gassendi felt that light was a matter of particles streaming away from a luminous body.
On the other hand, Descartes said that light was a passage of a tendency towards motion through a medium. So he's considered to be one of the people that starts the idea that light is not a physical substance, but rather a perturbation of some kind of medium, in other words, a wave.
Robert Hook, the person that I've mentioned to you previously as helping out Boyle with the air pump in the 1660s, said that light was a series of pulses of motion moving through a medium.
The real wave theory of light that's more akin to our modern one comes about from the Dutchman, Christian Huygens, which he's working on through the 1670s, 80s, and publishes in 1690.
One of the objections that Newton and other people lodged against the wave theory is that if you have waves in water and they hit an object, the waves tend to bend around that object.
But we don't see light bending around objects that is bending into the shadows that objects cast.
Well, actually, light does do that. It's an example of diffraction as it moves around the edges of bodies.
And diffraction was actually known at this time, even though Newton makes no mention of it. He may have not been aware of it.
It was actually first described by Francesco Maria Grimaldi in the 1660s. Grimaldi was an Italian Jesuit, and his studies were overall of the Scholastic sword.
He was a late Scholastic writer who did a lot of experiments.
And I mentioned him in particular not only to tell you about diffraction, but to point out that these late Scholastics were not quite as hidebound or unproductive as people like Newton and Descartes and Bacon like to make them out.
Well, the second part is of Newton's work on optics is about the composition of white light out of different colors.
That these colors were constant and that combining the colors of the spectrum, Newton named seven of them, gave us white light.
And if we separate white light, we're using a prism, we get the seven colors back again.
The idea is that white light is composed of distinct colors, and each one of these colors has a different refrangibility.
That is, a different angle at which each color is refracted as it goes through a prism.
Now, Newton was not, of course, the first person to see a prism.
Studies on the rainbow, for example, go back to the Islamic Middle Ages and even even further.
But what Newton said is that these colors are constant.
Other ideas of color said the colors were changes, modifications to white light.
So white light modified becomes the colors. Newton instead says no, white light is a combination of colors and the colors are constant.
He makes many beautiful experiments of separating white light into a spectrum and then refocusing it back to reform white light.
He makes an experiment with a string that's red at one end and violet at the other, hangs it in front of the prism,
looks at it through the prism and sees that the string appears to be separated.
Very beautiful experiment because the red light is refracted at one angle, the violet light at another angle.
So it looks like two discontinuous threads.
His experiments with prisms were really beautifully elegant and he calls them experimental crutches.
That is experiments of the crossroads.
That is to say that they're experiments which are done which allow you to decide yes or no kinds of questions.
It makes you choose one of the two ways at a crossroads.
So they're highly demonstrative and they have a proving point.
Newton's optics had a practical effect.
He realized that because light of different colors refracted at different angles,
one would never be able to make really large telescopes with powerful lenses,
with highly curved lenses, because of chromatic aberration, a phenomenon that he described,
which says basically that because the light is different, the different colors refracted different angles,
the focus for each color of light is at a slightly different point.
So you can't actually ever focus a light that's refracted through a strongly refracting lens.
So in order to avoid the use of such lenses,
he devises a reflecting telescope that uses a large mirror to collect and focus the light,
and only a small thin lens is used in the eyepiece.
Thus the majority of the focusing occurs by reflection rather than by refraction.
And since all the colors of white light reflect identically, chromatic aberration is avoided.
Well, this invention of this telescope brings Newton some notoriety.
The Royal Society of London, we'll talk about in the next lecture, asks to see the telescope.
He shows it to them, they elect him fellow, and he reads a paper on optics to them in 1672.
However, this was actually a double-edged sword.
It got Newton some notoriety outside of Cambridge,
but the problem was is that he got criticism for this paper.
There was a lot of support for it, but Robert Hook was one of the people that criticized it.
Remember, Hook had his own ideas of the wave theory of light and his own ideas about the origin of colors.
So he kept questioning, prodding Newton to answer certain questions,
which made Newton fly off the handle into uncontrollable rages.
Newton acted, we would say, overreacted or acted irrationally to this.
The result was that there was now going to be 30 years of on again, off again animosity with Robert Hook,
which was unfortunate, but also more immediately he withdrew, secluded himself back in Cambridge.
His work on optics he suppressed and didn't actually publish it until 30 years later,
after he had become president of the Royal Society.
He publishes the optics in 1706.
Well, so Newton goes back to Cambridge, he puts himself into seclusion,
he takes himself out of correspondence with most of his fellow natural philosophers.
That is until 1684, he receives a visit from Edmund Halley.
That is Halley of Halley's Comet fame.
Halley comes to him with a question about planetary motion, about the forces acting on falling bodies.
It's a question about orbits and that sort of thing.
It's a very difficult question, but when Halley poses the question to Newton, Newton answers it immediately,
as if he doesn't even have to think about it.
Halley surprised at this.
He said, how do you know this so quickly?
Well, Newton says, I've worked out all of this.
So what Halley stumbles upon is the fact that Newton has been doing lots of work on planetary motion and celestial dynamics.
And upon Halley's insistence, Newton starts writing this up.
And the result finally is his famous work, the Principia.
That is the mathematical principles of natural philosophy, which is finally published in 1687.
Now the Principia is sort of an odd book.
It's a great watershed in the history of physics.
But it's a curious book because even though Newton knew all this advanced mathematics like the calculus, which he devised,
and he probably used this calculus to discover what is published in the Principia,
it doesn't show up in the Principia.
Instead, he uses a rather archaic geometrical form of proof throughout the entire Principia.
People actually had difficulty with this because it was a very, very difficult text to read.
But what it did do was to draw together a lot of important threads of 17th century thought on planetary motion
and motion of falling bodies, all kinds of motion.
Let's look at some of the things in it.
First of all, he notes that Descartes' vortices will not work
and they will not produce the known planetary phenomena.
Just rules Descartes out of court.
Second, he says that instead the planets move in closed orbits
under the guidance of a central attractive force which balances their tendency by inertia to move in a straight line.
Let me go through that one more time.
He says that the closed orbit of the planets results from two forces acting simultaneously on the planet.
The tendency of the planet in motion to move in a straight line, that's an inertial motion,
and an attractive force towards the sun which holds the planet.
So that combination of those two tendencies gives us the elliptical orbits of the planets.
Thus it was that Newton enunciated the law of universal gravitation
and used it in Book 3 of the Principia, a book he wanted to suppress
and it took Halley quite a lot of argument to get him actually to publish it.
He uses this law of universal gravitation that says that there is a force that exists between any two masses in the universe
and this force drops off with the square of the distance.
He uses this law of universal gravitation to explain the orbits of comets.
He uses them to re-derive from first principles the three laws of Kepler on planetary motion.
Newton pulls those out of Kepler's work and shows their mathematical basis.
He also undergirds Galileo's law of kinematics.
Now the idea of gravitation, though it seems familiar to us, was not readily accepted.
The problem being that it reintroduces the one thing that the whole mechanical philosophy has been trying to get rid of,
action at a distance. How on earth does gravity function?
When it was published Newton's idea on gravitation looked like nothing other than an occult force
because there was no mechanical explanation.
You can't explain this force between two objects at a distance.
Well, this was a bit of a problem and he got quite a lot of criticism for this.
Let's move on now, though, to look at how he tried to resolve this problem and look at some of the less well-known parts of Newton's work.
The three things for which Newton is particularly celebrated are then the calculus, optics and gravitation, gravitation celestial mechanics.
These are well-known, but he spent probably more time on two other pursuits that are not as well-known, and that is alchemy and theology.
It's been reckoned that Newton wrote over a million words on alchemy.
He spent huge amounts of time copying out alchemical treatises, trying to puzzle out the enigmatic writings of the alchemists.
There's still some uncertainty about what he was really looking for.
We do know, for example, that he spent a lot of time doing experiments.
His nephew recalls that his uncle spent huge amounts of time in the laboratory working at the furnace doing things with crucibles and metals.
But unfortunately, even though Newton was an obsessive note taker, there are tens of thousands of pages of his manuscript still in existence,
we only have a few papers that deal with what he was actually doing in the lab.
So it's proved a little bit difficult to reconstruct that part of Newton's life that he seems to have kept very secret himself during his own lifetime.
It's been suggested that Newton's idea for the gravitational force was derived, in fact, from his readings in chemistry and alchemy.
That is to say, where active principles continue to be used.
Remember, the mechanical philosophy was not so good at explaining a lot of things in chemistry.
There were too many actions in chemistry that mechanical chemistry just didn't seem to explain well.
So these mechanical systems were often amended with active principles.
Principles that actually are not bits of passive matter, but are active matter instead, working, changing matter in various ways.
So it is possible, but it's not proven, it is possible that Newton's idea of this active force in the world comes from his reading of these sources.
But the single largest endeavor by Newton involved theology, and his theology is very interesting.
And again, it's another thing that he kept secret, although in this case, for quite a good reason.
Newton became convinced that Christianity was corrupted.
He was convinced that the doctrine of the Trinity and the doctrine of the divinity of Christ were corruptions to ancient Christian doctrine.
In short, Newton was a heretic.
He kept this secret because there were laws in England forbidding anti-Trinitarian views.
He certainly would have landed in prison if not worse if these views were widely known.
He pegs the origin of this corruption to the machinations of St. Athanasius.
Poor St. Athanasius becomes a horrible villain in Newton's writings.
Athanasius is an early church father, one of the patristic writers.
Newton poured over ancient theological texts trying to demonstrate the corruption that Athanasius and the people around him had introduced into Christianity.
His heretical stance, however, shouldn't allow us to overlook how deeply concerned Newton was about some of the same atheistic tendencies that Orthodox thinkers of his time were also interested in.
Namely, the atheistic potential of the mechanical philosophy.
That is, if the world is one great machine, where's the need for God in keeping it running?
God is at least absent. He's way out there. He's not relating to his world anymore at best, even if he still exists.
It is possible. This is another suggestion that has been made, which is very interesting.
Again, not proven because Newton is so secretive, it's hard to get a handle on him.
But it seems possible that he may have thought of the force of gravity as being a visible sign of God's action in the world at every moment in time.
It gives us a very different view of Newton and universal gravitation, if gravity is the constant action of God in the world at every moment.
That would certainly serve to amend the problems, the atheistical tendencies of a mechanical worldview.
Newton was also deeply interested in prophecy and with the end of the world. That is, eschatology, studies of the end of the world.
He copied out again the book of Daniel and interpretations on the book of Daniel from the Old Testament time and time again,
working through it, trying to figure out when the end of the world would come.
He labored mightily to correct, to fix the dates at which these prophecies would come to pass.
And to do so, he needed to know some dates in ancient history.
So one of the works of Newton, which is certainly one of his less read works, is a book he published late in life in the 1720s,
called The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended.
What it was was an attempt to figure out the exact dates, the historical dates of the reigns of certain kings in Middle Eastern empires,
of certain battles, of certain events that took place within the time period of biblical history,
in order to get the ancient dates right, because Newton needed to know the original starting dates,
so he could add certain numbers of years to them in order to get a date for the end of the world.
Now, what about this end of the world business?
Well, Newton believed that the destruction of the world by fire, as foretold in the book of Revelations,
would occur when a huge comet, possibly the one seen in 1680, which was an extremely bright comet, falls into the sun.
This comet, at this time, comets were thought to be very large bodies on the order of the size of planets.
They were not known at that time to be rather small, relatively small, certainly to a planet or a moon.
The idea with Newton was that this huge comet would fall into the sun, would give the sun more fuel to burn,
and so it would be like throwing straw onto a fire.
The sun would flare up and incinerate the earth and the solar system, and that would be the end of the world.
The idea is that this comet's orbit would slowly decay, and in four or five more passes, it would run into the sun,
and that would be game over for humanity.
Newton was actually very interested in this idea of comets being agents of change in dramatic, catastrophic ways in the universe.
It's curious that in modern times, we're now all of a sudden interested again in the idea of comets and asteroids hitting the earth,
but Newton certainly was, Holly was as well.
Edmund Holly wrote a treatise, or I'm sorry, gave a paper at the Royal Society about a comet possibly having hit the earth,
causing the axial tilt to the earth.
Very interesting, this is in the 1690s he was doing this.
Well, a common theme in Newton's studies is a belief in the Prisca sapiensia.
We've heard about this a number of times already, this original wisdom, this original knowledge revealed by God to the ancient patriarchs,
to Seth, to Adam, to Abraham, Solomon, some of these biblical patriarchs.
The idea also is that this knowledge is progressively corrupted over time.
Notice how this fits in very well with his heretical view of Christianity.
The Christianity is revealed by Christ and over time men corrupt it, and so it has to be repurified.
This idea of the importance, the purity of ancient wisdom runs through so much of Newton's thought.
For example, he thought that the ancients actually knew the inverse square law of universal gravitation.
He therefore was not its discoverer, but its restorer.
He also seems to have thought that the ancients knew the cause of gravity, something he desperately wanted to know.
While I'm on the topic of the cause of gravity, there is something that happens during Newton's lifetime and afterwards
where some of his followers say, well, don't ask that question.
The idea simply that matter as a part of its nature necessarily attracts all other matter.
End of question. I even remember myself being a freshman in college asking my physics professor,
well, why is there gravity?
Thought for a moment he looked at me and said, we don't ask those questions.
Well, some physicists, of course, do ask that question today, but the idea is that a sort of essentialist view of matter of gravity
developed during and after Newton's lifetime that matter just attracts other matter.
End of story. Newton was not satisfied with that, certainly. He wanted to know the cause.
So Newton saw himself as a restorer of ancient knowledge, almost prophetically so.
A restorer of ancient knowledge through both his scientific labors and of the ancient true religion through his theological labors.
So we find Newton looking at a lot of very early texts.
He was very interested in the corpus hermeticum, those writings of Hermes supposedly authored at the same time as Moses.
Well, these are parts of Newton's life that we don't actually hear about quite so much as his work in optics and calculus and planetary motion.
That's partially because he kept them secret, most certainly, but it's also because the pursuit of alchemy and theology for Newton
was not in conformity with the image of Newton as a rationalist that the 18th century after Newton's death wanted.
So the knowledge of these kind of pursuits of Newton was actually suppressed, or at least downplayed.
In fact, Newton's alchemical and theological manuscripts were very nearly dispersed because originally Cambridge was not interested and other people were not interested in seeing them.
This was not part of the Newton we wanted to know.
Now, fortunately through the action of two people who were at a sale, his papers were actually auctioned off in the 1930s to the highest bidders.
Two important people bought up most of the alchemy and theology, but some were distributed and we still don't know where they are to this day.
It would be nice to find them.
Now, this is often the fate of historical figures.
Their biographies are very often subsequently tailored to fit later ideas of the way they should have been.
This complicates the historian's task most certainly, but it also gives us something to do in the sense that the historian wants to go back and reconstruct what the character was really like in his context.
When we restore the totality of Newton's thought and work, we see that in many ways he's very little like a modern scientist in his beliefs or certainly in his motivations.
And Newton emerges as a much more interesting, much more fascinating, much more enigmatic and intriguing character than even we might have thought.
Well, in the next lecture, we're going to look at the creation of a new home for natural philosophy, a new kind of institution, namely the scientific society.
