At first glance, we might think that magic has nothing to do with the history of science
whatsoever, but appearances can be very deceptive.
Many Renaissance thinkers thought that magic was central to the promotion of natural philosophy
and technology.
One of them, by the name of Giambattista della Porta, wrote in the 16th century that
the works of magic are nothing else than the works of nature, and magic is the practical
part of natural philosophy.
Now if this seems odd or quaint to us, we have to pause to examine two things.
First, what did the Renaissance thinkers like della Porta think magic actually was?
And then second, how is it really related to natural philosophy?
How can it be the practical part of natural philosophy?
Once we've done that, we're going to spend the rest of the lecture visiting three very
curious characters who exemplify different aspects of the natural magic tradition of
the Renaissance.
So now let's start with what Renaissance natural magic actually is.
Natural magic is based on two fundamental principles.
One, it's based on a worldview that there exist connections or correspondences between
different natural objects, objects that we wouldn't necessarily think were related.
Nonetheless, the natural magic tradition says that God has implanted certain correspondences,
certain connections between these groups of objects.
The second part, which is equally important, is that the person who knows magic, that is
Amagos, is the name that's given to him, could make use of these connections for practical
purposes.
So connections between different objects and the use of those connections to some practical
end.
In fact, the close relationship to practicality is pointed out by none other than Francis
Bacon.
Lord Chancellor of England, one of the key figures in developing new methodologies for
the study of scientific topics.
He writes, a little bit after 1600, he says that magic proposes to recall natural philosophy
from a miscellany of speculations to a magnitude of works.
So again, this idea that it's practical, well, what do we mean by these correspondences?
What are they?
Well, let's take one as an example.
Let's take the common sunflower.
If you sit in your garden where you might have sunflowers growing, you'll notice that
as the day progresses, the sunflower turns from east to west and follows the sun.
In the morning, it's back at the east and follows the sun again.
Doesn't that imply that there's some connection between the flower and the planet, the sun?
They even, in fact, look something alike, the sunflower with its radiant yellow petals,
the sun with its bright yellow rays.
Is that the only kind of connection that can exist?
Well, no, let's extend it.
Let's try and be a magus for a moment and make some of the other connections.
We've got sunflower to sun.
What else might the sun be connected to?
Well, let's go from the vegetable world to the mineral world.
We've said already that alchemically, the sun is connected with gold.
So now we have sunflower gold sun.
How about the animal world?
Let's use human beings.
There are a number of organs inside the human body.
The sun is the regent, so to speak, of the cosmos, the source of life and warmth.
What part of the body would correspond to that?
Well, the heart.
So sun, sunflower, heart, gold.
Now, how might we make use of these?
Well, if someone had a heart element, we might try making a medicine from the sunflower because
there's a sympathy, as it's called, between the sunflower and the heart because they belong
to the same group.
We might instead make a medicine alchemically out of gold.
This is, in fact, where the word cordial comes from.
It comes from the Latin core for heart, and a cordial is a heart medicine originally.
These were often based in gold in the Renaissance.
Or we could hang an amulet of gold metal over the heart, again, bringing the two things
in close to one another to affect a relationship between them.
These relationships are all sympathetic.
There's a positive interaction, just like there's a positive interaction between the
moon and anything that's wet, like the seas.
As the moon rises overhead, the sea rises and the tide comes in.
We know that that's a sympathetic attraction, too, but there can also be antipathic interactions.
We know, for example, that if we make loot strings out of gut and we take the gut of a
sheep to make one string and the gut of a wolf to make another and put it on the same
loot, you'll never be able to tune the loot, because the two can never be tuned to the
same note, because there's a natural antipathy between the sheep and the wolf, which carries
out in the gut that makes the strings.
Now, these correspondences mean that one member of the group affects another, influences another,
and by the action of analogy, if you learn about one member of the group, you learn
something about all the other members of the group.
Now, the point of importance for us, answering the question of how is this related to science
and natural philosophy, is that the magus has to discover these correspondences.
In other words, he has to figure out what the groupings actually are, where does antipathy
and sympathy lie?
Now, this could be done in several ways.
It could be done from textual sources, so look at learned authorities.
It could be done by observation of the natural world, or by experimentation with the natural
objects themselves.
One way that the natural philosopher, the magus, can approach this problem is to use what's
called the doctrine of signatures.
The doctrine of signatures says that God gives us a helping hand.
In other words, he leaves these markers, these signatures, of how things are related,
so the magus has to observe these.
Well, let me give you one example.
What if we take a walnut?
We open the shell very carefully.
Do you notice what the walnut nestled in its shell looks like?
But it looks like a brain, doesn't it?
Therefore, the walnut has this shape because God is telling us something.
He's telling us that there's a connection between walnuts and the brain.
Therefore, with a brain element, one might suggest eating walnuts.
Now, in a sense, natural magic drew upon and exploited natural laws in the same way as
more familiar forms of technology.
We use technology to gain power over our natural environment to extend the power of man.
Natural magic is actually, odd as it sounds, a form of technology.
It's a way of producing effects of extending human power over the world.
Now, let's look at some of the sources that the Renaissance drew on, and then we'll look
at some people that exemplify it.
The Renaissance had many sources for the natural magic tradition.
There were some classical authors, first of all.
The Neoplatonic author Proclus, whose dates from the 5th century AD, wrote several works
which deal with the correspondences between things and how they can be used for natural
effects.
The Bible also gives us a background.
Remember that in the book of Exodus, Pharaoh's priests are able to turn their staffs into
serpents.
It's certainly a magical act of some sort, not miraculous because God was not on the
side of Pharaoh and his priests, clearly in that case, so the priests of Egypt must have
had some deep knowledge of magic in order to carry this out.
I should mention, having said that, that we need to think of magic always as something
natural and not as something miraculous.
We're making use of correspondences that God put in the world in order for man to use
them.
It's not supernatural, it's not demonic, it's entirely a natural thing.
There's also the ancient doctrine of the macrocosm, microcosm, that tells us that the heavens
above have a natural connection to the earth below.
This is the basis of astrology, for example.
Well just as there are relationships between the planets and the way things happen on earth
or the tendencies of things on earth, you'll remember that Ptolemy says that the planets
extend their natural qualities, like Mars is hot and dry, it increases hotness and dryness
on the earth when it's in particular signs.
In the same way, this interaction, whatever it is, it's a non-material interaction between
members of linked groups, it's the same way that astrology works, perhaps.
The same way the moon evokes the tides.
In the previous lecture I mentioned the corpus hermeticum, this ancient body of texts that
was thought to have been written by someone contemporary with Moses.
There are magical ideas there which are used very frequently.
And the translator, Marsilio Ficino, the Florentine, who publishes and translates the corpus hermeticum,
often invokes magic as an important part of knowledge.
There's one other source that's important, and that's the notion of what are called occult
qualities.
Now this is something scholastic, and when I use the word occult here, I don't mean
it in the 19th century sense of the word, that it's black magic or something, occult
just from the Latin word occultus, which means hidden or covered up.
An occult quality is to be distinguished from a manifest quality.
What are the manifest qualities of a thing?
Well, hotness, coldness, wetness, dryness, the Aristotelian qualities.
And this is a way that we know that things can affect one another.
A fire warms in a natural way because it's hot and dry, so it extends its manifest quality
of hotness to the object that we put into it.
That's easy to explain.
But there's a whole slew of qualities that are occult.
We cannot explain the effect of certain bodies based on manifest qualities.
What's an example?
Well, how about the magnet?
Think of all the manifest qualities of a magnet, but none of them will explain to you how it
does this remarkable feat of attracting iron through space and holding it fixed against
itself.
You can't explain that.
That's an occult quality.
You also can't explain how it is that opium causes a person to fall asleep.
Well, opium has certain tastes.
It has certain qualities that galenic physicians would apply to it of hot, cold, wet, and dry.
But none of those seem to be able to explain how it is that it has this soporific effect
on people once it's ingested.
That, too, is an occult quality.
Well, there's also a link to humanism.
Humanism, remember, put a high value on ancient texts, and it sought for new sources of knowledge
outside the traditional canons of the university and scholastic literature, scholastic commentary.
Magic is about the same thing, in a sense, seeking for alternative sources of knowledge.
And as we look through our three characters that we're going to talk about, think about
how they're employing new sources of knowledge.
Remember through all of this that the goal of the magician is to control and utilize the
hidden links and powers found in nature.
These could be turned towards medical purposes, gaining knowledge, controlling or redirecting
natural events, like a technology.
Right, well now let's go on and look at our three characters.
The first one I want to talk about is Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Netteheim.
He was born in 1486 and he lives until 1535.
He wrote a very important work called Three Books of Occult Philosophy, published 1531-1533.
It's a veritable compendium of magical knowledge.
For Agrippa, magic is the highest form of natural knowledge.
Our three books comprehensively describe the idea of the doctrine of signatures, the relationships
that exist between different groups of objects, how to produce amulets and various other kinds
of occult magical practices.
One thing that's very clear about Agrippa is that he is most definitely a humanist.
The use of classical sources and illusions is very, very thick.
In fact, you'll notice his name, Cornelius Agrippa, is in fact a Roman name, even though
he's a German himself.
The other thing that's important for Agrippa, interestingly enough, is mathematics.
And this is something that we see again and again, that mathematics, besides being a particular
interest of the humanists, mathematics is again and again related to magic.
According to what Agrippa says, he writes,
Mathematics is so necessary to magic and has such an affinity with it that those who profess
magic without mathematics are far mistaken.
They labor in vain and shall never attain their desired effects.
So don't think of magic as some sort of mumbo-jumbo, the way we think of magic.
It's not pulling rabbits out of hats, it's not that sort of a thing, it's something
that's related to humanist interests, it's related to mathematics and natural powers.
Agrippa felt that his goal was to restore what he believed to be a holy, ancient magic,
to purify it of accreted superstitions that had come upon it in later ages.
Again, this is a very humanist type sentiment.
Now the correspondences, as I've said, can only be learned by long experience in the
natural world.
Well, maybe not.
For Agrippa, it's very clear that his experience is not in the natural world, his experience
is in classical texts.
He's constantly referring to texts from the classical period.
He's really a humanist, he's a textual scholar.
And that's one way that a magus could deal with magic through text.
So that's Agrippa's story.
If we turn to a contemporary of Agrippa, we find a very different position to the wonderfully
named Theophrastus Philippus Aureolus bombastus from Hohenheim, otherwise known as Paracelsus.
He was born 1493, about that year, so around the time the discovery of America lived until
1541.
He's miles away from Agrippa in many, many, many ways.
The learned Agrippa on the one hand admired the classical tradition.
He was a humanist.
Paracelsus despised it.
The central feature of Paracelsus and Paracelsianism is generally iconoclasm.
You can think of Paracelsus as a rebel with a cause.
His iconoclasm reaches to everything that's traditional and that is an ordinary, usual
source of authority.
The other feature of Paracelsus is chemical medicine.
Chemistry for him and medicine are the metaphors, are the ways to look at the world.
Everything becomes chemical or medical.
Well let's see some of the things he has to say.
First he violently assails medical authorities, both classical and contemporary.
It's said that he opened a lecture at the University of Basel by taking the Canon of
Avicenna and putting it in a pan and setting it alight to show his contempt for traditional
medical learning.
He also often rejected foreign, what he considered to be foreign, medicaments, institutions and
ideals in favor of native Germanic ones.
Now he was Swiss.
He was born in Einselen, which is now in Switzerland.
One of the things that runs throughout Paracelsus' writings is a kind of German nationalism.
He really despised the Italians.
Remember that Italy at this time is the center of medical knowledge.
All the good medical schools are in Italy.
But he rejects Italians, modern Italians, he rejects Romans and Greeks and Arabs as
being foreign.
He says that Germany has its own people and its own herbs and its own minerals and its
own diseases, so we have to look for the cures for German elements, for German people
in German sources, in German materials.
He rejects scholastic argument.
He rejects university learning.
He rejects the university methods.
He was a man of tremendous ill temper, violent outbursts.
He was hounded from almost every place he set up camp because he invariably got on everybody's
bad side within a few minutes.
Unlike Agrippa, Paracelsus did not believe that texts were a satisfactory source of knowledge.
Where did you get knowledge from?
From experience in the world and practice in a chemical furnace, in the fire.
Knowledge from experiments in the fire.
Well, Paracelsus' worldview, as I've said, is chemically based.
He proposed what has been called a chemical worldview, that instead of seeing things in
an Aristotelian or a Ptolemaic sense, a classical sense, he saw the human body, for example,
as a chemical distillation, as a chemical process, as filled with chemical processes.
The earth itself, with the seas evaporating and the rain falling back down, is like a
great distilling flask.
The cosmos, the whole cosmos, works on chemical type principles, and God himself is not the
geometer of the Platonists, instead he's a cosmic chemist who creates the world by chemical
processes and embodies chemical processes into it.
For Paracelsus as well, spiritual powers are the cause of change in the world, not the
material interactions of qualities that the scholastics talk about.
Paracelsus provides a whole system of natural philosophy and of medicine that's contrary
to Aristotle and Galen, so here again we have now an alternative worldview.
Paracelsus also added to chemistry itself, we'll talk about this more later, but he adopted
the old Islamic dyad of Mercury and Sulphur, the two things that come together to form
the metals, and added a third principle, salt.
So now there's a material trinity that mirrors the divine trinity.
He also extended Mercury, Sulphur, and salt to all substances rather than just metals,
that's what everything is made out of.
The utility for chemistry for Paracelsus comes from the process he calls Shidunk, or division,
by dividing out the principles we can produce good medicines, get rid of toxins, produce
things that are useful for life.
Now I can't hide from the fact, nor would I want to, that many Paracelsian notions can
be called bizarre.
They're difficult to comprehend indeed, sometimes they're often obscurantist, meaning that they're
intended to be obscure.
It was said by one of Paracelsus' companions that all of his works were dictated while
he was drunk.
And if you read enough Paracelsus, you may come to believe this.
Now even though Paracelsus' writings and ideas are very poorly organized, they were rationalized
by his followers because it was a new kind of system, it was something iconoclastic against
general university learning against the classical tradition.
Paracelsianism, despite the problems of Paracelsus himself, gained an enormously wide following
for over a century.
Paracelsianism becomes a very important part of natural philosophy and of medicine as well.
Now it is true that a lot of people took it up, probably partly, on account of its iconoclastic
nature.
In modern terms, it's in a sense what we might call outsider science.
That is to say that it was popular among people who were not university trained, particularly
medical practitioners who were not university trained, and you can see why it would be appealing.
You don't have a university degree, you have sort of a folk knowledge of medicine.
Well here's someone who's sort of on your side in a sense.
He doesn't require you to go get a degree from a university because he thinks that's
useless.
Burn your books, sell them off, get a walking stick and walk around the world, visit mines
and plant and look at plants and animals, and you'll learn how to be a physician.
It was also popular among Protestants and Germans.
Again there's an iconoclasm there, the tension between the German world, which is considered
barbaric in the classical tradition, and the classical Mediterranean world.
There's also the Protestant-Catholic divide, and all sorts of others outside the traditional
university structure found Paracelsianism to be very interesting and very powerful to
them.
We'll talk a little bit more about Paracelsus later as well, but notice the difference between
this iconoclastic Paracelsus and the humanist Agrippa, opposite ends of the spectrum.
The third magus I want to talk about is John D. John D is a little later than the other
two.
He's born in 1527, he lives to 1608.
He's an Englishman, he's an Elizabethan mathematician and natural philosopher, he lives at the same
time the end of his life corresponds with that of Shakespeare, overlaps with Shakespeare,
and in fact it has been suggested that the figure of Prospero in the Tempest, the wizard
Prospero, is actually modeled by Shakespeare on John D.
Now John D illustrates some of the realms that are within natural philosophy, but also
some of the realms that are beyond natural philosophy, and the potentially close connection
that there can be between magic and scientific mathematical knowledge.
Let me say a little bit more about D first.
He was recognized as a mathematician, as a polymath, as a writer, he had the largest
private library in England.
He was involved in the production of the first English translation of Euclid from the Greek
in 1570, he wrote the preface to it, which is very interesting talking about the importance
of mathematics.
D's mathematical interests were far ranging and he was well recognized for this, but he
had other interests.
Certainly the relationship between mathematics and astronomy astrology is very close indeed.
D was asked to choose a date for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth I based upon astrological
considerations, and the day of her coronation was one that was supposed to be astrologically
propitious.
He also encouraged the queen to explore and exploit the new world.
In fact he's often credited with being the first person to use the term the British Empire.
There was also on the other side a popular rumor that he was a sorcerer, and this seems
to have come about because according to the story, whether it's true or not, we don't
actually know, when he was a student at Cambridge he constructed a mechanical flying beetle
that was used in a performance of a play by Aristophanes.
Since no one could figure out how the beetle actually flew across the stage, it was considered
to be a product of the black arts.
There's always a close relationship between technology and magic.
I want to reiterate that once again.
As for the connection between dark magic and white magic, or natural magic and demonic
magic, well in this time period usually the good magic is whatever I'm doing, and the
dark magic, the demonic magic is whatever someone else is doing that doesn't agree with
me.
Nonetheless, there is this relationship as well between technology and magic.
Unlike some of his contemporaries, some of his humanist contemporaries de-used the classical,
I'm sorry, the medieval sources much more.
His library was full of medieval texts, certainly Roger Bacon was extremely important to him.
Remember Roger Bacon, the medieval Franciscan friar of the 13th century, at Oxford of the
13th century, who had this idea of the multiplication of species that qualities could be propagated
across a distance, that is fire warms something at a distance because it projects the quality
of heat at a distance.
De-used this idea of the multiplication of qualities, the multiplication of species to
account for astrological effects, and for the action of the correspondences between
things in the natural world upon which natural magic is based.
But De also did something that's very curious that we have yet to have a good explanation
of.
For more than 20 years he carried out conversations with angels, at least that's what he says
he did.
He used a holy table, as he called it, carved with certain sigils and patterns, and gazing
stones, for example a polished mirror of obsidian, this polished obsidian gazing stone is actually
still in the British library, it's preserved there, you can see it, and he used scribes,
one most important by the name of Edward Kelly, who would look into this gazing stone and
describe what he saw to Dee, who then took down what was seen.
The idea was that Kelly and other scribes, because he used three different ones, were
able to see spiritual entities and various scenes within the stone.
What was really going on in these sessions remains a bit of a mystery, but there are
literally dozens of volumes of notebooks of the conversations that were carried out.
What is clear, regardless of what was actually going on, whether it was Edward Kelly having
a joke on Dee, then you'd have to explain the other two scribes doing the same thing,
or what was going on, we don't know, but what is clear is that Dee thought he could learn
the secrets of the universe by having God's own angels, who were after all present at
the creation of the world, tell them to him.
Talk about going to find an alternate source of knowledge, that's about as far away from
the scholastic method as you can get.
Many of Dee's surviving notes are full of an angelic language, which being the language
by which God created the universe would naturally have great power.
So Dee endeavored to learn this language in order to manipulate creation.
Again, this utility part of magic, usefulness, use the angelic language, the divine language,
to find out about the world and to do stuff with it.
Well, the impact of Renaissance natural magic on the development of modern science has been
hotly debated for a long time, and let's keep an eye on it in the next few lectures that's
going to recur.
Let me just mention quickly four ways in which it's important.
First, it's finding of alternative sources of knowledge and methods of learning.
Second, it's emphasis on action.
This in fact is similar to the humanist's interest in an active civic life.
So this action is important.
The emphasis on observing things that are hidden in the world.
So you have to go out and find things, you have to increase your observations of the
natural world.
Clearly, that's closely linked to the natural sciences.
And fourth, it emphasizes human power over the world.
In part, this is adopted from earlier Neoplatonic ideals.
Roger Bacon, U of St. Victor said the same sort of things.
But it's a notable counterpoint to the contemplative style of scholastic notions.
And it is a feature that's familiar to all of us in modern science and technology.
Well in the next lecture, we're going to switch from magic to astronomy.
We're going to examine the work of Nicholas Copernicus, who is famed for his crazy idea
that the earth is actually in motion and the sun stands still after all.
