Nicholas Copernicus is one of the best known figures in the history of science.
He's a national hero of Poland.
He appears on everything from t-shirts to postage stamps.
His major idea, his contribution, his importance to the history of science
deals with his rather odd notion that instead of the earth being immobile
at the center of the cosmos, the sun sits there and the earth revolves around it
once in a year.
Now, this idea of Copernicus is the idea of heliocentrism,
that is from the Greek helios for sun, that the sun is at the center of the cosmos,
seems so commonplace to us, seems so obvious, so well known,
that we tend to think that the moment someone proposed this notion, like Copernicus,
that every clear-minded, free-minded person immediately would think,
oh, well, this doesn't solve our problems.
Doesn't this make the world more rational, more reasonable, more predictable?
Well, in fact, as we should know by now in the history of science,
things often turn out far from the way we might expect.
So let's take some time to look at Copernicus and his ideas.
What I want to do in this lecture are three things.
I want to talk about the details of Copernicus' life.
I want to talk about the publication of his best-known book,
his book on heliocentrism,
and then talk about the contents of that book
and how it was received by the larger intellectual community.
Well, Nicholas Copernicus was born in 1473.
He lives until 1543.
So he was alive at the time of the discovery of America.
He's a contemporary of, for example, Leonardo da Vinci.
He studied widely and spent most of his life, however,
in the post of Canon to the Cathedral Church in Fraunberg.
Now, I should say what a Canon is.
We tend not to have canons very much in the United States,
but a Canon is a person in holy orders,
so it's a religious post,
but it's administrative, not liturgical.
Copernicus' duties at the Church of Fraunberg
were taking care of administrative functions in the Cathedral.
He was given this post by his uncle.
His uncle was the Bishop of Warmia in Poland.
Copernicus became an orphan at a fairly young age.
He was adopted by his uncle,
and his uncle looked out for his nephew.
One of the things he did was to give him this ecclesiastical post
in 1497 to the Church of Fraunberg.
I might mention the origin of an English word.
Copernicus was the nephew of the Bishop of Warmia,
nephew in Latin as Nepos,
and this practice of uncles, ecclesiastical uncles,
tending to give orphaned, or not orphaned as well.
A nephew's church positions is the source of the word nepotism.
Very common practice.
We have a bad sense of what nepotism is today,
but it wasn't considered a bad thing in this case at this time.
Well, Copernicus' education began at the University of Krakow.
He went there from 1491 to 1494,
but then he continued his education in Italy,
and his time in Italy was extremely important to his intellectual formation.
He studied both things that would be useful
for when he went back to take up the post of Canon.
Even though he was appointed to that post in 1497,
he got a number of leaves, and he didn't actually reside there
and start working at his post until 1512.
So in Italy, he studied at the University of Bologna,
he studied Canon law there,
he studied at Padua from 1501 to 1503,
where he studied medicine,
and he studied at Ferrara,
where he got a doctorate of Canon law,
obviously useful for a Canon, in 1503.
But for our purposes, what's a little bit more important
is the time that he spent at Bologna
associating with the professor of astronomy there,
Domenico Maria de Novara,
who was also a humanist and a Platonist.
Copernicus studied astronomy with him.
While Copernicus was in Italy,
he went to the great Jubilee, the year 1500 in Rome,
to see the celebrations,
and also observed, we know, a lunar eclipse while he was there in Rome.
Well, after he finishes with Italy,
he attends his uncle for a while as his personal physician,
and then in 1512,
goes to Poland, lives the rest of his life there,
and in relative seclusion as a Canon.
However, Copernicus' reputation as an astronomer
began to circulate by 1509 by word of mouth.
In 1514, he wrote a brief compendium of his ideas,
heliocentric ideas, which he circulated in manuscript.
This is called the commentariolas, the little commentary.
Now, this short work sufficiently established his reputation
as an astronomer that in 1515,
when the Lateran Council,
under the direction of Pope Leo X,
were considering how to reform the Julian calendar
because the Julian calendar had gone way off
by the 16th century since it was,
since its start in the first century BC,
when the Lateran Council was considering this,
they wrote to Copernicus to ask his opinion
about how to reform the calendar.
Copernicus said at that time that we didn't yet know
the length of the solar year to a sufficient level of accuracy
to reform the calendar.
So nothing happened at that particular meeting.
Well, now let's talk about Copernicus' most important book,
entitled De Revoluzionibus Orbium Celestium in Latin,
that is, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Orbs.
Now, Copernicus had in mind that he was going to write this work
as early as 1515 when he wrote the commentariolas.
But the publication history of the De Revoluzionibus,
De Reve as historians of science tend to shorten it,
is quite convoluted.
It didn't appear until 1543,
and it probably cleared the press
just a few days after Copernicus had died.
Why did it take so long to publish?
Why did it take so long to write?
Copernicus actually says in his preface
that he kept the work back for over 27 years.
Well, publication was in fact urged on Copernicus
by several people.
Most of them notable churchmen, in fact.
Let's mention some of these.
In 1533, Johann Albrecht Wittmannstetter,
who was Pope Clement VII's personal secretary,
lectured to the Pope and several Cardinals
about Copernicus' system for a day.
The Pope was very impressed by this system.
And Wittmannstetter afterwards threw the intermediacy
of the Cardinal of Padua, whose name was Nicholas Schoenberg,
wrote to Copernicus.
Schoenberg wrote a little bit later and three years later
in 1536 to Copernicus saying,
you know, these ideas that you're studying
are very interesting.
It should be published.
In fact, I'll pay the cost to send a copyist to you
to copy it so I can have a copy
and we can circulate the manuscript.
Copernicus, however, apparently declined
because he didn't actually...
the book still didn't appear for another ten years.
Well, finally, all these people,
other churchmen like Copernicus' friend,
the bishop Tiedemann Giza,
writes to Copernicus as urging him to publish.
Well, finally, apparently Copernicus is ready
or all these people nagging him, wear him down,
and he writes the text.
In fact, the autograph manuscript by Copernicus
still survives in the archives in Poland.
Although he wrote the text
and most of the front matter for the book,
he didn't really want to be bothered with the publication
and so what he does is he submits it,
he entrusts that publication to one of his students,
his most devoted student and disciple, Georg Joachim Reticus,
his professor of mathematics at Wittenberg.
In 1540, Reticus writes and publishes a Narazio Prima,
a first telling, in other words,
this sort of a summary of Copernicus' ideas,
just to see how it'll fly.
The reception is very positive.
People are very interested that the Narazio Prima
goes through more than one edition very quickly.
So in 1542, with Copernicus' ascent,
Reticus begins the publication process.
Unfortunately, Reticus ends up with the same problem
that dogs a lot of professors down to this day.
He gets a better job offer.
This time from the University of Leipzig.
So he leaves his post at Wittenberg and goes to Leipzig,
takes Copernicus' manuscript,
which he's been readying for the press
and hands it off to a third person
by the name of Andreas Oceander,
who's a Lutheran minister.
And Oceander is the one that actually finishes the publication.
There's a story that the first copy of Day Rev comes to Copernicus
while Copernicus is on his deathbed.
Actually Copernicus had suffered a stroke
towards the end of 1542.
He was bedridden after that.
So it's not clear whether one the book came after his death
or while he was merely mostly or partially comatose.
In any sense, he probably never actually recognized
the fact that his book had been published.
Well, let's look at the scientific ideas in Day Rev.
Fundamental ideas, I've said,
is that the Earth is in motion around the Sun.
The Sun is nearly at the center of the universe,
not quite at the center,
but very nearly at the center of the universe.
That is, it's a heliocentric system
rather than the geocentric system of Aristotle and of Ptolemy.
The Earth also rotates on its axis.
So that's another motion of the Earth.
The Earth goes around the Sun once in a year.
It rotates on its axis a diurnal motion,
a daily motion, once in 24 hours.
So not only is the Sun stationary,
the Earth is in motion.
It's a geokinetic system,
Earth moving rather than geostatic.
So what proof did Copernicus have as a system?
In fact, he had very little proof of his system.
And at the same time,
there were a lot of reasons not to accept it.
On the one hand, Copernicus pointed to the greater simplicity of his system.
But this simplicity has in fact been overstated.
Looking back on it,
we tend to think sort of from a first approximation
that the Ptolemaic system had been encumbered
with eccentrics and the idea of the equant
and epicycles galore to try and explain the observed motions.
And here comes Copernicus,
gives nice circular motion around a central Sun.
It solves the problems, right?
Well, not right.
Because Copernicus, doing the calculations
based on circular orbit centered on the Sun,
finds out that it doesn't give you anywhere near
the correct positions for the planets.
So Copernicus not only has to reintroduce eccentrics,
that the center of the motion
is not exactly centered on the center of the Sun,
as Ptolemy did,
but he also has to introduce epicycles as well
to make things work out right.
So there are fewer epicycles in Copernicus than in Ptolemy,
but there are still some.
Copernicus' system gives no better practical results, in fact,
than the Ptolemaic system,
although it does make the calculations easier.
So that helps.
Remember, through all of this,
what people are interested in is getting the positions
of the planets right.
You need that to do prognostications.
What about contrary evidence?
Well, there was one big piece of contrary evidence,
and that is, if heliocentrism is correct
and the Earth is moving around the Sun,
then there should be an observable stellar parallax.
Now, what is that?
Well, let me talk about what parallax is.
Parallax very simply tells us that from two vantage points,
the relative position of objects which are closer
changes more than four objects that are far away.
Imagine you're driving in your car down a highway,
and you have trees on the side and mountains in the background.
As you move by in the moving car,
the trees are zipping by very quickly,
whereas it takes you a long time to pass the mountains.
In other words, the trees seem to pass in front of the mountains.
You can do another experiment,
but don't do this while you're driving your car.
Hold your thumb out at arm's length
and line it up with something like a window frame
or a tree or something, and look at it with one eye,
then look at it with the other eye,
and you'll see that everyone will think you look very strange,
but you'll notice that your thumb seems to move
in front of the background,
and the closer your thumb is to you,
the greater the parallax.
Therefore, using the same kind of idea,
if we look at the stars, let's say in January
when the Earth is on one side of its orbit,
and then look at the same stars six months later,
they should shift.
The ones closer should seem to move back and forth
in front of the ones that are further away,
but none of this was seen.
That means either one, the Earth is not really moving,
or two, the stars are really far away,
much, much farther away than anyone had ever conceived of,
and no one could imagine the stars being that far away.
Why would they be that far away?
Why would there be so much empty space out there?
Moreover, the motion of the Earth is insensible
and unprovable at best.
You've seen medieval discussions of this issue.
And finally, heliocentrism disrupts the laws
of Aristotelian physics.
If the Earth is not at the center,
then why do heavy bodies fall to the Earth?
Aristotle says they, like the Earth,
seek their natural place, the lowest point,
the center point of the cosmos.
If the Earth is a planet whirling around the sun,
why do bodies keep falling into it?
And if the moon rotates around the Earth,
I'm sorry, revolves around the Earth,
how come that's the only thing that goes around the Earth,
and everything else goes around the sun?
It doesn't seem symmetrical.
It doesn't seem right.
It doesn't make sense in terms of physics of the time.
So why would Copernicus hold these ideas?
Well, let's examine why he would hold these ideas.
One of the reasons has to do with the humanism of Copernicus,
a humanism which he embodied not only from his environment,
but certainly also from Domenico Maria de Novata at Padua,
and presumably from all of his time in Italy
during a great flowering of humanism.
Copernicus' humanism is clearly witnessed
by the fact that his first publication
was a translation of Greek poetry.
It's also seen in the Deireve
with the thick classical illusion,
particularly in the prefatory material.
Lots of allusions to antiquity.
In fact, he tries to support the possibility of his own system
by referring to classical models.
The Pythagoreans talked about a central hearth of the universe.
Doesn't it make sense to think of that as the sun?
He talked also about a person mentioned by Cicero
by the name of Niketas, about whom we know nothing,
who apparently, according to Cicero, held a heliocentric view.
Copernicus also saw his system as more elegant and more aesthetic,
in a classical sense of aesthetics,
than what he called the monster,
the monstrosity of Ptolemaic cosmology.
He said that it is if someone took hands and arms and feet and heads,
each of them well drawn from different places
and stuck them all together, you get a monster,
and that's what the Ptolemaic system was.
Actually, that metaphor of the bodily parts coming from different places
actually comes out of Horace,
more testimony to his humanist tendencies.
Part of Copernicus' goal was to restore the more ancient
and classical goals of astronomy,
that is simple, uniform, circular motion,
as it had been enunciated by Plato.
Moreover, he thought that, as he expresses it,
since the world is, as he says,
created by the best and most systematic artisan of all,
he thought it a pity that it shouldn't be better understood
in how it functions.
So there's a point to learning about how God created the world,
how God interacts with the world.
So there's a religious sentiment clearly as well in this.
In fact, we see that Copernicus, in writing the dedication to his work,
dedicates it and ties it to the humanist element within the Catholic Church.
The book is dedicated, first of all, to the Pope,
to Pope Paul III, who's very well known at the time,
for his humanist interests.
He appends to it the letter of Nicholas Schoenberg from 1536,
urging him to publish.
And so he shows himself as being forced into this publication.
He says, well, there are some people who are going to have a problem with this system,
because they think it's too non-traditional.
He's talking about the scholastics, essentially.
But he says, mathematicians write for mathematicians.
And the mathematicians he's writing for are these humanist writers,
like the Pope and many of the Cardinals, who were humanist intellectuals.
He says that those who appreciate the beauty of mathematics
will appreciate the beauty of his system as well.
Well, what actually happened when Copernicus's book gets published?
In fact, it's hardly a response at all.
Most readers sifted Copernicus's ideas,
took the ones they liked and rejected the others.
Remember I said heliocentrism made the calculations a bit easier
for making tables of planetary positions.
And that's what most people cared about.
So, for example, less than 10 years after the publication,
the pretenic tables are published.
That's in 1551 as replacements for the older alphonsean tables of planetary positions.
These pretenic tables were calculated by one Erasmus Reinhold,
who used Copernicus's mathematical models,
but he himself did not believe in heliocentrism.
He just made the calculations easier.
The mathematics was good.
But there's one big problem that we have to deal with,
and this is something that comes out of the difficulties in the publication of De Reve.
This Andreas Ossiander played a bit of a dirty trick on Copernicus.
I don't think he thought of it as a dirty trick,
but that may be the way it would have come out to Copernicus.
Copernicus and Reticus really believed in the heliocentric theory.
It was literally true to them.
However, Andreas Ossiander, the Lutheran minister,
whose job it was to see the final stages through the press,
wrote an unsigned forward to the book
that he puts in front of Cardinal Schoenberg's letters,
in front of the dedication to Pope Paul III,
that says that the text is merely hypothetical.
In fact, Ossiander goes so far as to say that we are, quote,
absolutely ignorant of the true causes of planetary motions.
He says moreover that we can, quote,
expect nothing that is certain from astronomy.
The fact that Ossiander didn't sign this made it look,
many viewers, like it was Copernicus' own forward.
But it undercut the entire text, in a sense.
If Copernicus hadn't had his stroke in 1542,
he might have had one when he opened the published book
and saw Ossiander's unsigned preface there.
This distinction between Ossiander and Reticus and Copernicus
recaps the old divisions between the idea of saving the appearances,
saving the phenomena that is just getting the planetary positions right,
and producing what we could call a physicalist view of the universe.
That is one that is literally true, where the Earth really does go around the sun.
It's not just a calculating trick to make the calculations easier.
This is going to recur, I warn you, so we'll talk about this more.
We have to.
In the end, through the next 50 years after the publication of Day Rev,
there are probably no more, probably fewer, in fact,
than a dozen thinkers that are committed to the truth of heliocentrism.
So, in fact, the Day Rev was not a revolutionary text at the time.
Very few people paid very much attention to it,
except admiring its mathematical models for doing calculations.
In fact, let me tell you about something else that happens in the 16th century,
something that affected a great deal more people than did the Day Revolutionibus.
And that is the reform of the calendar.
Now, remember the Julian calendar.
It had been put together at the command of Julius Caesar in the 1st century BC.
It had been organized by an Alexandrian astronomer by the name of Sosigenes.
Well, Sosigenes estimated the year, the solar year, to be 365 and one quarter days long.
And so he proposed that every fourth year there would be one leap day added.
February would have a 29th day.
The problem is that Sosigenes' solar year is too long by 11 minutes.
Now you say, oh, 11 minutes.
Who cares about 11 minutes?
Well, after 10 years, 11 minutes isn't very much.
But after 100 years, it starts adding up.
And after 1,000 years, it really starts adding up.
And after the 1,500, 1,600 years that had passed, it had accumulated to an error of 10 days.
Now there had been many people who had noted that this error was going to accumulate.
That Sosigenes' date was too long.
Even the Sabian Thabit Ibn Qura in the Islamic period and as well Roger Bacon.
Roger Bacon suggested making a correction to the calendar every 125 years.
Well, why do we really care about the calendar?
Well, there are two big reasons.
One, you want to know the time of the equinoxes, spring planting, fall harvests.
If the equinox is supposed to be falling on the 21st or the 23rd of March,
and it's really falling 10 days off, well then your planting cycle is wrong.
Worse, much worse, is that remember you need to know the date of the vernal equinox
in order to determine the date of Easter because the date of Easter is calculated on a lunar calendar.
Easter is the first Sunday after the first full moon after the vernal equinox.
The Council of Nicaea in 325 had set the vernal equinox as it was at that time at the 23rd of March.
But the problem is by the end of the 16th century that equinox was not falling on the 23rd,
it was falling on the 13th, which means you'd celebrate the wrong day for Easter.
So the equinoxes slowly drift backwards through the calendar
and even though the medieval were aware of this, not any steps were taken to correct it.
The problem seemed intractable to how you would actually correct this
to get a really good accurate determination for the length of the solar year.
This is what the Lateran Council asked Copernicus about in 1515,
and again he said the solar year was not known, its length was not known accurately enough.
Well finally, towards the end of the 16th century, Pope Gregory XIII insists upon a reform of the calendar.
And this actually takes place finally in October of 1582.
The Julian calendar is thrown out and replaced by the calendar we use nowadays,
which is called the Gregorian calendar in honor of Pope Gregory XIII.
What he did was this, took two things.
First of all, keep the calendar from drifting anymore.
We'll say that every year, every fourth year is a leap year except for some of them.
The reason the calendar went off is too many leap days had been added in the preceding 1600 years.
So what would happen is every fourth year would be a leap year except the ones that were divisible by 100.
So 1700, 1800, 1900 would not be leap years even though under the Julian calendar they should be.
The years divisible by 400, 1600, 2000 would in fact be leap years.
Those would have an extra day.
The next century marker that will have a Gregorian day and it is a leap day is the year 2400.
We have a little ways to go before the next correction.
Then the calendar had to be corrected.
So by papal bull issued by Gregory XIII, the Pope decreed that the day after October the 4th, 1582, would be October the 15th.
Now this had two consequences.
One slightly comical, the other one more serious.
Let me tell you the slightly comical one.
It was on October the 4th, 1582 that St. Teresa of Avila took to her deathbed.
Let's put it that way.
And she died a little bit into the next day which means if you look at it on the calendar it looks like she was dying for over a week from the 4th to the 15th of October.
Actually it was only a few hours but it just so happens that those intervening dates didn't exist.
There is no 5th, 6th, 7th and so forth of October in that year.
The more important one is that remember that Protestantism had arisen by this point in the 16th century.
And the Protestants certainly were not going to listen to a papal bull.
So that meant for centuries often thereafter when you moved from a Catholic country to a Protestant country you had to change your calendar.
That is to say that throughout the 16th and 17th century from 1582 on to well into the 18th century if you got on a boat in Calais in France on let's say the 10th of, let's say the 11th of July and went across the channel to Dover.
When you landed in Dover you would arrive 10 days earlier than you left.
So if you think you have trouble dealing with time changes in airplanes imagine time changes at this point.
England continued to use the outmoded and erroneous Julian calendar until 1752.
They considered that it would be subjugation to papal authority, the papists of Rome to adopt the new calendar.
In Russia the Gregorian calendar was not adopted until the Russian Revolution in 1917.
And to this day the Greek Orthodox Church still uses the old Julian calendar which is why Easter in the eastern and western churches falls generally on different days.
They're still calculating it by the old Julian calendar the west by the improved Gregorian calendar.
Well the calendrical reform of Pope Gregory the 13th shows one of the practical applications of scientific knowledge in the Renaissance.
In the next lecture we're going to devote all of it to Renaissance technology.
We're going to talk about some simple technologies that affected everyday life or affected the life, the economy of states.
But also we're going to talk about how the successor on the Sea of Peter to Pope Gregory the 13th instituted and paid for a massive monumental engineering project which was probably one of the great wonders of the 16th century.
