Where did the world and everything in it come from?
How does the world function?
How is it maintained?
These are fundamental questions for the modern scientists, and around the world, scientists
continue to ask these fundamental questions.
Well, what about the Middle Ages?
How did Medieval try to answer these questions?
Well if we go on the basis of sort of hearsay and modern prejudices against the Middle Ages,
and the modern conception of the bad relationship between science and religion, we might come
back with the glib response, well the Medieval's were deeply religious, Bible says that God
created the world, that's the end of the question, end of discussion.
Such an answer may well have satisfied, probably did satisfy a great number of Medieval peasants,
and it probably satisfies some modern fundamentalists as well, but it does not satisfy very much
otherwise.
Certainly Medieval intellectuals did not find the answer, God did it, to be an adequate
answer.
The Medieval theologians wanted better answers.
So in this lecture we're going to examine the science of creation.
This will allow us to examine several interrelated issues, first in what context natural philosophy
was done, namely in a theological context, don't lose sight of the fact that natural
philosophy is that handmaiden to theology.
We'll also illustrate more about the relationships, the real relationships between science or
natural philosophy and religion in the Middle Ages, but that last statement actually bothers
me a little bit, because it incorporates some anachronistic elements, nowadays we have a
very clear idea of the distinction between science and religion, the Medieval's did
not share a recognition of that distinction, in fact in the Middle Ages natural philosophers
and theologians were frequently the same people.
Well, one important locus for the natural philosophical inquiry about creation was the
opening chapters of Genesis.
Genesis chapter 1 describes God's creation of the world, therefore it's a logical place
to ground the study of physics, astronomy, earth sciences, matter theory, botany, zoology,
meteorology, all the other branches of natural philosophy.
Remember that the medieval method of study is by commentary, well if you want a place
to write a general natural philosophical text, what better place to start with to start commenting
upon than Genesis 1.
Many many treatises on the six days of creation were written, and this genre was known as
hexameral treatises, or hexamara, comes from two Greek words which mean the six days, the
six days of creation.
In some cases, particularly in the later cases, it's clear that the authors were actually
much more interested in the natural philosophy than they were in biblical exegesis.
In some cases, the biblical commentary format is more just a framework around which or in
which to build a natural philosophical system.
Well, let's go back to the early days of Christianity to start with commentaries on Genesis.
The patristic writers began the hexameral tradition, particularly two of them, one St.
Basil, who was born around 329, died in 379, and the other is St. Augustine, one in the
Greek world, one in the Latin world, Basil the Greek, Augustine the Latin.
Now, St. Basil's commentary was given in the form of homilies, and these homilies were
given largely to audiences of tradesmen, so he's doing something very important there.
Is relating God's creative handiwork to the kind of crafts that were engaged in by laborers.
It's a way that St. Basil, in fact, elevates the status of the craftsman by comparing it
to God's own creative activity.
But the important thing about Basil's commentary is that God is working at creating the world.
Things that happen in Genesis are described as the action of God working upon his creation,
putting his creation together piece by piece.
He's a direct cause.
Now Basil's intention, his motivation, is to be homilitic and devotional, not natural
philosophical, even though his homilies do contain evidence that he knew the Greek natural
philosophical tradition quite well.
He brings it in to help expound the text.
In general, St. Augustine's more influential, certainly in the Latin West than St. Basil,
and St. Augustine set the tone for much of the later hexameral literature in his literal
commentary on Genesis, something we've already talked about.
Let me just remind you what Augustine suggested.
What Augustine set down as rules for biblical interpretation.
He says that they have to be logical, they have to explain the expressions that are used
in the text, and our interpretations, most importantly, must be in accord with the currently
received state of scientific natural philosophical knowledge.
Now, for example, St. Augustine rejected the notion of six natural days of creation in
favor of an instantaneous creation where God created everything in a moment, but over
time, once God created time along with creation, these seeds that he implanted in the world,
not literal seeds, but philosophical metaphorical seeds, would develop over time into different
shapes and different forms of different things under the influence of local conditions or
to fit with local conditions.
So instantaneous creation, creation develops over time as what is created in potential
becomes actualized over time.
Now, let's move from the patristic period, the foundations, to the Middle Ages.
Key to examples of medieval hexameral literature is naturalism.
Now, what is naturalism?
It means basically that arbitrary, miraculous actions of God are not acceptable explanations
for natural philosophy, and this is something that I have to impress upon everyone, that
this is a place where moderns don't necessarily have the same view as the Medievals.
The Medievals were very clear on this, God, yes, could do anything, but just because he
could do something doesn't mean that using his omnipotence was legitimate as an explanation,
as an answer to questions.
Now this view of naturalism is often explained by the notion of primary and secondary causes.
Medievals would all agree, God is the ultimate primary cause of everything, but that fact
has very little explanatory power.
In fact, medieval theologians viewed an unnecessary recourse to the primary cause, that is to
God, as what we would call in modern parlance a cop-out.
Secondary causation, that is the action of natural forces, which were created by God,
were adequate and proper explanations, and these were the places where inquiry was directed.
This was the focus of the inquiry, to look at these secondary causes.
In other words, God creates a nature, and then natural forces that he creates in that
nature have their subsequent effects.
Now medieval theologians held that God almost always works through secondary causes and
within the framework of the nature he created, God's direct intervention in the world produces
miracles and miracles are very rare.
Give you an example, eclipses.
Eclipses happen when the moon passes between the earth and the sun, so we can explain that
naturally.
We don't need a recourse to God, why are there eclipses?
Because God made the world in such a way that there are eclipses.
God makes eclipses, that's not an answer.
However, even though we can say all eclipses occur naturally, there's one eclipse that
didn't occur naturally, and that's the eclipse that happens at the crucifixion, because it
happens not during the new moon, but a full moon.
So there's no natural way that there could have been a solar eclipse, so there is an
example where God intervenes miraculously, overturns the usual order of nature, and acts
contrary to nature, to produce an eclipse at the wrong phase of the moon.
Already in the Middle Ages, some theologians were trying to explain even miraculous events
using natural causation, for example the parting of the Red Sea.
The Bible says that God sent a wind that swept the waters, therefore it's not God's willing
that suddenly makes the Red Sea part in front of the Israelites, he uses a secondary cause,
he uses part of his own creation, that wind, to cause the waters to separate.
Thus, while man could never under any circumstances comprehend that miraculous instant of the
Creiozio ex nihilo, the creation from nothing, everything after that initial moment should
be explicable on the basis of secondary causation, with the exception of those unusual contrary
to nature miracles.
This approach I think bespeaks a real confidence in the power of human reason and inquiry to
understand a rational orderly world, and it presumably stems from Christianized Platonism
that emphasizes the power of the human intellect and the salvific value, the salvific nature
of knowledge.
There's a lot that Plato has to say, or Neoplatonists, particularly in the 12th century, about man's
ability to know things.
Well, let's look at several medieval hexameral writers to illustrate these points, and show
the variety of interpretations that were possible, and the way natural philosophy was used and
extended in an expressly theological context.
Let's go back first to the school of Chartres, to Théry of Chartres and William of Conche,
both around the middle of the 12th century.
They both showed a keen interest in natural philosophy, the natural philosophy particularly,
of creation.
Théry of Chartres wrote a treatise on the works of the six days, that's how it's entitled,
and the text works its way through Genesis 1 verse by verse, and each verse of the Bible
gives him one chapter in his commentary, but he's clear from the very beginning he's going
to expound the text, Secundum Physicum, according to nature, according to physics.
He begins by positing the primary cause, remember Aristotle, four causes to everything,
and though the most of the Aristotelian writings were not known in the Latin West at this point,
that part was known through digests, so Théry of Chartres posits the causes of the world.
God the Father is the efficient cause, the Creator, God the Son is the formal cause.
We'll come back to talk about that in a minute.
The final cause is God the Holy Spirit, and the material cause are the four elements which
are created by God in the beginning.
Now using the second person of the Trinity, the Son, the Word, as the formal cause, reveals
his Christianized Platonism, what he's really doing is he's rewriting the Timaeus in Christian
terms, in the Timaeus the Demiurge, the Creator God, looks at the forms and forms matter.
In this Christian view, God the Father the Creator creates the world through the Son,
the Word through whom all things were made, so what he's really done here is to combine
the Timaeus with Genesis.
But these references to direct divine causation nearly disappear after the first few pages,
the rest of creation unfolds using his Word, not to a rally tear, naturally.
Let's look at an example.
At one point in Genesis, God separates the waters.
He separates the waters below the heavens, from the waters above the heavens, collects
the waters into a basin so that the dry land appears.
Well, how does Terry of Chartres talk about this?
Well, he uses natural causes to make this separation occur.
The heat of the stars, the celestial fire, warms the waters on the space of the earth
and causes them to evaporate.
The vapors rise into the form of clouds, thus there is a separation of the waters, from
the ocean to the clouds.
Now this actually comes out of St. Basil, St. Basil says a similar thing about the separation
of the water, but Terry of Chartres goes further.
He says the dry land appears because first of all the water of the seas is being evaporated,
so there's less of it on the water, and there's less water on the earth, and so the dry land
appears naturally not through another intervention of God's hand, but through the action of the
drying up of the seas under the influence of the heat of the celestial fires.
So again, a natural explanation.
Now let's move to William of Conch, Terry's contemporary.
He goes much further.
In fact, when you read the Dragmaticon philosophie, which I've already looked at a little bit,
it's at first not recognizable at all as part of hexameral literature.
There are almost no biblical quotations.
There is no explicit exegesis of the Genesis text, like in Terry of Chartres' text, but
if we look very carefully, remember that it's a dialogue between a duke and a philosopher,
and their discussion extends over six days.
The book is broken up into six books, six days, and each day is devoted to the kinds
of natural philosophical issues that are brought forth by each day of creation in Genesis.
So it's sort of in a sense a hidden piece of hexameral literature.
I'm sure that the medieval is immediately recognized for us, it's a little bit harder
to see.
At the beginning, God creates a chaos that is a mixture of four elements, the four elements
totally mixed together chaotically in the beginning.
Then as soon as they are created, they have a nature, they have a natural motion, and
they start to move, they start to sort themselves out, and the world starts to approach its
current form by natural forces.
Now let's go back to this issue of the separation of the waters, and let's see what William
does with this.
This is actually very interesting.
He first of all adopts the idea that the waters above, the waters above the heavens
in the scripture are the clouds, the vapors of the clouds, produced by the action of celestial
heat on the water.
But he also adds something from experience, from common everyday experience.
He says if we go to take a bath, and you take a hot bath, as the fire warms the water, you'll
actually see the water being divided into a fine mist, and rising up above the bath.
This for him is analogous to what happens at the beginning in the separation of the
waters.
The water is the fire of the stars and the sun, separating the waters.
Now at this point, the Duke retorts that, wait a minute, no, the venerable bead, an
English writer, says that the waters are actually above the actual heavens, that is beyond the
sphere of Saturn, beyond the fixed stars, that's where they are, that they're frozen
into ice, and that ice is then frozen into crystal, so they're hard.
Are you going to disagree with this venerable father?
Says the Duke.
Well, William says, yes, I am actually going to disagree with him, although I honor him
in terms of what he has to say about the faith, we should be free to disagree with the theologians
with the previous writers in terms of natural philosophy.
Well, they continue their discussion.
The Duke says, if the waters are frozen and hard, they could support themselves like an
arch.
William says, no, no, that's not possible.
The natural motion would be for them to collapse down onto the earth.
We don't see that happening.
There's no water above, literally above the heavens.
William says, in fact, look, if you take a piece of ice and you put it in the fire,
it dissolves and vanishes.
This icy, crystalline water up there near the fixed stars, near the fire, near fiery
spheres would itself be melted and dissolved.
It would not be stable.
Well, then the Duke exclaims, seemingly in a bit of frustration, you attribute everything
to the quality of things and nothing to the creator.
Surely, the creator was able to place the waters there, freeze them and keep them suspended
contrary to nature.
And then William replies, what is more foolish than to assume that something exists simply
because the creator can make it?
Whoever says God makes anything contrary to nature should either see that it is so with
his own eyes or show the reason for it being thus, or let him demonstrate the advantage
of it being so.
So this is a very interesting thing.
This is a constant argument that we'll see between science and religion, for example,
throughout subsequent history, down to our present day.
What do we attribute to God's power?
What do we attribute to secondary causation?
William goes even further.
He says that life itself arose from the natural action of heat on mud, and even man originated
thus from primordial mud, even though God at some point intervenes and gives him a rational
and immortal soul.
In fact, William says in a particularly interesting segment, that means that since man's body
came about by the natural action of natural elements working on one another within the
course of nature, several species of man could have developed.
In fact, those natural actions are still at work today.
And so even now, long after the creation, 6,000 years after the creation, a new species
of man might arise spontaneously as a result of natural forces.
Now William says, well, in fact, this seems possible, but we've never seen it happen.
There's never been an example of another human being coming up out of the mud, the one that
is not heir to Adam.
So perhaps God wills against this.
And then William says that the natural causation is constantly acting, and it is uniform, and
it is constant, but it requires God's willing it to continue, God's willing it, God's permission
to carry on.
So God isn't intervening exactly, but in a sense he's underwriting the laws of nature
by maintaining them.
This becomes a difficult theological point, eventually, about where God's action in underwriting
natural laws comes in, and I don't have time to talk about it today, though.
But what's important to take from these shaltrians is their insistence upon naturalism, that
explanations in natural philosophy have to come about in a natural way, using natural
forces.
And moreover, we see these hexameral treatises as places where natural philosophy, speculative
natural philosophy, can be advanced.
Well let's look at another character.
This character is a little bit later, Robert Grosstett, last name meaning big head.
He was the Bishop of Lincoln, he was born about 1168, died in 1253.
He also promoted what is more or less platonic reading of Genesis, but he was particularly
interested in one thing.
That is light.
Now remember at the beginning of Genesis, what is the first creation?
The first creation is light.
Fiat lux, let there be light.
That is how God begins creating the world.
Well light is also a key aspect of neoplatonic thought.
For neoplatonists, before Christianity in fact, or outside of Christianity, the world
is created by an emanation from a self-contained, self-sufficient, single God.
He radiates his goodness essentially like light, and that emanation creates the world.
Well this neoplatonic idea was Christianized in various ways throughout the Middle Ages,
very important neoplatonic thought.
We even see it, the emphasis on light in the building of Gothic cathedrals, which are
so interested in making these huge windows to let in light, to let in light.
And Robert Grosstett, his natural philosophical ideas are connected with this.
For him, light is a vehicle of creation, it is a vehicle of knowledge.
We get knowledge by light, by illumination, we still use that word.
Now Grosstett likewise favors an instant of creation.
The six days are just rhetorical he says, they express six parallel ways of expressing
the creation, but it's not actually six literal 24 hour days.
For Grosstett, the way God creates the world is this.
He creates a dimensionless point of matter, and a dimensionless point of light superimposed
upon it.
Now why dimensionless?
Well Augustine had realized that time is itself a creation.
People who ask, what was God doing before the creation are being silly, because there
is no before the creation.
Time comes into existence only when there's something outside of God.
So God has to create time.
Grosstett takes it another step and says, well, the dimensions don't exist.
Space doesn't exist before God creates them.
God has to create the three dimensions.
And so Grosstett says that God creates a dimensionless point, a dimensionless point of matter, a
dimensionless point of light superimposed on it.
And that's all God does, essentially, because what is the nature of light?
Light naturally radiates out from its source.
So the moment that was created, the light radiated in a spherical way, carrying the
matter with it, it kept radiating instantaneously, actually the propagation of light for Grosstett
is instantaneous, until it becomes so diffused that it stops radiating.
Now Grosstett was aware of something akin to our inverse square law for radiation, that
the power of the radiation drops off with the square of the distance.
So at that point it stops and the spherical cosmos is created.
He then elaborates further how the rest of the celestial spheres are generated, but
that's the moment of creation, through the expansion of light.
Now interestingly enough, Grosstett's interest in light manifested itself in studies of optical
phenomena.
It wasn't necessarily interested primarily in learning about the laws of refraction
and reflection, he did, but that wasn't the particular interest.
We wanted to know about light as a vehicle of knowledge, a vehicle of God's creative
activities.
Grosstett is often celebrated for being experimental, and it's certain that he did do certain experiments
to look at light.
He studied the rainbow, he studied refraction and reflection, but again we have to keep this
in a theological context.
Now I'm only going to mention one other character, and that is Henry of Langenstein.
Henry of Langenstein comes from the next century, he dies in 1397, so he's a 14th century character
now.
He wrote a lengthy commentary on Genesis, which turns out to be a veritable compendium
of 14th century natural philosophy.
Now given his later dates, Henry is predominantly Aristotelian, not Platonic, but he draws a
huge variety of sources, and in fact it's as if he's writing something in the encyclopedic
tradition, because he talks about just about everything, physics, cosmology, all the things
that you could possibly pull out of the first chapter of Genesis, lots of references to
all kinds of natural philosophical writings.
So we see a context now in which natural philosophy is done.
Natural philosophy, what we call more or less science, the study of the natural world
is a better way to express it, being done here in a theological context.
New knowledge, even experimental knowledge, in the case of gross tech, arguments from
common experience, in the case of William of Konch, being used to further the study
of the natural world.
In all these cases, what we're seeing is the open border between scientific and theological
speculation.
Theology and scripture do not restrict natural philosophy, but instead often provide an impetus
and a locus for natural philosophical speculations.
Well, in the next lecture we're going to visit two new orders, two religious orders that
developed in the 13th century, the so-called mendicant orders, namely the Franciscans and
the Dominicans.
Now interestingly enough, the Dominicans and the Franciscans soon became deeply involved
with natural philosophical issues, and curiously enough, their natural philosophical thought
was unique to each order and differed between them.
