Motion seems to be all around us, especially in our modern frenetic world.
What this lecture is going to talk about is how do we conceive of and study motion?
How did the Medievals conceive of and study motion?
We're going to look, in fact, at three subsets of motion.
First, we'll look at the celestial spheres.
How are they made and how do they move?
Then we'll come down to earth and look at motion in general, how Medievals started to
conceptualize the problems of motion, the foundations of the modern science of kinematics.
And finally, we'll combine the two and look at medieval arguments over whether or not
the earth itself is in motion.
Well, let's start with the celestial spheres and the question of astronomy in medieval Europe.
A European astronomy was significantly changed, like everything else, by the influx of Arabic
and Greek works.
The system of medieval astronomy was basically Ptolemaic and Aristotelian, those two.
The first popularizing text, by popularizing, I mean a text that isn't extremely mathematically
technical, so the first popularizing text in medieval astronomy was one written by Al-Farhani
in the 9th century, translated by John of Seville, one of those early Mosareb translators,
translated in 1137.
It gave the basics of the Ptolemaic system.
This long remained the standard text, but it was replaced and improved upon by another
work called simply The Sphere, in reference to the spherical cosmos, by Sacrobosco.
Sacrobosco is his Latinized name, the author's original English name, because an Englishman
he was, is John of Holywood.
He taught at Paris, the University of Paris, from 1230 to 1255, and he wrote The Sphere
while he was there in about 1250.
Now this work stayed a standard textbook on Ptolemaic astronomy, on astronomy in general,
down until the 17th century, after the inventing of the printing press.
It went through numerous editions.
Well, one of the things that the Middle Ages inherited, along with the Arabic works, was
a tradition of a tension between Ptolemaic views of cosmology and Aristotelian physics.
What was the basis of this tension?
Well, for Aristotle, he's really interested in the causes of motion and the way the universe
functions in a physical way.
That is, the Earth has to be at the center because that's the low point, that's the
place to which heavy bodies naturally tend.
Ptolemy, on the other hand, is interested in getting the positions of the planets right,
having a predictive model, having a mathematical model that allows you to predict where planets
will be and account for the observed phenomena in the heavens.
The conflict comes in because in order to do this, Ptolemy moved the Earth from the center
of most of the celestial spheres.
The spheres orbit a point, an eccentric, which is not coincident with the center of
the Earth.
So this causes problems with Aristotelian physics.
There's a tension there.
Well, there was a strong tradition of anti-Ptolemaic feeling in Spain by a number of Arabic authors.
Ibn Badja, known in the West as Avimpace, Ibn Rushd, known as Averuiz, was probably
the strongest proponent of this.
He just wanted to get rid of Ptolemy entirely and go back to an Aristotelian system, regardless
of what it did to the predictive elements of positional astronomy.
Well, the Spanish controversies didn't actually produce any workable solution, unfortunately.
But there was a solution that had been proposed earlier by Ibn al-Hatham, that is al-Hazan,
as he's known in the West.
This was to combine the two systems.
In other words, make Aristotle's spheres so thick that the deference and epicycle could
run through them like through a channel.
This meant that the outside, the convex surface of each celestial sphere and the interior
concave surface of each celestial sphere would actually be centered on the Earth.
But then the orbit of the planet would run eccentrically through that thick sphere.
So it saved both of the systems.
This was picked up in Europe.
First we think by Roger Bacon.
Roger Bacon certainly praises this system, and several other Franciscans do as well.
And it became a standard model for thinking about the universe.
Once we have these thick spheres now, I should mention, we can have attempts to measure the
distances to the planets, the thicknesses of those spheres.
In other words, if the spheres are nested together with no space in between them, then
we can use the thickness of the spheres to calculate the sizes of some of the orbits.
Well attempts like this were in fact made.
The most famous by Campanus of Novara, an Italian, although he lived, it seemingly,
all over Europe.
He was in Arles in the south of France, in Toledo in Spain, in England for a while.
In the 1260s he wrote a work called The Theory of the Planets, in which he attempted to give
measurements for the size of the universe.
He started with diameters of heavenly bodies.
He says the sun is the largest.
It has a radius of about 17,850 miles, much too small for our modern calculations, but
nonetheless of interest that he was trying to do this.
The moon, much, much smaller than the sun, has a radius of just a little bit under a
thousand miles, so much smaller than we think now.
He also tried to do the distances.
For the moon, he says that the inner surface of the moon's sphere is 107,000 miles away.
The outer surface is 209,198 miles away.
Well he's in the ballpark with that one.
The moon's about 250,000 miles away on average, so Campanus is relatively close.
The further he goes, though, the further off from modern calculations we get.
Of course it was very difficult for him to make these kind of calculations with the data
and the instruments he had in the 13th century.
For example, he says that Saturn's furthest distance from us is, very exactly, 73,300,000
miles away.
This turns out to be one-twenty-fifth of the actual distance that we now know, but nonetheless
it was an attempt to get a sense of the size of how big the world was.
For a medieval, 73 million miles is pretty big.
It must have been overwhelming to think of the universe as being that large.
Well, once we have celestial spheres, and celestial spheres that carried the planets
were accepted as real, as solid objects, real objects, by essentially everybody in the Middle
Ages, the question is what makes them move?
Well, here there's a problem.
You know that the traditions of Aristotle were very important for the Middle Ages.
Aristotle was ambiguous on this point.
Actually that's being too generous to Aristotle.
Aristotle was self-contradictory on this point, because he says two very different things.
In his work on the heavens, de Kylo in Latin, as it was known in the Middle Ages, he says
that the heavenly spheres are made of the quintessence, and quintessence has a natural
motion circularly, just the way a rock naturally falls straight down to the center of the earth
because it's made of earth.
So too the celestial spheres naturally turn in uniform circular motion.
But in the physics and the metaphysics, he talks of what he calls unmoved movers, which
are some kind of intelligences that are external to the orbs, but cause them to move without
being affected by them.
In some places it seems that he even says that the spheres are in soul, that they're
alive or intelligent and move themselves.
Well getting back to these unmoved movers, how do they move the spheres?
Again Aristotle doesn't give us much help, he says they cause the motion by being loved.
Now what on earth does he mean by that?
Well we can say yes, well love really does make the world go round, doesn't it?
Well perhaps that sentiment itself, which was expressed in the Middle Ages in fact,
it's expressed by Dante for one, may in fact have its original source in this cryptic comment
by Aristotle.
But you know, Medieval's didn't think very much of that explanation, nor could they
quite figure out what it meant in all cases.
So they tried to find other solutions.
Probably in a Christian context, God can be seen as the single unmoved mover, so God
causes the motion.
You know, but that tends to violate the theological principle that God works through secondary
causes.
And so some people instead proposed the idea that there were angels, which are creation
of God, causing the spheres to move.
So at least that's a secondary causation.
But you know, that didn't satisfy some people either because it tends to violate the principle
of naturalism that was so important in many contexts, that there have to be natural causes
to things.
We don't have to have recourse to supernatural causes unless we can't avoid it.
So some others, like the 13th century Englishman, Robert Kilwoodby, said that at creation God
had implanted a natural motion in the spheres.
This is very similar to what Aristotle says in On the Heavens.
Others argued that God had merely given us sort of a push to the spheres to get them
going, and then they would keep moving then forever after.
One of these characters was Jean Burradin, a master at Paris, lived from about 1300 to
about 1358.
One of the few philosophers we've seen in this course who was actually not a theologian.
All of his writings deal with natural phenomena, particularly with Aristotle.
He invents the idea of impetus, as he calls it.
It's somewhat akin to our notion of momentum.
It's not exactly the same thing, but it's akin.
It's an impressed force that keeps a moving body moving, and it was used, among other
things, to explain projectile motion.
Well the heavenly spheres, since there's no resistance, they're not moving through
a medium like a projectile through the air.
The impetus shouldn't be dissipated.
In other words, they shouldn't slow down once they're started.
Well a person who's often mentioned in the same breath with Jean Burradin is Nicole
Orem, a younger contemporary, also a master at the University of Paris.
He eventually became Bishop of Lisieux.
He was born in Normandy around 1325, and died in 1382.
He wrote something very interesting.
He said that the celestial spheres were constructed in such a way that they're like a clock.
And the way a man builds a clock, winds it up, and then the motion continues in the clock
thereafter under its own power, so too God could have created the world in such a way,
not when it started like the clock, and it just keeps perpetuating its own motion, and
unlike a clock, doesn't run down.
So as you can see, there was a considerable diversity of opinion on the subject of what
keeps the celestial orbs moving.
Well, after looking at the heavens, let's look at motion in particular, that is motion
in general, specifically the dynamics of moving bodies.
Now some very important developments occurred in this field in the 14th century.
And interestingly, what I want to emphasize here is that this very scientific topic, the
kinematics of motion, actually seems to have developed out of a purely theological speculation
made a couple of centuries earlier.
So let's start instead in the middle of the 12th century with the theologian Peter Lombard.
Now I've mentioned Lombard to you before.
He wrote those four books of sentences, or four books of opinions, which are interpretations
of biblical passages, interpretations of Christian doctrine.
He asked a question in the first book, its distinction number 17, about how grace or
charity could be increased in a person.
Can a person become more filled with grace or more charitable?
If so, how does this happen?
Well he answers that since grace and charity are gifts of the Holy Spirit, they are absolute
quantities, that is so an apparent increase in charity, if a person becomes more charitable,
more filled with charity, it's only because of his increased participation in absolute
charity.
There's actually not more charity in him.
Well, as you know, all of the theologians who wanted to get degrees in theology had
to write a commentary on Peter Lombard's books of sentences.
And that meant writing a commentary on book one, distinction 17.
One of the commentaries proposes an alternate answer that disagrees with Peter Lombard's
original conclusion.
This was proposed by the Franciscan theologian John Dunes Scotus, or John the Scott.
By the way, I should mention that in the Middle Ages, Scotus, the Scott doesn't mean what
we call Scots.
It means Irishman.
The Scots were then called the Picts.
He was born about 1265, died in 1308.
He argued that charity could be added incrementally, and in fact, every quality in a person or
in a thing could be added incrementally, and so was augmentable or diminishable.
This notion came to be called the notion of the intention and remission of qualities,
the increase and decrease of qualities.
Now shortly thereafter, after John Dunes Scotus, sometimes called the subtle doctor, after
he proposed this, the notion was applied not only to Aristotelian motions of quality, but
motions of place.
Now remember, think back to Aristotle.
Aristotle says there are three kinds of motion, three kinds of change, motion of place from
point A to point B, what we think of as motion, motion of quantity when magnitudes change,
that is, when the quantity of something changes, and motions of quality, as for example, when
a green apple turns red, the change in equality from greenness to redness from sourness to
sweetness.
Well, once this notion was applied not only to motions of quality, like less charitable
charitable, it could also be applied to motions of place, that is, an object moving from A
to B, or moving with increasing speed, so speed is a quality, so we can add speed.
Well, what happens, importantly, is that around 1330, a group of people called the Oxford
Calculators began to use the intention and remission of qualities to talk about local
motion.
These characters, three of them are William Hatesbury, John Dumbleton, and the rather
unfortunately named Richard Swine's head.
They were all scholars at Merton College, Oxford.
They defined, for the first time, notions of uniform velocity, uniform acceleration,
and they tried to get a handle on the notion of instantaneous velocity, that is, velocity
at one given instant during an acceleration.
They defined uniform velocity as the traversal of equal distances in equal intervals of time.
And that uniform acceleration was the addition of equal increments of velocity added in equal
intervals of time.
So that's essentially the modern definition, expressed in a slightly different way, though.
They also devised something called the mean speed theorem.
Now, this is a little bit difficult to conceive of, especially the way they express it, because
they didn't have mathematical formulas the way we do.
Mean speed theorem goes something like this, assuming that there's uniformly accelerated
motion, a body going from 0 to 60 miles an hour or something, and it's accelerating uniformly.
A body will travel the same distance in the same time as another body moving at a constant
velocity, which is the mean between the starting velocity and the final velocity of the first
object.
So in other words, if we have an object that's starting at a speed of 0 and it goes to a
speed of 8, it will traverse in a given interval of time the same space as a body moving with
a velocity, the mean between 0 and 8, in other words, 4.
Well, why is this important?
Well, first of all, it sets the foundations for kinematic motion.
The truth of the mean speed theorem was proven geometrically by Nicole Orem around 1350,
and Orem's proof was very well known thereafter.
But there's something important here, because Orem's geometrical proof of this mean speed
theorem shows up once again about, well, not quite 300 years later.
It shows up in 1638 as the fundamental axiom of the new science of motion in Galileo's
two new sciences.
So here Galileo, an accepted, a recognized founder of modern classical physics of the
kinematics of motion, is dependent upon these medieval Oxford calculators, who in turn were
dependent upon the results of a rather obscure theological question first propounded in the
middle of the 12th century.
So this example shows us how enormously far a succession of ideas can move from its original
source.
A 12th century theological query about the Holy Spirit, about grace and charity, eventually
contributes to a fundamental axiom of kinematics.
I don't need to argue much more now about how wide of view we need to take in doing
the history of science.
We can't isolate out things that we recognize as scientific, because whenever we do that,
we miss the context and the causations behind things.
We miss a lot of the influences that come in originate from what we would recognize
as non-scientific endeavors.
Well finally, let me now move to the last topic for this lecture, that is the motion
of the earth itself.
We have no evidence really of anyone trying to say in the Middle Ages that the earth moved
around the sun, that it had an annual motion.
But we do find people talking about diurnal motion of the earth, that is rotation on its
axis.
The first indication of this is a curious comment by William of Conch.
Remember he's the Chartrian master in the first half middle of the 12th century, who's
so interested in natural philosophy.
In his dialogue, the Dragmaticon Philosophia, which is between William as the philosopher
and a duke, the Duke of Normandy, at some point the duke asks him, well what do you
think about this business about the earth being in motion?
And William replies saying, ah, you must be under the influence of that crazed philosopher,
who's always in a frenzy before lunch and drunk after lunch.
The implication being that since he's drunk all the time, he feels the earth moving under
his feet, because that's the only reason anyone could come to such a crazy notion.
Well, the duke says, come on, you've got to give me a better reason than that for the
stability of the earth, don't just tell me that he's drunk.
And William says that, well earth is made of earth, and earth is not a mobile element
like fire, so it doesn't make sense to have earth actually in motion.
And common sensically, who would ever think that the earth is actually moving?
We don't feel it move at all.
The curious thing, the mystery here is about whom were they talking?
We have no idea.
All we can say is that somebody was raising this question in the 12th century, maybe more
than one somebody.
We don't know who they were, or where they were.
Well, the topic comes up again in the 14th century under the guidance of Jean Buridan
and Nicole Orem.
Buridan noted that as observers, we can only ever observe relative motions.
We can't really know absolute motions.
So if we're in a boat going along the coastline, we really don't know whether the boat we're
in is moving, or the coastline is moving alongside us.
We really can't tell.
Nonetheless, Buridan rejected the idea that the earth was rotating based on the fact that
if you shoot an arrow straight up into the air, it falls back to the ground exactly where
you shot it from.
If the earth were rotating, the arrow should be left behind.
The earth, in other words, would rotate under it, and so it would never return to its starting
point.
Now his younger contemporary, Nicole Orem, later argued that the arrow experiment doesn't
prove anything.
The arrow also has an impressed horizontal force that it picks up when it's shot from
the earth that keeps it moving along with the earth.
Moreover, Orem uses a very interesting argument based upon what things look like on a moving
ship.
Very similar, in fact, to the same kind of arguments Galileo would use 250 years later.
He says that if we're on a moving ship and we put our hand on the mast and move our hand
up the mast and then down the mast, for any observer that's on the ship, the hand looks
like it's moving straight up and straight down.
But to an observer who's not on the ship, it looks like there's also a horizontal motion.
The hand is not moving straight up because what they would see is the combination of
the motion of the ship sailing along and the motion of the hand.
And so we would see two different things from two different vantage points.
Moreover he says all the motions that we can do on a moving ship look the same to the sailors
on the ship whether the ship is moored at the dock or is sailing very fast on the ocean.
What he's getting into here is an idea of frames of reference.
He didn't call it that, but it's an idea about frames of reference, which is of course very
important in the physics of motion.
He also notes that it's much more economical if the earth turns once in 24 hours rather
than having every single celestial or do that motion itself.
It's more economical just to have the little earth do that than the great celestial sphere
which seems to move all the planets, the sun and the moon and all the stars around us in
24 hours.
However, in the end after a long logical disputation, a REM actually rejects the possibility of
a moving earth.
Before doing this however, he concludes that there is simply no way to decide the issue.
Logic and reason cannot possibly give us the answer as to whether it's us moving or the
stars, the sun and the planets moving.
He just can't tell.
Reason fails us, so he falls back onto what is the more common, sensical answer.
The earth doesn't seem to be moving, it doesn't make sense for it to be moving, no one has
ever proven it's moving, there are no observations that tell us it's moving, so we'll just stick
with the traditional view that it is stable.
Question is why does he do this?
It's not just about the motion of the earth, it's about in a larger sense the use of reason
to answer very difficult questions.
He says, and I'll quote from him, what I have said here by way of diversion or intellectual
exercise can in this manner serve as a valuable means of refuting or checking those who would
like to impugn our faith by argument.
What does he mean by that?
Well he means that reason is a very powerful thing, but there are limits to what reason
can actually show us.
Like it can't tell us about the motions of the earth, whether it moves or not, it can't
answer that question.
Similarly, if it can't answer a physical question about the world like that, we have to be very
careful about the use of reason in discussing theological articles of faith, that his faith
should not be impugned too easily by reason.
What a ram has done is actually very clever.
He's used rational argument to show the potential insufficiency of rational argument, which is
an amusing self-reflexive action.
In sum, we can see how the physics of motion and the physics of the heavens and the earth
were important topics for medieval speculation.
Many different views were proposed about the motion of the heavenly bodies, arguments
for and against the rotation of the earth, and the formulation of basic theorems of kinematics.
Well we've spent a long time now in the medieval period, and the time has come for us to take
our leave of it.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at changes to European thought which took place
in the late Middle Ages.
That is, we are ready for the transition from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance.
But how much of a transition was it?
