In this lecture, we're going to begin to look at a new culture and a new civilization
in the Mediterranean, namely that of Rome.
From the 3rd century BC to the 2nd century AD, Roman armies conquered lands from Spain
and England, around through Greece, Arabia and North Africa.
By conquering the entire circuit of lands around the Mediterranean Sea, they reduced,
in the words of one writer, the Mediterranean Ocean to the status of a Roman lake.
Now we encountered the Romans very briefly a few lectures ago.
We found them besieging the Greek city of Syracuse at Sicily, and this was part of their
early expansion off of the Italian mainland.
They were held at bay, at least so the story goes, for some time, three years by the technological
prowess of Archimedes, who was a native of the town of Syracuse.
Well the Romans did manage to take the town finally into 12 BC, and when the Roman army
was occupying the city, the general gave explicit orders that his men should go and find and
protect the mathematician Archimedes.
Unfortunately orders are not always obeyed the way they are intended to be, and Archimedes
fell victim to the sword of a Brash Roman soldier.
Well if the story of the Roman general's concern over Archimedes is true, and if that
Roman general was typical of his later countrymen, his later Romans, he was probably more interested
in Archimedes as a technologist, as we would say perhaps an engineer, than as a theoretical
mathematician.
And that's what we're going to look at in this lecture, the relative greater interest
of the Romans for technological, practical applications of natural knowledge over natural
philosophy.
Well through the course of history, cultures and civilizations rise and fall, they come
and go, and their characteristics and contents span a broad spectrum, broad spectrum of ideas
and values and goals.
Through all of this, through the revolutions of human and cultural fortune, nature and
the laws of nature remain constant, but the constancy of those laws of nature should not
make us assume that the way cultures engage with and approach those natural laws and nature
is a constant, that somehow there's a linear or even uniform development in man's relationship
to the natural world.
We've already seen this a little bit in the second lecture when we did a brief comparison
between the early Greeks and the Egyptians and the Babylonians.
Egyptians and the Babylonians, ancient, stable civilizations, Greeks, sort of the new kids
on the block if you will, but the Greeks had different questions.
They asked more questions apparently about the whys and the hows of the universe, and
so developed a natural philosophical approach that seemingly was absent in the Babylonians
and the Egyptians.
In the case of the Romans, we find an interesting situation vis-à-vis the relationship to
the immediately foregoing Greeks.
They created a staggering culture of literally monumental accomplishments.
The impact and the memory of imperial Roman culture has echoed down through the ages,
and the echoes, the memories of that greatness are with us still.
But curiously, amid all the towering achievements of the Roman Empire, we are hard-pressed to
identify any specific, significant contribution made by Romans to natural philosophy.
While Roman tastes certainly did favor the Greek arts and Greek culture, the Romans seemed
to have been quite uninterested in Greek natural philosophy.
How do we account for this?
Well, first of all, we have to disengage the success or interest in natural philosophy
of a culture from other measures of the success of a society.
No one, I think, would doubt the military, the literary, the administrative, or as we
shall see the technological accomplishments of the Romans, but achievements in these
areas does not necessarily imply achievements in natural philosophy.
Now part of this has to do with our perspective, because science is such a big part of our
culture.
Because we rely on technology so much, we have an almost automatic tendency to judge
other cultures by their level of science and technology.
But we have to remember that these are our values, they respond to our questions and
our needs, and they're not necessarily applicable to other cultures.
Now we could say, as has been said, that the Romans were a practically minded people,
and so they naturally preferred practical applications to non-applicable ideas.
Well, that does in a sense explain why Roman technology is head and shoulders above Roman
natural philosophy, but in a sense it's not a very satisfying answer, because it only
defers the question to one generation further away.
Why were the Romans this way?
Why were the Romans practically minded?
Well that's not a question we can answer now.
We're just going to say that the Roman culture did differ significantly in many ways from
the Greeks, and note that science does not develop automatically, and the same is true
of technology.
It responds to the needs, the questions, the temper, the system of values, and various
other activities of the culture in which it is done.
Having said that, let's take a look at Roman technology.
Well, the status of technology in general is a bit problematic.
On the one hand it is practical, and we would imagine that being practical it would be valued.
On the other hand, the deployment of scientific principles for practical affairs runs counter
to the ideals that were put forth by people like Plato and Aristotle.
For Plato, natural philosophy is for improving the mind, for improving the individual, for
ordering the individual.
For Aristotle, episteme, the knowledge, the causal knowledge of things, is at a much higher
level than tecne, the arts or the crafts of doing things.
Tecne of course being the word, the Greek word, from which we get technology.
Well, technology in the ancient world had two major aspects.
The production of things that were useful to human life, and the things that were marvelous
or wondrous.
And in fact today we still have this.
Our life depends in its daily functioning on technology, but we tend to like gadgetry.
Americans tend to, in particular, like special kinds, new varieties of cell phones and computers
that can do more and more interesting things, and all kinds of gadgets.
That sort of wondrous aspect of technology was very much part of the ancient world as
well.
We see it, for example, in the works of Hero of Alexandria in the Hellenistic world.
His works are filled with automata and miraculous devices using air pressure or falling weights
as driving forces.
One example is before going into the temple, the Greeks had to be purified ritually with
water.
Hero supposedly designed a coin-operated dispensing machine that would be put presumably, if such
a thing were ever built, put at the portico of the temple and you drop your drachma piece
into it and it gives you a splash of water on your hands and your face.
So a sort of miraculous device, a bit of gadgetry.
But knowledge of historical technology often comes more from artifacts than from texts.
This is because the people who were involved, most in technology, were involved in craft
skills.
They tended not to be highly literate.
They tended not to pass on their knowledge in a written form.
So often to study technology we need to employ the skills of the archaeologist more than
that of the archivist or philologist.
Well, let's take a look then at some archaeological artifacts, some big artifacts from the Roman
Empire.
Let's start by noting one thing that was characteristic of the Roman Empire and that is a high degree
of urbanization.
Roman cities grew larger than any cities, as far as we know, than had been seen previously.
The city of Rome peaked out at a population, hard to say, but probably around a million.
There's a lot of technological requirements for maintaining a population of that density.
Well, one of the technological requirements that the Romans were particularly interested
in was hydraulic technology, that is supplying water for Roman cities.
The Romans loved water and they used a vast amount of it.
It is estimated that they used much more water per person per day than modern Americans do,
and modern Americans are known around the world for being wasteful with the quantity
of water we use.
The Romans tended to use even more.
What for?
Well, for baths, we'll talk about the baths later, they had indoor plumbing in many of
the more wealthy houses, even public toilets that would wash away the waste straight away
after it was deposited, of course, presumably straight into the river nearby the city, but
nonetheless, public toilets, indoor toilets are certainly something that's not seen very
much after the fall of the Roman Empire for a long time.
Well, where does all this water come from?
The Romans tended not to like river water, you don't want brown river water in your bath
or in your fountains, the Romans preferred good quality water from springs.
Towns tended to be built around springs, but within a few years if the town was at all
successful it outgrew the spring, and water had to be brought in from the outside.
This meant that they had to build channels to bring the water into the cities.
To do so, they produced channels, which included elevated aqueducts.
And I think all of us have seen photographs of Roman aqueducts, but let me just express
to you the amazement that one has the first time one really sees a Roman aqueduct, a beautifully
well preserved one.
They are remarkable accomplishments, they are beautiful, they are functional, they are
impressive to an inordinate degree almost.
At least that's the way the first one I ever saw struck me.
The first one I saw was north of the city of Tarragona in Spain, the ancient Roman capital,
provincial capital of that part of Spain then called Taraco.
A bus will drop you off on a dusty side of the road, out in the middle of nowhere, about
10 miles north of the city.
And there's a little path that you can walk down, and I walked down this around through
clumps of trees, around a rocky crag, and all of a sudden there spanning the valley
was a 2,000 year old Roman aqueduct.
Nothing around to tell me that I was still in the 20th century.
Remarkable, and a beautiful one as well, it's called the Devil's Bridge now, built
about the year 1, it's 125 feet high, 700 feet long.
The water is carried by a sluice built on the top.
This particular one is quite nice because you can walk across the aqueduct and the channel
is wide enough, probably not for two people to walk, but one person can walk very comfortably
through the sluice way across the top.
To really understand what Roman hydraulic engineering accomplished, let's follow the
course of water in one specific case from its source to its users.
And in this case we're going to leave Spain to go to another Roman provincial town, the
town of Nemosis, now known as Nîme in the south of France.
Nîme grew quite rapidly because it was on a major crossroads between Roman roads.
And so soon it outgrew the springs that originally provided it with water.
The Romans however located other springs about 35 miles away at the town in place where the
town is now called Yusei.
Yusei produced nice water and it happened to be at a higher elevation than Nîme.
So it was possible to make water run downhill, remember the Romans didn't have pumps that
they used, so the water was gravity fed, it had to run downhill to the city.
Now Yusei is 60 feet higher than Nîme, which means that it sounds simple enough, 60 feet
in height, but remember that drop is spread over 35 miles, which means that the Romans
would have to build in essence a ramp 35 miles long that only loses 60 feet or less in altitude
over that 35 mile distance, which is quite a great distance, it's a very, very small
slope and it needs to be constant.
Well in the year 19 BC the Emperor Augustus ordered an aqueduct to be built.
Well the Roman engineers set to the project, but this ramp that I mentioned is the ideal
case, that would be in terrain that's perfectly flat, but the terrain between Yusei and Nîme
is nothing flat.
So what happens, sometimes there are hills in the way, then the water channel has to
go through them, 20 miles of the distance is underground, through covered underground
culverts, 3 miles, 3 miles of the course was bored, tunneled through solid rock, substantial
engineering accomplishment.
In other cases the land was not so uneven and small adjustments like covered ditches
or covered sluices was sufficient to keep the water flowing, about 10 miles of the distance
is covered that way.
But sometimes there were little valleys or streams that had to be crossed, in that case
elevated aqueducts were necessary, in this one line there are 6 elevated aqueducts totaling
about 4 miles of the total distance.
Now 5 of these aqueducts are fairly small, but the Roman engineers found that the best
route had to cross the valley of Gardin as it's now called, and there they had to build
the largest aqueduct that the Roman Empire ever built, an aqueduct which is today called
the Pondugas, the bridge of the gare.
It's 180 feet high, over 1100 feet long, it's composed of 3 tiers of arches, built
out of stones, some of which weigh in excess of 6 tons, all fitted together squared stones
without mortar, the only mortar that's used in the construction of the Pondugas is in
the third tier that carries the water channel.
It was also built slightly curved because the Roman engineers knew that the river that
ran at its base would be a raging torrent in the spring time, during the spring, and
so they curved the outline of the aqueducts to resist the force of the water, that is
the convex side is pointed upstream.
Apparently it worked because 2,000 years later, despite the depredations and the abuses
wreaked upon the structure during the Middle Ages when it was used as a bridge, it still
stands 2,000 years later.
The third tier, if we go up to it and inspect it, there we'll find the channel for the water.
The channel is 5.5 feet deep and about 4.5 feet wide, so that's a pretty substantial channel
for water.
What happens to this water after it passes the 35 miles from Ise down to Nîme?
Well at Nîme, it enters a structure called the Castellum, now the Castellum, or Castle
in English, at Nîme is one of a very few surviving number of water distribution centers.
There's a pit that 18 feet in diameter, surrounded by a low wall with holes in them, about a
foot in diameter.
The holes once carried pipes of lead, and these lead pipes would distribute the water
throughout the city.
I should mention that by the time of the first century AD, Roman lead piping had been standardized.
There were standard girths, diameters of lead pipe for transporting water.
I should also mention that our word plumbing actually comes from the material the Romans
use, namely lead.
Lead in Latin is plumbone, so that's a plumber is a person who works with lead.
Where did the lead pipes go then?
Well, to different quarters of the city.
One of them would have won, or several would have supplied the large baths, the large public
baths of the city of Nîme.
Others would go to public fountains, fountains in city squares where people could haul their
water from.
But some of them also supplied private houses, because some Roman houses of the very wealthy
had indoor running water.
And once the water got to the Roman houses, there were nozzles of bronze that were put
over the opening of different bores, and these bores were also standardized.
The smaller the opening, the less the amount of water that could come through, and so you
paid less for your water bill.
The larger the opening, more water, more expensive.
Clearly, there's a lot of administration that has to go not only to laying out the aqueduct,
but to keeping it functioning and maintaining the costs of it by charging for water.
So that requires a very stable society, stable administrative structure, stable workforces.
About how much water actually came through these 35 miles?
Well, it's hard to estimate because we don't actually know the flow rates, but the best
estimates say that probably about 350,000 gallons of water flowed into Nîme per day.
At the Castellum, that works out to about 4 gallons a second.
That sounds like a good deal, but I must tell you, it is not to make a bad pun, a proverbial
drop in the bucket compared to what happened at Rome in the 1st century, 2nd century AD.
It's estimated, and this is a conservative estimate, that the ancient city of Rome consumed
150 to 200 million gallons of water every day.
An enormous quantity of water.
Well, if we now pass beyond the hydraulic engineering, the water engineering of the
Romans, and look at their cities a little bit more, we can find some more examples of
Roman technology.
For example, in buildings, the houses of the very wealthy had indoor heating.
They developed a system of putting vents of ductwork underneath tile floors and through
the walls, through which hot air from a fire, a hypocost in the cellar, or underneath the
house, would circulate, so it would warm up the floors and the walls.
Of course, remember that this is a time when labor, human labor has to do everything immediately,
so a down in that cramped, unbearably hot hypocost was a slave constantly throwing fuel
into the fire to heat the house.
In terms of building materials, the Romans developed an excellent kind of concrete made
of mixing lime and sand and volcanic ash.
In fact, they had a kind of concrete that was hydraulic, that is, it would harden under
water.
If we go again to the city of Rome to look at the magnificent structure of the pantheon
with its famous coffered dome, that dome is a concrete dome, made by Roman concrete,
and as you can see, still standing.
In the crowded centers of the cities, though, most people could not afford their own housing,
and so they lived in what were called insulai, what we would call apartment blocks.
Insulai means literally an island.
Well, as population density increased, these insulai had to get taller and taller and taller,
eventually peeking out at about four stories, maybe five stories in some cases.
The problem was that catastrophic collapse of these insulai was by no means unknown in
the Roman world.
The Romans did often blame this on shoddy construction, and crooked constructors, crooked builders,
which there was probably some truth to.
On the other hand, the Romans were at the limit of their material technology for constructing
taller buildings.
It's only so far you can go with the technological idea of the Roman arch, which is a very good
way of distributing weight, but it requires that you need immensely thick walls to hold
up the thrust, the outward thrust, from the arch.
There's only so much strength in bricks, Roman bricks, and Roman mortar.
So the Romans had really gotten to the edge of the material technology, and this is something
that happens very, very frequently with technology.
Technology tends to move in a society that values it, move to the limit of the material
technology.
We see this in our own age in terms of computer technology.
Computer technology is linked to the ability to make better materials for the components.
So we tend to think about technology sometimes as being more cerebral than necessarily it
is.
There's obviously a cerebral part of it, a theoretical part, but because it's technology,
it's tied to practicality, there is a necessity to have materials that can incorporate the
ideas of the technologist.
We are sort of, in a sense, like Plato's Demiurge.
We've got some matter, but the matter isn't taking our ideas very well.
So we have to develop new matters, something that the Demiurge couldn't do.
Well what else, what other kinds of Roman technology should we mention?
Well one that is, again, well known, like the aqueduct of Roman roads.
By the third century AD, the Roman Empire could boast over 40,000 miles of roadway.
And the Roman roads were not just simple, cleared, gravel paths.
They tended to have substantial foundations.
They were graded to shed water.
In the vicinity of towns and cities, they were topped with flat stones and grouted with
mortar.
The one thing the Romans did do that we don't, is if you look at a Roman road, they tend
to run straight as an arrow across the countryside regardless of what's in the way.
And so the grades on them, the steepness, is often quite high.
This is probably because what did the Romans really want their roads for?
It wasn't necessarily to facilitate trade.
It was to facilitate the movement of Roman troops.
And of course you can force your troops to march up as steep a hill as you like.
The point is, you want to get there fast when the military needs to move.
It needs to move quickly.
The Romans also developed technologies of mass production.
A recent archaeological dig has discovered molds for blowing glass figurines.
In such numbers that it's clear that this factory, if I can call it that, was churning
out items for the luxury trade, probably not the very high luxury, but middle luxury
trade, at an incredible amount.
So sort of early mass production techniques.
Now when I talk about mass production, one of the things we should think about is, what
about energy and power sources?
Today we're always concerned about where our energy is coming from.
Our rampant use, our squandering, as some people would say, of fossil fuels makes us
worry all the more about where the energy is coming to come from in the future.
What did the Romans do about energy and power sources?
Well curiously enough, the Romans, despite the enormous technological achievement, tended
to give very little attention to ways of getting power and energy.
The water wheel was known, it was a known technology, but the Romans seemed to pay it
very little attention.
In fact, the only example, which is important only because of how unusual it is, is a factory
that was set up in the late Roman Empire, probably the fourth century, near the city
in France, which is currently called Aurelate in Latin.
There a mill was set up using eight water wheels.
The factory is estimated to have been able to grind three tons of grain an hour, a remarkable
amount of grain.
But this is highly unusual, it's almost the only one known in the Roman world.
Why?
Well because the Romans had a cheap energy source, the same reason we don't bother really
putting our effort into developing solar or wind or alternative energy sources because
fossil fuels are still cheap.
So too, the Romans didn't bother developing the technology of power sources because they
had abundant, cheap power in the form of slaves.
Huge numbers of slaves, taken as war booty generally from conquered lands, the number
of slaves in the Roman Empire is enormous.
Slaves were abundant enough that even tradesmen of the middle class, upper working class could
afford at least one slave to help out in the business.
So when you have this great abundance of slaves, you don't worry about other sources of energy.
Now it turns out that the very few examples we see of the Romans paying attention to getting
new sources of power come with the late empire.
And not because there's a linear progression towards developing these, but because by the
late empire the source of slaves begins to dwindle.
No more Roman conquests, the Romans are losing their outer territories.
And so at that point, as one energy source starts to decrease, they start looking for
other things.
Well, now the emphasis I've put on Roman technology today is not to say that the Romans totally
ignored Greek natural philosophy, they did not.
But they amended it, changed it, altered it, developed it to suit the needs and the tastes
of their own society.
And that's what we're going to talk about in the next lecture, the Roman versions of
Greek natural philosophy.
