During the 16th and 17th centuries, many new world systems were created and proposed as
replacements to the Aristotelian world system and the scholastic methodology that was under
attack from many quarters.
One of the most celebrated of these new world systems goes by the name of the mechanical
philosophy.
The mechanical philosophy in the simplest terms envisioned the entire world and everything
in it as a great clockwork, as a great machine that functioned by mechanical laws.
It's an example of using a technological device or whatever kind of device as a metaphor for
the entire world.
And we still do that today a great deal.
Our language nowadays, in the early 21st century, is peppered with terms that come
from computer technology.
We talk about accessing things more than we used to.
We talk about filing and various sorts of terms that are drawn from the computer.
Well, in the 17th century, their equivalent of the great computer, of the supercomputer,
was the clock.
We find mechanists talking about, for example, the great astronomical clocks found in great
cathedrals, particularly the one in Strasbourg, the great astronomical clock that tells the
phases of the moon and predicts the calendar for the next year and does all kinds of wonderful
things that has these automated figures that march around on it at particular times of
day and night.
Well, it's impossible to talk of a single mechanical philosophy because there were probably as
many mechanical philosophies as there were mechanical philosophers.
There were, nonetheless, a few more or less characteristic properties of the mechanical
philosophy.
The first of these is that the ultimate explanatory principles are mechanical ones, namely the
size, the shape, and the motion of the infinitesimal corpuscles or particles of matter that make
up the world, their mutual collisions, agglomerations, and falling apart.
Some qualities and Aristotelian substantial forms were rejected.
What do I mean by that?
Well, things like heat.
Heat in a body is no longer a quality, as it is according to Aristotle.
It's caused by the rapid motion of the particles that make up the body beating upon our sensoria
on our senses that make us sense something as hot.
The substantial form in Aristotelian scholastic natural philosophy is the combination of all
the qualities that make a body what it is.
So for gold, it would be yellowness, heaviness, softness, ductility, malleability, that sort
of thing.
Substantial forms as well were rejected because all of these qualities are reduced to the properties,
the activity, the motions, the size, the shapes of the small particles of matter of which
it is made.
Another point is that sensible qualities are no longer in the world out there.
They're in the sensor.
That is to say honey is not sweet because it has a form of sweetness.
It's sweet because its particles, the particles it's made up of, activate the tongue to give
us the sensation of sweetness.
So qualities come away from the external world and are put onto the sensor.
And at a distance becomes inadmissible, as in fact it was with Aristotle, but certainly
not in things like the magnetical philosophy of Gilbert or in the natural magic tradition.
In the mechanical philosophy, everything has to function by contact mechanics in its strongest
form.
It's a billiard ball universe where billiard balls, microscopic, submicroscopic billiard
balls are bouncing off one another and causing the phenomena, the changes that we see.
So there's no sympathy, there's no antipathy, just contact mechanics.
The particles of matter moved in accord with mathematical, mechanical laws produce all
the phenomena.
So the mechanical philosophy is a philosophy that's aggressively reductionist.
What do I mean by reductionist?
What I mean is that it tried to explain the maximum number of phenomena with the minimum
number of explanatory principles.
So we can explain everything in the world with the size, the shape, and the motion of
particles.
Nonetheless, there are certain failures that are going to become very clear in the mechanical
philosophy.
If we try to explain a difficult property like flexibility, how is that done?
Well people try to explain it by saying the particles are flexible, they're like coils,
they're like little springs, they're like wool, well you really haven't explained anything.
You've just transferred that quality of flexibility to a lower level of matter.
You haven't really explained why the particles themselves are flexible.
So there are certain problems with the mechanical philosophy that will become clear.
Well as you already have no doubt divined, a foundation for many versions of the mechanical
philosophy is a revival of ancient atomism, that the world is particulate.
Democratian type atomism had very little support in the Middle Ages.
Aristotle's objection to it were very well known, and moreover it retains the taint of
atheism that it got by its association with Epicurus.
Remember Epicurus, he's the don't worry, be happy philosopher.
You can't do anything about what happens to you in the world because it's all predetermined,
it's just collisions of particles bouncing off one another.
There are no gods to worry about or placate, so don't worry, it's all just atoms doing
it to you.
So that atheistical taint was still very much present in atomic ideas.
You'll remember that Lucretius, the Roman writer, made a Roman popularization of Epicurus.
This was lost in antiquity, but it was rediscovered and edited in the Renaissance in 1417.
The three letters of Epicurus were found by various humanist scholars shortly thereafter.
Galileo himself tried to build up an atomic system, but he didn't succeed because he ran
against that same problem that Aristotle had of confusing the idea of indivisibility,
that is indivisible physical atoms, with dimensionless atoms, that is mathematical points.
There's a problem there.
You can't build up a body from dimensionless points, but if you have something that has
dimension, it should be divisible, so that's a problem.
The successful revival of Epicurian atomism came maybe from a surprising source, from
the hand of Pierre Gassendi, born 1592, dies in 1655.
He's a French priest, and he's interested in many, many areas of natural philosophy.
He's the first person to observe a transit of Mercury, that is, when Mercury passes
across the disk of the sun.
This has been predicted by Kepler.
Kepler died before it happened, but Gassendi witnessed it in 1631.
In the 1640s, he also did experiments that had been described by Galileo, by having people
galloping on horses and tossing balls to each other, or dropping balls as they're at full
gallop and watching how the masses fall.
In the 1630s, he began to construct an atomic system to explain natural phenomena.
This was eventually published posthumously in 1658 as the Syntagma Philosophica, which
is this encyclopedic, massive work.
Well Gassendi's system, like Epicurus's, postulates atoms moving in a void.
Visible phenomenon are the effect of the mechanical actions of these invisibly small atoms, and
he borrows a lot from Lucretius in this.
For example, we smell odors because microscopically small particles of things are floating off
of them and being inhaled through our nose, and that's how we sense them.
Lots of these things that he gets from Lucretius, like the wearing away of paving stones slowly
by the passage of carriages, the wearing away of microscopic atoms a little bit at a time
that eventually builds up.
One of the things that Gassendi does, which is crucial in the words of one historian of
science, is that he baptizes Epicurean atomism.
That is, by getting it away from this atheistical, fatalistic tendencies that it was associated
with by Epicurus.
For example, God creates the atoms, they're not eternal.
God sets them in motion, so they're not self-moved.
He also rejects this strange Epicurean motion of the swerve of a particle, which somehow,
in a very difficult to understand way, was supposed to explain the existence of free
will for Epicurus.
Gassendi just does away with that entirely.
Free will exists in the immaterial soul, the gift of God.
Now, Gassendi's system depended upon atoms in a void, but you didn't necessarily have
to have a void in order to be a mechanist.
Another kind of mechanical philosophy was proposed by René Descartes.
And Descartes, who's an almost exact contemporary of Gassendi, he's born just three years later,
he dies five years before Gassendi.
He produced a comprehensive mechanical system with no void whatsoever.
For him, the world is like Aristotle's world, it's a plenum, that is, it's completely filled
with matter.
Well, this comes partially from Descartes' definition of matter.
He calls matter race extensa, meaning extended stuff.
So the very definition of matter means that it's space-filling.
The very definition of space means that there's matter in it.
So logically, you can't have empty space because the matter actually defines the space.
Descartes builds up his system as we'll see the way Euclid does.
He's not an experimenter.
He starts from first principles, the cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am, and goes
from there to produce this comprehensive world system in the way from a mathematician
does from proposition to proposition.
Well think about it for a moment.
If the world is totally full, then motion is impossible.
If I move from here to here, I either must leave a space behind me, well I do have to
leave a space behind me, and then I have to push something out of the way to take up a
new position.
Unless of course, motion is circular so that you think of these rings of things moving
where as one thing moves, it sets a ring in motion that fills up the space that's left
behind instantaneously.
As a result, Descartes' universe is full of these eddies, or vortices, toward beyond
as he calls them.
The solar system is one great vortex, and this explains the motions of the planets that
go all in one direction, and the centrality of the sun, because the smallest particles
fall to the center, and those smallest particles are the basis of luminosity and heat, and
so the sun is naturally at the center of the system.
Well Descartes' system has one other kind of stuff besides the extended stuff.
It has the race cogitons, thinking stuff, and this is immaterial.
That's made up of the race cogitons, the soul, spirits, and God.
These are immaterial substances.
They are not extended in three dimensions, so we can't think of, they're totally different
from the material stuff.
Well one benefit of this division is that it allows Descartes and his followers to
mathematicize the world totally.
Everything in it is extended in three dimensions.
Everything in it works mathematically and mechanically.
You can't mathmatize the incorporeal soul, but you can mathmatize everything else.
So it allows for a mathematical treatment of everything in the entire world.
But on the other hand, by creating this fundamental division, which we call Cartesian dualism,
Descartes deanimates nature utterly.
The entire world is dead.
Everything in it, including your pets, are just machines.
They have no life.
They are just machines.
That clearly changes once again in another way man's relationship to the universe.
Descartes division of body and soul has become so ingrained in our thought, it's hard for
us to imagine that that's not the only option.
That was Descartes' option, but it's not necessarily the only one.
Moreover, Descartes' thought, like the mechanical philosophy in general, separates man from
the rest of the natural world.
He's the only thing with a soul.
He's the only thing with a vital essence.
And so first of all, he's different from the world, but also his observations are self-created.
They don't exist out there in the world.
Man becomes an alien in his own world with a Cartesian view.
That's not to say the Cartesian thought wasn't very fertile and very fruitful, and it's not
to say the Cartesian thought isn't extremely influential down to the present day.
But it is possible to say that Descartes' system was open to a great many objections.
It was a subject to the criticism of being atheistic because God and his activity really
gets moved away from the functioning of the world.
It was thought to be enthusiastic.
What does that mean?
It's a theological term, meaning that you have an unmediated revelation from God, a
personal revelation.
And that's not a very good thing in early modern theology.
That's this laying claim to unmediated revelations from God.
There's all kinds of problems with that.
But what does Descartes do?
He sits there in his garret by his stove.
He throws away all the knowledge he has, and he starts with the cogito ergo sum and builds
up a system, as if God is revealing the world to him personally.
So that was a problem.
But especially more than either one of these two was the seeming arbitrariness of his system.
His explanations, like most of his system, tend to be a priori.
That is, they're made before you look at the world, not after you look at the world.
Well, much of the force of the 17th century is an insistence on really observing the world,
doing experiments with it, like Bacon's method.
You get all these observations, and then you draw conclusions from them.
That's a posteriori kind of methodology.
Descartes is not like that.
It's like geometry.
That means that many of his explanations are fanciful and were seen as such by his readers.
The best examples of these occur when he tries to explain occult phenomena, actions at a
distance in the most important cases.
How does the magnet draw iron to itself?
How in the world can that happen mechanically?
If you have particles streaming out of the magnet, let's say, in a fluvium of particles,
well, they should hit the iron, and if anything, they'll push it away, not draw it closer.
How can you possibly explain this?
You can't have action at a distance.
It's got to be mechanical.
Well, his explanation usually makes students grin a bit.
He's got the idea that, yes, particles are coming out of the magnet, but they're cork
screw-shaped particles, and iron has pores in it that are screw-shaped, so these particles
come out of the magnet, they hit the pore in the iron, they screw through the pores
and pull the iron closer to the magnet.
And repulsion works the same way, depending upon whether you have right-handed or left-handed
screw-shaped particles.
Very clever, but there's not a lot of way to verify something like that.
The power of Descartes' system seems to be that it is comprehensive, like Aristotle's
old system.
The issue of the void distinguishes the gossendist view from the Cartesian view, and this issue
of the void becomes a celebrated cause in the 17th century.
Does a vacuum exist?
Can a vacuum be produced?
What are its qualities?
Remember that Aristotle had argued vociferously against the possibility of a vacuum, just
as he argued against the possibility of atoms.
A vacuum cannot exist, he says.
One of his arguments is that the rate of motion of a body is inversely proportional to the
resistance of the medium through which it moves.
So things move more slowly in water than they do through air.
Well, if you have a vacuum with no resistance, there's no medium, then the speed of an object
should be infinite, which to Aristotle doesn't make sense.
It would get where it's going at the same moment it leaves, so a vacuum can't exist.
That's only one of his several arguments.
But in the middle of the 17th century, an experiment became highly celebrated, known
as the Torricelli experiment.
This was devised by Evangelista Torricelli, born in 1608, dies in 1647, so he had a very
short life, only 39 when he dies.
He's a student of Galileo's.
Torricelli does this experiment in 1644, and what he does is this, he takes a long tube
about a yard long, closed at one end, open at the other.
He fills it with mercury, then he takes a bowl full of mercury, puts his finger over
the end of the tube and inverts the tube into the mercury, takes his finger off.
What happens?
The level of the mercury in the tube drops as the mercury starts to flow out of the tube
and then stops somewhere about 30 inches above the level of the mercury.
This brings up two questions.
One, why does the mercury stop flowing out of the tube, and why, regardless of the tube
that you use, is it always at about 30 inches?
Second question is, that space above the mercury, where the mercury has moved away from, what
is it?
What's in that space?
These are the two questions that the Torricellian experiment brings up.
Well, Aristotelians explained the arrested outflow of the mercury by recourse to the
horror vacui, that is, nature's abhorrence of a vacuum.
We still say today, as a sort of proverb, nature abhors a vacuum.
Well that's a sentiment straight out of Aristotelian natural philosophy, meaning that nature so
abhors a vacuum, it hates the idea of a vacuum being formed, that it stops the mercury from
flowing out to prevent the creation of a vacuum.
That space above the mercury is filled with some kind of subtle substance that presumably
comes out of the mercury, but of course it's not a vacuum.
Mechanists on the other hand used fluid equilibrium as the cause.
There's an equilibrium between the height of 30 inches of mercury and the weight of
our atmosphere.
That is to say that 30 inches of mercury weighs an equal amount as a column of air from the
level of the basin of mercury to the top of our atmosphere.
So the two are in equilibrium.
What is above the mercury?
It's a vacuum.
Now the Aristotelians can't, a strict Aristotelian can't accept the idea of a vacuum, it also
cannot accept the idea of this fluid equilibrium because according to Aristotel the air has
no weight.
It's light, it's not heavy, it's positively light rather than having a weight.
Essentially what Torricelli in Vence discovers is the barometer, so he's measuring air pressure,
the weight of the atmosphere.
Now a famous experiment was done a few years after that by Blaise Pascal.
Blaise Pascal lived in Clermont, in the center of France, in the Auvergne, near a very high
mountain called the Puy-de-Dôme.
What Pascal did was to make one of these Torricellian tubes, measure how high the mercury was in
it, in his home in Clermont, put the barometer onto a wagon and carries and he has it carted
up to the top of the Puy-de-Dôme.
Then he finds that there the level of the mercury is now lower, which seems to argue
that he's at a higher level, the air pressure is less, the fluid equilibrium now, there's
less air to counter-poise the weight of the mercury, so the mercury is at a lower height.
That seems to argue in favor of the mechanists and it becomes an extremely famous experiment.
Of course Aristotelians don't immediately get convinced of this, they say well you know
the barometer gets shaken up a lot as it moves up to the top of the hill, how do you know
that there wasn't some other cause for the decrease in the level of the mercury.
Experiments often cause as many problems as they solve or as many questions as they solve
and we see this again and again and certainly in modern science to this day.
Well now that I've brought up the topic of air pressure and the vacuum, I should talk
about a very important very fascinating character by the name of Robert Boyle.
Robert Boyle was born in 1627, he lives until 1691, some of his most important work was
done in fact with the air and he was a mechanical philosopher.
He also happened to be a very rich man, he was the son, the seventh son in fact of the
great Earl of Cork who was the richest man for a time in Britain.
So Boyle had the leisure life as a gentleman and he was able to do lots of experiments
and follow his interests.
He in fact is the one that coins the term mechanical philosophy, that's Boyle's own
term, he was very good at coining these terms, they tended to stick when he made them.
But he develops his own version of it, let me talk first about his work with the air.
In the late 1650s, helped by his assistant Robert Hook, who's a very clever guy with
his hands, he's very ingenious making machines, Hook and Boyle build an air pump, a big glass
sphere, a piston, you crank on this piston and it pulls the air out of this glass globe
and so you can do experiments at lower pressure or if you believe in a vacuum, in a vacuum.
He brings lots of evidence to bear in favor of the mechanical explanation of Torricelli's
tube, because he puts the barometer inside this glass globe, cranks it down and watches
the mercury fall as the air is taken out.
He also discovers what's known to this day as Boyle's law, namely that the pressure and
volume of a gas is inversely proportional.
You put more pressure on a gas, its volume decreases, you take pressure off, the volume
increases, what he called the spring of the air, that it expands like a spring does when
you take the pressure off of it.
Well, Boyle had his own version of the mechanical philosophy, which was based on what he called
corpuscularianism, not atomism, but corpuscularianism.
Why did he make up this new term?
Well, on the one hand, Boyle's corpuscles are divisible, they are not indivisible like
Epicurus's atoms, their shapes can be changed, chemical operations, Boyle was very interested
in chemistry, and so we're going to talk more about him in that context later on.
Their shape can be changed by chemical operations, and so change their qualities, the qualities
of the bodies they compose.
Moreover, it gets you a little bit further away from this nastiness of atomism that's
still carried over from Epicurus and his atheism.
What Boyle also does to get rid of this atheistical taint is that he and others, other Englishmen,
other people on the continent as well, try to find a better origin for the atomic philosophy.
Rather than having it come from this horrible atheist in Greece, what's a better way?
What's a better place for it to come from?
In a couple of places, Boyle calls atomism the Phoenician Hypothesis.
Phoenician?
What about the Phoenicians?
He's trying to link it, as others do, to a character that we know very little about by
the name of Moscus, who was supposedly a Phoenician.
Now, Phoenicians are Semites, so they're closely related to the Jews, and maybe Moscus isn't
Moscus, but rather Moses.
So he tries to find a Semitic origin, in other words, a revealed by God origin, to atomism.
This is tied up with the idea that we've mentioned before of the Priscus sapiensia, the original
knowledge.
At some time in the distant past, God revealed knowledge to the very distant ancients, and
that knowledge has been corrupted over time.
So perhaps God revealed the corpuscularian hypothesis to Moses, and this is translated
down through the ages.
All right.
Trying to find a more reputable source for a useful world system, essentially.
But it's important to point out that many of Boyle's ideas about corpuscularianism don't
come from Epicurean classical atomism at all.
They come from a totally alternate path, a totally alternate tradition that comes to
him through the Alchemists, the Chemists.
That is this idea that we talked about in a previous lecture of the Minima Natiralia.
This comes also from a curious statement that Aristotle makes in one of his books, where
he says that if you take gold, for example, and you keep splitting it smaller and smaller,
eventually you'll get to a particle that's so small that if you split it one more time,
it's no longer gold.
It can no longer hold the form of gold.
So there's a smallest particle size for every kind of substance in the world.
It's not atomism because they're divisible.
It's a particulate matter theory.
It was very much used by a large number of medieval alchemists, and Boyle certainly read
these texts, and he was interested in chemical processes.
So what Boyle seems to be doing is he's joining up both this immediate classical tradition
from Epicurus the Cretius and also this other tradition, ultimately from Aristotle, but
heavily influenced by medieval alchemical thought.
We'll talk a little bit more about that later when we talk about Boyle's chemistry.
Well, Boyle was a great champion of the mechanical philosophy.
He thought it was clearer, more comprehensible than the obscurities of Aristotelian scholastic
natural philosophy.
At the same time, he was very deeply troubled by its possible implications and its overextension.
There are two implications, in fact, that really bothered Boyle and many others in the
17th century.
One is that it removes God from the operation of creation.
God may have made this clock, but then what happened to him?
Could he have willed himself out of existence, and now the world is just functioning because
he wound it up at the beginning and it's still running?
Does God even care anymore about what happens to the world?
These are very troubling theological issues.
The absent watchmaker, that's a problem for the 17th century.
The other problem is that a completely mechanical world is deterministic.
If you know the motions of all the particles, where they're going, at what velocity, how
they interact, that means the entire course of human history is entirely predetermined.
You can predict any future event from the motions, it's just extrapolating the trajectories
of the particles.
What happens to free will?
Well the 17th century is a huge battleground, figuratively and literally, over the issue
of free will between Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Puritans.
This is a huge problem again.
So mechanism had great promise, but it carried great peril, and much of the history of science
in the latter half of the 17th century is about working through these problematic issues.
Yet, I have to mention to you that we need to remember that mechanism was not the only
option, nor was all mechanism totally mechanical.
There are lots of compromised positions.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at another system that is a supplement to or
an alternative to the mechanical philosophy, one that sees a vital living world rather
than a dead mechanical one.
