Alchemy is one of the most intriguing but at the same time one of the most difficult
to understand topics in the history of science. Alchemy is going to be the first topic that
we cover in this lecture. Actually there are going to be three topics that I cover, first
Alchemy, then second, a curious division between rival groups of intellectuals in the Islamic
world and the very unusual matter theory of one of them. And then finally, since this
is the last lecture that I can devote to the Islamic world, we have to talk about the difficult
and hard to answer question about the decline and the causes of the decline of Islamic culture
which was in evidence by the end of the 12th century. Well, let's start with Alchemy then.
There are two aspects I want to talk about. First, its origin outside of the Islamic Empire that
is in Hellenistic Egypt in the first few centuries of the Christian era and then its development
into a full-fledged part of natural philosophy in Arabic culture. All right, well let's start
with the background. The background for Alchemy, for chemistry, starts about the third century AD
in Alexandria, the area around Alexandria in Hellenistic Egypt. The Greek word chimia at that
time was used to describe a group of processes mostly for the refining, the purification of
metals, the making of alloys, the making of artificial gems, and the making of mimics,
alloys that mimicked gold and silver. Now the word chimia seems to come from the Greek verb
keo, which means to melt or to smelt or to cast. So clearly the origins of Alchemy, the origins of
chemistry come from this metalworking tradition. What's unfortunate is that very, very little
survives from these early Greek texts. We have some scraps of papyrus, we have some more or less
corrupt texts from writers like Zosimus, who was a fourth century writer, but it's very difficult to
get a clear sense of what was going on in this first phase of Alchemy in Hellenistic Egypt. What
is clear, however, is that by the time chemistry chimia was transferred to the Arab world, the
practitioners were no longer interested in making just artificial, look-alike, airzots gold and
silver, but actually real gold and silver from cheaper metals by the process known as transmutation.
Well, the Islamic world took up Greek texts on Alchemy during the translation movement in the
ninth century, but soon, certainly by the end of the ninth century, they were starting to do their
own chemical experimentation and theorization. There is one story that's told about the Caliph
Al-Mansur, the founder of Baghdad, that in the late eighth century he heard about Alchemy from one
of his secretaries who had traveled to the court of Constantine V, the then reigning emperor of
the Byzantine Empire, and that this secretary saw at the emperor's court a transmutation of base
metals into gold. Now clearly something like this would be something that would get the attention
of a reigning Caliph monarch king prince, whatever, the ability to make gold naturally has certain
practical advantages. Well, let's talk about alchemy in the Islamic world. The term alchemy,
notice there is the letter AL at the beginning again, it is an Arabic word, it's the Arabic
article AL plus the Greek kimia, that's where the word comes from, and in the Islamic world this
term al-kimiya in Arabic dealt with the study, the treatment, the refining, and the production of
specific material substances. Now just like in astronomy today we see some remnants of Arabic
astronomy, in chemistry today we can see some remnants of Arabic alchemy, so words like alcohol
and alkali and alum are all words that come out of the Islamic Middle Ages from the Arabic
contributions. One of the places for contribution was in the improvement of the practical processes
of dealing with material substances, this is something that's special about alchemy or chemistry,
that it's intimately related with how human beings deal with material substances, how do we do
crystallizations and distillations and sublimations, and how do we work with these substances. Well,
part of the Arabic contribution was the devising of improved methods and improved instruments for
carrying out things like distillation and crystallization. They improved upon the rudimentary
methods that were first devised in Hellenistic Egypt, one of the ways they were able to improve
was again through a technological substance, a technological ability that was preserved in
the Islamic world, namely glass blowing. This nearly died out in the West, the West was not
able to make glass, it was made very much in the Roman period, but glass making was not practiced
very much in the Latin West until the late Middle Ages. In the Islamic world however,
glass production, glass blowing had reached a quite a high level of development. Well,
let's talk about describing material substances, if the Islamic Empire is spread out all over
huge swath of territory, there are all kinds of stones and minerals and metals and herbs and
various sorts of things that need cataloging. And so catalogs of these were developed in the
Arabic world. One of these comes from Arrazi, a Persian physician and chemist who was born about
865, died in 925. He's sometimes called the Arab Galen because of his contributions to medicine. He
wrote books on fevers and on anatomy and on drugs. And in connection with his work at a hospital
that he managed, he was interested in the chemical preparation of various substances,
presumably because they could be used medicinally. One of his most important works is the Kitabul
Asrar or the Book of Secrets. This was translated eventually into Latin and became an important
part of the corpus of Latin alchemy in the Middle Ages in Europe. Well, besides these practical
aspects, we should go to theory now, alchemical or chemical theory. Most important theory is attached
to the name of Jabir ibn Hayan. It's called the Mercury Sulphur theory. Let me say something first
about Jabir ibn Hayan. There may at one time have been a person by this name. There may not have
been a person by this name. What we do know is that there are about 2,000 books that are attributed
or were attributed at one point, many of them are lost now, to this one character. Either he lived
a very long time or he was very prolific. Well, actually neither one of those because the works
were written over about a 150 year period. And they're actually the productions of a Shiite sect
that put the name of their founder on basically everything that they wrote. Well, let's look at
the theory. The Mercury Sulphur theory tries to explain the origin of the metals and why the
metals have so many properties in common. They're all shiny. They're all hard. They're fusible.
They're able to be hammered and beaten. The Mercury Sulphur theory states that all metals are made
out of two substances which Jabir ibn Hayan, whoever he is, calls Mercury and Sulphur. This was
an outgrowth, a development of an idea that Aristotle promoted in his book on on the meteors.
He says that in underneath the ground two fumes arise from the center of the earth. One is dry
and smoky. One is wet and vaporous. Jabir ibn Hayan calls the smoky one Sulphur and the wet
one Mercury. They condense underground and combine and from that we get the metals. When the Mercury
and Sulphur are very pure and in just the right proportion, we get the best metal of all, gold.
But when there's too much of one or the other, we get one of the baser metals. Now notice what this
does. This theoretically undergirds the possibility of transmutation because if all the metals are
made out of the same two substances and differ only in proportion and purity of those two ingredients,
all you need to do to turn lead into gold is purify the ingredients and get their relative
proportions right. So there's a theoretical underpinning for transmutation. Sometimes
moderns like to scoff at this long-term search for the secret of transmutation, but really there's
a theory that undergirds it. We have a different theory that doesn't, but nonetheless. Transmutation,
how is it carried out? Well supposedly, it was supposed to be carried out by a prepared substance
that you made in a vessel and this substance was called by the Hellenistic alchemists the
philosopher's stone. It was also called xere. Now xere is literally a powder that you put on a wound
to heal it, a medicinal powder. This xere apparently is also a powder that you could put,
this philosopher's stone also called xere could be put on a metal and in a few minutes it would
transmute it from a base metal into gold in a sense healing it the way a medicinal xere would heal
a wound. The Arabic transliteration of that word xere is xir and if you add the Arabic
article you get al-xir which is the origin of our word elixir which is the word we still use to
talk about a medicine with great potent characteristics. Well alchemists in the Islamic world as well as
in the later Latin world endeavored to prepare this secret substance the philosopher's stone.
The Islamic Mercury-Sulfur theory promoted by the Jabirian corpus was the foundation
of chemical theory in one way or another for the next 800 years. Down until about 1700
there were still developments of the Jabirian Mercury-Sulfur theory these two elements that
make up the metals and ore of other things as well. These ideas were still being promoted
in Europe so it had a very long lifespan and was very influential. Another important writer I should
mention on alchemy is Ibn Sina known to the latin's Avicenna. He's tenth and eleventh century
born about 980 and dies in 1037. He, like Arrazi, is a Persian and again like Arrazi was a physician.
He wrote a huge book called Al Kanun, the Canon, about medicine. It's an immense text. It was a
compilation of medical knowledge and techniques. After it reached Europe it was considered
authoritative there as a work on medicine until the 17th century and was printed actually in
Arabic in Europe in fact not only in translation. In terms of alchemy Avicenna also wrote a book
called the Kitabu Shafa which is the book of the remedy. It adopted the Jabirian Mercury-Sulfur
theory but at the same time denied on the basis of Aristotle the possibility of transmutation.
So an Arabic alchemy comes into the Latin West which we'll see later on. It comes in in two
different strands. It comes in first of all the sort of Jabirian ideas promoting transmutation,
looking for the philosopher stone, the elixir, and also this Avicenian branch that says well no
transmutation is not possible. And so right from the very beginning when alchemy gets into Europe
there is a dissension within it. We'll talk about that much more later.
Now let me move from the topic of alchemy but still staying on the topic of matter theory
to talk about two rival groups that coexisted within the Islamic world. This is very interesting
and we wish we knew more about these two groups. One group, the one that we know more about,
are called the philosopher. Now philosopher, this is just if you listen to it carefully,
it's philosophers, it's just a transliteration of the Greek. The philosopher considered themselves
to be the true heirs and advances of Greek natural philosophy and Greek thought. Their
commitments were generally to Plato, Neoplatonism, and a sort of platonic reading of Aristotle.
Their opponents or their rivals at least were called the Mutakalimun. The Mutakalimun were the
practitioners of what was called Kalam. Now Kalam literally in Arabic means discourse or speech.
What it is is Islamic speculative theology. It's a matter of discussing, in the Islamic world
the tradition of theology is deeply oral, as it is for example in the Jewish tradition. It's an
oral tradition and so Kalam, this discussion, is the discussion of theology. Now although Kalam
was predominantly theological in character, it also dealt with such issues as epistemology
and ontology and logic, but more interestingly also with physical theories of matter and
cosmology how peculiar. Well in fact matter theory became one of the major points of
contention for the Mutakalimun. What was their matter theory? Well it's very unusual and very
different from that of the philosophy. In the 9th and 10th century and probably earlier their ideas
were radically atomistic. That's strange, because I've already told you that Epicurean
atomism was rejected by both Christians and Muslims in general because of its tendencies
toward atheism. But the Mutakalimun seemed to have picked up some ideas of Epicureanism.
How radically atomistic was it? Well they not only believed that matter came in discrete
smallest parts, but also believed that time was not continuous, but came in discrete
smallest parts, as well as space, as well as motion. All of these came in discrete parts.
What they seem to be adopting is a radically non Euclidean view of space. For Euclid,
his whole geometry depends upon the idea that there is a continuity of a line,
that a line is not made up of discrete points. Put as many points together as you want,
you never get a line. The Mutakalimun on the other hand seemed to be using what we call
a discrete geometry, where points actually do add up to something.
Where on earth did they get this from and why? Well both of those questions are difficult to
answer, because the earliest writings of the Mutakalimun are lost, so we only have digests
of them from later writers. There is however no evidence that any writings of Epicurus were
ever translated into Arabic. There's no evidence that any legitimately Epicurean, much less
Lucretian works, were read by Islamic theologians. What may have happened instead was that they
got sort of a digested version of this, from interactions maybe with Nestorian Christians,
who would have been familiar with the natural philosophical ideas of the Hellenistic world,
but we really just don't know. Why did they adopt it? Well that also is unclear.
There has been the suggestion made that it was adopted for a specific theological purpose,
namely to confound the dualists. Now the dualist I mentioned once before, very briefly when we
were talking about Augustine. The dualist believed in two forces in the universe, two gods, a good
one and an evil one, and generally believed, particularly in the Manichean version of dualism,
that matter was inherently evil. Now the idea of matter being inherently evil is not consonant with
either Christianity or Islam, because God created matter, and what God creates is good.
The dualists would have been a problem for the early Muslims, especially once the capital was
moved to Baghdad, because now where were they? They were in the middle of Mesopotamia, which is the
origin of dualist philosophies. The Persians were certainly dualists at one time. Therefore,
if you want to say something about matter not being evil, you need to know something about matter.
This is how the argument goes. Know something about matter, you need a matter theory, and the
Multikalimun seem to have picked up this discrete geometry and this atomistic view of
matter. What I want to emphasize to you, though, is that if this origin is actually true, what does
it mean? It means that a theological need, a need on the part of theologians, actually was the cause
for the adoption of a specific scientific conception of the world. That is not a usual
connection that moderns tend to make, but this, I promise you, will not be the only example we see
of this. Once we get to the Latin middle ages, there'll be a lot more. The Multikalimun and the
Philosopher also idealize or typify two different ways in which scientific knowledge can be
transmitted between cultures. The Philosopher actually had the books of the Greeks. They were
actually in that tradition, they read the exact words, at least in Arabic, of Greek natural
philosophers. But if you think about it, that's not the only way we learn. When we want to learn
about astronomy, we don't necessarily read the latest papers in the astrophysical journal. We
don't necessarily read the cutting edge part of science. We tend to read popularizations
or we tend to pick up things sort of just from the culture in general. In our culture, so many
scientific ideas are built into it that we know a lot of science that we take for granted that we
don't actually know where it comes from. Something like this, it's been suggested, was what happened
with the Multikalimun. They as well picked up some of the basics of an Epicurean atomism
divorced from the atheistic bad parts of it that made Epicureanism so distasteful to so many people,
but picked it up from some source, maybe not necessarily a popularization, but maybe,
maybe from speculations going on in the Christian communities who were familiar
with Greek texts, maybe not, we don't know. This is of course the problem that we always
run up against until we get to the modern age, that the texts we really want to have,
we don't necessarily have. It would be lovely to have early texts from the Multikalimun,
don't necessarily have them. Maybe they're out there somewhere and we don't know about them.
Well, having said this now, we need to go to a sad chapter in Islamic history,
a sad chapter in Islamic culture, and that is the decline that occurred in Islamic civilization,
evident by the beginning of the 13th century. By say 1500, there was really very little scientific
work going on in the Islamic world, and that's a problem that needs to be explained. It's in
fact one of the big questions, one of the great mysteries in the history of science. What happened
in the Islamic world? And there are a lot of theories, and for the remainder of this lecture,
I'm going to try to present you with some of those theories, but remember that all of these are
tentative. I mentioned earlier in an earlier lecture that there's so much work left to be done
on this topic. There are texts in Arabic scattered, for example, throughout Europe,
in libraries where not necessarily anyone reads Arabic. We don't even know what's there. There
are presumably Arabic texts throughout the Arab-speaking world that also we're not terribly
familiar with yet. So there's plenty of work to be done there. History of science is thinly
populated as a realm. On the one hand, we can point to external factors, that is external
to the history of science itself, in the culture of Islam. The unity of the Islamic world by the
12th century was falling apart. No longer was there a clear central authority. There were more and
more civil strife breaking out, more and more local princes and leaders wanting to be more
independent. Moreover, problems came from the outside. It turns out that the decline of Islamic
civilization corresponds pretty well with the rise of the Latin West. And in fact, the Latin West
started bringing armies now against Islamic lands. In the late 11th century, the Muslims
lost most of Spain, much of Spain, all of Sicily. And remember at the end of the 11th century was
the first crusade, which captured Jerusalem, captured most of the Levant from the Islamic
empire in 1099 and set up a Latin kingdom of Jerusalem that lasted for 150 years. But it wasn't
just from the West that things started eating away at the Islamic empire. From the East as well,
the Mongols were reaching their zenith at about this point, and were starting to invade the Islamic
world from the East. The most horrid moment of this, at least for a Muslim, would have been in
1258 when the Mongol hordes overran Baghdad and sacked it. Much of the city was destroyed in that.
This is one of those moments of incalculable loss for Western civilization that we can't even begin
to fathom. For 500 years, Baghdad was the glittering cosmopolitan capital of the intellectual world.
In 1258, it sacked. Its libraries dispersed. The story that is told by one Arab historian was
that the Mongols, whether this is true or not, we don't know, but this is what one Arab historian
says, that the Mongols threw the books of the library into the Tigris, and that there was so
there were so many books that the river ran black with ink for three days. No doubt an exaggeration,
but it expresses the sense of horror of what this sacking of Baghdad, the end of the Abbasid
dynasty meant to the Islamic intellectual and cultural world. Now, on the other hand,
a historian might well argue that such signs were not the cause of decay, but rather just signs
of decay, that Islam, the Islamic empire had weakened and allowed these military losses.
So whether or not it's a cause or an effect, we're not actually sure. There were certain
intellectual reasons as well. One theory points to dissension between the Muti Kalimun and the
Falasifah, that the claim goes something like this, that the Muti Kalimun were conservative
Islamic theologians who increasingly viewed the kind of work that the Falasifah did as foreign,
un-Islamic, alien. According to this model, victory over the Falasifah by the Muti Kalimun
undercut the development of Islamic natural philosophical thought. Well, that might be the
case. Many people point to the 12th century theologian Al Ghazali, who certainly had a very strong
negative reaction to a thought that came from the Greek world, from the non-Islamic world.
Yet not everyone is convinced by this. Al Ghazali should not be allowed to speak for the totality
of Islamic thought in the 12th century. No more than Tertullian should be allowed to speak for
Christian responses to Greek knowledge in the 2nd century. Moreover, there were plenty of Muti
Kalimun that seemingly did not have a clear opposition to Greek thought. They adopted
intellectual systems, sometimes not quite knowing where they're coming from, but nonetheless,
Greek thought was already incorporated with Islamic theology from an early point.
Remember, the Translation Movement occurred early, 300 years, 400 years earlier. How foreign
could assimilated knowledge be after 400 years of being in the Islamic world? Is it still foreign
at that point? So maybe that argument is not the best solution either. Maybe part of it,
but it's certainly not the whole thing. One related issue, which I find very interesting,
but again, may explain only a portion of the decline, rather than the whole decline, is this.
That the rise in occasionalist thinking may have had a bad effect on Islamic science. Now,
what do I mean by occasionalist thinking? Occasionalism is this, that God keeps the
world functioning at every moment. The idea works something like this for the Muti Kalimun with a
discrete atomistic philosophy. Let's say we have a body moving in front of us. Because motion is
not continuous, the body is actually at one point in one indivisible instant of time, then in the
next indivisible part of time, it's in the next indivisible part of space, and so forth. So essentially
it's a jerky motion. The idea then is that God recreates the universe at every infinitesimal
moment, at every discrete smallest part of time. So the object really isn't moving, it's that God
recreates the universe in the next moment of time with the object a little further along.
Now, with just a little bit of thought, you'll see what the problem with this is. It's entirely
contrary to a naturalistic reading of natural philosophy. That is to say, there aren't really
natural laws undergirding the behavior of natural objects. It's God's intervention at every
discrete smallest part of time. And so if you have that kind of a notion, well then you really
don't have any science anymore. You don't have scientific laws unless you're going to assume
that God makes up a scientific law that then he abides to in making bodies appear to move.
It's an interesting thought, but again, I don't think it can explain everything.
In fact, we still know very, very little about the text written in the later period of the Islamic
Empire after about 1200. And so I think it's probably still a bit premature for us to draw
firm conclusions about what happened. In fact, even after the Mongol invasion, after the Mongols
destroyed Baghdad in 1258, there seems even in Mongol-controlled parts of what was the Islamic
Empire, important astronomical work is being done suddenly. Or still, I shouldn't say suddenly,
it's continuing to go on. So none of these factors are complete and all of them have problems with
them. Part of the problem is that the scholarly study of the Islamic Empire often comes to an end
with the time that the Latin West starts to awaken. So if you're going to do 12th, 13th,
14th, 15th century history of science, you tend to do it in Europe, which means there's a relative
vacuum of studies for those periods in the Arabic-speaking world. So all I can tell you
is to stay tuned. In the future, hopefully there will be more scholars of Islamic history of science
and we'll find out a little bit more about the real story. In our next lecture, we then have to move
back to the Latin West.
