We are now coming to the end of our journey through the history of science.
In this lecture, there are two things we should do.
First, we should take a quick glance ahead to catch, to see what kinds of themes that
we've noted in 17th century natural philosophy are going to turn into in the 18th century.
The other, perhaps more important, is to look back over the huge amount of ground that we've covered
in order to review some of the major trends and developments and highlight some overarching themes.
Let's begin with the developments yet to come in the 18th century.
First of all, the 18th century is sometimes referred to as the Newtonian century.
Now there's some truth to this somewhat exaggerated title.
Newton had, in fact, succeeded in presenting a cosmological system
wherein all the matter of the universe, regardless of its qualities,
regardless of its identities, acted by universal gravitation on every other bit of matter.
The effect was a unification of the cosmos on the basis of universal gravitational force.
The system was beautifully explanatory.
It explains Kepler, it explains Galileo, and it explains a host of other phenomena
that had not yet, to that time, been explained.
And the 18th century spent a lot of time working through the ramifications of the Newtonian synthesis.
Newton's system promised to provide a unified view of the world,
a long-awaited replacement for the Aristotelian worldview,
which by 1700 was almost gone in any recognizable form.
Thus subsequent attempts were made to add to the unity of Newton's system
by extending its domain, by expanding it to other fields outside of physics and astronomy.
Newton himself worked on these kind of topics, but without a great deal of success.
He tried to examine the forces of electrical and magnetical attraction,
and the forces of chemical attraction.
Most of these researchers did not end in a clear conclusion for him.
And the resolution of these issues of magnetism, electricity, and chemical attraction
would come from other systems and other ideas.
I might point out that today physicists are still hard at work
on the grand unified theory trying to combine the four fundamental forces of nature into one.
This was a project that Newton conceived of, but of course could only conceive of.
In the course of expanding the Newtonian sphere, there were attempts in the 18th century
to produce, for example, a Newtonian chemistry, where laboratory phenomena,
which had long been known to chemists, were explained by the simple Newtonian principles
of matter and force.
This was, however, largely a failure.
The attempt to extend Newtonianism to chemistry
underlined one of the problems of universal gravitation.
If every particle in the universe is attracting every other particle in the universe,
why is it that the entire universe hasn't collapsed into a lump?
Chemistry brought this out most clearly, because in chemistry,
substances not only unite, but they also separate.
Various substances seem to have affinities.
That is to say that, for example, iron combines with some acids more vigorously
and more tenaciously than does copper.
Indeed, if a lump of iron is thrown into a solution of copper in an acid,
the copper dissolves, I'm sorry, the iron dissolves and the copper is replaced.
The copper comes out of solution.
Clearly, these kind of behaviors of coming together and separation
cannot be explained by attractive force alone.
Newton and Newtonianism also had many opponents,
most notably those who preferred more rigorously mechanical methods
and views of Descartes, for example, to the new idea of force,
which, as I say, seemed to be a cult.
The 18th century dealt with debates between the two camps.
One notable contest that I'll mention was the race to determine what the exact shape of the earth is.
Descartes, or the Cartesian system, which explained gravity
in terms of an ethereal wind pushing things down upon the earth,
said that this wind would be strongest at the equator,
where the earth is in the most rapid linear motion.
And so the earth would be pinched at the equator and elongated at the poles.
Newton, on the other hand, talking about an attractive force rather than a pushing force,
said that the spinning of the earth would stretch the earth at the equator
and it would be flattened instead at the poles.
Well, two teams were dispatched from Paris by the Academy of Sciences
in the early 18th century, one traveled to the frozen north of Lapland,
the other to the steaming jungles of South America.
Their job was to take measurements to enable a decision to be made between these two options.
And Newton won that particular contest.
Well, if Newton's did not turn out to be the universal system it promised to be
at the beginning of the 18th century,
it nonetheless continued an extremely important trend in natural philosophy,
which left a deep and indelible mark on all succeeding physics.
And here is one general theme that we can take from this survey.
Newton's approach continued that of Kepler and Galileo,
that is a mathematicizing view of the world.
Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and their followers,
and many others shared a confidence in the reliability of mathematics
to explain and describe the universe we inhabit.
A mathematical formula describes what happens to a body in free fall motion.
A mathematical formula describes why a planet and how a planet orbits the sun in an ellipse.
The relation of mathematics to natural philosophy is one of those topics
we have touched upon again and again throughout the course.
Long ago we visited the secretive school of the Pythagoreans,
who believed not that mathematics was a description of the world,
but rather that the world was number.
Their influence on Plato comes out clearly in Platonic cosmology,
where the demiurge creates a world in fundamentally mathematical ways.
The very tiniest particles of matter are the platonic solids.
The matter is formed by the demiurge into triangles and then into perfect polyhedra.
The whole organization of the cosmos is on mathematical grounds.
The platonic motto that God always geometrizes echoes down through the ages.
Think only of Plato's challenge to explain the complex apparent motions of the heavenly bodies,
particularly the planets, with combinations of uniform circular motion.
In other words, take what our senses perceive to be something unordered or not clearly ordered,
not symmetrical, and explain it with an ordered mathematical system of simple uniform circular motion.
This was a fundamental challenge to astronomical thought and calculation
through the Hellenistic period, through the Middle Ages, and after.
It was the revival of such thinking of God as Geometer,
a notion that never disappeared from Western thought that set Kepler on his quest
for the mathematical and geometrical basis of planetary distances and planetary motions.
The world is a harmonious, mathematical whole.
Galileo himself, in saying that the book of nature is written in the language of mathematics,
is in a sense paraphrasing Plato.
18th century workers would develop many, many new mathematical descriptions,
new mathematical tools to extend Newtonian views into new areas of celestial dynamics
that Newton was not able to explain in his time.
Today, modern physicists describe subatomic entities with mathematical expressions.
Indeed, verbal expressions do not exist, which could describe them properly.
They have no qualities, these subatomic particles, to which we can relate from our everyday experience,
and so mathematics is the necessary language by which to describe them.
Thus, in some branches of the sciences, at least,
mathematics does seem to be the appropriate language in which to understand nature.
Plato would not have been surprised.
These observations on Plato in the role of mathematics in modern science
should not, however, allow us to forget or diminish the importance of his student
and seemingly eternal sparring partner, Aristotle.
Aristotle was THE philosopher for centuries.
We have to recognize with Aristotle that not all the sciences benefit equally
from a Platonic, Pythagorean emphasis on mathematics and quantity.
The life sciences in particular, in chemistry to a considerable extent,
continue to rely heavily on a qualitative, descriptive approach.
The approach that Aristotle promoted based so heavily on his zoological work
continues to be of notable importance to the fields he himself found so central.
The natural history approach of Francis Bacon recapitulates some of Aristotle's observational prowess,
even while the Lord Chancellor declaims against the contemporary followers of Aristotle
the university scholastics.
Yet, in the guise of scholasticism,
Aristotle's methods, Aristotle's logic created a cogent and consistent method
of approaching, analyzing and answering problems.
It helped to foster the disputative culture of the medieval university,
a critical spirit that is so essential for scientific inquiry.
Far from being the mere juggling of words as 17th century critics tried to cast it,
scholasticism provided a disciplined method of investigation and organization.
Indeed, most if not all of the heroes of the new science of the 17th century,
of the scientific revolution, Galileo, Descartes, Cassendi, Van Helmont,
and many others were educated in the scholastic method
and cut their teeth in the Libri Naturales, the natural books of Aristotle.
The critical senses and the probing questions that these people later turned against the learning of the schools
were in fact largely learned in the schools.
Even as 17th century characters tore down the Aristotelian system,
they employed Aristotle's methods and adopted Aristotelian terminologies and classifications,
often in rather non-obvious ways, and many of these remain with us today.
Indeed, it's in these very fields, like the life sciences,
that we most often find recourse to the final cause,
that most important part of Aristotelian philosophy of nature,
but something which, officially at least, has been banished from modern science.
Why are things the way they are? What are they for? Towards what ends do they tend?
Aristotle's world, like Plato's world, was suffused with purpose,
and that purposefulness of the natural world was a key part for natural philosophy for millennia.
The identity of the final cause changed often,
but there remained an unshakable certainty that the world and everything in it,
or at least most things in it, have a purpose, an end, a final cause.
Now, final causes make some moderns nervous,
but perhaps no more nervous than should the alternative thought that there might be no final causes.
This question has yet to be resolved.
Aristotle and Plato, Plato and Aristotle, how often have we invoked their names in this course?
These two figures and their ideas have dogged us down through the ages.
To be sure, every age brought its own interpretation of their words and their works,
but every age was inspired by them, whether in the Islamic world or in the Latin West.
And it seems as though succeeding generations continue to argue their basic disagreements about how to view the natural world.
The Academy, the Lyceum, may have closed in the early Christian era,
but their legacies continued long after in a thousand other centers.
And here's a point I'd like to make about the influence of classical culture.
We have encountered at many, many points the longing nostalgia for the glories of Greece and of Rome,
a desire to return to the ideals and the achievements and the styles of that period.
The Arabic world of the 8th century eagerly sought out classical texts,
even though they came from a foreign infidel source.
In the 9th century in Europe, Charlemagne's school endeavored to resurrect the way the Romans wrote,
and Charlemagne's architects worked to build once again after the Roman fashion.
In the 12th century, fragments of the lost memory of Europe returned,
elaborated by the enormous contributions of the Arabic world,
and these fragments of the memory were heartily embraced.
Again in the 15th century, the humanists of the Renaissance tried to forget their own times
and their immediate past and return to the glory days of classical Greece and Rome.
Again in Baroque Rome and in Renaissance Rome,
part of St. Peter's Basilica was torn down to facilitate the relocation of an ancient pagan monument,
which eventually became the focal point of the square in front of Christendom's largest and greatest cathedral.
Again and again, fond and longing glances were cast back to the ancients.
The call was to turn back to the source, turn back to the ancients,
and again in the 18th century, after our own time period covered by this course,
the neoclassical period would again revive Greek and Roman taste.
At the very same time that a young United States would show in its choice of forms and imagery
that it was not a new creation, but a revived Roman Republic.
We tend now to think of science as something that's always new.
It casts out the old constantly and tries on the new.
But in our survey, we've seen how long ideas and difficult questions and challenges really endure.
Even ideas which have been discarded reappear after long spaces of time.
Epicurean atomism is revived after 1,500 years, even though an atheistical system, by a French Catholic priest.
After 2,000 years, Thaley's water theory comes back in the influential thought of Van Helmont.
Newton himself scoured the oldest texts he could find in an attempt to find answers to questions about the natural world
that he could not solve on his own.
We associate the statement, if I have seen further than other men,
it is because I stand on the shoulders of giants with Isaac Newton,
a statement which he did make, and perhaps an uncharacteristically modest one.
But this is a line in which he was repeating an idea itself uttered many times before in the Middle Ages.
The sense is then of people keenly aware of their history and their lineage.
It rooted them and it inspired them.
If we are tempted to ask why they constantly turned back to revisit the thoughts of their predecessors,
we should first turn that question around and ask, why is it that we fail to do so?
Compared to the eras we have been studying, there is little acknowledgement today of the thoughts
and the accomplishments of the ancients or even of most of the early moderns.
Why do we cut ourselves off from this heritage and forget the past?
What do we gain in doing so?
And this is a real question you might want to think about.
What do we gain in doing so?
What do we lose?
Indeed, that attitude I think does distinguish us sharply from the people in the periods we have studied.
Perhaps then it is a mark of modernity.
The modern world begins when we forget our past, our sense of history and our connectedness with it,
at least when we stop looking back to it.
Whether or not this is a good thing perhaps remains to be seen.
Another point which Bear has mentioned here in our conclusion is the motivations for the study of the natural world.
Well, we've seen many of these through this course.
Those who were devoted to the idea of natural magic believed in using the secrets of nature they discovered for useful purposes.
This motivation seems akin to the interest of modern science in linking itself closely to productive processes and applications.
In this way, usefulness, utility was an important driving force in natural magic or in modern science.
Knowledge of the natural world and the way it works gives the knower power over his environment.
This goal of utility was shared by Francis Bacon and by many in the Scientific Revolution such as the founders of the Royal Society.
We saw just in the previous lecture that the members of the French Royal Academy were at the call of the French Crown.
As so again, utility and usefulness were important to their work.
While control of the natural world was important to these thinkers, we should recall that Plato and many of his later followers
saw knowledge of the natural world as a means not to control nature, but to control oneself.
The order of the natural world is a prototype of the order which should characterize the philosophical mind.
For the medieval Platonists like you of Saint Victor, knowledge was not only self-transformative, it was redemptive.
Restoring the preternatural human qualities lost on account of original sin.
This clearly is not a motivation shared by modern science.
And this theological dimension should remind us that throughout so much of the periods we have studied,
religious motivations undergirded the study of the natural world.
In both Islam and in Christianity, scientific information was in general viewed as a support or a supplement to the truths of revelation.
The material cosmos as God's own handiwork was another means of communication with the divine.
While the Creator is hidden from our bodily eyes, His creation stands before us always and thus presents another means of knowing the Creator this time through His creation.
And this realization should help us overcome the old canard about the constant warfare or conflict between science and religion.
It would of course be idle to deny that nowadays it does seem that science and at least the popular forms of religion engage in constant skirmishes.
It would also be idle to deny that there were such skirmishes although at a lower order and less frequently in the past.
Yet our journey should have demonstrated that this recent development is a bit of an aberration.
Even in the famous issue of Sr. Galileo, we saw the complexity of the historical scene,
a complexity that forbids us to characterize it as a simple issue of science versus religion.
Indeed, during much of our trip, we saw that religious institutions were the chief patrons of natural philosophical and other kinds of intellectual inquiry,
whether that meant the mosque and the madrasa, the cathedral school or the medieval university.
Even if we return to the ancient Babylonians, we find it was the priestly class that kept the astronomical records and made the astronomical predictions.
And remember, Aristotle tells us that it was the priests of Egypt that devised mathematics.
The various religious orders in Europe provided further institutional foundations and support for natural inquiry,
the Benedictines, the Dominicans, the Jesuits, and even in order like the Franciscans,
whose founder wanted them to stay away from scholarly pursuits, soon found itself deeply entrenched in the scholarly life of the university
and making important contributions to the study of the natural world.
Even long after the Middle Ages, the religious motivation to scientific inquiry remained strong.
Descartes may have begun with cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am, but his immediate next move was, there is a God.
Boyle saw his entire enterprise in the context of Christian belief,
and like many of his contemporaries, saw his work as a natural philosopher as an inherently religious activity, a kind of devotion, if you will.
Newton, we find, spent the greater part of his life involved in theological pursuits
and hoped to be able to use his scientific discoveries to make manifest the continuous operation of God in the world.
It is striking that the original motivations are so soon forgotten.
In any standard physics textbook, we can still read about Kepler's three laws, we can read about Galileo's free-fall motion,
we can read about Newton and his theory of universal gravitation.
When we read Kepler's three laws, we learn in our textbooks how now to derive them, as Newton did, from Newtonian principles,
but nowhere save among historians of science, of course, is it remembered that Kepler's motivation in enunciating these three laws was to find the harmonies of the universe implanted by God,
whether that took the form of the equal aerial law or the music of the spheres.
His commitments were platonic, Pythagorean, and more than a little mystical.
His motivation was to render service and glory to God by revealing the hidden harmonies he had implanted in the world at its creation.
Thus we should remember that science tends constantly to rewrite its own history.
The original questions, the original motivations of the original discoverers and enunciators of natural philosophical scientific principles are soon rewritten out of the story,
leaving us with a rather mysterious account of why it is that people did what they did and why things turned out the way they did.
This gives an illusion that science somehow develops on its own from discovery to discovery in a logical or even a preordained sequence.
Clearly, that's a very inaccurate portrayal, and we constantly require the insights and lessons of the history of science to remind us of the reality.
Well, I hope at this point you have gained a fresh insight into how science works and what science is.
There are misconceptions aplenty about science and its workings and its history.
Some are the product of people outside of the sciences, some are the products of people within the sciences.
But by a careful consideration of science's history we can come to a fuller understanding of what it really is, how it has really developed, and how it works.
If we want to understand science, that engine that drives so much of our modern culture,
surely it is better, I might even say, more scientific to examine carefully what its history has been, to observe who pursued it and why,
and what really happened and why, rather than making more or less prescriptive statements about how the way it should be in some false or idealized world that never existed and never will.
What we see in the end is that the science we know today developed from a bizarre mixture of ingredients worked over by an innumerable army of minds working towards a wide variety of goals.
We encountered Babylonians, Greeks and Arabs and Latins. We encountered Pagans, Muslims and Christians, Platonists and Aristotelians, Franciscans, Dominicans and Jesuits,
Mechanists and Vitalists, Astrologers, Alchemists, Mathematicians and Magicians. All of them put their stamp upon the developing notions and content of what we call science.
And many of those marks are still there today if only we can learn to recognize them by a doctrine of historical signatures.
The history of science is by no means a linear progression from discovery to discovery, nor is it the product of people who shared the outlooks and the goals of the modern scientist.
It did not develop by an orderly replacement of correct ideas for wrong ideas. It did require men of genius to be sure.
But this is not the romanticized notion of a lone genius off working in isolation. Instead it was the combined activity of many people working with the legacies they had inherited from their predecessors,
rejecting some, reviving some, rediscovering others, reworking, constantly reworking that legacy within the context of their own society and needs and culture and adding their own thoughts to it.
Adding also their own aspirations, their own tastes and all the peculiarities and characteristics and desires and dreams of their own time, place and culture.
Science was not and will never be an inanimate, a dispassionate, mechanical process. It will always remain a human activity, perhaps as much as any of the liberal arts.
You'll remember that many figures compared the natural world to a book, a book they called the Book of Nature.
That book is written and its words are constant, but each generation reads it anew and adds its own interpretations, interpretations conditioned again and again by its own experiences and its own aspirations.
Well now the time has come to conclude our journey. This has been a bit of a whirlwind tour. There have been many places where we should have rested much longer and many places that we did not visit at all.
But for now that's OK. You don't have to see everything the first time you travel far from home. Right now I will be content to think that I have given you a glimpse of a broader array of interesting places and interesting people.
And more importantly, I hope that you now have a survey of the landscape and some of the tools that you will need to explore, to go back and to understand more deeply your favorite parts in greater detail on your own.
So in the future you can now, I hope, and I hope you will, more easily return to those places you found particularly appealing and settle down there for a while to learn more about the locals, to expand your horizons further and perhaps pick up some perspectives and some ideas that you'll adopt in your own thinking and your own life. Good luck.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
