In the history of science, it's important to know not only what was known and by whom,
but also where natural philosophy was studied, practiced, and distributed.
What are the locales?
The institutions that support and sponsor make a home for learning of various sorts including
natural philosophy.
If you think about it, nowadays very little scientific work is actually done outside the
context of an institution or association of some type.
And in the modern world the varieties of these associations and institutions is quite broad.
We have at one end the research institute which exists for the purpose of promoting
research.
We also have universities of various sorts, more or less interested in research or teaching
or both.
There are also corporations that engage in scientific research for different goals of
course, but again it's an institution that supports the work of individuals.
We also have scientific societies, the National Academy of Sciences for example, institutions
that again bring people together in order to facilitate communication to make a home
for learning.
Now many, but not all, of the historical characters that we've dealt with so far in
this course have belonged to one or another kind of an institution.
In the ancient world there was Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum, both giving a life
span to the idea of their founders, a place for students to gather, a place for work to
be conducted, and discussions to take place.
Another example was the combination of the museum and the library in Alexandria, the
first place that we saw an institution with royal patronage, and the library at Alexandria
and the Associated Museum, mostly the library, survived for about 500 years.
I haven't actually mentioned what happened to the library of Alexandria because everybody,
I should though, because everybody likes to blame everybody else for the destruction
of the library.
The fact is that probably it was destroyed about the year 270 AD when the emperor Aurelian
was trying to put down a rebellion.
We know that there was heavy fighting in the city of Alexandria.
The palace quarter, the palace precinct was devastated, and that's where the library
happened to be.
So that was probably the end of the library.
I'm afraid there's not some great mythological story attached to it.
It's rather pedestrian, but still tragic.
In Islam, there were also institutions like the Baitul Hikmah, the house of wisdom in
Baghdad, supported by the caliphs.
But also in Islam, the mosque and the madrasa, madrasa being an Islamic school, also provided
locations for the pursuit of intellectual culture, of intellectual affairs, including
natural philosophy.
We mentioned previously that Al-Hazin was connected with the Al-Haz-Azhar mosque in
Cairo for the last 18 years of his life.
Well now that we've moved to the Latin West, what was the locus for learning for natural
philosophy, for all kinds of intellectual activity?
Well these were first the schools and later the universities.
The schools developed along the lines of the Roman educational system that had been part
of Latin culture since really the Roman Republic, so for quite some time.
You'll notice actually, before I go on talking about these schools and universities, that
in many of the cultures we have dealt with, the function of education is closely related
to religious institutions.
So the mosque and the madrasa, the museum and the library in Alexandria, the Cathedral
Monastery and School in medieval Europe.
So there's a very close connection between intellectual life and religious life traditionally.
Now as I mentioned in the last lecture, the 9th century Carolingian edict that ordered
that all monasteries and cathedrals established schools was slow to take effect.
Nonetheless, it did in a big way in the 11th and 12th centuries.
Now the teaching in these schools was based largely on the traditional 7 liberal arts,
the Trivium and the Quadrivium.
But there was a considerable amount of local variation in terms of the emphasis that was
put on various parts of the Trivium and the Quadrivium, or the general philosophical tenor
of the discussions, or even the purpose for the education.
What I'd like to do then now is to look at two particular schools of the early 12th century
that had their heyday in the first half of the 1100s.
The first one is the school connected to the Cathedral of Chateau.
Nowadays, people go to the Cathedral of Chateau to look at its beautiful stained glass windows,
which are medieval.
Chateau is one of the best preserved, probably the best preserved medieval Gothic cathedral.
In the 12th century, people went to Chateau for two reasons.
One, it was a pilgrimage site.
It contained the Santa Camicia, which was a piece of fabric believed to have been worn
by the Virgin Mary.
Chateau was also on the way to the pilgrimage sites in Spain, to Santiago de Compostela.
You left Paris, you would stop.
One of your stops would probably be in Chartres.
But there was another reason people went there, and that was because of its school.
The school of Chartres in the early 12th century was an important center of scholarship.
The school was actually founded in 1020 by one Fulbert.
Fulbert was himself a student of Gébert of Aurillac, the Pope Sylvester II, whom I
mentioned in the previous lecture.
Before becoming Pope, he taught at the Cathedral School of Reims, from about 972 until 989.
Now Gébert, as I've already mentioned, was very interested in mathematics and astronomy.
He was renowned as an excellent teacher, that used models and demonstrations to teach
his students.
And in fact, his interest in mathematics and scientific topics was transferred to Fulbert,
and from Fulbert to the school of Chartres.
So Chartres put special emphasis on the quadrivium and on physica, that is natural philosophy.
The greatest period for Chartres was the first half of the 12th century, and there are three
people there of importance, Bernard of Chartres, who was the master for a while in the first
quarter of the century, his brother, Théry of Chartres, that we'll talk about later,
but especially his student, William of Cange, who wrote some very important texts.
Before I go on to tell you about what Théry and William did, let's take just a quick
visit to the current cathedral of Chartres, and I encourage you to visit it.
If we go there, you will see as you approach the beautiful royal portal, the front façade
of Chartres, with three entrance ways.
I'd want to direct your attention, though, if we were there, to the one on the right.
There in the center of the tympanum is the Virgin and Child, with the child being presented
to the viewer, but look away from that for a moment to the statues, a set of 14 statues
that surround the inside of the arch, because these 14 statues are something very important,
and I should point out that this royal portal was, in fact, sculpted from 1145 to 1155,
so it itself comes from the high point of the Cathedral School of Chartres.
Those 14 statues are divided into two groups of seven.
Seven of them are personifications of, guess what, the seven liberal arts.
The other seven are statues of classical figures who typify each one of the seven liberal arts,
right there on the façade of the cathedral.
At the base of one arch is Aristotle, with a lap desk writing his works, next to, directly
underneath, a statue representing logic.
On the other side is Pythagoras, representing music, again with a lap desk and a set of
bells above him working on his musical treatises, and it goes all around the arch, so this is
something that we can go and see today that the students at the Cathedral School of Chartres
in the 12th century would have seen as well.
It's a wonderful illustration of the importance of the educational program in the life of the
medieval cathedral.
It's right there on the façade.
Well, let's turn to two of these characters.
Briefly let me say something about Therese of Chartres.
Therese is supposed to have introduced the rota, the zero, into mathematics in Europe.
He also wrote the heptatoicon, which is a didactic work teaching the seven liberal arts.
Person I'm more interested in really for this course is William of Conche.
He wrote a work, one of several that survived, called the Dragmaticon Philosophiae.
It's written between 1143, 1149, when the front façade of Chartres was being sculpted,
and it's written in the form of a dialogue between a philosopher and a duke.
The philosopher is clearly William himself.
The duke is the duke of Normandy, Geoffrey Plantagenet, the father of the future, Henry
II, King of England.
Almost all of its contents, and this is important, almost all of its contents deal with natural
philosophy.
It implies that, in fact, this must have been the emphasis that William had for his own
work.
This is what he certainly emphasizes in his writings.
It must have been what he emphasized in his teaching.
Let me take a few minutes to go through some of the things that William of Conche talks
about in the Dragmaticon.
He talks first of all about the elements.
He says there are four elements.
He denies the fifth element of Aristotle, says that's not right.
Remember this is happening before most of the works of Aristotle actually make it into
the mainstream in the Latin West.
But he also says something very interesting.
He says, and I'm quoting him here, in each body there are minimal components that when
joined together compose a single large object.
And there are four kinds of these components corresponding one of them to each of the four
elements.
At this, the Duke exclaims, why?
It sounds like you're falling back on Epicurus and his doctrine that everything is made of
atoms.
Well, William responds in an interesting way.
He says there's no philosophical system that's so wrong that it has no truth in it whatsoever.
So what he does is he says, yes, Epicurus was wrong, in fact, blasphemous by making the
atoms eternal, for only God is eternal, and he was also wrong about saying that they move
and avoid.
Nonetheless, there are these minimal particles that compose large bodies.
Probably he's getting much of this from Plato's Timaeus, which you may remember developed
a geometrical sort of atomism.
In fact, William of Conge wrote a commentary on Plato's Timaeus.
Remember, it's the only work of Plato that was available in the Middle Ages in Latin.
He also talks about the earth and its shape, spherical, of course, as any intellectual
knew, but also creates a very interesting thought experiment that I should share with
you.
The Duke says, what happens if we bore a hole right through the middle of the earth passing
through its center so that it comes out the other side?
And then we go to the hole and we drop a rock in it.
What happens to the rock?
And William replies, well, it falls towards the center because it's nature to go towards
the center of the earth.
As it will go past the center of the earth, because it's moving very quickly, but then
it will slow down and then turn around and come back and fall towards the center, rising
from our point of view, overshoot it again, and then oscillate each time passing the center
by less and less until finally it comes to a rest right at the center of the earth.
And it will stay suspended right there, which is, of course, correct for a slightly different
reason for William than for us, but it's interesting to see him using a thought experiment
like this.
What else does he say?
Well, he talks about the motions of the heavenly bodies, and he uses the eccentric and the
epicycle to explain their motions.
Now, there's something interesting about this because, remember, Ptolemy's Almagest
was not known to them.
Where's he getting this from?
He's actually using epicycles to explain retrograde motion.
Well, he tells us, he says that this is what the Chaldeans teach.
The Chaldeans, the Chaldeans are Babylonians.
What on earth is he talking about?
Certainly not the Babylonians.
What he's probably talking about is he's using the word Chaldean to refer not to the ancient
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, but the contemporaneous inhabitants of Mesopotamia, namely the Arabs.
And so possibly he had a text.
We can probably identify what it was, the introduction to astrology by Abu Mash'ar,
which means he had contact with some of the earliest astronomical translations from the
Arabic coming into Europe.
Now there's a possible, and I must stress that this is a tentative, a possible link.
This particular work was translated by Adelaide of Bath, who lived, who flourished from about
1116 to 1142, so an exact contemporary of William.
Now, it turns out that Adelaide of Bath was for a while at the Cathedral School of Laan.
Well, the Cathedral School of Laan was also home to Therese of Chartres, so they seem
to have known the same people, which brings up an important point about institutions like
this.
They bring people together and facilitate communication that otherwise would not happen.
Very important point about institutions and locations.
Well, I need to read you one more line out of William of Conche.
That is the last line of his text, because it starts to give us one impression of why
he was doing this.
He writes, it is through knowledge of the creatures that we arrive at knowledge of the
Creator.
Once again, natural philosophy and onchilla, a handmaiden to theological spiritual pursuits.
Alright, well, I'm going to actually come back to William of Conche's Dragmaticon a
few lectures from now.
For now, I'm going to go on to our second school.
That is the school that was set up at the newly founded Abbey of St. Victor, just outside
of Paris.
The school was public, so people came to it not just to be educated as priests, but the
general public as well.
People came at a variety of ages, variety of educational levels must have been difficult
to teach because presumably you would have some students that were barely literate and
others that had a fairly decent grounding in the Trivium or the Quadrivium.
One of the masters of the school, by the name of Hugh, and he died around 1140, 1141,
we don't actually know his date of birth, he wrote a text called the Diddescalicon.
It was basically about what should be learned and why, and it fits into a tradition of educational
writing stretching back to St. Augustine and then back to Pagan Rome as well.
What's of interest is that his emphasis differs significantly from that of William of Conche
and the Schacht School in general.
Hugh of St. Victor's text presents knowledge as redemptive of fallen man, and so knowledge
has a direct spiritual consequence.
Hugh of St. Victor's argument works something like this.
The fall of man in the expulsion from paradise affected the entire human race in three ways.
One, it affected man's relationship to God, he was now further from God, he didn't have
that direct knowledge of God that Adam and Eve had in paradise.
Two, it affected his ability to know things rightly.
Adam had a closer knowledge of the natural world than we can have now.
And three, it weakened man's body.
If you read the expulsion, for example, Adam has to work and earn his bread by the sweat
of his brow, women's pains are increased in childbirth, so clearly something has gone
wrong with man's body as well, it's become weakened.
Well, the infirmities of these three parts of man are all helped by learning of various
sorts.
On the one hand, the separation from God is healed with theology, of course also healed
by the vicarious sufferings of Christ, obviously, but in an active sense, the participant by
studying theology helps his relationship to God.
Second, the intellectual weakness is cured by the liberal arts and by natural philosophy
in general, learning about the world.
But the most interesting one is that the weakness of man's body, according to you, is cured,
or at least eased by what he calls the mechanical arts, namely technologies.
And Hugh goes to what I think is a unique extreme by naming seven mechanical arts in
analogy with the seven liberal arts, I don't think anybody else does that.
Let me read you what his seven mechanical arts are.
Fabric making, Adam and Eve were naked in the garden, but human beings don't have fur,
they can't stay warm by themselves in the winter, so we need to use technology, fabric
making to address that weakness.
Armament, man doesn't have claws to protect themselves like other animals or big teeth,
and so we use arms to protect ourselves.
He considers commerce to be a technology, he actually calls it a kind of rhetoric.
Moreover he says something very interesting, he says that commerce reconciles nations,
calms wars, strengthens peace, and turns the private good of individuals into a benefit
for all.
Commerce in other words makes us go and meet other people and learn from them, so it doesn't
only supply us with the needs of the body, but also needs of the mind as well.
Our other technologies he mentions, medicine, and the last one curiously enough is theatrics.
He says that theatrics is an important part because it gives relaxation and refreshment
to the mind, and it can be virtuous refreshment and relaxation.
Well, schools such as these represent in varied forms a great flowering of platonic thought
in the Latin Middle Ages, platonic views of knowledge in a fully Christianized context.
These two schools as I've said were at the border of the translation movement.
The School of Chartres certainly benefited from a few early contributions of Arabic in
Latin, but not much.
There's certainly pre-aristotle.
The arrival of Aristotle coincides with the growth of certain of the cathedral schools
into that medieval institution, the university.
Certainly not all cathedral schools turned into universities, very few of them did, but
some did in fact.
The emergence and growth of the university indicates both a growth one in the body of
knowledge that had to be taught, and two in the cultural need, the social demand for
education on a larger scale, more people.
The university itself was structured on the model of the medieval guild, and guilds were
associations of craftsmen that came together in order to administer and to protect their
rights and privileges, the rights and privileges that came with their particular crafts.
The university is itself a guild of scholars and teachers originally.
It was endowed by ecclesiastical and later by secular authorities, they were the patrons
in general, but the interesting thing is that there was very little formal structure early
on, nothing essentially was owned, there were no real estate holdings, no campuses like
we're used to in terms of modern universities, even the books tended to be rented, books
were very expensive in the middle ages, and the university would outsource to use the
modern term, renting things from stationers and real estate agents.
As a result, the early university had incredible flexibility, and this was a great source of
power for professors, professors have never had this much power since.
It meant that if you got annoyed by the way the local bishop was treating you, the way
the local secular authorities were treating you, all you had to do was say, we'll leave
and go someplace else, and that threat was enough to strike fear into the hearts of all
the local town leaders, because the students and the professors spent a lot of money.
So the professors always had this wonderful threat, the threat of leaving that they could
use as a weapon.
Three important universities in the 13th century were the ones in Bologna, Paris, and at Oxford.
I'm going to concentrate for the remainder of this lecture on the university at Paris.
Let's talk about its structure, who went there, how many people were there, and how a student
progressed through the classes and what they learned.
Faculty of Paris consisted of four faculties.
The majority of students and teachers, masters, were concentrated in the school of arts, the
faculty of arts, by far the majority of the university.
There were also then three higher faculties, law, medicine, and theology, not unlike modern
university systems with a tiered system of professional school and undergraduate school.
There's a similarity there.
During the 1200s, the University of Paris was home to anywhere from between 1200 to 1500
students.
So that's a huge influx of people in a town.
So this is why the university became such an important part of town culture in the High
Middle Ages.
So I should mention that the Middle Ages were the origin of the town and gown controversy
because both groups tended to depend on each other, but tended not necessarily to like
each other.
Students entered at an age of 14 or 15.
They would attach themselves to one master, and they would spend three or four years to
earn a bachelor's degree.
However, it's important to point out that most students left before they ever obtained
a degree.
And this wasn't because they ran out of money or they got bored or they were expelled, nothing
like that.
Most students came to learn just what they needed to know to go get a decent job somewhere
else.
Now, we, at least professors, like to think about the medieval universities as these pinnacles
of selfless pursuit of knowledge, unlike the kind of students we get today that just want
to go out and get a job, unfortunately, as much as I regret to admit it, the medieval
university was not so different.
As I say, most left before obtaining any degree.
They would learn enough reading and writing and arithmetic in order to go off and get
a clerical job, a clerks job somewhere, a notary, some kind of working at court, or the government.
Well, for those who did obtain the bachelor's degree, two or three more years of study would
bring you to obtain a master of arts degree.
Now, the master of arts degree came with a great benefit.
It gave you a particular right, which was called the use Ubi Kwe Dochendi, the right
of teaching anywhere.
That means if I'm in Paris and I get annoyed with my students, they're rotten and I can't
stand them, or the local bishop annoys me, I just pack up my bags and I go to Oxford
and start teaching there, or I go to Montpellier or Bologna or some other university.
In fact, generally, in most places, there was a simple examination that was given to
make sure that you really had the use Ubi Kwe Dochendi, but in a sense, what this was,
it was admission to the guild as a master.
So it's very similar to craftsmen guilds in that sense.
Now, some students, very, very few, a very small percentage of students proceeded onto
the higher faculties to obtain a master of law, medicine or theology.
Law and medicine were certainly the two more popular of these.
They were lucrative, the course of study was not as lengthy, four to six years generally
to get a degree in law or medicine.
Theology was by far the most rigorous program in the medieval university and required an
enormous commitment on the part of the student.
It required 10 to 16 years of further study to obtain a doctor of theology degree.
Now think about this, it means that the graduate with a masters in theology, master and doctor
are the same thing in the middle ages, would be in his thirties when he graduates finally.
Now what's the life expectancy in the middle ages, 42, 43, 44, somewhere like that?
So it means by the time he gets out, he's middle aged.
It's also because all students and masters had to be unmarried, it means you have made
the decision to be the last of your line.
So you will presumably never bear children at that point.
Now all students and faculty at the university had clerical status.
This is a great thing because it means that you are exempt from the punishment of civil
authorities.
If you do, if you commit a crime, the civil authorities have no power over you.
You will be tried in an ecclesiastical court instead.
Now in the modern day we tend to think, oh my god, ecclesiastical court, inquisition,
something like that.
No, no, no.
You are much, much better off in an ecclesiastical court that has clear rules of evidence and
clear process of law, much better than the civil courts of the middle ages.
This was one of the reasons for the conflict between townspeople and university life, because
if a crime happened between two people from each of those communities, the even murder,
for example, which did happen occasionally, there were riot students or students.
They tended to get drunk in the middle ages and get rowdy, thus the same way they do now.
The process of law was very cumbersome, particularly for the non-university person.
Well, the thing that I want to talk about in the next lecture is what happens when university
culture meets Aristotelianism.
The combination of those two things generates a philosophy, a method of study, a method
of inquiry known as scholasticism.
And scholasticism, although it tends to get a bad rap ever since the 17th century, was
actually a very powerful means of studying the world, and it was the center of university
curricula.
