The new astronomical discoveries from Copernicus to Galileo and the new cosmological systems
presented several difficulties to people around the year 1600.
In fact, two difficulties in particular seemed to be key.
First of all, these new cosmologies undermine the foundations of Aristotelian physics and
that in several ways.
First of all, if the Earth is moved away from the center of the cosmos, then the idea
of natural place and natural motion, the explanation of falling bodies, is obliterated.
A moving Earth that is an Earth that's going around the Sun in an annual orbit confounds
Aristotle's distinction between violent and natural motion.
Finally, the distinction between the superlunary and the sublunary sphere with their respective
physics that Aristotle posited is also abolished if the Earth is no longer at the center.
Aristotle's physics and Aristotle's cosmology held together as a unit.
When one starts to totter, the other one will have to totter with it.
So if Copernicanism is correct, if the world really is heliocentric, then we need a new
physics and that's the first problem.
We need a new physics to undergird the new cosmology.
The second point is how truthful are these new descriptions of the world?
We know that Copernicus and Reticus, as well as Kepler and Galileo, believed in the literal
truth of heliocentrism.
The Earth really did go around the Sun.
On the other hand, remember Andreas Oceander, who adds this preface to the De Revoluzione
by saying, well, it's just a hypothesis and astronomers give us no certain knowledge.
Well, Oceander is probably more typical if we took a census of astronomers of the period.
Saving the phenomenon was what was important, getting positions right, finding a mathematical
model to help with the calculations, not necessarily the literal truth.
Well, Galileo had to deal with both these issues, dealing with a new physics to undergird
the new cosmology, and dealing with people who are probably genuinely confused why he
was so insistent about the literal truth of his system.
And that's what we're going to talk about in this lecture, Galileo and his contributions
particularly in physics.
Well first of all, Galileo studied the dynamics of falling bodies.
This is a very important area of work with him.
We mentioned Kepler and his three laws of planetary motion, which occur in introductory
textbooks.
Similarly, the same introductory textbooks present basically Galilean kinematics.
Galileo is the one that worked out these laws of motion.
Well, it was a subject for Galileo throughout his life.
Very early on, around the year 1590, while he was still a relatively unknown professor
of mathematics at the University of Pisa, he wrote a treatise called De Motu on motion,
which dealt with this issue of moving and particularly falling bodies.
That interest propagated throughout his entire life, and what is arguably his most important
work, the mathematical discourses and demonstrations concerning two new sciences, puts the capstone
on Galileo's theories of motion, physics of motion.
That was published in 1638, 50 years after De Motu, while Galileo was under house arrest
in Florence.
Now in all of these places, he uses a combination of three things to study motion.
He uses logic, mathematics, and experiment, and the three are interconnected at deep levels.
What he does, he uses these three things to show the errors of Aristotle and to set the
foundations for his new science of motion.
Well, what does he find?
One of the things he finds is that contrary to Aristotle, falling bodies do not fall
at rates proportionate to their weight.
He finds that all bodies fall at the same rate, and that all falling bodies accelerate
uniformly in fall.
That is to say that falling bodies accelerate uniformly with their velocity increasing in
proportion to the time of their fall.
This is Galileo's law of free fall motion, and it's a basis of classical physics.
Now, to explain the apparently common sense observation that if I take a feather and a
cannonball and drop them, the cannonball hits the ground first, Galileo looked at the
resistance of the medium through which an object falls.
And he comes to two conclusions.
He says, first of all, if we remove the medium, if it's just a vacuum, then there should be
no resistance and the feather and the cannonball will drop at the same rate, hit the ground
at the same moment, no matter how far they're falling.
This actually was demonstrated on the moon during one of the Apollo missions.
It took, I think, it was a hammer and a feather and dropped them, and you find they hit the
moon's surface at exactly the same moment.
The other thing, the other conclusion that Galileo comes to is the idea of a terminal
velocity.
That is, there's a maximum velocity that bodies reach.
And he comes to this by saying, well, on the one hand, bodies are accelerating uniformly,
their velocity increasing all the time.
Also, the resistance of the medium is proportional to the speed at which the body is moving
through it.
So as the body moves faster and faster, the resistance gets greater and greater.
And at some point, the resistance to most to increased motion balances the tendency
to accelerate, and so the velocity remains constant, and that's a terminal velocity.
He also uses mathematics to show that the path of a projectile is a parabola.
Remember, we mentioned this in terms of tartalia and gunning, gunnery.
Galileo shows for the first time it must be a parabola.
Well, Galileo's experiments are of great importance.
He conducted a great number of them using inclined planes, rolling balls up and down
inclined planes, looking at pendulum, because a pendulum is really a kind of free fall motion.
And Galileo's work with the pendulum is fundamental to studies of simple harmonic motion in pendulum.
But he also uses thought experiments, and that is experiments that he doesn't actually
do, but works out through logic what the solution must be.
There's a wonderful moment in one of his dialogues, almost all of his works are written in the
classical format of a dialogue, where the character talking the part of Aristotle says
to Galileo regarding the experiment where you're supposed to drop a rock from the top
of a mast of a moving ship, and Galileo says it should fall right at the base of the mast,
whereas Aristotle says the ship will move underneath it, and so the rock will fall at
the back.
This character, Simplicius says, oh come on, you haven't done this experiment a hundred
times, you haven't even done it once, and the Galileo character says, yeah, you're
right, I haven't done it even once, but I don't have to, because I know that it must
be so.
You get a little sense of the arrogance that's an important part, and in the sense of fatal
flaw to Galileo's character, and we'll come back to that.
Another important point is that he applies his ideas of physics to astronomy.
So for example, the dropping of a rock from the mast of a moving ship, in a sense, gives
you a symbolic treatment of the moving earth.
In other words, if I jump, the earth doesn't move under me, and I fall far to the west,
or if I drop a stone, it falls far to the west as the world turns underneath it.
Similarly, he makes a very, very interesting argument.
This is really quite clever.
He says, all right, if I take a ball and I roll it uphill, it slows down.
If I roll it downhill, it speeds up.
Therefore, if I roll it neither uphill nor downhill, it must do exactly what's in the
middle of those two things, that is, neither speed up nor slow down, but maintain a constant
velocity.
Okay?
Now think what he's saying.
He points out that he's doing these experiments on the earth, and the earth is spherical.
So if we were to polish the earth smooth, so there was no resistance to the motion of
the ball, we roll the ball towards the east, sooner or later it'll come up over the western
horizon, pass between our legs, and keep going.
First of all, this is an expression at least of half of the law of inertia, that things
in motion tend to keep moving.
But also, what's the ball doing?
It's making an orbit.
It's moving in circular motion around the earth, and so Galileo uses this to say, we
don't need to worry about what causes the planetary motions.
Once they move, they just keep moving because they're going neither uphill nor downhill
like that ball.
Now there are two aspects of Galileo's method, which are at least as important as his results.
The first is his absolute conviction that mathematics and mathematical abstractions give
an accurate representation of natural phenomena.
There's another beautiful passage in Galileo's writings.
I should say that Galileo is considered by students of Italian literature to be a formative
influence on the Italian language, and students of literature read his dialogues because of
the language, because of the way he uses Italian.
There's one line where he says that this great book, I mean the world, which is open
constantly before our eyes, is written in a language, and that language is the language
of mathematics, and its characters are circles and triangles and other figures.
So if you want to read the book of nature, you need to know mathematics, and mathematics
is the way to describe the world.
Now clearly contrast this to the Aristotelian view, which is based on qualities, hotness,
dryness, coldness.
Galileo wants a world view based on quantities, where the qualities are stripped away and
we look just at the quantities, and that in effect is the way physics has been done ever
since, for the most part.
The second aspect of Galileo's method is how he subtly changes the questions of physics.
He's no longer apparently interested in why bodies fall, instead he contends himself with
describing how bodies fall.
This is very different again from Aristotle, who's talking about natural motion.
The seeking of natural place explains the falling of bodies.
Kepler uses this magnetic type of movement of two like bodies towards one another to
explain the causes of motion, but Galileo doesn't worry about that issue, he's describing
mathematically how bodies fall.
Well both of these features have one classical precedent that I think is important, and that
is Archimedes.
Archimedes is one of Galileo's favorite authors, and he's also a favorite of many of the Italians,
the contemporary Italians in Galileo's day.
Galileo's first writing, La bilancetta, or the balance, which he wrote in 1586, dealt
explicitly with Archimedes.
In fact when Galileo starts talking about falling bodies in De Motu around 1590, he's
not talking about dropping balls, what he's looking at is he's looking at things like
differently dense blocks of wood and wax rising and sinking in water, which is something
that's right out of Archimedes.
So he uses Archimedes as the entree to these issues of dynamics.
What I'd like to point out is that Galileo's interest in describing the how, rather than
worrying about the why, is in a sense the viewpoint of an engineer.
And this makes a lot of sense once we think about Galileo's context.
He grows up in Northern Italy, which is permeated with the ideas and the activities
of the architect-engineers of the Renaissance.
Busy building great monuments in a highly-mathematized way.
Their craft skills were mathematical as well as technical.
And if we go to look at the two new sciences, again arguably Galileo's most important book,
the second of the new sciences may be Galilean kinematics.
But what's the first one?
The first one is about the strength of beams.
It's about the problems of scaling up and scaling down mechanical devices.
And the interlocutors of the dialogue meet where?
In the arsonale of Venice, looking at the shipyards, looking at building.
So in a sense it's an engineer's book in a very real sense.
All right, well that's our first issue of what Galileo had to deal with.
The second one is this problem of literal truth of astronomical explanations, cosmological
explanations.
This is going to explain for us and introduce us to the problem that Galileo is probably
best known for, and that is running a fowl of church authorities because of his work
with Copernicanism.
What I have to say is, first of all, one could teach an entire course on that issue.
It's extraordinarily complex.
Dozens of historians of science have devoted their entire life to trying to understand this
issue because it's so complicated.
All I can urge is that all the documents are now published, and they're out there so you
can go read them yourself as well.
What I want to do is just a quick overview of this to show you a little bit of some of
the issues involved.
Well, first of all, one has to admit that the Galileo affair, as it's come to be called,
his problems with the Catholic Church, have been used polemically in many, many different
venues, even during Galileo's own lifetime.
But we want to transcend that and look at the historical facts and try to get a historical
understanding.
First thing you need to know is that there were two distinct phases to the Galileo affair.
The first one, from 1613 to 1616, ends with Galileo being warned not to teach Copernicanism
publicly as literally true.
Use it as a hypothesis, but not as literally true.
In the second phase, which comes 20 years later, 1631, 1633, Galileo is convicted of
vehement suspicion of heresy, which is a technical term, and placed under house arrest.
Well, let's start with the intellectual problems.
First of all, there's a seeming contradiction with the idea of a moving earth and certain
passages in the Bible literally interpreted.
One psalm says that God has established the earth immovable forever.
Another place, Joshua makes the sun, not the earth, stand still and extends the length
of the day.
Now although Copernicus noted in the preface to his work that some theologians might make
objections to his heliocentric ideas, that's because he felt that they were Aristotelian
scholastics that wouldn't accept it, and that people within the church who were humanists
interested in his mathematical models and humanist sources would understand them.
Remember, he dedicates it to the Pope, and all these cardinals are trying to get him
to publish it.
Sustained Catholic objections to heliocentrism only start with Galileo.
There were some Protestant objections earlier, mostly because Protestant theologians tended
to be more literalist than Catholic ones.
The letter that really gets Galileo into a bit of trouble is a letter he writes to
the mother of his employer, the grand duke of Tuscany.
Her name is Christine, a grand duchess of Tuscany.
There Galileo makes a few things which probably in retrospect he would have thought as missteps.
First thing he does is he reinterprets scripture in such a way that it fits his own ideas.
Second thing he does is he lays out boundaries, professional boundaries for theologians and
for natural philosophers.
Now remember, what's the background to this?
Throughout the Middle Ages, theologians are at the top of the intellectual food chain.
They're the ones who are doing natural philosophy.
But here comes Galileo along saying, no, this is my territory, you theologians back off.
You stick with what you do and let me do the natural philosophy.
Now, Galileo is not, he knows his sociology pretty well.
He quotes St. Augustine to say that biblical interpretation has to be in accord with the
current state of scientific knowledge, and Galileo's absolutely right about this.
In fact, he likes to quote one of his friends, the Cardinal Baronio, who says that the scripture
is to tell us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.
Well, he's right on with this one, but Galileo failed to realize that he was living in a
very troubled time, or at least failed to respond to that fact.
Medieval theologians reinterpreted the Bible in enormous numbers of ways, constantly and
freely without any incident.
But Galileo was not living in the Middle Ages.
He was living in a post-Reformation church.
He was living in a church that was very concerned about the schism of Protestantism.
He was living in a church that is we call post Tridentine, that means after the Council
of Trent.
Council of Trent took place in the middle of the 16th century to try and address the
issues of Protestantism, to stop the schism.
One of the regulations that they passed was to say that no one was allowed to interpret
scripture in a way contrary to the consensus of the church fathers.
Now here comes Galileo interpreting the scripture publicly in a way contrary to the church fathers.
Now Cardinal Roberto Bellarmino, who was at the Council of Trent, he was an important
figure there, he was also in charge of the first phase of the Galileo inquiry.
And he writes a very interesting letter where he claims that if the motion of the earth
were proved beyond all reasonable doubt, then the proper authorities, theologians, would
have to move in and reinterpret scripture in a way that was in accord with this demonstrated
fact.
But he says, I don't think that there's ever going to be such an ironclad proof.
Galileo in fact had no proof of the earth's motion.
He thought that the tides were caused by the earth's rotation and the combination of the
earth's rotation and its motion around the sun.
He's wrong, but he didn't have much sympathy for this idea that the moon was causing tides,
so that seemed a little too magical for him.
So the first phase ends with the decree by the investigating committee that Copernicanism
is absurd in philosophy and erroneous in theology.
In case closed, Galileo goes home.
The second phase begins after Galileo publishes the dialogue on the two chief world systems
that compares the Ptolemaic and the Copernican system.
In the intervening 20 years, Galileo's friend Maffeo Barbarini had become Pope Urban VIII
that has given his approval to Galileo, Galileo sits and talks to them for a while, and he
gives his approval to Galileo writing this book, provided that Galileo includes a fair
hearing of the Pope's own argument based on God's omnipotence, which says that any natural
phenomenon can have potentially an infinite number of causes because God is omnipotent.
God can make whatever cause he wants produce whatever effect, and it's going to be very
difficult and it may be impossible for us to find the true cause without infringing on
God's omnipotence and freedom.
Well Galileo writes his book, he gets an imprimatur to have it published, it gets published,
but what does he do?
Rather foolishly, he includes the Pope's view, remember the Pope's an old friend of his,
he includes the Pope's view only on the very last page of the book, where it's dismissed
as, oh what an angelic doctrine this is, it's dropped, and moreover, he puts it into the
mouth of Simplicchio, the simpleton, the one who's made to play the fool throughout all
the dialogue, very bad move Mr. Galilei.
From the 8th, furious at being betrayed by a friend, and when he finds out that Galileo
apparently forgot to mention that he was told not to publicly defend Copernicanism back
in 1616, orders a new trial.
Galileo comes to the trial, he says, oh well, you know, I really don't believe Copernicanism,
but because Copernicanism is so unlikely, I had to heap the rhetoric on to make it seem
more likely than it was, so I really didn't mean it.
This doesn't hold water, and nobody buys it.
And so he is sentenced with vehement suspicion of heresy, and he abjures the earth's motion
on the 22nd of June in 1633.
Well a very complex affair this is, and I must apologize for having run through it so
quickly, but I have to at least mention it.
It involves a lot more than a science-religion controversy, that's really not what it's
about.
On the one hand, Galileo had this really bad habit of alienating his friends.
The man just sort of loved to get into arguments, and he was often perceived as arrogant.
He had lots of people who were friends that he just got into arguments with all the time,
over strange things.
In one case, there's a comet controversy where Galileo actually supports Aristotle's
notion that the comets are atmospheric phenomena.
Why is he doing this?
Well until we can have Galileo on a psychiatrist's couch to figure out why he feels the need
to do this, we might not be able to answer that question.
Moreover, he lives in a tumultuous and troubled church, in a post Tridentine church, which
is now in 1633, Europe is in the middle of the Thirty Years' War, one of the most violent
and long-lasting wars of religion, excuse me, of religion.
And that's the necessary background to what took place.
He gets caught in a web of political, theological, personal, intellectual, philosophical problems.
It's an incredible rats nest of problems, and that's why it's so hard to understand.
Well, before I end this lecture, I'd like to talk a little bit about other developments
in physics.
This is a lecture on physics, that's a lecture on Galileo, but I want to talk about what
other people were doing in physics at the time.
Nowadays, if you take a course in physics, you generally have it divided into two parts,
kinematics, optics, classical dynamics and kinematics, and one on what's generally referred
to as E and M, or electricity and magnetism.
Let me move to that other topic.
This is not an issue that Galileo deals with, but at exactly the same time as Galileo, there
is someone dealing with the issue of magnetism.
And that is one William Gilbert, an Englishman.
He's born in 1544, and he lives until 1603, so he's a little older than Galileo.
He writes a substantial book, a very large book, called On the Magnet, in which he does
some very interesting things.
This book on the magnet is published in 1600, by the way, so right in the middle of when
Galileo was working as well.
He investigates the properties of the lodestone.
Now, where did people get magnets from in the early modern period?
Well, they were naturally occurring.
Minerals type of magnetite, an iron ore that's naturally magnetic.
What you would do is you would find one of these, and then they would be capped.
That is, you take two hemispherical pieces of iron and clap them around the lodestone
to make a sort of egg-shaped magnet, and that's what he was studying.
What he does is he studies the properties of the lodestone, the properties of magnetism,
and relates it to the earth and the phenomenon of the compass needle, which we know points
towards the magnetic pole.
What he does is he says for the first time that the earth is a great magnet.
It's just like the lodestone.
And he does lots of experiments with lodestones, where the lodestone is the laboratory model
for the earth.
This is a very important development, the use of laboratory models.
He can't obviously do an experiment on the whole earth, so what he does is an experiment
on the lodestone that's analogically related to the earth.
He makes this comparison that the magnet has poles, the earth has poles, the magnet affects
a compass needle, the earth affects a compass needle, and so forth.
But for Gilbert, magnetism is much more than just what makes the compass point north.
It is a cosmic force which animates the earth and causes its rotation.
So here's another one of the few people that actually supported the rotation of the earth,
the diurnal rotation, and he says the reason it's in motion is that's a magnetic virtue,
a magnetic force that allows it to move.
Well interestingly enough Gilbert's ideas become extremely important, and one person
that we've already seen picks up on them, and that's Johannes Kepler.
It's probably the case that Kepler picks up his idea of the anima matrix, this force
in the sun that causes the planets to move around it from Gilbert's work on magnetism.
Now Galileo himself, let's get back to Galileo for a moment, Galileo himself picks up very
little from Kepler.
Remember his argument about the ball rolling around a spherical earth as being the model
for planetary motion?
Well hey wait a minute you might say, Kepler has already shown in 1609 that the planets
move in elliptical orbits.
Galileo very carefully never mentioned this, that the planetary orbits are actually ellipses
not circles, but there is one thing he does get from Gilbert, I'm sorry, from Kepler,
and that is when he reinterprets the Joshua miracle, he says, it's very, it's very, it's
very curious, very clever, he says, oh yes we can save the literal sense of scripture,
this is Galileo speaking now, where Joshua stops the sun and that still lengthens the
day.
Why?
Well because I've seen sunspots and I know that the sun rotates, and so when Joshua stops
the sun he stops it from rotating, he stops the sun from rotating, we can say that it's
probably the rotation of the sun that's making the planets move around in their orbits and
rotate on their own axes, and so stopping the sun stops the whole system by sort of
a cascade process.
And this must be related to Kepler's idea of an Anima matrix that's in the sun, that's
what's powering the solar system.
So Galileo says, well Joshua stops the rotation of the sun and by, that's the engine that's
powering everything, it actually stops the earth from rotating and the day gets longer.
Theologians were not particularly impressed by this explanation.
Gilbert.
Gilbert is actually the person who coins the term electricity, he studies electricity
as well, but doesn't get very far with it, it is difficult to study.
It's also not current electricity, it's static electricity, you know, socks in the dryer
kind of electricity, not plug in the wall kind of electricity.
But he does distinguish it from magnetism.
Now Gilbert's magnetical philosophy was very popular for many, many generations.
It tends to explain a lot of things that are hard to explain otherwise.
The magnet is really a strange thing, in fact, and it's difficult to explain how we can put
a piece of iron on the table and bring a magnet close to it and the iron zips up to the magnet
or put two magnets together and one drives the other one away.
This kind of action at a distance we'll see becomes extremely important throughout the
17th century.
Well fine, as you can see the early 17th century was a very tumultuous but a very fertile time
for physics and astronomy.
As the rest of the century would be, in fact, in our next lecture we're going to turn to
the biological world from the physical world and look at the topic of the natural history
and look at other methods that were created in the period of the scientific revolution
for studying the natural world.
