In the previous lecture, we looked at some examples of Roman technology and mentioned
in passing the Roman's relative lack of interest in Greek natural philosophy.
In this lecture, I want to expand on the idea of Rome's response to Greek natural philosophy
because they didn't just simply disregard it, they altered it, took from it selectively,
for whatever suited their purposes.
What was the Roman response and what forms did it take to Greek natural philosophy?
Well I think first, a good example to begin with is one that illustrates the Roman's recognition
of the superiority, the talent of the Greeks in scientific topics.
And the specific topic also underscores the Roman's interest in practical applications
as well.
The example I want to use is the reform of the calendar in the first century BC at the
urging of Julius Caesar.
Now to reform the calendar, Caesar did what in modern business speak is called outsourcing.
He turned to the experts, where were the experts?
In the intellectual capital of the Mediterranean, Alexandria.
He engaged an Alexandrian astronomer by the name of Sosigenes to develop a calendar for
the Roman Empire.
Now before I go any further, the song may be saying, what's the big deal about the calendar?
Well we live in an age where we get calendars given to us, they come in the mail with advertising
on them.
Such a common part of our daily life, we take them totally for granted.
But the calendar incorporates a great deal of sophisticated astronomical observation,
of timekeeping, all kinds of calculations far into the future and into the past.
The concerns over the calendar recur almost every century of the times that we're looking
at.
Many centuries people didn't know what to do to reform the calendar, this is a time
in which people did know what to do by asking Sosigenes the Alexandrian, the Romans developed
or Sosigenes developed for them, what came to be called in honor of Julius Caesar the
Julian calendar.
Why is the calendar so important?
Well our lives are tied to astronomical events, particularly if you're an agricultural society
you have to know when to plant and when to harvest.
The entire culture, particularly ours now that calendars are so widespread, is governed
by the days of the week and the months of the year.
So a calendar is an incredibly important way of crystallizing social structures in a society.
Also maintaining the success of agriculture and other affairs, banking, the list just
goes on without a calendar, without time reckoning, a lot of the accoutrements of civilized society
become impossible or at least very complicated.
Well remember in the second lecture I mentioned that one of the Egyptians, the ancient Egyptians
contributions to the modern world is the calendar and in fact it is, our modern calendar ultimately
derives from the ancient Egyptian.
So Sosigenes presented the Romans with an improved version of the old Egyptian calendar.
His calendar required the determination of the exact length of the solar year.
Well what is the exact length of the solar year actually mean?
That means the time it takes for the sun to move through the zodiac and make exactly one
circuit.
What does it take for the sun to go from position A all the way around the zodiac exactly back
to that position?
That's what we define as a solar year.
So Sosigenes determined this at 365 days and one quarter.
Therefore he suggested that the Romans use a four year cycle of calendar.
A year would be composed of 365 days.
No five holidays, extra calendrical days the way the ancient Egyptians did, 365 counted
days.
They were to be divided up into 12 months alternating in length between 30 and 31 days.
Every fourth year however an extra day would be inserted into the month of February.
Not at the end the way we do in the middle of the last week of February is where the
Romans did it initially.
So in other words 365 days for three years that quarter of a day would add up at the
end of a fourth year would add up to a whole day and that got stuck into February.
Well after Sosigenes came up with this idea it had to be implemented.
Well unfortunately the previous calendar of the Romans was so inaccurate so sloppy that
it took a great deal of drastic action to get the Julian calendar started.
Let me just give you an example.
Have you ever noticed, if you know a little bit of Latin, the names of our months don't
seem to be right?
September, October, November, December.
Well those are the roots at the beginning, sept, seven, oct, eight, nine, ten.
But they're not the seventh through tenth month, they're the ninth through the twelfth.
Well in the original Roman calendar they were in fact the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth
month because the old Roman calendar only had ten months.
The Romans in their very early days didn't even seem to have bothered to have counted
winter days, days when agriculture was impossible.
The calendar started up again in the spring.
Well they didn't always start it up at the right time so errors accumulated there.
Moreover I should mention just in passing that the months we call July and August were
originally called quintalus and sextalus, the fifth and sixth months.
Where do the current names come from?
Well they're named after the Roman emperors Julius and Augustus Caesar.
The old Roman calendar was sufficiently far off that in order to get the vernal equinox
that is the first day of spring to fall on the twenty-fifth of March, which is the way
they wanted it, an edict had to be passed to make the year that we call 44 BC longer.
In fact the year that we call 44 BC, the year of Caesar's murder, was 445 days long.
That returned the first day of spring to the twenty-fifth of March.
The regulation of the Julian calendar was given over as the duty of the Roman priests.
Now you will notice that the calendrical work and the priesthood go together in society
after society.
The Babylonian priests took care of announcing when a new moon had been sighted and therefore
a new month was starting.
The Egyptian priests kept their calendar functioning.
The Roman priests kept their calendar functioning.
Actually they didn't do a tremendously good job of it because they were confused about
how to count leap years, when to start adding them, they added too many and so the Julian
calendar had to be amended yet again.
They got it right finally in 4 BC and the Julian calendar then functioned for 1600 years.
But after the collapse of the Roman Empire, who do you think took care of the calendar?
Christian priests were the ones that marked the time and the passage of the years.
Well, was everything fine then after 4 BC with the Julian calendar functioning?
Well, Sosigenes' estimate of calculation, observation of the length of the solar year
was pretty good.
It was off by only 11 minutes, you say 11 minutes and 365 days, that's not bad.
Well no, it's not bad relatively speaking except over time if you expect the calendar
to function for century after century the error adds up.
And so finally in the 16th century the calendar had to be revised yet again to the one we
use, the Gregorian calendar named after Pope Gregory XIII.
Again it's the priesthood taking care of the calendar.
Alright, well what about the attitude of the wider Roman culture towards Greek natural
philosophy?
Well it's fairly well known that the Roman Lezard class and the Lezard class expanded
enormously owing to the wealth flowing into the Roman Empire.
The Roman Lezard class had an interest in Greek learning and culture.
The Roman poet Horace, for example, wrote in one of his epistles a line that's become
famous which reads, captive Greece, that is captured by the Romans, captive Greece captured
the rude victor and introduced the arts to rustic Latium, that is the land of the Latins.
Now this taste for Greek culture also extended to Greek natural philosophy.
It was fashionable to know something about Greek natural philosophy, Greek scientific
topics, but the fact that the cause of the interest was fashionability among the Lezard
classes had two opposite effects.
On the one hand it increased the readership.
More people were reading texts dealing with Greek natural philosophy, more than would
have done in the Greek world simply because there was a social pressure to do so, but
because it was a leisure time pursuit and more a matter of taste and good breeding rather
than say an Aristotelian desire to know, the Romans didn't sweat a great deal over it
and so they developed popularized versions.
The audience operated at a rather low level.
Now since I said the Romans didn't sweat over it, in some sense that's wrong, because
I have to point out that one of the places where the Romans did this study of Greek natural
philosophy was in fact their baths.
The Roman baths were cultural, educational, entertainment centers.
They were the one stop shopping for entertainment and leisure time in the Roman world, combination
of athletic center and social club, country club all rolled into one.
The Roman baths were huge.
We forget how big they were.
Caracalla's baths in the third century AD covered about 25 acres.
It was a huge complex.
It included in fact two libraries.
That's where libraries were located in the Roman world.
You would relax in your three temperatures of bath, then come out of the bath and spend
some time reading perhaps.
Diocletian's baths could serve over 3,000 people at the same time.
This was a big complex and that's where a lot of this reading went on.
What are some examples of the popularized Roman versions of Greek natural philosophy?
Well one is the poem written by the Roman Lucretius.
It's called De Rerum Natura on natural things, or I'm sorry, on the nature of things.
It was a popularization inverse of Epicurean atomic theory.
Now wait you say, you know I'm here a leisure Roman after my bath.
Why am I reading about atomic theory?
That doesn't exactly sound like leisure time reading.
Well in fact remember that the atomic notions of Epicurus were tightly bound in with his
moral and ethical precepts, his moral and ethical philosophy.
His philosophy that I've called previously the don't worry, be happy philosophy.
Everything in the world happens on account of random collisions of atoms, so don't worry
about fortune or placating any gods, just live your life.
That's something that appealed to certain classes of Romans and Lucretius's poem was
apparently fairly widely read.
If we go to astronomy, the serious, what we would call serious works of Eudoxus and
Hipparchus and the others were very little known in Rome, very little.
At the same time however a work again in verse by the Greek popularizer Aratus, whose third
century BC entitled The Phenomena, was the most popular work on astronomy and weather
prognostication in Rome.
In fact it was translated into Latin at least five times, at least four times I should say,
perhaps more, we know of at least four translations of it, separate translations.
What you might want to compare this to is the work by the Roman poet Virgil, the Georgics
on agriculture.
Now if you're a farmer or you want to be a farmer, you don't sit down and read Virgil's
Georgics and then go out and buy a farm and become an agriculturalist.
It's some way for leisure people to understand something about the world around them, the
trades or various sorts of things.
They're intended to be entertainment, they're not intended to be teaching texts.
There's also one reason why all these things that I've just mentioned to you are in verse.
There's a matter of taste involved here, of aesthetic taste, not necessarily of learning
more about natural philosophy itself.
Well this popularizing trend produced a new genre of writing for the Romans, the encyclopedia.
Now don't think about this as the encyclopedia Britannica with so many volumes in alphabetical
order with little articles written on various topics.
The encyclopedic works were works that were intended to be read to give an overview of
the state of knowledge in a field or in all fields, what you have to know to be an educated
cultured upper middle class, upper class Roman.
They were well adapted to amateur readers.
They tended to be entertaining, not too heavy, sort of light reading.
For the history of science the most important such work was written by Pliny the Elder,
titled the Historia Naturalis.
Now Pliny is an interesting character in and of himself, he was born in 23 AD and he died
on the 24th of August AD 79.
Well we certainly know his date of death very carefully, down to the day, in fact down to
the hour.
Why?
Well the year 79 AD may strike a memory with some of you, it's the year of the eruption
of Vesuvius that buried Herculaneum in Pompeii.
In fact Pliny the Elder was killed in the eruption.
He happened to be on a ship nearby near the Bay of Naples when the volcanic eruption
started.
He went to get a better look and was killed by the poisonous toxic gases from the volcano.
Of his eight known works only the Historia Naturalis survives and it's a huge work.
It was completed in 77 AD, composed of 37 books.
Pliny deals with astronomy, geography, zoology, botany, medicine, mineralogy, metallurgy,
technical subjects, all kinds of things.
In a plain and often very entertaining style it's filled with accounts of monstrous races
of humans, ones that have one leg that they hop around on or one eye or all kinds of bizarre
things.
It contains anecdotes, stories and observations.
These text includes borrowings from many acknowledged sources like Aristotle, Theophrastus,
Eudoxus, all the rest of them, many of which are now lost in the original.
In fact the first book of the Historia Naturalis is basically a table of contents.
It says what is in each book and the authorities he used.
In fact he read over 2,000 books he says in order to collect his information.
If we look at the list of names there's some people in there we know nothing about.
We would have never heard of them if it hadn't been for Pliny recording their name there.
Well Pliny often moralizes as well while he's recounting natural philosophical information.
It's not, remember, predominantly a scientific text.
It's for the leisure classes to read and so moralizing is part of what Pliny does.
Pliny chides his fellow Romans frequently for luxury and superficiality.
Well let me just give you a few examples of Pliny.
You'll be kind of surprised at some of the things that are in Pliny.
In one case he recounts the Greek studies of meteorology and in doing so he points out
one of the points that I've been trying to make about the difference between the Romans
and the Greeks.
He says, more than 20 old Greek authors put forth their observations in these matters.
And I'm amazed at this all the more because then the world was in chaos, chopped up into
many kingdoms, yet so many men were still busy on so difficult a study even amid wars.
Now we live amid peace under a ruler who rejoices in the advancement of the arts and the letters.
And nothing at all is learned by means of new investigations.
In fact, not even the discoveries made previously are being taught.
So Pliny's wagging his finger, in a sense, at his fellow Romans, for one, not even learning
Greek natural philosophy correctly and for not advancing it anymore.
He moralizes, for example, on when he talks about Tyrian purple, the dye made from the
murex shell, which was used to dye a purple stripe on the togas of high class individuals,
upper class individuals, of course purple also used for the emperor.
Here's another example.
The ostrich of Africa is the largest of birds.
It is taller and faster than a man on horseback.
And it has wings only to assist it in running, for it is not a flying creature and cannot
take off from the earth.
It has talons like the hooves of a deer, which it uses as weapons.
That's true enough.
It can grasp stones, which it can then throw when being pursued by pursuers.
Another thing he says about the ostrich is that it's incredibly stupid because it thinks
it can hide itself by sticking its head into a bush so that it can't see.
We're all familiar with that.
Did you ever think it actually came to us through Pliny?
In fact, a lot of our ideas, our folkloric ideas about animals are actually from Pliny.
If you think back to the things you've learned as children, sort of uncritically about animals,
you'll find them in Pliny.
For example, when he talks about the elephant, it has a prodigious memory and it's afraid
of mice.
Now, besides these amusing bits, Pliny does transmit some important things on to later
generations.
For example, the size of the earth calculated by Eratosthenes and numerous other things.
I would suggest that it's a very readable text.
They're readable edited translations.
Now, I would suggest to you you would find it an amusing thing to read.
You can flip through it, go take a nice warm bath and curl up like a Roman with a copy
of Pliny.
You'll find an enjoyable reading.
Well, the important thing, I think, for the Historia naturalis is that it was not a work
that was ever lost.
It was transmitted to the Latin middle ages, something we're going to have to talk about
in the next lecture, and it became a major source for natural knowledge throughout the
middle ages.
Fine, well, after having gone through something about these encyclopedic works, I need to
say a little something in my last few minutes about Roman education.
At the time of the Roman Empire, there were many Greek schools available, espousing different
philosophies, different approaches, different kinds of things to be taught.
As were Greek tutors.
If you were a wealthy Roman, you would have a Greek tutor, presumably a slave, to teach
your children Greek and Greek philosophy.
Being bilingual was an important part of being an upper class Roman in the heyday of the
Empire.
Very much the same way that in the 19th century, it was considered an important accoutrement
for young ladies and gentlemen in the English-speaking world to know some French.
Same way with Greek for the Romans.
Again, it was a matter of taste and social status.
The Romans did develop a new kind of schooling, however, with a more standardized, one being
very careful about using that word, but a relatively more standardized curriculum.
These schools were frequently attended by the children of people in the urban middle
classes, upper middle classes, people who maybe couldn't afford a private live-in tutor
slave, there would be a school that they could send their children to.
The basis of the Roman educational system was borrowed again from late Hellenistic educational
systems.
The basis of the Roman education, at least towards the end of the Empire, centered around
what came to be called the seven liberal arts, the artes liberales.
They are liberal, free, because they are not tied to practical concerns immediately.
They are not craft skills, they are free skills.
The enunciation of these seven are actually chosen out of a list of nine that were put
together by the Roman writer Varo in the first century BC.
He considered these nine subjects as the suitable subjects for aristocratic Roman gentlemen.
He included medicine and architecture in his list, which are not now considered part
of the liberal arts.
They were banished from the status of the liberal arts by the end of the Empire, certainly
throughout the Middle Ages.
Those two topics, medicine and architecture, are too closely allied to craft traditions.
Their practitioners don't have the same status, the same high status as people who know the
liberal arts, the gentlemanly arts.
The seven liberal arts are divided into two groups.
First group are predominantly verbal, rhetoric, grammar, and dialectic, or logic.
That was the first course of study.
By the end of the Empire, these three came to be known as the Trivium, which literally
means the three roads, the three roads to wisdom, three roads to knowledge.
Or the three lane highway, perhaps in modern parlance.
By the way, though, words also evolve, and the word Trivium gives us the basis for our
word Trivial, because these three things, everybody knew them.
It was nothing you could boast about, just like today, you can't go out and have an impressive
resume by saying, well, I can read and write.
There's a trivial accomplishment.
Everybody has them.
They're the basis of learning.
And the same was true throughout the Roman period and the Middle Ages.
So eventually Trivium developed into Trivial, not to say that they're unimportant, but
they're the basis.
The other four liberal arts are of mathematical arts, mathematical as defined by Pythagoras.
And they are arithmetic in geometry, astronomy, and this one may surprise you, music.
Well, it shouldn't surprise you if you listen to what I had to say about Pythagoras and
the importance of music and harmony in the mathematical life of the Pythagorean school.
They constitute a second group, namely the quadrivium, the four roads.
The real innovation of the Romans themselves came in what we might call higher or professional
schools.
The first of these was law schools.
That's a development of the Roman period.
Roman law, of course, is highly advanced.
It forms a basis of later Western law.
It certainly forms a basis of our own legal system along with English common law.
It's no accident that if you go to Washington, D.C., and you look at the Supreme
Court, it's a Roman temple.
In the fourth century, a second professional school was added, that of medicine.
And Roman medicine actually developed quite a high degree.
We haven't talked about medicine very much.
But the Greek writer Galen, who lived in the second century AD, lived in Rome for a long
period of time, wrote extremely influential, extremely important, extremely long-lived
texts on medicine.
They were along with the writings of the earlier Greek Hippocrates, the basic texts for medical
education, medical studies, down to the end of the Middle Ages, certainly down to the
17th century.
Later, in the Middle Ages, particularly after the rise of Christianity, or particularly
on account of the rise of Christianity, I should say, a third higher faculty, higher
degree was added, that of theology, the highest level of all in the medieval university.
We'll have plenty of time to talk about the medieval university in due course.
What I can say for now is that the late Imperial Roman educational system formed the basis,
the pattern, for schools for the next thousand years.
And some traces of this Roman organization survived today.
We still divide, for example, standardized tests into verbal and mathematical, the trivium
and the quadrivium.
Well, in some, the Romans valued a smattering of Greek natural philosophical knowledge,
not at a deep level, but rather at a fairly dilettante-ish level.
Dilettante is probably not a fair word.
But the point is, is that the knowledge of Greek natural philosophy was considered an
accoutrement of civility, an accoutrement of the proper aristocratic class, like the knowledge
of Greek, the knowledge of how, of being bilingual in Latin and in Greek, if you were a member
of the right set, the matter of a member of the right class.
In any case, of course, there are never very many members, total of a society, who devote
themselves to the cutting edge of knowledge.
Even in the Greek world, the Greeks passed on to us, on to the Romans, of sophisticated
natural philosophy.
But again, there wasn't a large proportion of the Greek population that actually was
doing that.
It was a very small number.
But the fact remains that in the Roman world, we still can't point even to that small number,
that small proportion of the overall population.
We cannot point either to any Roman authors who made substantive developments over Greek
thought, the legacy of Greek thought, in the area of natural philosophy.
Now, this has important consequences, because this relative lack of substantive interest
in Greek natural philosophy meant that when the end of the classical era came about, the
Romans could transmit to their heirs, that is, to the early Middle Ages, only what they
themselves possessed.
And that was not much more than a smattering of Greek natural philosophy at a low level
in a very popularized form.
