This lecture is going to represent a bit of a departure from previous lectures.
Either two, we've been talking in a largely chronological fashion, going from the Babylonians
and the Egyptians on through the Greeks and down to the Hellenistic Age.
This lecture on the other hand is going to be topical.
It's going to concentrate on one area of Greek natural philosophy that was particularly
successful and particularly widely pursued in the Greek world, namely astronomy.
Now observational astronomy, as I mentioned in the second lecture, had been practiced
by the Babylonians and the Egyptians for centuries.
These large Babylonian tables of eclipse observations and yearly cycles were important
sources of information for the Greeks.
But the interesting thing is that these ancient peoples, the Babylonians and the Egyptians,
seem to have done their astronomical observations without an explanatory framework for the motions
of the heavenly bodies, that is without what we would call a physical astronomy.
What does the universe actually look like?
Part of the thrust of Greek astronomy was to explain the observations, to reduce the
observations as well, to mathematical principles, to mathematical explanations.
You may remember that the pre-Socratics gave some physical descriptions of the universe,
but despite some important conceptual steps, what the pre-Socratics passed on was really
fairly rudimentary.
I'm thinking in particular of Anaximander's idea of a drum shaped earth.
The important part of it is that it's not supported by anything, it hangs in the middle
of the heavens because it's equidistant from everything else, but in general at least what
we have of the pre-Socratics seems to be fairly rudimentary.
The crucial development made for the history of Greek astronomy was a challenge given by
Plato supposedly to his students.
There is some evidence that this may in fact have occurred because as we'll see later in
this lecture, throughout this lecture in fact, most of the promoters of Greek astronomical
systems actually had some connection with Plato's academy.
What was this challenge that Plato gave to his students?
Well Plato in the Timaeus says that the planetary motions in particular are what he calls wondrous
in their complexity.
The observed motion of the planets are very complex, but what Plato challenged his students
to do was to try to explain that complexity in simple mathematical terms.
It boils down to this.
Can we reduce the apparent complex motion of the planets to combinations of simple uniform
circular motion?
That is to say is the complexity we see when we look up in the heavens at the planets,
these complex paths that they trace out in the sky, is that complexity just an artifact
of our vantage point and do the planets really move at a constant speed and in perfect circles?
Well, before I can actually talk about the solutions to this problem, I think I need to
say something about what observed celestial motions are.
Nowadays we tend not to look up to the heavens as much as our ancient forebears did.
We live in cities that are overly lit so we can't even see the stars the way the ancients
did.
We might want to think about what that says about our own culture and how that affects
us that we can't, we don't have that immediate connection to the universe that our predecessors
used to.
You might want to think about that.
Most people nowadays don't actually recognize what the motions of the heavens are in fact.
So let me go through them.
Some of them are complex, some of them are easy.
The easy one is the diurnal motion.
It's one of the three kinds of motion I'm going to talk about.
The diurnal motion is every day celestial bodies rise in the east, move across the sky
and set in the west.
Sun, moon, planets, stars, everything.
Diurnal motion.
The next motion is the annual motion.
We know that some constellations are seen in the summertime and others are seen in the
wintertime.
This is because every star rises a slight bit earlier each night.
Therefore, the whole celestial sphere, the backdrop of the fixed stars, seems to rise
in the east and set in the west, making one revolution in a year.
Annual motion.
Number two.
The third motion is the proper motion of the planets.
And by planets I also include, as the Greeks did, the sun and the moon.
This is more complicated.
First of all, where do planets move?
Do we find them anywhere in the sky at all?
Well no, they're restricted to a band of the sky around what we now call the ecliptic,
that band known as the zodiac.
The planets are always found within that narrow band, a strip on the sky.
The proper motion of the planets is their motion through the zodiac.
They appear to move at a variable speed backwards, that is west to east, against the backdrop
of the fixed stars.
They move backwards through the zodiac, but at a variable speed.
Now with the exception of the sun and the moon, occasionally the planets seem to stop,
turn around, and go back the other way.
And that's called a retrogradation, or retrograde motion.
They stop again, and then resume their usual motion.
During all this time, there's also a slight north-south, wavy motion to their apparent
movements.
So in some, the planets are seen to move at varying velocities and directions in wavy
paths through the zodiac.
Quite complex.
Well Plato's challenge seems to have been first taken up by a student, Eudoxus.
Eudoxus flourished around 375 BC.
Now Eudoxus' works themselves are lost, but their contents fortunately are transmitted
to us by Aristotle, who adopted Eudoxus' general ideas.
Eudoxus' universe is composed of 27 nested concentric spheres, rotating at various but
uniform that is constant speeds, and with axes inclined to each other.
The earth is immobile at the center.
The highest sphere carries the fixed stars daily, east to west.
The sun and moon are moved by a combination of three spheres, and this gets a little
complicated here.
The highest sphere, the biggest sphere, rotates east to west and contributes the diurnal motion.
The next one rotates west to east and contributes the proper motion through the zodiac, and
the lowest one contributes that north-south waving, wavy motion in the zodiac.
So when you sum all of those three motions together, you get something that approximates
the apparent motion of the sun and moon.
The other planets do this retrograde motion, and so they need one extra sphere.
So the other planets are moved by four spheres, and again it's the cumulative sum of these
four motions that approximates the apparent motions of the planets.
Now Eudoxus' system has quite a bit of success in expressing the complex observed motion as
a sum of uniform circular motions, but his system failed in two respects.
It failed to account for two well-known observations.
Number one, the planets as they move through the zodiac seem to change in brightness, which
seems to imply that their distance to us is changing, sometimes closer when they're brighter,
sometimes dimmer when they're further away.
Also, the seasons are of different lengths.
In the northern hemisphere, our summer is actually longer than the winter.
The period between the equinoxes is longer for the summer than for the winter, which
implies that the sun's velocity is not constant.
Well, subsequent natural philosophers, particularly Calypus, who was also an Academy student,
and Aristotle, of course also an Academy student, altered Eudoxus' system by adding
further spheres to try and correct it.
Aristotle was most concerned about the problem of the communication of the motions from one
sphere to the next.
Now Eudoxus doesn't actually ever tell us so far as we know how it is that these motions
are actually summed up to get a planetary cumulative path.
Aristotle was worried about another problem.
He felt that the spheres from a higher planet would influence the motions of the spheres
for a lower planet.
So he inserted all these additional spheres.
He got up to about 55 spheres total by adding what he called unrolling spheres that counteracted
the motion of the higher spheres so that the sum of the motions at each new planet started
out at zero.
Well Eudoxus' achievement was in attempting to do something that we call saving the phenomenon.
This is actually a Greek term.
What that means is we want to explain what it is we see.
That's the goal of Greek astronomy, trying to explain what we see.
He did in fact, Eudoxus that is, reduce these complex and apparently irregular motions to
a combination of underlying mathematical simplicity and regularity.
Clearly, this is a goal that would warm the heart of any Platonist.
The Platonist, as we saw in our study of the Timaeus, the Platonist wanted to look for harmonies
in the universe.
An irregular motion of a planet doesn't make sense in a Platonic worldview.
We want to have mathematical beauty, perfection, and harmony in the world.
So there must be some kind of simplicity underlying the apparent complexity.
Also by the way, in commitment, excuse me, it is also by the way, in harmony with the
Platonic commitment to mathematicizing nature.
Remember Plato's influence that he got from the Pythagoreans.
Okay, well, there were two major innovations I should mention by other Greeks before I
go on any further.
These were not however widely accepted.
One of these came from Heraclides of Pontus, again another student of Plato's Academy.
He suggested replacing the diurnal motion of the heavens that 24 hour rotation with
something simpler, the diurnal rotation of the earth on its axis.
Aristarchus of Samos, 3rd century BC, hypothesized that the earth was not at the center, but
rather that the sun was at the center.
In that way then the annual motion of the heavens around the earth would be replaced
by the annual motion of the earth around the sun.
Both of these systems however were rejected quite early in antiquity.
Now as moderns, knowing as we do that the earth does rotate on its axis, knowing as
we do that the earth does revolve around the central sun, there's sort of an immediate
response of, well, you know, why were they so dumb?
Why did they give up these correct ideas?
Well put the ideas in context, that's the message that we'll hear again and again throughout
this course.
Heraclides and Aristarchus in context didn't make any sense for a couple of reasons.
One their systems were in conflict with prevailing physics.
If the earth is not at the center, what holds it up from the center?
Remember we saw Aristotle's idea of natural places, putting the sun at the center and
the earth up in the heavens doesn't make sense in that case.
We're also in conflict with common sense.
As I said before, we don't feel the earth moving, think how fast the earth would have
to be moving, we have no sense of this.
So part of the reason for their rejection, although not all of it, had to do with the
context that these answers, these suggestions were made in.
Conflict with prevailing physics, conflict with common sense.
Well now we come to what might be considered, should be considered I think the culmination
of Greek astronomy.
And that is in the person of Claudius Ptolemy, 2nd century AD, lived in the first half of
the 2nd century AD.
Ptolemy's system formed the basis of astronomical thought and astronomical calculation for
the next 1500 years.
Ptolemy lived at or near Alexandria.
We know he did his calculations at the parallel of Alexandria.
He tells us that much.
How much time he actually spent in the city or outside the city is not actually clear.
One of the things I do have to mention about his biography is don't confuse him with the
royal dynasty of the Ptolemy's.
This happened in the Middle Ages.
He was considered to be one of the royal king's Ptolemy of Egypt.
He was not, he was not.
Ptolemy used two notions to create a system different from the Eudoxian concentric spheres
model.
And these two innovations were the epicycle and the eccentric.
Now both of these innovations are mathematical devices and are probably the work, not of
Ptolemy himself, but probably of the mathematician Apollonius of Perga who lived from about, well
who flourished from about 12 to 20 BC until 190 BC.
That's where his dates of greatest activity.
Both of the innovations, the epicycle, the eccentric were developed further by Hipparchus
of Semos.
Now Hipparchus was called by Ptolemy that diligent worker and lover of truth.
And in many ways Ptolemy casts himself as a follower, as a student, so to speak, of Hipparchus.
Let me talk about the eccentric first.
That's a little bit easier to explain and to understand.
An eccentric is very simply this.
It's a planetary orbit whose center does not coincide with the center of the earth.
In the systems we've seen previously, the earth is exactly at the center, all the planetary
orbits center exactly on the earth.
For the eccentric, the center of the planetary motion and the earth are separated.
There's a distance between the two.
So what the planet is actually circling is not the center of the earth.
Why would we want to do this?
Well, first of all, it explains that one thing that the Eudoxian concentric spheres model
couldn't, namely that the seasons are of different lengths.
Because if we draw a set of perpendicular axes through the earth that divides an eccentric
orbit into four arcs, you will find that two of the arcs are longer than the other two.
Therefore, if the sun is moving on an eccentric at a constant velocity, it's going to take
longer to go the longer distance across the longer arcs of the orbit.
In other words, that's our northern hemisphere summertime.
Whereas the shorter arcs, it traverses in a less and a shorter period of time.
So that explains that.
The epicycle is a secondary orbit which actually carries the planet.
The epicycle is centered on a point on the primary orbit, which is called the deferent.
Now the deferent carries the epicycle around the orbit so that the planet traces a path
which is the combination of the motion of the epicycle and the motion of the deferent.
So we've got a circle on a circle, basically.
Why would we do that?
Well the use of the epicycle explains the other problems of planetary motions and of
planetary brightnesses.
Think about it this way.
Imagine you have a deferent moving in a counterclockwise fashion.
The epicycle, likewise, the planet moving on the epicycle is going in a counterclockwise
fashion.
When the planet on the epicycle is outside the deferent, then the motion of the epicycle,
the motion of the deferent, are in the same direction.
So the planet looks like it's moving very fast because we're combining the two motions.
Now wait until the planet gets around to the lower side of the epicycle.
Inside the deferent, then it's moving in one direction, on the epicycle, the deferent
is moving in the other direction.
If the motion on the epicycle is faster than the motion of the epicycle around on the deferent,
that means that the planet appears to be moving backwards, contrary to its usual motion.
That is, in retrograde motion.
Moreover, this explains the changes in planetary brightness.
Because clearly, as the planet moves on that epicycle, it's getting further away from and
closer to the earth.
So when it's in the superior, the upper part of the epicycle, it's further away, it's
less bright.
When it's on the inferior part of the epicycle inside the deferent, closer to the earth,
it appears brighter.
The result that Ptolemy came to was both explanatory and predictive.
Was very valuable in the sense that we could calculate back into the past planetary positions,
we could predict in the future where planetary positions would be.
And as I mentioned, Ptolemy's system promulgated first in the 2nd century AD, ends up being
the major system of astronomical conception and calculation until, well, certainly until
Copernicus, but even after Copernicus, a lot of people were still using Ptolemy for the
next 100 years, because it was good for doing calculations, it was familiar.
I should say that during that time, there were a large number of corrections, adaptations,
adjustments to Ptolemy's system by a whole lot of different individuals.
We're going to talk about those in later lectures.
Now I need to do two final things in this lecture.
One, I need to talk about the reasons behind Greek astronomical speculation, and then I
need to talk about how much did the Greeks believe about their systems.
Let's start first with the reasons behind Greek astronomical speculation.
For Plato and Plato's immediate followers, physical astronomy, and by that, I mean working
out what the celestial motions actually look like, what paths the planets follow, and why
they follow them, that physical astronomy was part of their program of revealing the design
inherent in nature.
Remember, that's the whole story of the Timaeus, that the world is full of design, the demiurge
made it, looking at the forms, and made it in harmony with mathematical intervals.
So if we just look, we'll find those mathematical intervals.
The mathematical basis of the world is therefore manifested by trying to fulfill Plato's challenge
of reducing the complex observed motions of the planets to combinations, to sums of the
cumulative apparent effects of uniform circular motion.
We go to Aristotle.
For Aristotle, physical astronomy was part of his comprehensive system, and it interleaved
with his physics.
We can't understand Aristotelian dynamics, that is the falling of heavy bodies, the rising
of light bodies, without understanding a cosmological system, how the world is put together, dividing
the world into a sub-lunary and super-lunary realm.
So for Aristotle, physical astronomy is part of his comprehensive system, one of the things
that's so interesting and so important for Aristotle.
For many Greeks, and for Ptolemy in particular, physical astronomy gave a better ability to
calculate past and future celestial positions.
Now why were they interested in calculating past and future celestial positions?
What was the reason for this?
Because it was necessary for astrology.
Here again, the topic of astrology has come up.
We mentioned it first when we were talking about the Babylonians, and I cautioned you
all at that point not to disregard astrology straight away, don't have a negative reaction
once you hear the word.
Because astrology in the ancient world, the medieval world, the early modern world, was
a serious endeavor involving complex calculations, and serious people did it.
By the way, I might mention that if you still don't believe me, Galileo himself cast natal
horoscopes for his children, so even Galileo himself.
What he did with those horoscopes, we don't know exactly, but he did in fact cast them.
Well, let's talk a little bit more about ancient astrology.
First of all, why should we believe it?
Why should we believe that the celestial events have an impact on the earth?
Well, of course they do.
Just look around.
In the summer, it's warmer.
The sun has moved to a different part of the zodiac, and the weather is warmer.
And it's in a different part of the zodiac.
The weather is colder.
So clearly, we can feel the sun's heat when we look up at the sun.
We can feel its rays impinging on our skin, bringing warmth.
So clearly warmth is coming from the sun, or something is coming from the sun light.
If nothing else, light is coming from the sun and impinging on the earth.
What effect does that light have?
The moon is more remarkable.
Light actually causes the entire ocean to move.
The tides are linked somehow, and people spent centuries trying to figure out exactly how
the moon causes the tides, and what the linkage between the lunar cycle and the tides actually
are.
Well, for astrology, it's not enough to know the month that a person was born.
Nowadays in modern sort of knock-off astrology, you just need to know your astrological sign.
Real astrology would laugh at you for that.
You need to know not only where you were born, but you need to know the month, the day, the
hour, and if you can, the minute.
Because the celestial bodies are constantly moving, they never stand still, therefore
the combinations of where the planets are in the heavens is constantly changing.
You need to know the exact moment of your birth in order to figure out, to calculate
exactly what was on the horizon, what was rising, what was setting at the moment you
first took a gulp of air.
So this meant a lot of very complex calculations.
Tables were developed to make this easier over time, and we're certainly going to see
more about that, but the Ptolemaic system was in fact put together primarily for the
purpose of astrological predictions.
We know this because we will find that to be the case when we put Ptolemy's work back
in context.
Ptolemy's physical astronomical system appears in a book that we call his Almagest.
Well the Almagest is not the only thing that Ptolemy wrote.
Ptolemy's works on geography and refraction of light and other things, Ptolemy also wrote
a book called the Tetrabiblos, which is supposed to be seen, which should be seen in conjunction
with the Almagest.
Just as we couldn't understand the Timaeus without putting it back in the context of
the Republic, so too we can't understand the Almagest without the contextualization provided
by the Tetrabiblos.
Well the Tetrabiblos, what is it about?
It's all about prognostications, casting horoscopes, proving that heavenly bodies have influence
on the earth, and then how to interpret how to calculate what those will be.
Fine, we will return to astrology time and time again.
The last thing I want to mention is to what level did the Greeks actually believe in these
systems that they had composed?
How far did they believe that if we actually traveled to the heavens we would in fact see
the planets moving in Ptolemy's case on epicycles carried by deference around eccentric points?
Was that really true?
Well there has sometimes been an attempt in the history of science to say that all that
the Greeks wanted to do was save the phenomena.
They really didn't care whether these were true descriptions, as long as they were mathematically
accurate for predicting, they worked as a tool, as an instrument for predicting positions
of planets, that was enough.
Other historians of science will argue that that is not the case, and I tend to agree with
them.
There is a range from very mathematical astronomy where the astronomer really doesn't care
about what the planetary structure of the cosmos looks like as long as it gets to the
right answer for the position of the planets, to the other end a more physicalist view where
you want to have a true description.
For example, Aristotle added spheres to Eudoxus' system because he was worried about the communication
of motion from higher spheres to lower spheres.
That's a purely physical concern.
If Aristotle were just interested in the mathematical predictive ability, he wouldn't
have done that.
Similarly, the work of Heraclides and Aristarchus was rejected because it conflicted with contemporaneous
physics, it conflicted with common sense.
These systems would have worked very well mathematically.
What's the difference where you stick in the diurnal motion, whether it's on a large
scale for the sphere of the fixed stars, or whether it's on a small scale for the Earth
spinning on its axis?
You get the same mathematical result, but the implications for physics, common sense,
are different.
And as a result, they were rejected, these ideas of heliocentrism and a diurnally moving
Earth.
So I think it's a mistake to see Greek astronomy as concerned only with saving the phenomenon.
Each thinker lay along some kind of continuum between mathematical and physicalist views.
But I have to point out, it is also true that this continuum is not something that
exists in modern astronomy.
And that in and of itself constitutes a difference between ancient and modern astronomy.
Modern astronomers would not be satisfied just to give an apparent explanation of what
the cosmos looks like.
They want to know what it really looks like.
They want true explanations, true descriptions.
That's not to say that good enough descriptions are not deployed satisfactorily in some parts
of modern science.
You might want to think about examples of that.
Well, now we've run the course of Greek natural philosophy, and it's time to turn to the conquerors
of the Greeks, namely the Romans.
Well, the Romans had a culture very different from the culture of the Greeks, and so as
we shall see, it's no surprise that their responses to natural philosophy and technology
were different from those of the Greeks.
