Welcome to the Future Thinker's podcast, episode number 42. Today on the show we have
Daniel Schmacktenberger, the co-founder and director of research and development for Neurohacker
Collective, which is a smart drug company with a vision of advanced human optimization.
Daniel's past work involved being a dean for a college of mind-body medicine and running
a think tank that focused on developing complex system solutions to environmental and societal
issues. We already interviewed Daniel on our podcast once before, where he talked about
complex global systems, and you can listen to that episode by going to futurethinkers.org
slash 36. But today our topic is neurohacking, or the voluntary altering of your own brain
function to optimize for performance, well-being, or a number of other factors. And we recently
got our hands on Qualia, which is a neuroenhancer or a smart drug stack from Neurohacker Collective,
which Daniel is the co-founder of. We've tried a few other smart drugs before, like
Modafinal, for example, but Qualia seems to be quite different from the others. For example,
my experience of Modafinal was that it made me just dislike people in general, although
it made me extremely focused, but Qualia didn't have any of those side effects for me. It
gave me a sense of emotional well-being and a general sense of balance as well as focus,
which was quite interesting. The term for this is broad-spectrum cognitive enhancement,
which means that it doesn't just improve one quality of your functioning, but multiple
qualities at the same time. Qualia specifically focuses on three areas of enhancement. Cognitive,
psycho-effective, and physiological. Cognitive area includes things like intelligence and
creativity. Psycho-effective area includes increasing confidence, willpower, and empathy.
Physiological area includes higher levels of energy, awareness, and responsiveness.
Qualia has also been designed with an ethical mindset. Instead of depleting or overriding
your brain's natural function like some other smart drugs, it works to support and enhance,
without creating dependency. There are over 40 active ingredients in Qualia, and it's all
transparent, you can check all of it out on their website, and there's 40-plus years of
international research on neurotropic stack formulation behind these ingredients. If you're
interested in learning more about Qualia, go to futurethinkers.org slash brain hack. One word.
And finally, before we get into the show, I just want to give a quick thank you to our patrons
and donors, Josh, Alfred, Lauren, and Melanie. Thank you guys for supporting the show. We love you.
To check out the show notes from this episode, go to futurethinkers.org slash 42, and the second
half of this interview will be at futurethinkers.org slash 43 once it's live. And to listen to our
first interview with Daniel, go to futurethinkers.org slash 36. Enjoy the show.
Last but not least, if you want to get access to more content, hidden episodes, or if you just
want to chat with us and previous guests, then check out our community at community.futurethinkers.org.
Daniel, welcome to the show. It's good to have you on again.
I'm happy to be on again.
So your last episodes were quite popular, but we talked about quite a different set of subjects,
and today we'd like to talk with you about neurohacking. So maybe can you give us a brief
introduction to what neurohacking is and why we should be doing it, if we should be doing it?
Yeah, so neurohacking is a broad and kind of ambiguous term related to biohacking and
consciousness hacking. Generally, we can think of it as the application of any tools for
technologies or processes to modulate, augment, upgrade some aspect of psychological neurological
function. And so we could think of ancient neurohacking technologies being meditation and
sweat lodges and psychedelics and dancing around the campfire to get into translate states and
etc. And obviously with advances in neuroscience and neuro technology, we've got QEG neurofeedback,
we've got transcranial stimulation technologies, we've got much more advanced microbiomic,
genomic, you know, biochemical technologies. So we can think of neurohacking as how do we
optimize the mind-brain interface towards any positive purpose utilizing whatever tools best
serve that particular purpose. I love how you say mind-brain interface as if they're very
separate things. Well, the reason that we're saying mind-brain interface together is because if you
want to run the analogy of mind stuff as kind of like software and brain stuff as kind of like
hardware, you realize that the distinction, the clear distinction in computers between software
and hardware, we don't have such a clear distinction in the human organism that any change in thought
has a physical change in the brain that's happening. Any physical change in the brain has some
change in thinking, emotion, experience, etc. And so they are dynamically co-inter-affecting
each other all the time. So I suppose a lot of the thinking that we've done about consciousness has
well, it's come from a lot of different perspectives, but the one that we land on quite often
is the perspective from Hinduism and Buddhism, which is you are not the mind and the consciousness
is not exactly localized in physical material in the brain. So do you have much to say from
that perspective before we dive deeper into neurohacking? Yeah, so we get right into what's
famously known in neuroscience as the hard problem of neuroscience. How does consciousness and brain
or in general consciousness and physics, what are they both and how do they relate and is there
causal interaction in both directions? This is the hard problem of neuroscience, but before that
this was the kind of hard problem, the mind-brain problem or the dualism challenge that all
philosophic systems face is it seems like there is third-person stuff, that we can
all independently measure in sciences the method of knowing the third-person reality,
what we think of as third-person or objective reality, we can all measure it, we can corroborate it,
and if we're going to make hypotheses about interactional dynamics, we'll be able to
make predictions, etc. And third-person stuff has weight and position and charge and length and
spin and those kinds of properties. First-person stuff doesn't have any of those. It has emotion
and feeling and longing and impulse and it can't be corroborated by anybody else at all. You are
having a first-person experience as we're talking and I can empathetically imagine and to feel into
what your experience is like, but that is different than actually having the first-person access to
it that you do. So that both of these realities exist has been acknowledged and there are
philosophic systems that don't think that they're both real, right? You have what are called idealism
systems that say consciousness is fundamentally real because it's the only thing we can know.
I can know that I'm having an experience but I can't know that what I'm experiencing about the
world, even through my scientific measurements, is true because I could just be a crazy person,
right? This could all be a dream. I could all be the matrix and it could just be
contours within consciousness, but I only have first-person experience, first-person access to
my experience of stuff, not the stuff itself. And so in those models, what's fundamentally
real is consciousness and the rest of the universe, right? Third-person stuff is either not real at all,
Maya, or it's an epiphenomena of consciousness, mind creates reality. You've got the other side and
says what's fundamentally real is physical stuff, material stuff, physical stuff,
happen with the Big Bang, interactions occur that lead to complexity, emergent properties have
enough complexity and somewhere around biology or maybe nervous systems, consciousness is an
emergent property, but what's fundamentally real is physical stuff and then consciousness is either
just not real at all, it's called radical limitivism. So Dan Dennett and others kind of propose that,
it's kind of like an illusion or consciousness is real but it's an epiphenomena of complex
neural networks, right? Radical emergentism. So you've got different philosophic systems that don't
see both of those as fundamentally real things or reduce them to the domain that seems more real
to them or they're stuck with, alright, these both seem real and they seem unconvencerate
called dualism or attempts to try and reconcile them more deeply and so when you're living your life,
when your body is touched, interacted with, sensation happens, this is physical, right? It's
being mediated by via biology and physics and yet you have a conscious experience. So it seems like
physics can affect consciousness, there is a causal movement but you also experience yourself
having some choice and again we get deep into not just the topic of consciousness but the
topic of will and volition and if your choice is real and then affects your hand moving,
it would seem that consciousness has some effect on physics and there for every branch where you
say well what about that and each of these questions, each of these things I've said and
the questions that come up, there is a whole branch of philosophy that goes down, is there really
free will or not, is it compatible with a deterministic universe or not, is universe deterministic,
etc. But most of what we're going to talk about today does not require these deep existential
issues being solved to say that we do know empirically both first person and third person
things that we can do with our subjective experience, so mindfulness, meditation, introspection, etc.
can actively affect the brain and affect the brain in ways that affect the mind's predispositions
and things that we can do to the body, i.e. changing its biochemistry, changing its microbiota,
exercising differently, change cognitive and emotional, right, mental and the experience of the
conscious creature. And you can abstract and say well okay so you're saying the mind, thinking,
feeling stuff is different than the body, is consciousness different than that as the
non-dual witness, you mentioned kind of the Hindu Buddhist philosophy, so maybe there is
consciousness as a field effect that is then interacting with this self-organizing system.
Fascinating questions and if you wanted to do a show where we just dive into them
existential questions at depth, I'd be happy. I think that's the plan for the next one actually.
Yeah, cool. But yeah, you bring up non-duality and that's exactly what I was going to say just
now. Do you approach neurohacking from a non-dualistic perspective where it's both ascending and
descending in terms that Ken Wilber uses? Yeah, so when Ken talks about the ascending path,
he's talking about the transcendent direction and the descending path, the eminent direction,
so the transcendent spiritual processes are around in some way having consciousness leave
body, mind, etc., and go into higher states of witnessing universal consciousness, etc.,
the descending paths around taking universal consciousness and embodying it more fully.
And if you just want to talk about it very simply in terms of just having expanded states of
awareness and then being able to integrate those expanded states as integrated stages,
yes, that's a valuable way to think about it. Cool. So why don't we move into the actual
subject of neurohacking? You talked about the different tools that we can use. What are some
of the currently available tools for neurohacking? Well, so there's a lot of different goals, right?
And so if someone's wanting to decrease anxiety, or brighten their mood, or increase their cognitive
function, or have altered psychedelic, numinous states, or improve their sleep quality, or each
of these goals are going to have different tools that are more appropriate, and then each of the
goals are going to have different tools that are different depending upon the person and what the
person actually has going on, their specific biochemistry, genomics, etc. So I'll speak broadly
about categories of tools that are currently available, and then we can get into applications
more. So think about first affecting the brain and body, and this is another important distinction.
So we look at the intersection between the mind and brain, but it's not just mind and brain,
it's your conscious experience in your body as a whole. And then we could say, well, it's actually
the mind, brain, body, environment complex, because the environment and the body are
affecting each other inexorably in real time. So these are embedded complex systems. But let's
just talk about the topic of embodied consciousness and conscious experience that is mediated beyond
just the nervous system in the physiology. You know, the first example that I think people are
getting pretty properly aware of is the gut brain axis. And the gut brain axis is mediated by
via a number of things. You've got the enteric nervous system, which is a whole branch of peripheral
nervous system in the intestines, where inflammation in the intestines can cause imbalance between
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system can cause neural inflammation, etc. But you've also got
the microbiome digesting food. And actually, many of our nutrients are metabolic byproducts of
the microbiota. And obviously, we evolved with our microbiome over so many generations before
we had chlorinated water and antibiotics and refined sugar diets. And so the human genome
doesn't actually code everything necessary to make a human, the genome codes a bunch of stuff.
But we got a genome and a microbiome from our parents. And the baby's microbiome comes some in
utero, some from the vaginal flora, some from, you know, breastfeeding. But if we damage that,
a whole bunch of functions necessary to make an optimum human can be damaged. So specifically
regarding nervous system, some of the main neurotransmitters like GABA, dopamine, serotonin,
are primarily produced via flora in the intestines. And so each of those three I just mentioned,
somewhere between 30 to 80% of those neurotransmitters are actually produced in the gut. And then,
you know, move to the brain. If you think about losing 30 to 80% of your serotonin or GABA or
dopamine, that's, you know, psychopathology, right? That's a messed up brain. So then you start
looking at, well, how many people are eating food that is feeding some microbes more than others
and changing the gut microbiome or have some GI disturbance? And so it's important that if we
helped the microbiome of someone's gut, that's a neural hack, right? We can be changing their
brain chemistry, the most critical kinds of signaling chemicals by changing the bacteria in
their gut. The same is true if we want to look at, say, pain anywhere in the body. Pain can create
inflammation that can cross the blood brain barrier and cause neural inflammation and creates
depression and cognitive issues. Exercise, certain types of exercise can actually affect
genetic transcription and change endogenous biochemical patterns in the brain. And so,
you know, we'll talk about technologies to affect the brain and nervous system directly,
but some of them are technologies to affect the environment that the brain and nervous system
lives in, which is first order of the body, right? So tools. Let's think about biochemical tools.
So first line of biochemical tools is things that you can put in your mouth, right? So we're
talking about vitamins and supplements and herbs and drugs, et cetera. So you've got
anxiolytic biochemistry, things that can decrease anxiety. You've got things that can help with
sleep. You've got things that can help with cognition, all the notropics and smart drugs.
And then, you know, you've got things that can create
experiences that might not be where you want to live all the time, but are meaningful state
experiences. So let's take psychedelics and say, all right, are we optimizing the physiology by
taking a psychedelic or are we augmenting it, moving it into a specific range of function that
we might not want to live in all the time, but that has very meaningful positive effects,
lastingly, if done properly. So you've got, you can just think about all the biochemical stuff,
right? Now, then you've got biochemical stuff that could be injected, could go intranasally.
There's a lot of different delivery methods for biochemical technologies for neural hacking.
You've got the biological technologies, which like we were mentioning,
you know, affecting the microbiome of the gut, but not just the microbiome of the gut, the microbiome
of all of the mucosa systems of the body. It's pretty common for people to have infections in
their mouth, subclinical dental infections or subclinical nasal infections that are actually
releasing biotoxins that affect the brain. And so they are the boundary between good
integrative functional medicine and neural hacking, right? That kind of blurs. We've got
genomic therapies we can think about for neural hacking. So, you know, we're at the edge of starting
to think about CRISPR and looking at, do people with higher IQs, do people that are happier,
more depressed, have different genomic patterns? And can we actually do gene doping, splicing,
etc., to affect that? And even before looking at a genomic level, we look at a genetic expression
level. Can we turn on or off or modulate certain gene expressions? And there's a bunch of things
to do that. And then to the degree that we know someone has, say, a bunch of mutations on their
MAO branches or their COMT branches that code for certain neurotransmitter predispositions,
can we at least just do nutrigenomics, right? Provide different nutrients for them to bypass
where they have genomic deficiencies. You've got so many fun technologies. You've got biofeedback,
biofeedback, and specifically neurofeedback, EEG neurofeedback, which can provide input about
the brain to the brain that it doesn't normally get, that teaches it how to regulate much more
profoundly and quickly in many areas. We've got all the transcranial technologies so we can
stimulate the brain with transcranial lasers, transcranial direct current or alternating current,
transcranial magnets, or ultrasound. Ultrasound has some fascinating studies and early studies
in curing Alzheimer's right now. TMS has had some great work in depression and some of the TDCS has
been used for hyperclocking the prefrontal cortex. So there's a bunch of fun things in there, the
transcranial lasers, low-level laser. Not just transcranial, but sometimes they'll go up your
nose. Intranasal lasers can increase ATP production in the neurons, so increased mitochondrial output.
That's a good example. If you're increasing ATP output, you're not making the system more
moved in a stimulatory direction, right? You're not affecting stimulating neurotransmitters or
neurohormones. You're also not doing neuroinhibitory ones. You're just increasing the cell energy for
it to do whatever it wants to do better, which is kind of like a younger brain. Interesting.
There's a bunch more, but give me more questions, otherwise I'll keep going.
So you brought up the gut brain. Is there a feedback mechanism that you can train yourself to pay
attention to so that you have better insight or thinking sort of informed by the gut?
So we could take this a couple different ways. We could say that we might be actually looking at
the information processing of the enteric nervous system, right? That there is this gut brain,
gut nervous system, that it provides a different kind of input or feedback, just like there's
a bunch of neurons in the heart, and we could talk about the heart as an information processing
system, or the neurons in it at least. That might be true. I don't think we know enough
to know for sure. We can also though just talk about the benefit of tuning into different
perspectives and being able to get different information. So let me give you a totally
different example. Napoleon Hill's famous book, Think and Grow Rich. So he said that one of his
favorite practices that he developed in there was he had this Council of Invisible Advisors,
and his Invisible Advisors were, he thought about who he wanted to become,
and the qualities that mattered most, and he thought about people that really represented
embodying that quality well. And so maybe he didn't want to become Genghis Khan holistically,
but there was some aspect of Kurds that he wanted Genghis Khan's insight for. And so he had his list
that Lincoln, Da Vinci, Ford, whoever, I don't remember whose exact list was, but he studied
those people well enough that he could have some real sense of their personalities. And then he
would convene seeing them all at a council table with his eyes closed and a kind of meditative
state. And then he would bring life issues to them and ask for their feedback and go around and have
Lincoln talk, right, then have Napoleon talk. And one of the things that he found was that when he
was asking for Gandhi's input, he got insight that he would have never got just journaling his
own thoughts. And he said, all right, so is it because I am channeling Gandhi? Or is it simply
because I'm looking at the universe through a different lens that I wouldn't normally using my
own brain? And, you know, he said, let's assume that it's the latter, but it really doesn't matter
at all. The net result is profound, valuable, useful, empirically useful insights came from
looking at the world through those lenses. You can do the same thing with parts of your body.
And it's actually a really meaningful part of somatic psychology. So you can tune into your
gut, you could tune into say you want to use the chakra system, right, and you tune into your solar
plexus or your heart chakra, your throat chakra. Does it matter if they're really chakras? No,
it doesn't matter at all. Does it matter if the chakras correlate to nerve plexis or to
endocrine glands? Or if they're nonsense? Is you're just tuning in to this part of your body
and saying, what does it want to tell me? What does it think? What does it want me to know?
And some information comes, and then you step back in your normal state of consciousness and look at
that. Might you be able to gain meaningful insights from it? Definitely. Yeah, I think that's a really
good way of looking at it, because some people, you know, if they're not used to, or if they don't
believe that, you know, chakras exist, they might just refuse to use that technique. But actually,
the way you put it, you can totally just use the technique without having any kind of belief about
it. Does this work? Yes, it does. Does it not work? Okay, well, maybe I can try something else.
And, you know, it doesn't have to just be chakras as just an example, you could just take an area
of your body that's heard and tune in and say, what does this part want me to know? Maybe you
don't get anything, but then you just kind of feel the pain and you or the tension or whatever it is,
and you say, all right, if this pain could talk, what would it say? And you see what comes up?
It's interesting how often that ends up being insightful. And when we talk about the mind-brain
interface or the mind-body interface, there are a tremendous number of places where the top-down
regulatory system has huge effects on all the other systems. And so where specifically,
emotions, psychology end up affecting physiology. You think about why does a placebo ever make
anything better for anybody, right? Like, it doesn't even make sense why a placebo,
like why isn't the body already healing at its optimum capacity as it is, since it would be
genetically programmed to do so. And it is already healing at its optimum capacity and taking the
sugar pill isn't interesting. And it's not even the belief that's interesting. It's when someone is
in, say someone has a disease state, they're anxious about it, and that anxious is mediated by
cortisol and epinephrine and et cetera. And so their cortisol is taking the precursor hormone,
pregnant alone, and shunting it into cortisol and the adrenals, which means less of it's going to
DHEA, so the cortisol DHEA ratio gets higher. Well, that ends up affecting everything from genetic
transcription to lean muscle mass to bone density to so many things. So then when the person believes
they're going to get well and they feel better and their stress drops and their parasympathetic
nervous system can kick on and their sympathetic nervous system chills out and their cortisol DHEA
ratio moves in the right direction. The actual reparative mechanisms of physiology are more
available to them. And so their body is healing as best as it can in the stress state and in a
non-stress state it can actually heal better, right? Now, one of the interesting things is it's
placebo is not the only thing that can do that. You look at work like Norman Cousin's work where he
just watched comedy because he thought he was dying of cancer and his cancer got better,
not because he believed he was going to get better, but because he was not stressed out and he was
happy for the first time and ended up being that stress was meaningful to the process of
pathology that was going on for him. And so this doesn't mean that it's the only thing or that it
will always be affecting. Sometimes placebo just affects how you sense something, but not the
underlying pathophysiology, but it's a part of it. So when you tune into pain in the body, for instance,
or tension in the body, is it possible that there is some psychological connection that's
happening there where you can gain insights often? Are there other ways of affecting cortisol in your
body that are meaningful in the long term other than this kind of observing your body and releasing
it consciously? Oh, yeah. So this is like the first place that functional medicine doctors and
naturopathic doctors talk to people, which is understanding how the HPA axis works and that
the dysregulation and the HPA axis usually starts at the A at the adrenal side and that
roughly you can say the sympathetic nervous system innervates the adrenal cortex and the primary
hormone there's many coming from that process is cortisol and the parasympathetic nervous system
innervates the adrenal medulla and there are again many hormones that are coming out, but the primary
one is DHA. So the ratio of cortisol to DHA as hormones in the endocrine system in the blood
representing kind of systemic effects is roughly equivalent to the sympathetic parasympathetic
ratio of the system as a whole and related to chronic stress. So in early phases of chronic
stress cortisol goes up and the precursor to cortisol in the brain, ACTH, goes up. After that's
been the case for a little while, DHA starts to go down because cortisol and DHA are both made from
the same precursor hormone called pregnenolone and it's a rate-limited hormone. There's a finite
amount of it. After a while if someone stays in chronic stress cortisol starts to drop too simply
because the adrenal glands are fatigued and now DHA is way lower. So you can see people in high or
low cortisol adrenal stress states depending upon how long they are in that pathology, but so you
can give someone bioidentical hormones or things that support hormones to get them in the right
range quickly and make the person feel better. So say you do a blood or a salivary hormone lab
to look at adrenals you can do that but the big thing is just going to be dropping the stress
load and the stress load is psychological and physiologic stresses. So too much sugar and an
unstable blood sugar cycle causes cortisol spiking but it reads it as stress kind of continuous
starvation cycle responses. Not enough sleep is a huge cause of stress. Both not enough exercise
or exercising in a way that's causing injury. So you've got and as well as toxins and pathogens
that cause inflammation. So all of those can cause chronic stress as well as all the psychological
sources. So one of the you know you can say that the first good part of neurohacking is just health
right health and well-being because so many people are dealing with brain fog or low level
anxiety depression before they seek to optimize beyond baseline just getting back to baseline is
pretty great. So identifying the things that took them below baseline and reversing those
that should be the foundational stuff. Right I think so many people neglect that they're trying
to kind of go to superhuman levels rather than just trying to optimize for what's missing or for
what's kind of below normal levels. So what else is in that spectrum of what people often overlook?
We've talked about cortisol we've talked about the gut microbiome are there any other important
components of this equation? Sure this is not the sexy part this is the like fucking don't tell us
about the stuff again part but it's just it's critical and then the sexy part is the stuff
that seems like magic bullets that make you make you have superhero powers so we'll get
more into that the end but those parts really do there are some really neat exciting technologies
that can be very powerfully augmenting but they really do function radically better in a well-tuned
system than an already dysregulated system doesn't mean they can't help to get you back to function
in a dysregulated system but we really want to be functioning on foundational well-being.
So first category is sleep I say this because it ends up affecting more categories of health
and psychology faster than almost anything else and it's something that is just so easy
for most of us to do a poor job with. By sleep I mean both enough sleep and good quality sleep
so even you know it's give or take a third of your life but it's like 90% of all the
repair that happens to your physiology and you've got some very meaningful information
consolidation psychological consolidation happening in dreams and theta but almost
all the physiologic repair happens in delta it's also where the memory consolidation happens
so making sure that we're getting enough delta sleep I would say is a is a huge foundation
now we've got neural hacks for helping that you can you know one should make sure that
the foundational things are in place so that environmentally do you have a good sleeping
environment you have a good bed is it dark is it quiet good air quality you're not in a room with
mold or VOC etc and you don't have people or dogs or whatever waking up throughout the night
like we could do a whole show just on how to make an optimized sleeping environment
and it's a pretty important thing factoring how how big a deal it is and then there are
definitely supplements that people can take that will help them sleep better depending upon what's
wrong with their sleep but if they're if they're not sleeping long because they're waking up to pee
a lot versus they're snoring right those really need addressed in different ways
but addressing them is really important there's also the amount of light that you receive before
sleep so many people stay on their phone right before they go to bed and that can have really
terrible implications because your brain doesn't produce enough melatonin yeah so cortisol and
melatonin are in a circadian rhythm with each other where cortisol is high in the day low at
night melatonin is low in the day high at night and it's a light stimulated cycle and so it's
actually important to get enough bright light during the day if you don't and your cortisol
doesn't actually go high then it won't come low enough and give you good sleep at night but it
is important to avoid bright and blue light before bed so you see a lot of people wear blue blocking
glasses or put the flux app on their computer to take it out of the blue range you know things
like that in general I would say a wind down routine before bed where you stop taking in stressful
things you stop blue in the bright light and you start preparing body and mind for sleep whether
it's through a bath or the right kind of reading or stretching super useful we're working on some
technology some biochemical technologies that induce better delta sleep a number of different
ones one of the ones that we're most excited about is a new kind of brain inductions called
phase locked induction and this was a DARPA funded project originally with some people that were
partnered with out of a university of northwestern and rather than try to induce delta waves like
using binaural beats or strobelites or transcranial stem these researchers recognize that the brain
actually resists having its brain wave patterns changed externally pretty strongly because its
own process for regulating the frequency that it's in which is the opening and closing of the ion
gates is very very sensitive it's controlled by many factors and it's really only susceptible
to induction when the gates are open when the ion channels are open and so they put EEG on people's
head found out when the people went into delta sleep they were specifically trying to improve
the efficiency of delta sleep and then exactly when the gates were open they put in a stimulus for
the exact same wave pattern the same frequency that the brain was in where it was crest crest
aligned so they weren't changing the brain wave pattern they were just adding more of the exact
brain wave pattern that the brain was in to add amplitude which the hypothesis was would increase
the efficiency of everything that was happening because you get more net communication per unit
time happening and this happened and so the first studies that were done were done on memory
and they found a 400 increase in long-term memory in healthy adults after a week of using this
technology and that's testing memory but if delta sleep is going up that's going to be
helping anxiety it's going to be decreasing risk for Alzheimer's it's going to be affecting
oxidation and anti-inflammation so this technology is not far from being market ready this is an
example of like really fun neural hacks that we're right on the brink of that is so interesting
it sounds like it's almost tricking the brain into thinking that is doing a better job at whatever
it's already doing than it actually is and I wonder if it has a feedback loop where the brain
picks up that oh this is really working and and then it knows how it arrived there because it was
already doing that maybe just to a smaller degree and then it already knows how to do that and it
better next time is that the case so there are some therapies where after you do them the brain
continues to do them on its own because it learns how to do them that's kind of the exact opposite
of the way we usually think of say psychopharmacology drugs right which is that they create dependence
and addiction you get off of them your brain can't do that anymore because it overrode the
natural regulatory system this is one of our primary design principles is that we want to
understand what the brain's own regulatory process and the body's regulatory process is doing and
support it rather than override it in a way that whenever someone stops with that particular
technology you have a net neutral to net positive lasting effect rather than a down regulation
independence I would say good neural hacking in general should have that as one of its criteria
with this particular one I don't think a study has been done yet on someone using it for a while
and then stopping and seeing if they continue to get that elevation from baseline I wouldn't see it
as much as that it's trying to trick the brain as it is supporting it by adding energy right like
if you're if there's three people pushing a car and one more person comes along to push it just
goes better because there is you know more force being added to what's already happening and so
here the goal was as the brain is modulating its frequency and it's at the max amplitude that it
can generate if we can just add energy so we're adding amplitude we're just going to increase
the efficiency of its process there's something very beautiful it's something very aikido about
not we know what the brain should be doing better and we're going to try and induce this specific
frequency of delta but we actually don't know why it is moving between the frequencies exactly the
way that it does but we're going to kind of trust it and follow it and just add resource I think
stem cells is another way that you can think about that right as you think about stem cell therapy
we don't know how the stem cells differentiate into tissues fully and then all the metabolic
functions those cells do but we're simply adding resource to the system in general I think
the approach to support the system's own regulatory process is doing what they do better as opposed to
trying to override them is a is a key distinction in how we should approach tech interface with the
body interesting and so when it comes to supplements is this also your approach that you're trying to
support what the body is already doing rather than kind of installing a new program oh this is how
you're going to do it body okay yeah of course so you know like with the the supplements that we've
developed and more that we're in process of developing so let's take qualia as an example
it's a notropic product cognitive enhancement product that we made because there's a good example
here so some of the ingredients are actually just nutrients right they're nutrients that you should
get in food and if you're eating a healthy diet you'll be getting more of them than not but they're
nutrients that either are very commonly deficient even in good diets for a number of reasons so certain
trace minerals that are important for brain function they're just deficient in soil even
organic soil is still very different than before the soil originally went through a bunch of uh
monocropping and plants can't make minerals right they're gonna pull up the minerals that are in
the soil similarly if the soil is deficient in microbiota it's going to affect the plant chemistry
if the plant's been hybridized so if there are common deficiencies and certain nutrients that
are necessary for cognitive capacity or sleep or something like that making sure that there's enough
of them that's just augmenting eating and that doesn't mean that you can then eat poorly right
that's why we use the word supplement right is that it is too supplement to be in addition to
because what someone takes a few grams of in pills compared to what they're taking like
pounds of in food there's no way that that's going to replace the primary effect but it can
meaningfully add to it but also just like if someone is going to be using some function a lot more
than an evolutionary environment would have had them use that function right so if athletically
someone's going to be sweating a lot more they're going to lose electrolytes faster so we give them
electrolytes and it actually makes a difference or they're going to be using branched chain amino
acids to build skeletal muscle more if they're tearing down skeletal muscle so we supplement
branched chain amino there are nutrients that get used faster when someone is in certain kinds
of cognitive process so if they want to spend a lot of time in peak cognitive process they're
going to burn through those quicker so you want to supplement those brain nutrients and that is
just the body's going to convert those so say the the amino acids that can get converted to
neurotransmitters the vitamins and minerals that are involved in the conversion process the body's
going to convert them as it needs them but you're not going to have nutrition be a rate limiting
factor so that's obviously working with endogenous pathway support there are other things where
say we are looking at the acetylcholine pathway has a lot to do with memory and learning
and sensory motor function speed of neural communication so the body's producing acetylcholine
it's moving across synapses it's getting received in the postsynaptic receptors we can give plants or
chemicals that modulate that process but that modulate the process in a much more holistic way
than say traditional psychopharmacologic approaches which is a single drug intervention
that's going to affect one part right like a Adderall being a presynaptic dopamine agonist and
then not necessarily looking at how that works within the whole dopamine cycle and how dopamine
relates to norepinephrine and epinephrine and serotonin the rest of the whole rest of neurotransmission
so we want to look at if we're going to affect a neurotransmitter we want to look at the entire
cycle of that transmitter we want to look at the cellular processes of the pre and postsynaptic
neuron and we want to look at all the other transmitters and signaling chemicals that it's in
relationship with and make sure that we're actually supporting a holistic process right and so
you've got to factor if you're wanting to be able to run more acetylcholine through the system
the body's ability to acetylate the choline so that you have enough acetyl group you have
choline certain source of choline can go to the peripheral neuron or to the central nervous system
so depending upon what you want to do you do that differently and then there are you know rate
limiting cofactors like for that one it happens to be b5 so you want to make sure that's not going
to be rate limiting but then the acetylcholine getting across the synapse you have enzymes that
are breaking it down just like you have enzymes that are breaking down dopamine or serotonin so
you know many of the pharmaceutical meds that affect transmitter levels are working by modulating
what's happening in the synaptic cleft right reuptake inhibitor so if someone has genetically
high MAO levels or COMT levels or acetylcholine esteritis levels then they're going to be
sub functional in that area and you can actually be able to you know have a
nutrigenomic override to that and if you're going to be producing more acetylcholine
and you want it to get across the synapse so you're going to you know help with acetylcholine
esterase inhibitors and then you actually want to get it up taken in the postsynaptic neuron right
so the the NMDA receptors primarily there are things that you can use it will modulate that
receptor if you support the entire cycle of how the body is actually producing it you'll get a
lot more optimum results and you'll end up getting the body learning how to do that and being able to
actually have plasticity effect right it's going to rewire to that state if it does that state a
significant amount and then when someone gets off it they'll either have little effect or lasting
positive effects because they have rewired one of the bigger ways that you get lasting effects
is by actually working to change brain structure in a positive direction so this is things like
can we help the brain develop more new neurons and increase gray matter density or in or develop
more new synapses so it's called a neurogenesis or synaptogenesis so we get more densely interconnected
brain structures and there do happen to be a lot of things that are known about specific nutrients
and specific chemicals that do support the brain's natural process of neurogenesis happening more
robustly or the brain's process of neurotophagy killing old senescent brain cells they cause problems
and allowing new ones to you know proliferate and so these are these are examples of ways you could
get lasting benefit after you know from a biochemical solution after stopping taking the
biochemical solution because it's actually seeking to one just tune the system better and two
rewire to an upregulated state and three actually support the development of new structures
this is really interesting i wanted to rewind slightly to where you're talking about neuro
transmitters that regulate mood because there's a huge industry of selling drugs that regulate mood
that actually have adverse long-term effects if you stop taking them or if you continue taking
them they kind of lose their effectiveness in a way over time and for example i have experience
taking SSRIs and i had both of those effects with withdrawal after coming off of them and
decreasing effectiveness over time but what you're talking about is that it's actually possible to
have supplements or drugs that have net positive effects over time even if you stop taking them
can you talk about that a bit specifically when it comes to mood regulation yeah so let me say
that the the ideal way to approach this is a personalized medicine or personalized well-being
approach because so say the SSRI did some good for you for a while but then it had side effects and
it had down regulation and you adapted to it did it do some good for you because you actually had a
dysbiosis issue in your gut where you just were not producing half of the serotonin that you need
that's an important question right because if so i wouldn't even want to give you
brain supplements i want to fix your gut or was there actually something where your diet was
deficient in tryptophan and so the raw amino acid necessary to make serotonin was low and we just
actually had to address your diet right or so there's so many things that can be involved and
we can say in general if someone takes 5-HTP which is 5-hydroxy tryptophan hydroxylated
tryptophan that's just one conversion step away from 5-hydroxy tryptamine to serotonin
and they take the phosphorylated version of b6 p5p that it converts the 5-HTP to serotonin
that they're much since that's just the stuff that is one step away from serotonin the body be
working with anyways that they're less likely to get dependence and down regulation from just
having enough of those things than they would from an SSRI that's true and ideally i would find
out what's going on first because you know we also see so many people who they get on an SSRI and
then they get much worse right so many of the shooting cases that we've seen were after someone
was put on an SSRI who hadn't been on it before and the suicidal homicidal tendencies are true
because if someone is more dopamine deficient in their depression and they really
needed something like well butrin instead like this is what's so crazy to me is we don't even
do any kind of testing to see that it's a neurochemical imbalance before we give them chemistry
rather than psychology and then to the degree that there even is a neurochemical amount we don't
know which one or which ones and then to the degree that we even knew which one we don't know why it's
off and the answer is just straight to a drug yeah that's just crazy it is and think about this
so your brain is as complex a system as we know of existing in universe right and you've got the
number of neurons and of glial cells and the number of synaptic connections and the number of
metabolic processes per individual one and the feedback and feedforward processes is just completely
mind-boggling so when you think about something like serotonin right that is a it's a signaling
molecule that's the end of many steps of metabolic transform so if it's low how likely is it that
other things are low or high or dysregulated or there's something else off like it's pretty high
right when we just go straight to let's give more serotonin right let's keep it from you know reuptake
and because we have to you know in the drug the drug industry has to use synthetic single molecules
to be able to get them patented which is the only way that they could ever make enough money to go
through FDA trials and that that's FDA but every country has you know some version but I think
us probably leads the way in some of both the good and bad aspects of this
what's the chance that a single synthetic molecule meaning it's not part of your natural
landscape at all and it's just one molecule could ever be an adequate solution to a complex
chemistry dysregulation in a self-organizing system like your brain like it's just doesn't even make
sense right it it doesn't make sense that that could possibly be the thing that's really going to repair
it yeah so it's usually going to be not one molecule that's off but lots of them and so
then we have to from maybe lots of different processes so how do we identify what's going on
and support the systems increasing its own internal resilience I mean the same as like
when you talk about cognitive chemistry is cognitive chemistry mediated via dopamine
or via acetylcholine or glutamate or sodium ion channels or long-term potentiation or
all those things right complex interactions and lots of those things and so one of the key
things is that when you're wanting to work with a complex system like a brain you've really got
to have a more complexity and form and approach than single molecule interventions
so you're saying we're mostly involved in this single molecule interventions because
that's what's profitable it's not just that's what's profitable that's the only thing that you
because it's profitable it's the only thing you can even afford to do research on
right you know when you hear things like well there are not so many good scientific trials
done on herbs who the fuck would pay for them I mean you'll see little trials done on herbs but
it costs a billion dollars give or take to take a drug through FDA approval well who's going to put
in a billion dollars and then when you take the drug through you're not even sure that it's going
to work in the market and then you have a class action lawsuit at the end like you've got to have
a 20 billion dollar potential on that for it to make any sense to even embark on right
so of course you've got to have a patent on it and so if you have something that's not patentable
and even in the drug space there are certain drugs that got published about in a way that
makes them unpatentable and even though they're super promising they just don't get developed
because who would develop them right because if it's not a synthetic chemical if it's already
available in nature they probably can't patent it for example in my case I've been using
peganum harmala seeds for mood regulation and I've had really excellent effects with them
much much better than I ever had with SSRIs also combined with meditation and diet adjustments
but you know if something like that was patented as a mood regulation supplement they probably
couldn't patent it well no they they definitely can't patent it but even some synthetics can't
get patented because you know the information was already released and so now it's part of the
commons or after the patent life on a drug expires and so now it's not really profitable because
the generics are all going to be really cheap then we need to for a drug company look for a new
thing in that space even if the new things are not better or even shittier than the previous
things simply because we we just can't make money doing that so what are the ways around it
supplements don't have to go through FDA approval think about from pharmaceutical industry what it
means to invest something like a billion dollars of capital before you've made your first dollar
back right like that's so far from silicon valley software tech thinking that's a lot of money to
invest before you know actually having any revenue but yeah so supplements they don't have to do that
but they can't claim that they have any medical purpose or heal anything so then that becomes
the tricky thing if they want to claim it they have to go through FDA process if they're going to go
through FDA process that's super expensive and they're going to have to have a profit stream
to be able to justify it so that's the deal basically to really fix that the entire regulatory
financial and intellectual property structures have to be changed and realistically I can say
for-profit medicine is a broken system because when you have a for-profit sick care system where
people come in ill pharmaceuticals or hospitals or insurance or anybody you know any money that's
going to be made in the multi trillion dollar complex of health care is only made when people
are sick so prevention would just obsolete that entire profit stream right and so then you start
thinking about patients as customers and every MBA first thing they learn is how do you maximize
the lifetime value of a customer and that should never apply to a patient right theory of markets
of free markets should apply to things that one can choose into choose out of you can't reasonably
choose out of health care and so it should not be structured in the for-profit way that it is
any more than for-profit prison should be yeah you're optimizing for what you don't want exactly
you know I was talking to a group that was working on peace and reconciliation the other day
and I asked them what's the chance of having a world free from war or any militarized conflict
while having a for-profit military industrial complex lastingly and they realized that supply
and demand theory says zero percent chance that those two could coexist enduringly right
because if there isn't demand for that supply it'll shut down and stop existing it won't be
a for-profit complex or it will have to do supply side economics and create demand
and so that means that you have the largest block of economics have its own survival
antithetical to global peace that's that's a fucked up structure for humanity
and for-profit prisons are the same and for-profit health care is the same and when you start going
through you see how many places the financial incentive the game theory is exactly opposite
to what the collective goal should be so like what it takes to really fix medicine and health care
and well-being care etc the IP has to change to where we're not focused on patentable things and
then separate patents that can't be combined because different IP holders have them and only
unnatural things etc the whole IP process is broken and it needs to move to maximum innovation
not ownership restriction the financial models have to change where all the financial incentive is
aligned with what we actually want which is optimized collective well-being not otherwise and
that doesn't look like any fiscal health care system we've had and the scientific model has to
change rather than a you know small number of variable reductionist approach to understanding
a complex self-organizing system we have to actually get better at complexity science
and understanding the body as a regulatory system the body mind complex regulatory system
what causes regulatory breakdown and how to support increased regulatory capacity of the system
rather than just overriding it all the time right it's a whole different set of incentives
it's a different kind of science it's different incentives and it's different legal structures
and so yes there's a lot of things that we want to evolve in diagnostic medicine and therapeutic
medicine and AI interpretation and you know but deeper than all that are these metastructures
that need to evolve so going back to the kind of specific approaches that you are taking how are
you building these metastructures in a different way than they currently exist yeah so we're obviously
within the within the confines of those metastructures to begin with so where our first
products are supplements the reason why we chose to do supplements was to be able to bring things
direct to consumer that's what it's going to be called rather than to go through FDA process and
a doctor process and specifically since we're working with some synthetics but largely you
know synthetics and natural compounds both so a lot of unpatentable things and combinations of them
and you know moving towards customizable combinations it's outside of patentability so for all those
reasons that made sense and because we wanted to be able to control the integrity of the company
we wanted to take on very little capital and only very values align capital and so we wanted to
build things that we could actually build ourselves first to then be able to grow the company and
continue so like for instance the first product we brought to market quality our cogs on it right
just our cost of goods is higher than the retail cost of most other cognitive enhancers on the market
and all the investors looked at said well you got to get the cogs down and like there is no way to
get it down until we get to huge economies of scale and we're and owning our own supply chain
without cutting quality because I run a bunch of additional steps of testing to make sure that
there's you know optimized purity and potency and that no mycotoxin or whatever got into the
supply and manufacturing and use forms that are more expensive forms of all the ingredients and
you know amounts that are actually meaningful which is expensive so part of it is when you're
working within those structures knowing what your mission is very clearly so your mission is not
delivering returns to shareholders first it's actually delivering meaningful technology to
enrich people's lives and if you don't have something that'll do that you just don't do it
that's a really key first part of it right and then being able to grow while maintaining control
of that mission is a key part of it how else we're working with those metastructures well
we open source our information so as far as IP we just don't believe in it so rather than say we
have a proprietary blend of this number of milligrams of things we just have the exact
number of milligrams of the exact sources and all the sourcing info so if anyone wants to just go
buy the raw ingredients and make it themselves they're welcome to if someone wants to try and
make a better formula they can because we just want to support the field advancing for optimized
human well-being as best as possible and so that's we have a strong open source take on everything IP
and then reinvesting our capital and developing new technologies and really focusing on
not where is the highest profit margin technology but what are the technologies that will really
make the biggest difference in addressing the things that cause most suffering that are the least
well-addressed currently all right on this bright and shiny note we're gonna end this episode we
still got an hour left in this interview but that's going to be in the next episode to check out the
show notes from this episode go to futurethinkers.org slash 42 and the second half of this interview
will be at futurethinkers.org slash 43 once it's live see in the next one bye thanks for listening
to the future thinkers podcast to get notified of new podcasts and videos go to futurethinkers.org
and subscribe to our mailing list you can also find us on itunes stitcher and youtube if you
like what we do and you want to help us make more podcasts and videos give us a like or a view
share it with your friends and consider becoming a patron go to patreon.com slash future thinkers
if you're looking to get serious about meditation check out the meditation app that we've created
with Vinay Gupta called the cutting machinery go to cutting machinery.org slash out last but not
least if you want to get access to more content hidden episodes or if you just want to chat with
us and previous guests then check out our community at community.futurethinkers.org
you
