So, you may not be aware of this, but Age of Empires has had quite the remarkable comeback
over the past few years.
This all started back in 2018 when Microsoft released a full-scale remaster of the original
1997 Age of Empires under the title Age of Empires Definitive Edition.
This was followed one year later with a Definitive Edition of its insanely popular sequel, a
year later with the Definitive Edition of the first 3D game in the series Age of Empires
3, and in an effort to keep the streak up, Microsoft just went ahead and made a new Age
of Empires game and named it Age of Empires 4.
So you're probably thinking what I was thinking, right?
Big company like Microsoft suddenly making a bunch of cheap remakes of this classic series
just to get people interested in it again so they can reboot the franchise.
But here's the thing, every single one of these games has been well received, not just
by the fans, not just by the media, but by the market too.
The past few years have been a full-blown Age of Empires renaissance with active online
communities, terrific age-focused YouTube channels like Spirit of the Law, and even
a vibranese sports scene thanks to the Red Bull Wololo tournament that's been running
since 2000.
The series has been so popular that earlier this year Microsoft released a console version
of Age of Empires 2, a game that seems inconceivable to play without a mouse and keyboard.
So I mean, that's gotta be a cash grab, there's no way people actually enjoyed playing it
on a controller.
So here's the thing, this is a bit of a selfish documentary because myself and my wife played
dozens of hours of Age of Empires 2 Definitive Edition over the past few years, specifically
during the COVID-19 lockdown.
See we were 13 when Age of Empires 2 was originally released on PC, and like most PC gamers back
then I was enthralled by its exciting balance of city building and real-time strategy.
Age of Empires isn't the first real-time strategy game that Honor is usually given
to Westwood's Dune 2, but it was a genre-defining game.
A beautiful, isometric world with a collection of civilizations to choose from, each with
their own language, buildings, and style of warfare.
The battles were exciting, but manageable.
There was a single-player story, but you could also create custom skirmishes with different
rules on a variety of different landmasses.
There were sea battles, there's early artillery, politics, religion.
Age of Empires was basically chess on steroids.
So during the pandemic, when we had to close the previous no-clip studios, I had to bring
all that equipment back to my house, and I suddenly had like four desktop PCs just lying
around my house.
So myself and my wife decided to look for any PC game that we could play cooperatively.
We had both played Age 2 while growing up, so we turned the spare bedroom into basically
a LAN cafe.
And so when our kid went to sleep, we'd burn the quarantine midnight oil, ganging up against
some bots in custom skirmishes.
It became so much of our day today that for Valentine's Day that year, she made me this
card.
Again, sorry, if you're not getting the willow-low thing, don't worry, we'll cover it later.
So today we're going to dive into the resurrection of Age of Empires by talking to two of the
folks at the studio that Microsoft spun up to helm this effort.
Ernest Yon, executive producer at Worlds Edge, and Adam Icegreen, senior creative director
at Worlds Edge.
But before we dive into the nitty-gritty, I wanted to ask them where the decision to
remake the first three games came from.
You see, it's not like you couldn't play Age of Empires until these definitive editions
came out.
An HD remake of AOE 2 had been on Steam since 2013, and a version of Age 3 had been available
on Steam since 07.
Why did they think people wanted these new versions, and why is it they made the decision
to remake all three?
You know, a lot of people in that time were like, oh, Archeist games are dead, right?
They got eaten by MOBAs, they got eaten by Tower of Defense games, your farm bills, whatever,
you know, let this genre split.
And when we put the catalog up, the crazy thing was that we're like, wait, people are
engaging with this, like with long sessions, and more people keep coming to the title.
And we really were like, well, wait, maybe Archeist isn't dead, like, what could we do
here?
And I think that was that plus what we wanted to do with Age 4, when they're like, hey,
if we made a new Age game, what would we do?
I think that all contributed to us being like, boy, these games are in kind of rough shape.
Can we preserve them better?
Can we do a better job with networking?
I mean, there's some poops people have to jump through right to play them.
Can we make that better?
And, you know, that kind of started the whole conversation towards what Definitive Editions
became.
I would say that you start above just over five years ago is when we start doing it.
We kind of like did it in parallel when the Age of Empires 4 project was like being discussed
and then start.
And then we say like, hey, you know what would be awesome is we have a chance to actually
bring all the original Age of Empires back as well.
So by the time Age 4 comes out, then everyone already like have the chance to recently would
play all the all the awesome Age of Empires games.
We want to make all the age fans happy.
So that's why when we signed the project, we got approval to do all of them.
One was never actually re-released.
So when we re-released Definitive Edition, that was the first time that we bring it back.
But in terms of production, we did do one first and then go to two and then three started
in parallel as well.
So but the idea is like, hey, let's learn how to do real-time strategy games the right
way again.
You could almost say that Age 1 is like the national game of Vietnam.
It's almost like Starcraft is for Korea.
It's crazy, but they only play Age 1.
Like they don't they're not really into Age 2 and then yet Age 2 has surpassed a lot
of people because I think it's just how globally accessible it is, right?
It's just like there's there's hey, one of your your nation or a previous nation that
became your nation is in that game somewhere, right?
Every one of them just has such a unique player base and I think that's because each game
kind of has its own rhythm to it and its own pacing and people have fallen in love with
the unique stick of each one.
So it's funny when you say like, well, did one replace the other?
No, they never did.
Yeah, Age of Time has one was special for that reason.
You really teach us a lot of foundation work on how to redo all the art, how to like really
build a game across different regions of the world at the same time, get all the like
really, really smart people together that are passionate about Age of Empires to work
together on the projects.
We set up a whole studio for Age of Empires, like literally this one, this one we did.
We have all these wonderful sister studio partners that work with us, right?
Tana, Liz, Forgotten Empires, Relic, just name a few and they all end up working in
different aspects on pretty much every Age of Empires game because they all have such
unique strengths that they all get pulled in at some point.
It's like, it starts, well, it's just going to be Relic and it is for a while and it's
like, Hey, Forgotten Empires, can you come in and help us with some tuning and like, oh,
hey, can you do this part of the code over here that we, yeah, it's a big family.
Actually, matter of fact, there's a lot of Command and Conquer people here myself.
Yeah, like I was on all the CNC games except for the very first one and there's two others
from Westwood as well that are on my team that are on our team that all work on the
game now, which is kind of fun.
But we did talk to a lot of X Ensemble people since we have friends and we get to talk to
them.
It was really cool that a lot of them still remember Age of Empires really fondly.
So they want us to do well and was pretty helpful.
We actually learned a lot of things from one.
So for one, the project itself, we definitely like try to bring up the quality of life.
We added a new user interface so we can actually tell what's going on.
We actually try running the original code as is and the pixels are so big that you can
actually see it anymore.
It is amazing.
But there are just so many conventions that people are so used to.
Then we also need to like, Hey, but the fans play Age of Empires one because it is Age
of Empires one.
So we want to make sure that we keep the spirit of Age of Empires one, the code to be the
same.
So we ended up using a plan.
We actually updated the engine instead of creating a new engine.
We did do some experiment of complete, do a new engine for a little bit.
But then really quickly, you find out that they are timing the feel of it.
Keeping the feel is very important to us because that's what the fans want, right?
Man, a lot of people, they had this fondness in their head for what Age one looked like.
I actually originally, we wanted to, I had posed the idea of starting every game on the
original graphics and then it blur, like I'll pixel and then it blurs into the new version.
But the asset load was so crazy from the new version that we're like, we can't even hold
the memory to have the pixelated versions in there.
The original assets are pretty much unusable for us to go forwards with.
So we had to redo everything from scratch.
We're trying to learn where the bar is, like the authenticity bar versus like high-res bar,
like where do you draw the line and we have to learn where that is.
But we have learned that from two, from one, that if you get too close to the original,
all the original fans will love it, but it makes it really hard for new people to join.
So for two, we set up, one of our goals, we actually write on the whiteboard, they say,
we want to build the Age of Empires 2 you remember, not the reality that you see.
You know, fortunately, given the size of the game and given the zooms, there was certain,
that puts some restrictions on how big they had to be, how detailed they had to be.
So it made the modeling a little simpler, but to get to 4K assets, everything had to
be redone, all the animations, all of the states, every single sprite rotation that
we have to do, creating 3D assets of them because it's just easier to animate them quickly
instead of having to draw all the, because you'd have to do keyframes and then do all
the tweens and like if you're doing classical animation.
So it's just easier to do it in 3D that way to capture all of the animations.
And then one of the challenge, the big challenge was converting the eight facings so they didn't
just pop into a blend so that we could have kind of more smooth rotations.
If you go back and you look at the old, a lot of the old RTS games, they've only eight
directions for anything.
So you get things to go mm, mm, right?
And we blended them, but we had to maintain the timing of the original because as Ernest
said, feel was so important.
There was a lot of logic and code that went into making sure that, again, we maintained
feel even though we could improve the visuals.
Like noise is always an issue in RTS games because you want really clean reads, right?
I mean, like if you really think about it, RTS games at their core are three elements.
There's units, structures and things that block me, right?
And then the things that block me can be a building, it could be water, it could be,
you know, a hill, whatever.
But like that's really what you need to be able to, a player needs to be able to read
that in seconds, right?
And so silhouettes were insanely important to us.
And so that was a challenge, right?
Because if you have all this super detail on the units is that if you crush it down directly,
you just get noise.
And then it's hard to read the units.
So a lot of care was taken in making sure that things like if they had shields, that
the shield remained relatively clean, even if different resolution scales such that if
that was a key reader, that unit that would maintain, right?
And that we had to do that with each kind of unit to make sure that the unit's still
read is the units.
For voices, for each two, for example, we did record all the voices, many can be voices.
So those are the things that we completely record for each of them as two.
For authenticity, we wanted to keep as much as we could.
If we had good source and could clean it up, we would do that over re-recording.
Right.
Yeah, you didn't have anyone shouting walla-la-la into a microphone at this time.
Right.
That was from like a sample library.
We did re-record walla-la-la, actually, because of that we didn't want to, because there was
a time, I think, when people were pretty fast and loose with audio assets in terms of ownership,
and we wanted to make sure that this time around we were doing the DEs, that everything
was buttoned up in that respect.
Do you have any idea why that was chosen for that particular unit?
I don't know.
I do not know.
I think it was literally something like the name of the audio sample was like priest chant
or something like that, and maybe they just saw it, like, oh, priest chant, maybe that'll
work, and they're like, well, okay, let's just do it.
Every definitive revision game we reached out to the communities that were holding those
games up.
I mean, a lot of these games were maintained by the community for years and years and years
without us being involved at all.
So we reached out to them, and we're like, hey, we'd love to improve these.
What would you like to see?
We don't want to break the spirit of the game, like, absolutely.
So how can we improve them without breaking them?
Because there's a certain, I think there's a certain amount of things that you would
love to modernize sometimes, but that would not make it age one or age two.
If you're familiar with age two, you know that things like when we put in auto-scouting,
how contentious that was for some people, even though then you play it and you're like,
well, okay, I get it.
For new players, it works.
I'm not going to use it as an advanced player.
We, some folks remember that, for example, for age two, we actually run multiple betas
that were literally like, I think the first time was like tens of thousands of people.
And like right before ship, we have like lots of people because we want to stress the server.
We also want to see what people always have an opinion on what they like and what they
don't like.
Ideally, we do those before the game even comes out.
And of course, we have our internal QA teams, and they know the game very, very well.
So for years, real-time strategy developers have tried to make their PC games work on
consoles, and we've had mixed results.
Some of the better examples are games that were developed from the ground up for consoles,
but that wasn't really an option here.
Console players wanted to play Age of Empires after all, not some reduced version.
And that's what makes the console version of Age of Empires two so interesting.
You see, the various teams working alongside World's Edge made some fairly significant
changes to the game to get it to flow properly on consoles.
Not just new interface elements to better suit the controller, but full-blown automation
systems to unburden the player from some of the game's micro, especially with how you
assign citizens to collect various resources.
So how did they change so much and still seem to satisfy these players?
As your economy grows, you will train more villagers and gather different types of resources.
Villager priorities automatically distribute your villagers between resources, making it
easier to manage your economy.
So when we first started being part of the Xbox organization, we did talk about, hey,
do we need to do Xbox version as well?
Luckily, our boss Shannon Loftis at the time said like, no, concentrate, make the best
PC game that you guys can.
And we have space to really focus on the PC version.
And that's what we did.
We spent all our resources to make sure we get the best games out possible.
So I've made, over the years, I think I've made four console RTSs, starting with Red Alert
on the PlayStation and then going through the years.
My previous one was Universal War, right, by Sega put out.
So there's been a history of us kind of working on it and trying to think through them.
The big thing is just the fundamental difference of a mouse is a precision instrument.
It's like, I click this thing, I click it over here, I'm making very precisiony kind
of movements, right, where a controller is like, I drive, I move a camera, I move a unit,
like I do something direct.
It's really hard to make the two of those work together.
So we did a lot, a lot of experimentation, I mean, just a ton.
And I have to say that Phil Spencer was really like, when am I going to get my console version?
Because Phil loves the Xbox.
And so the whole time that we were like, no, we want to do the PC first, and then we'll
think about console, which is what we did.
But he was just like, no, I want, when, when am I going to get this?
And he plays.
You go online right now and you can see him playing a couple of times a week.
It's great.
After H2 comes out, I would say every single time we made any announcement of anything
we, someone is going to be in the feedback comment session where it's like, when is it
coming to Xbox?
When is it coming to Xbox?
Literally, I want to say like two years, like non-stop, that fans are asking for it.
Like I mentioned earlier, our studio principle is to make our fans happy.
At a certain point, we say like, okay, this is not just one of you guys, you really need
to like make this work.
So we started to look at it seriously.
The fun part is from a production standpoint, like we internally try to hook up a controller
directly to emulate the mouse, because when you ask a programmer how you would do it,
that's exactly what a lot of games have done, right?
They look at like, this is the mouse, and A and B, which is like, man, was it bad?
The mouse you can actually move across the screen really quickly.
And the way that people play on PC is they click on the screen and then they hockey back
and then click on the game right.
You can't do that with the analog stand.
It is just way too slow.
The game example we actually talk about is actually Diablo, because when you look at
like Diablo, it is a very mouse click game, right?
So they click a lot, but they transition to console really well.
What's the Diablo equivalent for real time strategy game for each of the empires?
That's literally like how we start thinking then, okay, let's make these things feels
really good first.
And in order for that pacing to be right, you cannot just do the repetitive pick a guy,
do this pick a guy, this you can, but it is boring.
That is not how people want to interact with the game.
So the AI is done in a way to help take a lot of the tedious workout, but we actually make
sure that you get to pick the automation level.
So all these strategic decisions are still made by you, the player.
So that was very important for us to make sure that it is not like auto everything and
then you don't even have to play the game.
But it's auto enough that you can enjoy the game and enjoy making strategic decisions.
So that was the key, key part on how the team actually come together.
And once that happened, we had the contest sensitive, sorry, site-based command manual,
then magic happens.
Based on my previous work and Tanlist's previous work on doing things like city skylines and
other games that they've done, we're like, okay, we need to put our minds together and
figure out what interface would really work here.
And the radials and all that stuff came out of that, but the thing that really was fascinating
is watching how it evolved.
Like the thing that really brought about what I feel is it's really hard to go back, honestly,
even to some of the stuff on PC now from what we've done on console with villager automation
and the contextual actions based on, that was the original conversation.
I'm like, I want contextual actions in here, how do we do it?
All of that, like click on a gold mine, just build the gold mine, please.
Like all of that, and it's great to see that people are really enjoying it, but all of
that came about through time.
And just, we were really fortunate that we were prototyping console controls.
I mean, probably even before we admitted it, to be honest with you.
I think that we were, we've been working on them since right around the ship of, I think
after DE3.
We started messing around with the radials and trying to figure out what to do with it
and how we could do it.
We had some people free on one of the teams and we're like, all right, let's just go to
town on this and figure out how to make it work.
I've always said that RTS games are basically, you're spinning plates, right?
You're balancing plates on sticks.
And it's how many plates can you keep going at once and which ones are you letting falter
determines how good of a player you are.
So just because the villagers are automated doesn't mean they're optimal.
Our goal is never to replace the high-end meta with something that's automated, right?
It should be something that allows people of the same level to be like, we're just going
to have fun and I don't need to worry about this as much so I can concentrate on fighting
and scouting and building buildings.
One of the things we always say about the age games is we always want to make sure we
leave room for mastery, that that can have its moments, right?
And that people can get good and very good at doing certain things.
And so, but villager automation was one of the things that we thought like, okay, people
might be a little upset over it, but it's not going to break the high-end of the game,
right?
The spirit of the game.
The villager automation AI and it's actually a lower level AI and debt has evolved over
time completely separately as well.
And the reason we get to do a DE AI is because the game has now has been played for two decades
now and actually pro players, they play it.
So what we have done is during development of declarative editions, we actually look
at how these pro players, what strategies do they use?
And we actually adapt and edit those strategy and bring it to a game, for example, like,
hey, it's open field, you build crossbowmen, that we build it into the game so that people
actually realize how to, the AI actually have that understanding and apply those strategies
like a pro player would.
So that is how we edit it.
I have this strict theory about video games that I call the one button of fun.
It's like, anytime I should be able to push a button and have some fun, be that, you know,
in a main menu, I want to get into the game, just stop with all the, just one button, let
me just say have fun.
Like, but in the game, you're like, I want, especially RTS games, right?
RTS games are all about, if you think about it, a click in an RTS game is insane.
Like with one click, you select a bunch of units, you clicked across the map.
Well, you just did a click, but what did you really see in your mind?
Go here, go this way, go the way I intended you to do.
Make sure you engage or don't engage, right, the things that I want.
Go around that rock this way, don't go over that, make sure you go this, why aren't you
listening to me?
Right?
And all you did was click.
And so, how can we take more of that into the console?
And I think that was part of our driving spirit was like, how do we just make it a click,
a button?
Like, do the thing.
Don't make me hunt for it.
Don't maybe dive into a building to get to a thing to do, like Blacksmith to do this
thing.
I can do it right here.
That, I think, was our finding like, pull those, bubble it up, I guess, for the console
to make it just much more accessible.
It's actually good that we did them one at a time because we would find a feature that
we would love, right?
Or we would experiment and say, oh, let's try putting this in.
And it would be so great.
We're like, well, it has to go in all the DEs now.
And then we'd have to figure out how to move that feature across the games given all the
different engines and the different tech.
But it's been fun.
It's been a fun journey of learning and leapfrogging all of those DEs in order to create the package.
It's been great.
Just the features, as we leapfrog features, we put Art of War in because I really wanted
to help people learn how to play RTS games.
And then we're like, this is so good, it has to go in all the games.
And so then it ended up in three and four.
And now, what's the myth version of Art of War?
Well, we've got to figure that out.
How do we manifest that?
Things like villager automation and context management, do we have that show up now from
now on?
Is that just part of the game?
We've got to talk about that.
How do we bring that alive if we want to across all the games and what do we do with it?
So it's been great.
A lot of the learnings and everything that we take from every game we're just going to
roll forward with and keep evolving.
The English pretensions in Scotland are surely at an end.
The forces of Wallace are triumphant.
I think that we, a lot of the sentiment got to people about like, oh, this is long in
the tooth.
RTS really did have a heyday and the industry is very cyclical, I guess is the way to put
it.
Where something will come up and come down and come up and come down, there's a time
for racers, there's a time for shooters, what the really hot thing is.
And I think the great thing is that RTS never really went away completely, but it did wane
in terms of being in the public eye.
I think everyone was waiting for someone to take a bet on a big game again, a big RTS
game.
And that's what we did with age four.
And now it's honestly, it's kind of delightful to see that we've got what, three splinter
companies from Blizzard that are all working on RTS games of different types, right?
Everyone was just waiting for someone to take that like, hey, this can be quality and look,
it can be successful.
And then everybody else was ready to dive in.
See?
HFM Pass 2 is now a generation game.
So they are literally people who now have their own kids that they try to play with.
So we want to make sure you get to someone, maybe, maybe one person play on the console
and the other person play on the PC and they can play with each other.
When we do something, we go all out.
We are very happy with how the games turn out.
Hopefully the fans will continue to support us and listen to the fans, so keep telling
us what they like, what they don't like.
And we want to keep building each of empires more and more.
