I think.
Okay. Hi, everyone. So I'm Christophe Boyd from Orsay, and it is my great honor to welcome Anna Karajani, who is a professor at Imperial College in London.
So she's a specialist of the Langlands program of galore presentations, orthomorphic presentations, and of the Comology of Shimura Varieties, on which these two representation are supposed to be realized.
The role of her talk is the Comology of Shimura Varieties with torsion coefficients and applications. Unfortunately, there will be no questions during the talk, but you can discuss after the talk if you join the discord channel.
Thank you very much, Anna, please.
Thank you very much. And it's a great honor for me to speak at the ICM and I am very grateful for the invitation.
And in this talk, I want to focus on Shimura Varieties, which are really fascinating algebraic varieties equipped with many symmetries and which play an important role in the Langlands program.
And specifically, I want to mention some recent results concerning the Comology of Shimura Varieties with torsion coefficients, as well as applications to modularity and potential modularity over CM fields.
So I want to start with an overview of Shimura Varieties.
One way that you can think about Shimura Varieties is from the perspective of local symmetric spaces. So you start with a connected reductive group, G over Q, and then you can look at the symmetric space for G of R.
This can be identified with a quotient of G of R by a maximal compact subgroup.
Now, if you have an integral model of your group, and you look at a congruent subgroup gamma, so something that is cut out from this integral model by congruence conditions, this will act on the symmetric space and you can form the quotient.
The quotient X gamma is an example of a locally symmetric space for G. And if your original group is sufficiently small, then the locally symmetric space is a smooth Riemannian manifold.
And sort of the first example that you should have in mind is when you start with the group SL2 over Q, and then you take some congruent subgroup inside SL2Z.
The associated symmetric space can be identified with the upper half plane, and the locally symmetric spaces are Riemann surfaces that are sort of often called modular curves.
In fact, something really magical happens in this setting, namely modular curves are really algebraic curves defined over finite extensions of the rationals over number fields.
And sort of so there's already some arithmetic in the picture, and they don't just have this complex structure.
And this picture is a picture of the fundamental domain for the action of SL2Z on the upper half plane. It's this one and this gives you the shaded region this gives you some sense for what the quotient looks like where you have to say identify this boundary piece with this boundary piece
with this piece and then you get something that looks like the punctured Riemann sphere. And for smaller congruence subgroups you get coverings of this and higher genus Riemann surfaces.
But a different kind of example of a locally symmetric space happens if you start with an imaginary quadratic field, such as the Gaussian numbers Q adjoined I.
Then the associated symmetric space can be identified with hyperbolic three space, and the locally symmetric spaces are arithmetic hyperbolic three manifolds, or so called bianchi manifolds.
And these don't have a complex structure because they have this odd real dimension.
And they also don't have a natural structure of algebraic varieties defined over some number field. So it's, it's something that's very different from the first case that we looked at.
And sort of this is where the theory of Shimura varieties comes in. So, in general, say for instance if you work with an arbitrary number field.
And you look at locally symmetric spaces for GLN over that number field, then they don't typically have an algebraic structure.
But for some groups, it can happen that you do get locally symmetric spaces with an algebraic structure. And then they come from smooth quasi projective varieties defined over number fields, which are called Shimura varieties.
And we understand which groups give rise to Shimura varieties. For instance, symplectic and unitary groups over the rationals do give rise to Shimura varieties.
And in some cases, even the locally symmetric spaces that are not algebraic varieties can be related to higher dimensional Shimura varieties.
For instance, these Bianchi manifolds, which are three dimensional Israel manifolds can be seen in the boundary of certain compactifications of unitary Shimura varieties specifically you to to Shimura varieties.
In this talk, we're really going to be concerned with the comology of Shimura varieties. And this is important for the language program because it sees certain automorphic representations of your group.
And in order to really make sense of that, you have to know first that there's an action of a commutative heck algebra on say the singular comology of your Shimura variety.
This heck algebra is generated by heck operators which are certain averaging operators.
And if you look at systems of eigenvalues simultaneous systems of eigenvalues for all the heck operators.
These, it turns out come from automorphic representations of your group. For instance, in the case of a compact Shimura variety this follows from Matsushima for me.
In this talk, I'm going to be really focused on the following phenomenon, which is that the most non degenerate automorphic representations tend to occur in comology in the middle degree.
So for example in this compact case for Ellen wallach show that those representations which are tempered at infinity contribute to comology of the Shimura variety in the middle degree.
And another example of this phenomenon is by the Eichler Shimura isomorphism in the case of modular curves.
These are the cusp forms of level gamma and wait to, which are those modular forms that are really genuinely new for Jill to cusp forms I mean, contribute to comology in the middle degree which is degree one, so they contribute to each one.
So the question that's going to be really the driving force of this talk is, can we prove a similar result for the comology of Shimura varieties with mod L coefficients, where now L is some prime number.
And you can think of the systems of eigenvalues that you see in there as sort of mod L automorphic forms.
So we're moving towards some extension of the Langland program.
For torsion classes, and to make things more precise the need to understand torsion classes is motivated by a program that Caligari and Garrity outlined about 10 years ago to vastly extend the scope of the Taylor Wiles method for proving modularity.
The Taylor Wiles method has been used to prove the modularity of all rational elliptic curves.
The Caligari Garrity method was designed to be applied to elliptic curves defined over imaginary quadratic fields and that's a setting that, you know, at the time when they formulated their program was considered out of reach.
And they didn't necessarily make things much better because their method was conjectural on a very precise understanding of torsion in the comology of locally symmetric spaces that aren't even Shimura varieties.
So for instance, beyond the manifolds, and the precise understanding is from the point of view of the Langlands program.
So that's sort of these are the questions.
And now I want to tell you how to make progress on these questions using a new tool that was introduced by Schultz also about 10 years ago, which is called the Hodge state period morphism, and this gives you a new way to think about the geometry and
of Shimura varieties.
So rather than talking about this Hodge state period morphism directly, I want to first give you an analogy with a complex picture.
And so let's say we're looking at the modular curve.
Then we have we can view it as a Riemann surface in which case you can identify it with this quotient of the upper half plane by a congruent subgroup.
This is covered by the upper half plane, and then itself, it admits an embedding into the Riemann sphere into P1 of C, which is equivariant for the action of SL2R on the upper half plane by Mobius transformations.
And these transformations are the ones that are really crucial to defining the quotients and to talking about modular forms.
And this diagram has a modular theoretic interpretation.
Namely, you can think of the upper half plane as parameterizing hodge structures of elliptic curves. So this kind of decomposition of a two dimensional complex vector space into this direct sum.
The map on the right hand side, the map here, sends the hodge decomposition, this direct sum decomposition to just the hodge filtration, which remembers just one piece, this H0 of omega one.
And that's the kind of thing that is parameterized by P1, so a line inside a two dimensional vector space.
And now, it turns out there's a piatic version of this, and to access it you have to think about your modular curve as a piatic analytic space and we're going to do that using attic spaces in the sense of Hoover.
Then, there is a diagram that at least sort of superficially looks like the complex one, where you cover your modular curve by a modular curve with infinite level at P.
And this is something that Schultz approves is a perfectoid space. And then this admits hodge state period morphism to a flag variety which is again going to be P1 in this case.
And this is a covariant for the action of SL2QP on both the source and the target of the hodge state period morphism.
And this is a very interesting interpretation. Namely, it measures the relative position of the hodge state filtration.
Where you see this hodge state filtration if you look at the etal homology of your elliptic curve with CP coefficients and then you extend your scalars, say to perfectoid fields such as C.
And this is a decomposition but again we only care about the filtration and an elliptic curve together with a trivialization of its take module or doily a trivialization of h1 etal gets sent to the point on P1 that just remembers this this line inside a two dimensional vector space.
So here's a result that was proved in the past decade about the geometry of the hodge state period morphism.
And I've sort of mentioned some people who contributed to this. So, I want to state it in the case for simplicity where you have a Shimura date I'm a hodge type.
This is the kind of thing that will admit an embedding into ZEGO modular varieties.
So in that case we know that the associated Shimura variety is perfectoid.
And moreover, we know that there is a morphism of addict spaces which is this hodge state period morphism to the flag variety, which has this group theoretic description.
And so we can say that this hodge state period morphism measures the relative position of the hodge state filtration of sort of the family, the universal family of a billion varieties that you can construct over your Shimura variety of hodge type.
And that's one thing.
But moreover, you can decompose the flag variety into Newton strata. And this mirrors the decomposition into Newton strata that you see if you look at the special fiber of the Shimura variety.
So for example, the modular curve on the special fiber will have an ordinary strata and a super singular strata, depending on what the p torsion on an elliptic curve over FB bar looks like.
So if depending on what this p torsion is, the corresponding point will be their ordinary or super singular.
And it turns out there is a way to define such a decomposition on the flag variety and that really only uses local techniques.
In particular, it uses sort of the vector bundles or d bundles on the far content curve and results of far again so on.
And these strata are locally closed, and by recent work of FEMA and we understand their closure relations.
And moreover, the fibers of the morphism over each strata are also understood, and they can be identified with perfectoid versions of some more classical objects that are known as egusa varieties.
Really my favorite thing about the geometry of the hot state period morphism is the fact that it gives a very clean description of the Montauvan product formula.
And this happens if you go to infinite level on your Shimura variety, you get this kind of Cartesian diagram that shows how to decompose a Newton strata as a product of a local analog of a Shimura variety,
which is this object here, this is a wrap up word saying space, and one of these perfectoid egusa varieties.
And so this tells you not just that the fibers are egusa varieties over an individual Newton strata, but it gives you a way to understand the fiber bundle structure.
All right. So this is the hot state period morphism and now I want to talk about sort of how to use it to understand the comology of Shimura varieties with torsion coefficients.
And I specifically want to focus on proving vanishing theorems where we sort of say that the non degenerate part of the comology with torsion coefficients is concentrated in the middle degree.
That's the kind of result that we're after. And I should say that before the hot state period morphism was introduced there was already work in this direction.
And I really want to mention results of Lawn and Sue and also why.
And now I want to mention sort of the main result that can be proved using the hot state period morphism and its geometry.
And this is also the result that's sort of the most useful for applications. So we want to work with an imaginary CM field F, and then a unitary group that preserve some non degenerate skew Hermitian form on F to the end.
And we want to look at look for systems of Hecke Eigen values that occur in the comology of the associated Shimura variety with model coefficients for some prime number L.
So I want to put a non degeneracy condition on this system of Hecke Eigen values, and the precise condition. I want to call it decomposed generic.
And rather than really giving you specifically what it is. I want to say that it's an auxiliary condition that's imposed at some prime different from L.
And you have to assume that this prime splits completely in your CM field, and some condition on the Eigen values, or on the satake parameters of M at that prime.
So from a representation theoretic perspective, what it does is it guarantees that all the lifts to characteristic zero of this system of Eigen values are principle series representations at irreducible principle series representations, or equivalently generic principle series representations
In some sense, these are the simplest kinds of representations, they're the ones that are induced from characters.
And then the result says that, well, first of all, if your Shimura variety is compact, then sort of the after localizing your comology at some maximal ideal that is decomposed generic.
So the comology becomes supported only in the middle degree.
So that's a nice result, symmetric.
Then if your Shimura variety isn't compact. For example, if your if your group is quasi split. And let's assume also that our end, which is the dimension of this vector space over here. Let's assume that this is even.
You have to consider both comology with compact support and usual comology. And you get this dichotomy where comology with compact support is concentrated in the middle degree and below after localization at M.
And usual comology is concentrated in the middle degree and above after localization at M.
Schultz and I proved.
First the compact case of this result and then the non compact case but under various technical assumptions. And then last year.
And then Shikawa put out a paper where he uses a different method, also relying on the geometry of the hot state period morphism, but where he manages to get rid of all our technical assumptions that were unnecessary and gets a much cleaner result.
All right.
I want to now really give you some sense for how this kind of theorem can be proved.
And then after that I will mention applications of the fear.
So remember our goal is to understand the comology of the Shimura variety with torsion coefficients, and we can think of it as a locally symmetric space.
So remember to think of it as a periodic analytic space and consider that comology. And of course, we want to understand it together with the heck action.
So we want to put some non degeneracy condition on the system of heck eigenvalues, because otherwise you can never just guarantee that comology will be supported and one degree for instance you can compute connected components of your Shimura variety and sort of see that.
There's nothing non trivial there already.
In many cases.
And the idea is to use this diagram that showed up in the definition of the hot state period morphism.
So you cover your Shimura variety with a Shimura variety with infinite level at P.
I understand so if you if you can prove a theorem of the kind that I mentioned upstairs, then you can descend it to finite level gamma.
Just using the whole shield Sarah spectral sequence so as you can relate the comology up here you can compute it in terms of group comology applied to the comology of the space upstairs.
And then you want to compute the comology upstairs in two steps, essentially by considering the Loray Sarah spectral sequence for the hot state period morphism.
Let's say I want to understand the comology of the constant sheaf FL upstairs. Instead, what we're going to do is compute the complex of sheaves downstairs that you get by taking the push forward of this constant sheaf.
And the goal is to sort of show that this complex in the generic in the decomposed generic case is as simple as possible.
And if we can achieve that then sort of we're in good shape for proving our theory.
Okay, and now it turns out so this hot state period morphism has some miraculous properties.
So it's both affinoid and partially proper.
So in some sense it behaves like a profiling map, even though we understand it's fibers and we know that the fibers can be high dimensional because they're these ego sufferings.
But still, sort of these properties allow us to prove that this complex, after localization at some maximal ideal behaves like a perverse sheaf on the hot state period domain.
On the other hand, we also understand the fibers of the hot state period morphism over a particular Newton stratum, namely they're given by these ego sub varieties and I guess for the purposes of understanding their comology you can replace the perfectoid objects with a more classical
and so because of the perversity in point one, you get that the complex, which computes the comology of ego sub varieties now with model coefficients is supported in one degree.
When you look at the first Newton stratum in terms of sort of the largest dimensional Newton stratum that is in the support of our maximal ideal.
Well, if you know comology with model coefficients isn't concentrated in one degree, you can deduce the same thing holds true for characteristic zero coefficients by an induction argument.
And then sort of the catch is that when you have homology with QL coefficients, you can actually compute it using the trace formula and specifically by appealing to work of Sagu Shin.
And so now your goal is to sort of show that under this generosity condition on M, the comology of ego sub varieties with characteristic zero coefficients has to vanish.
And this tells you that this whole complex vanishes this tells you this one has to vanish as well.
You proceed by descending induction on the dimension of the Newton stratum until you're left with the zero dimensional stratum that is the ordinary looks.
And I want to give you a toy model for this in the case of the modular curve.
And so I mentioned that the modular curve has the Newton stratification that is just the decomposition into the ordinary and the super singular locus.
And that's something that you can see on the special fiber.
But it's also something that you can see on the level of the flag variety.
The ordinary locus consists of the points defined over QP. So, you're looking at lines inside this say two dimensional vector space.
That's a priori defined over some perfectoid field but really you want the lines that are already QP rational.
And then if you throw those away, you're left with a super singular locus, which is the drenfeld upper half plane.
And sort of roughly the two ways of defining the Newton stratification upstairs and downstairs match.
So the ordinary locus at least on the level of rank one points maps to P one and the super singular locus on the level of rank one points maps to the drenfeld upper half plane.
This is an open one dimensional stratum and this is a closed zero dimensional one.
So if we want to implement our strategy for proving a vanishing theorem in the modular curve case, then what we have to do is somehow eliminate the drenfeld upper half plane sort of show that something generic cannot possibly contribute to the
transition from the drenfeld plane. And now it turns out that the fibers of the hot state period morphism have a nice interpretation in this case, namely, they are profite sets, and they can be identified with Shimura sets
for D cross, where D is the quaternion algebra over Q that is ramified exactly at P, and that infinity.
So let's talk to an observation of Sarah, but the specific statement that identifies the super singular use of varieties with these profite sets is in a paper of Sean.
Now, if you have, say an automorphic representation of GL two of the Adele's such that a system of hecke eigenvalues coming from it also contributes to the homology of one of these super singular ego sub varieties.
Then your automorphic representation has to be in the image of the global Jacque Langlands map that takes automorphic representations of D cross into automorphic representations of GL two.
Because we understand global Jacque Langlands and we understand that it's compatible with local.
We understand that the component at P of such an automorphic representation has to be either say a twist of the Steinberg, or super hospital representation, but it cannot be principal series representation, and this is exactly the condition that violates the
system that we had made in the beginning where remember we had said any lift of our system of hecke eigenvalues to characteristic zero at P has to correspond to generic principal series.
Okay, so this is one way in which you eliminate the stratum and then you're supported just on a zero dimensional stratum then you can show okay you're supported in one degree over that and this is how you prove your theater.
In another dimensional case, at least in the original approach that was due to me and Schultze goes like this except you have to handle a lot more Newton strata.
And sometimes you actually have to compute the homology of ego sub varieties and you cannot just appeal to sort of a miracle like the geometric Jacque Langlands correspondence.
Last year, I mentioned that Koshika developed another approach to the vanishing results, where sort of if you think about it from the perspective of the month of on product formula.
In order to eliminate Newton strata, he doesn't kill the comology of ego sub varieties but rather he kills the comology of rapoport zinc spaces.
He controls that using the recent cutting edge work of fart and Schultze.
And he can't quite just conclude with the with a local result. He also has to appeal to a semi perversity result that we established earlier in our paper in the non compact case.
The university student Mafalda Santos, who is expected to finish her thesis this year is generalizing this semi perversity result to Shimura varieties of PL type.
And this will hopefully remove the assumption that the group is quasi split when you look at our main serum in the non compact case. So it should apply to all PL type a Shimura varieties.
Another approach that's complimentary is that in joint work with Matteo tamiozo. We proved an analog of this main serum in the case of Hilbert modular varieties.
And that's a case where you have for every Newton strata, you have an instance of the geometric Jacque Langlands correspondence that relates your ego sub varieties to ego sub varieties that occur on a different smaller
quaternionic modular variety. And so in that case we also sort of work by killing the homology of ego sub varieties but we don't have to compute anything we just directly generalize the argument that I explained to you.
In the toy case of the modular curve.
And in further work in progress. We also apply this result and geometric Jacque Langlands, and the technique that involves patching developed by Manning and Chotten to establish cases of the harass lemma for
Hilbert modular varieties and quaternionic modular varieties.
So this is a question about the comology of these varieties with torsion coefficients but it's sort of a question about what it is as a representation, rather than just in what degrees do you expect to see.
All right. And now I can talk about applications to modularity and potential modularity of this kind of vanishing theorem. And so the first thing that I want to say is that.
And so this is a study used to prove the sadotate conjecture for elliptic curves over CM fields. So the sadotate conjecture is sort of statistical result that predicts the distribution of the second order term.
And when you look at the number of points of an elliptic curve modular varying products, and it predicts that the distribution should be basically a semi circle.
So, um, in 2019.
In joint work with Patrick Allen, Frank Caligari, Toby G.
David Helm, Bow Le Hung, James Newton, Peter Schultz, Richard Taylor and Jack Long.
We proved this conjecture for elliptic curves over CM fields by implementing the Caligari Garrity program unconditionally and in arbitrary dimension.
And this was essentially by sort of one key step was to relate locally symmetric spaces that are not Shimura varieties, such as Bianchi manifolds to higher dimensional UNN Shimura varieties.
And whose comology, even with torsion coefficients, we understood as a result of this main vanishing here.
All right.
And more recently, there's been progress on actual modularity, rather than just potential modularity of elliptic curves over CM fields.
And one breakthrough occurred in 2019, where Alan Karen thorn proved that over a fixed imaginary quadratic field, a positive proportion of elliptic curves are modular.
The main ingredient in their work was actually residual modularity they, they were able to show that quite a few mod three and mod five gal war representations are modular.
And in joint work in progress with James Newton.
We are showing that over a given imaginary quadratic field, 100% of elliptic curves are modular.
And this relies on these residual modularity results of Alan Karen thorn, and also on stronger modularity lifting theorems.
Come from better controlling the gal war representations attached to torsion in the comology of locally symmetric spaces for GLN over F.
And more precisely, we've proved sort of a local global compatibility result for these gal war representations in a setting that's more general than the 10 author project that I mentioned on the previous page.
And we also say for certain imaginary quadratic fields, such as for Q a joined I were able to show that all elliptic curves are modular.
All right, well, thank you very much for your attention and I'm happy to answer questions, if there are any.
Thank you very much, Anna. So you're a little bit ahead. It's nice. Thank you for your very nice talk and very pedagogical talk.
So I can ask a few sort of elementary questions.
And then, as I said, people can meet after on the discord channel.
At the very beginning, you mentioned that some non algebraic Shimura curves variety can be seen in the boundary of algebraic ones, right.
But you said some. So I guess this means that some of them remain completely inaccessible.
Yes, that's right. So, I guess, if you have GLN over a CM field, then the associated locally symmetric spaces can be accessed through the world Sarah compactifications of unitary or simplectic Shimura varieties.
But you cannot do this for a general number field. And so one big problem in the field is what to do from the point of view of the Langlands program.
When you're working with GLN over a general number field or even GL to over a general number field.
Yeah, I guess I should mention that there are some results recently for quadratic extensions of totally real fields that are sort of were initiated by
the Caligari Garry program in the coherence setting and this is a work of boxer Caligari GN Piloni, for instance, they were able to prove that elliptic curves over such field are potentially modular.
But in general, we don't really know how to go beyond sort of totally real fields or CM fields or maybe a quadratic extensions of totally real.
Okay, thank you.
Maybe another question. So you.
So just to be sure, you had this restriction that the lifting character six zero must be a principal series in order to avoid having to deal with the drinfeld space for for the modular case right and then you say that.
Finally, just to be sure I understand could deal with the drinfield case right to do I understand so he can he can deal with I don't know supercaspital and engage is no yeah so he still proves a version of the same theorem.
So he still assumes that you're decomposed generic, but what he shows is that something like this cannot contribute to the comology of drinfeld space.
So sort of under that condition, both the goose up varieties, and the rubber boards in spaces don't contribute. And so it's sort of, yeah.
Okay.
Okay, okay, thank you.
Also at some point you had.
So, I mean, I don't exactly remember all the, or your slides but you had that the assumption that G was a unitary group, right.
And then at the end you mentioned that you had a student working for more general jury G do I understand correctly.
Sort of so there there's a geometric result, which is a semi perversity result that comes from basically understanding the fibers of the hot state period domain for toroidal compactifications.
And there she's working in the case of PL type things, but then she's combining things. She's combining with Koshikawa's technique and Koshikawa's technique works by a Farke Schultz and by understanding the sort of
the extent to which Farke Schultz is compatible with local language. And so that's something that we know for GLN, but we don't know for other groups. And so ultimately my students results should apply to Shimura varieties of type a.
And again at a prime that splits completely. So locally, it will only be a product of general linear groups. But there are other people who are working on other cases because now sort of, yeah, with how much is accessible.
And with Koshikawa's approach as well, sort of it's open in some sense the floodgates and you can, you can imagine doing other groups. And so I think there may be various people working on GSB for which should definitely be doable.
And yeah, I'm optimistic that I don't know within the next 510 years will will know much more than just, yeah, sort of the case where you're locally GLN.
Okay, so I had also something about the difference between potentially modular and modular but in your last slide you indeed mentioned. Oh, yes. So there was just what to be clear when you say 100% of electric curves.
Just to be sure this this means all electric curves or is this some sort of.
Okay, okay.
This means that you want to order them by the height of the virus stress equation, and then you get 100%.
It will be those elliptic curves, which have large image, either mod three or mod five.
Okay.
And for certain imaginary quadratic fields, we can actually prove that all elliptic curves are modular.
So that would be for the Gaussian numbers and for others for which the modular curve x not 15 has genus zero over those imaginary quadratic fields.
Okay. Okay, thank you for making that clear. So I think I've asked all my questions I mean one could ask lots, lots, lots of questions but I guess I'm not a specialist enough to do so.
Yeah, thank you very much for all that you have anything more to say.
I guess not but yeah just thanks to everybody who came to this talk or is watching this talk and yeah it's really a great honor and a pleasure to speak at the ICM.
Thank you thank you and again for your brilliant talk. Thank you for everyone who listened and so as I said at the beginning you welcome to go to the discord channel and go on or start a discussion on any part of Anna's talk that you that you want.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, yeah.
