Hello, welcome to another episode of The Portal with Eric Weinstein, and I am pleased to
be joined in studio with none other than Jaco Willing.
Jaco?
Sir.
And I understood that Jaco didn't call for an immediate response, and so none was given.
Jaco, it's great to be here with you.
Thanks for having me on.
Thanks for coming.
One of the things I'm really excited to talk to you about is just how our military interacts
with our civilian society.
But before we get there, what I'd love to do is to just have you talk a little bit about
your trajectory through Special Forces and the SEAL program into this situation where
you're now a podcaster, I guess, you were brought to the world of podcasting by our
mutual friend Tim Ferriss.
And what are the highlights of that trajectory so that we have some place to begin?
I was born and raised in a small New England town on a dirt road out in the middle of nowhere.
I joined the military when I got done with high school.
I went through SEAL training.
I went in the SEAL teams.
It was now 1991 when I showed up at a SEAL team, SEAL team one.
I was an enlisted guy, so then I spent several years there.
And then I got picked up for a commissioning program, which meant I was going to become
an officer, move into a leadership position.
And I did that.
And then I went to the East Coast, went to SEAL team two.
From there, I had to go to college.
I went to college at the University of San Diego and majored in English.
And went back to a SEAL team.
I did two deployments to Iraq once as a platoon commander and once as a task unit commander.
Got done with that.
I ran training for the West Coast SEAL teams.
And the training that I ran was the tactical training, not the training where you see the
guys on TV carrying boats on their head and carrying logs around.
That's the basic SEAL training.
And I ran the advanced kind of tactical training where SEALs learn to shoot, move and communicate
and where they learn their tactics and where they learn combat leadership.
And that's where I spent my last three years.
And then once I got done with that, I retired from the Navy.
And when I got out, I started working with companies teaching leadership.
And that expanded, eventually started working with a friend of mine I was in the SEAL teams
with, Leif Babin.
We got a lot of business consulting about leadership.
Eventually, a lot of those businesses asked us to write down the concepts that we had
or to be able to give them something, a handout of some kind.
So we wrote down the concepts and that eventually became the book Extreme Ownership.
The book Extreme Ownership came out in 2015.
And in 2015, I was on Tim Ferriss's podcast through a mutual friend, through two mutual
friends, Kirk Parsley and Peter Atia, and was on Tim Ferriss's podcast.
When I got done recording with Tim Ferriss, he pressed stop on the recorder and he looked
at me and said, you should do your own podcast.
And I noted that.
And then a couple weeks later, or a couple months later, I was on Joe Rogan's podcast
and in the middle of the podcast, he told me that I should have my own podcast.
So I started my own podcast because when Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan tell you to start a podcast,
you should start a podcast.
So they told me I started a podcast.
I've recorded a hundred and eighty something podcasts.
Since then, I've written a bunch of other books, a book called Discipline Equals Freedom
Field Manual, a book called The Dichotomy of Leadership.
I've written three kids books in a series called The Way of the Warrior Kids series.
And I've written one book for smaller kids called Mikey and the Dragons.
And we've continued on with the business at Echelon Front, working with companies all
over the world teaching leadership.
I think that's where I'm at right now.
Well, that's quite a story.
Something that would be meaningful for me to know more about is I've always understood
that our military has had to have really a separate culture right down to, let's say,
marriage ceremonies looking different in the military than they do outside.
And one of my questions is, to what extent is the military still a separate culture?
Do I have that wrong?
And then following up on that, to what extent are the individual special forces units really
an entirely alternate world with different practices, different disciplinary regimes,
things that are unthinkable, let's say, in the civilian world?
The military is made up of a bunch of human beings, people from America, from every different
walk of life in America, and they all come in, and certainly you go through boot camp
or whatever indoctrination program that you go through, and you learn some of the fundamental
military methodologies of living, such as being disciplined, such as chain of command,
such as the rank structure, tactics, so you learn those things, but at the end of the day,
those are just overlays on a bunch of human beings that are just human beings.
And so the military is just a subsection of American society, and it reflects that way
inside the military. As far as the special operations forces, sure, they all have their own
little culture, but you go to different colleges and they have different cultures and you go to
different businesses. I work with different businesses all the time. They all have their own
little cultures going on inside. And you don't think it's more profound? The military of a difference?
I don't know if it's more profound. There's some really dynamic companies out there that have
very, very deeply rooted cultures, and those are probably in some cases even more
distinct than what you have inside the military. One thing that's interesting about the military,
sure, there's some military traditions that go back hundreds of years, but the military,
people come and go in the military all the time. As an officer in the military, you might spend
two, maybe three years at an individual unit, and then you're gone and someone's going to take
your place. So it's not like a business or a company where sometimes I work with companies
where there's been people there for 28 years. Throughout the chain of command, maybe it's a
frontline worker that's been running some machine at a company for 27 years, or maybe it's the CEO
who's owned the business or started the business or inherited the business or bought the business,
but he's been there for a long time. So those cultures can have kind of a more unified way
about them because there's that continuity of human beings in it. Whereas the military,
people move around and they get stationed, they get out, they retire, but so there's cultures,
I think, in everywhere in the military, certainly has a culture, but depending on what you're into,
if you go to a Grateful Dead show, you'll see a strong culture there that everyone dresses the
same, everyone looks the same, everyone probably thinks very similarly. If you go to a Metallica
show, same thing, people are going to dress very similarly. So I guess it just, I think everyone's
got a culture and it's present in the military for sure, but I think there's cultures everywhere.
Somebody who was in the military once said to me that you have to understand that the
military values interoperability in place of continuity, because people are constantly
being moved around, the culture is almost defined by a kind of mental flexibility of a certain
kind and that the person went on to say that American companies used to move people around
and have stopped doing that largely, so that it used to be in his estimation that our companies,
like Procter and Gamble or an Exxon, would be much more like the military and that they would
have an expectation that you would be posted to a particular place for a couple of years,
there would be sort of a welcome wagon and there was a way of absorbing families
and that that had actually been given up and that the military had retained some of that,
but that was in fact also at risk. I don't know whether that resonates at all.
Well, certainly the military, you have to be adaptable and when you take different people
all the time and you cycle them into different military units, you learn to work with different
people, that's for sure and you can't get used to working with one type of human being because
even though that human being has been through boot camp and they've been indoctrinated,
they've still got all their own personal emotions and drives and personality and idiosyncrasies and
things that are going to drive you crazy and things that work well and things that don't work well
and you've got to deal with all those things and so that does happen in the military and it happens
in the civilian sector now. What I find interesting about that statement is I think nowadays people
change jobs a lot more than they did when I was a kid. When I was a kid, all my friends' parents,
they worked at the same company for 29 years. They might have been moved around by it and now
you might move around a lot but stay in the same city. Yeah, but you might move around from company
to company. Exactly. So, following on that, one thing that I had heard that I thought was kind
of interesting at an almost a biological level was a description of boot camp, which was that
boot camp was a recapitulation of human development for adults that needed to be retrained as if they
had always been meant to be soldiers. So, the idea being that you have a civilian set of instructions
in your brain and you have to more or less blow it away to accept all of these differences,
that there really is a chain of command and it's not flexible in the way that your regular life
might be flexible or that you think that you can't do something that is within your physical
capacity to do it but requires a lot of effort for you to get to that level and that in essence,
what boot camp was was it was a second childhood that was imposed to make you safe to be a soldier,
to be in harm's way whereas if you took your regular self onto a battlefield, your instincts
would be completely counter to what would be safe for not only you but for others who were
attached to you. Do you buy that boot camp is effectively another version of childhood that
is overlaid over the previous one? I don't know if I'd call it another version of childhood
but I can tell you what the military boot camps do an incredible job of taking normal human beings
from every walk of life and turning them into someone that is in many cases now the military is
not perfect by any stretch of the imagination but if you take a kid like me, we'll use me as an
example, you take a kid like me that was a marginal student, a marginal athlete, I was very
rebellious, I was getting in trouble a lot and you put me into boot camp and say okay here's
you have a blank slate, none of your past matters, we don't care where you're from,
we don't care what your parents did, we don't care about any of that, we don't care about your history,
your past at all, what we care about what you're going to do now and if you do these things,
you're going to move in the direction you want to move into and here's what you're going to do,
you know what you do in boot camp? You fold your underwear a certain way, you walk a certain way,
you eat a certain way and that's what you do and if you do what they tell you to do,
you can move forward and you can advance and things work out well. Now what the thing that
you've got to remember is boot camp is a miniscule fraction of what your career in the military is.
So for instance, obedience to orders, that's something that you get drilled to do in boot camp,
in fact the purpose of military drill, you know you see the guys marching around with
rifles on their arms and they're all coordinated doing synchronized movements,
that's called close order drill and they used to do it because when you were in battle in ranks
in the revolutionary war period, of course we didn't fight this way in America, that's why we won,
but the the British military, close order drill, hey you're going to draw your weapon at the same
time, you're going to load your weapon at the same time, you're going to fire your weapon at the
same time and you're going to follow these orders when they come out directly, that's what it was
originally for, but they, we still do close order drill in boot camp and the reason that they do it
is so that you learn immediate obedience, obedience to orders, that's why you do it.
Now what you find out after boot camp and what I tell people all the time is the last thing I want
as a commander is people that are just going to obey my orders without questioning them,
I want to be surrounded with people that question what I'm saying, that give me push back when
something doesn't make sense and the last thing I want is somebody that's just going to blindly
obey my orders, so boot camp is like childhood I guess, but it's really only like infancy,
it really just teaches you, gets you potty trained and then once you get into the military,
that's where you actually learn to maneuver, how to lead, how to interact with other people,
you learn how to flex up and down the chain of command, like you talked about the
inflexibility of the chain of command, that's actually once you get the further you get in
the military the more flexibility you see in the chain of command. So in part wouldn't that be
because the people who rise to positions of power cannot get there by doing it highly egoically,
that they have to actually recognize that the guy at the bottom might have the best information
and that so that it's really because we refuse to promote people who are crazily egoic that we
have that kind of flexibility. Well that is an ideal outlook and certainly that would be a nice
thing, but no there's people in a like I said in an ideal situation, sure people are getting
promoted because they're the ones that are open-minded, there's the ones that put their ego
aside, but I have to explain this to people all the time that because I always tell people, hey,
you need to keep your ego in check and I have to explain to people, yeah sometimes that person
that is concerned about themselves and they're taking care of themselves, while I'm telling you
Eric, hey, don't worry about, you know, don't worry about yourself, take care of the team,
take care of the mission and things will be okay and I have to say, but listen, this other guy
who's taking care of himself, he might actually get a promotion ahead of you, he might move ahead
of you this time, he might even move ahead of you next time, but guess what, eventually people are
going to look at that guy, they're going to characterize him for what he is, which is someone
that's taking care of himself, doesn't care about anyone else and that is going to undermine his
future. So in the long run, you'll advance because you took care of the team, you take care of the
mission, maybe in the short term, you might advance because you took care of yourself,
but that's not a long-term solution. So ideally, yes, people that put their ego in check,
those are the people that get promoted, unfortunately, it doesn't always work that way,
sometimes some people are egomaniacs and they step on people's backs and they make it to the top,
that absolutely happens. Do you find that there's a, I mean, I'm always suspicious of the idea of
really sidelining the ego, that the ego is in some sense this receptacle for we, you know,
our life needs a protagonist somehow and the ego provides that sense that it is about us because
we have one set of eyes and that's how we tour the world. Do you find that the people that you
respect the most, keeping their ego in check as you say it, are people who are really not highly
egoic or are they people who have their ego involved in like a Mexican standoff with other
parts of their personality so that there's a tension and a dynamism to it?
Certainly, there's something that I call the dichotomy of leadership, which are these opposing
forces that are pulling you in opposite directions all the time. And yes, ego is absolutely one of
those things because if I truly had no ego, well, then I wouldn't care what my performance was,
I wouldn't care about anything, right? I would just be happy to be sitting watching television
and eating Cheetos. That's what a total lack of ego could do to me. The other extreme is,
hey, I'm going to step on everyone's back in order to rise to the top and I don't care
whoever gets in my way, I'm going to take them down. Where do we want to be? We want to be
in a balanced place where we're confident but we're not cocky. You know, I went and spoke
with some inner city kids here in LA. And whenever I speak to people, one of the topics that I
talked to them about is, hey, you've got to stay humble because normally I'm talking to people that
are CEOs of companies or people that are in positions of power. And so I have to constantly
remind them to keep their ego in check. And that originated in the fact that I was training young
SEAL leaders and young SEAL leaders, they're front runners, they're overachievers, they've got a
strong ego. So they have to be told, hey, you got to keep that thing in check, you got to make sure
you're listening to other people, you got to hear other people's ideas, you got to make sure that
you're taking care of your team, head of yourself. They need to hear that. I went and spoke with these
inner city kids and it was an interesting group of inner city kids because they weren't just
they weren't just underprivileged, they were underprivileged, but they had done some kind of
tests so that they were, they were, they were smart kids. And I was going to talk about the
normal topics that I speak on and one of them is humility and I went in this room and I immediately
realized I wasn't going to talk about humility at all because every one of these kids in this room
was, was beat down. That was the message they needed. Their heads were hung low,
they wouldn't look me in the eyes. So what they needed to hear is, hey, be confident, you have
capability, you can do this. So they were, there's a group of people whose ego was crushed too far
and they needed to have confidence built up. So again, this is another one of those classic
dichotomies that needs to be balanced. You need, yes, you need to have an ego, but at the same time,
you have to be humble enough to listen to other people and you can't let your ego get out of
control. So I'm super glad to hear you bring up the dichotomy of leadership and I was just
trying to touch it lightly. Can you talk more about what that theory is and how you've come to it?
It's interesting the way I came to it. The way I came to it was by real, I actually had to have
the ultimate form of humility with myself because I realized as I preached these, many of the,
the theories that I had as I preached them, I realized that I wasn't always right. And I'll
give you an example is one of the things that I always talked about, especially on the battlefield
was that you had to be aggressive. Like you have to be aggressive. That's what you have to be.
You have to be ready to maneuver. You have to take the fight to the enemy. If you see a problem,
you need to attack that problem. I talk about that all the time. And then plain as day, clearly,
are there times when as a leader or as a human being, you can be too aggressive?
Yes, there absolutely are. And we used to call that running to your death. Like if you're super
hyper aggressive, because Jaco said, you got to be aggressive. And so now there's a machine gun
nest on a hill and you just go charge that thing, you're going to die. And whoever follows you is
also going to die. So you, you have to be, you have to, you have to modulate your aggression.
Either sometimes we have to back off. And that was sort of the first thing that I said, well,
on the one hand, I talk about, you got to be aggressive, but there's times where you can be
too aggressive. And then I said to myself, well, what about, what about talking as a leader?
Because as a leader, you have to talk, right? You have to communicate with the other people
on your team. Right. Is there such a thing as a leader that can talk too much? Yes, there absolutely
is. And if I, as a leader, all I do is talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, will eventually people
stop listening to me. They don't know what's important and what's not. I over communicate
to them to the point where they stop listening. So you can talk too much, but the other side
of the spectrum is I don't talk enough. And now you don't know what's going on. The team doesn't
know which direction we're heading. So this is where this idea came from is that the quality
that we're looking for isn't on the extremes. It's a balanced, it's a dichotomy of leadership
and finding the balance in those dichotomies led me and my buddy, Leif, to write this follow on
book to extreme ownership. The reason the follow on book to extreme ownership, the reason for that
is because that's as we work with companies, not only did most questions revolve around
this idea of the dichotomy of leadership, but most answers, most answers that I give are someone
says, oh, my team isn't taking any initiative. Okay, well, let's break that problem down.
Why is that happening? That's happening because you perhaps are taking so much ownership, so much
extreme ownership, you read the book extreme ownership, so you're taking so all this ownership.
Well, now your team doesn't have any ownership. So they're just waiting for you to tell them what
to do. So when you do that, their initiative gets crushed. You go too far in the other direction,
and you've got people doing things that they shouldn't be doing, working on their stepping
outside their bounds, they're not staying within the parameters you've given them because
you've got them running wild. So you've gone too far in the other direction.
Where do you want to be? You want to be balanced. And that's where that dichotomy of leadership
comes in. So, I mean, it's fascinating to have to tell people that the best advice is to constantly
recalibrate the forces that are in opposition within your mind. Do you have any way of helping
people in general with dialectics that need to govern them? I feel like, I thought it was beautiful
what you said before about these intercity kids. So much of what I hear is people giving blanket
advice, which has no sense of what listener it's finding. So you teach people to be humble,
who are already humble, you're just cutting them off at the knees. Or if you teach people,
you need to be assertive and you've got somebody who's wildly over-aggressive,
the person just takes it as license. How do we responsibly push out a framework
for balance, which isn't mealy-mouth, but really has full-blown versions of these opposing ideas
within one mind? Again, that's why this book, The Dichotomy of Leadership, was we had to write it.
Because we put the name on the first book, Extreme Ownership, we gave it that name. And that's a
great concept when you've got people that don't want to take responsibility for things like,
listen, you've got to take extreme ownership of what's going on. But it's like you said,
when you give it that to someone that's already a micromanager, oh, they're all of a sudden,
they're running like, what'd you say, a license? It's like they have a license now to micromanage.
Double low micromanage. Yeah. And they're wondering why things are falling apart on them
and why no one has any initiative anymore and why they're having to make every single decision
and why the frontline troops aren't maneuvering on their own. Well, it's because you're micromanaging
them, now you're micromanaging them to the extreme. So that is why we had to do it. Because these
things, as you said, you have to constantly modulate all these different balances, all these
different dichotomies, you have to constantly modulate them. And by the way, once you get it
modulated today, tomorrow, it'll change a little bit. Because all of a sudden, you know, if you
had no initiative, Eric, and I said, hey, listen, I might have been micromanaging you, I need you
to step up more and you go, oh, okay, cool. And the next day you show up and you start
doing some project that I hadn't even authorized. And now I got to come back and I got to adjust
because now I got to tighten you up and say, hey, I want you to take initiative and I appreciate it,
but you still got to stay within the bounds of what we're trying to get done. So I was right
yesterday. And now all of a sudden, same mindset, I'm wrong, and I have to adjust again. So
you're 100% spot on. You have to modulate all these principles for the people that you're
dealing with and the situation that they're in. So one of the things that I've been really curious
about, I don't know whether this, whether you reacted this in any way at all, is we always
talk about teaching critical thinking, but we don't talk about teaching critical feeling.
And but by critical feeling, I mean that most of our emotions are susceptible to becoming
maladaptive. And because they're not analytic thoughts, they're sort of harder to access and
harder to influence. I would imagine that when you are in some situation where you're, you know,
in harm's way and you've got a bunch of people that you're looking out for and you've got to get
something done and stakes are very high, the emotions that you might have around your house
on the weekend, when you're with your family are very different than the emotions you can afford
when you're actually engaged in some sort of action in a military context. Can you,
do you relate to this concept of critical feeling at all? Does that sound like something that you
have had to think about? Am I off base? I have had to think about emotions a ton. And what I have
found with emotions is just like every other thing that we have as human beings, they can get
out of balance. So if I have a leader that gets super emotional about every decision or flies
off the handle or shows a bunch of anger and loses his temper, that is not going to be good.
People will not respect that. People will not trust his judgment because they're emotional.
So we can't go and be super emotional human beings if we're trying to be in a leadership position.
And that includes in your house, right? If you fly off the handle with your wife or you fly off
the handle with your kids, that is not going to be healthy for those kids. They're not going to
trust your judgment. They're not going to respect you. How can they respect you when you can't control
your own temper? And if they do respect it, that's actually scary because what you're teaching them
is that in order to get respect, what you have to do is have a violent crazy temper. So you don't
want to be a super hyper emotional person. What's the other end of the spectrum? The other end of
the spectrum is I've shut my emotions off completely. I'm totally and completely detached. I have no
emotional connection with the people that I'm leading, whether they're on my team or in my
family. And guess what? If I don't have that connection, as a human being, as human beings
working for me, they are not going to do what they need to do to accomplish the mission when they see
me as a cold blooded robot. So with these emotions, you have to keep them under control. I'm not telling
people and I don't tell people that they should be void of emotions. Because if you're void of
emotions, you're a robot and people don't follow robots. People follow other human beings. People
follow human beings that they're connected to emotionally. However, let that go too far and
your emotions are out of control and you're making bad decisions. I always I was asked people when
what kind of decisions do you make when you're super emotional? The answer is not really good
ones. Not really good ones. Yeah. But if you completely cut emotions out, if you've got a team
and you're going to make a decision, that's going to be a massive negative impact on them
and you don't let those emotions play a little bit and you just make the perfect business decision.
Okay, great. You made a perfect business decision. You saved X amount of dollars,
but you cut that emotional connection with your people and they saw that you didn't really care
about their emotions. Okay, you got the short term win. You made a little more money this quarter.
Guess what's happening next quarter? You're losing three people, critical people that went
and found a job somewhere else. Somebody, some other leader somewhere made an emotional connection
with them and now they're gone. And so your short term win turns into a long term loss.
How do you think about the concept? We're used to hearing your overthinking this.
And I've started to try this phrase. I think you're over feeling this.
I've noticed that in our public square, it's become more important to constantly
explore one's feelings and to the point where I find it absolutely distracting,
the extent to which people are now sharing their feelings feels, to my way of thinking,
wrong. They're not holding anything back. There's nothing intimate. You're expected to go into this
performative kind of heart connection to various abstractions. I know there's a better way of saying
it. Your over feeling this is not an easy thing for people to hear. How do you get people to
rein in some of those emotions? I actually don't know if there's a better way of saying that.
Over feeling is a great term. I think I might have to use that. That's great. And that's explaining
what I just explained. If you tell me something and my reaction is this massive emotional reaction,
what's horrible about it from a strategic perspective is if you tell me some opinion
and I just immediately fly off the handle emotionally, you don't listen to another word
that I say. And it means nothing to you other than, well, he's super emotional. You discount
everything that I say because I'm emotional. And you as a human being know that someone else
being super emotional isn't thinking straight and isn't making good decisions. And they're just
being emotional. So I'm better to say, oh, interesting point. Let me give you what my
take on that is. And all of a sudden you're going to sit and you're going to listen to me and you're
going to hear me out. And so yes, over feeling is something that happens all the time. And again,
that's just going too far out of balance in the dichotomy of leadership with your emotions.
So another thing I want to explore with you is this question.
Well, come at it from kind of a funny angle. Are you familiar with Esther Perrell at all,
the relationship expert? No. She specializes in thinking about very difficult topics. She's touched
what happens to marriage in a monogamous setting when it feels very constraining.
She's touched on infidelity. She's now talking about workplace issues,
where she's exploring sort of forbidden thoughts about what happens in the workplace.
And one of the things that she said to me that was very interesting is that she was
reconsidering masculinity. And she said that masculinity is clearly an incredibly powerful
thing. But she hadn't appreciated that it is as fragile as it is powerful, that the number of
ways of invalidating men is quite high and that there is some sort of dependence on kind of a
bargain in which men tend to be more disposable, particularly in times of war and conflict.
Let's be honest about it. No doubt about that. And that there is something both
extremely powerful but also fragile about the concept of masculinity itself. It's very difficult
for us, even in our society, to find things that are wholly positive that we ascribe to the concept
of masculinity that we would deny to the concept of femininity. Like we've gotten to a point where
we're just unsure it would seem as to whether or not there's a compelling reason for half of humanity.
Now war, of course, is an easy counter to that. But the more distance we've gotten from World War II,
I worry that we've forgotten exactly why men exist in terms of their full
complement of abilities and skills and functions. Do you think that there's anything to the concept
that masculinity may be intrinsically fragile?
Like it's subject to veto. If you do something that's heroic, let's say, and nobody chooses
to acknowledge it or like, well, you're showing off, it's a very hard thing to protect. Do you
detect a crisis in masculinity? That's a big topic. We get a lot of young people
who come to some of the shows of friends of both of ours. And it's very clear that there is this
search for how do I make my way as a young man? Are you getting this energy?
Yeah, you know, I don't get a lot of that energy. And the reason I don't get a lot of that energy
is because I mean, I do what I do. My friends, they do what we do. I think the thing with masculinity
is just like everything else. If I take any masculine trait and I take it to an extreme,
it turns bad. And I should say traditionally masculine trait. Because if I take any tradition
of masculine trait and I take it to an extreme, it turns bad. The thing is the masculine traits
that we talk about, but I have three daughters and one son. I raise them all the same. And I want
them to have the same amount of the masculine traits. Hey, do I want you to be assertive?
Yes, I want you to be assertive. That's a traditionally masculine trait. Do I want you
to be brave? Yes, I want you to be brave. Do I want you to be stupid and go overboard?
Hopefully that isn't just a masculine trait. Yeah, we have to check with my wife on that one.
But even those aren't really, I mean, I wouldn't say that assertiveness is a masculine trait. I
would say we have, our flavor of assertiveness has been traditionally different than the female
flavor. But definitely, I think if my wife is one of the braver people I know, and there's
nothing that contradicts the feminine and that, but she doesn't do it the way, let's say my brother
would behave in a brave context. And so the question in some sense has to do with,
it's, you know, I give people the puzzle, name some positive trait that you would associate
with masculinity to distinguish it from femininity. There's plenty of things that we say that are
feminine that are positive, but there are very few things that we can say are masculine that
are positive without an immediate claim that that is as female as it is male.
I don't know. I mean, I don't know. I'm over here doing what I do. I don't know whether it's
considered masculine or whatever, but this is kind of what I do, how I live my life. The people
that I know that are men, they all seem kind of similar to me. Okay. I mean, not all of them,
obviously, because you got, I mean, I have friends that are that are not like me at all.
But yeah, I don't know. Let's try another one. I don't know if I have the best, the best answer
for that. Okay. What is it that I guess I think about the few people I've gone through life and
death situations with, and I feel a very special strong bond to them that was catalyzed by the
peril that we went through together and I watched how they performed. But it wasn't in a military
situation. It was just sort of, you know, you're like, you're out on a remote hike and people
perform and they come through and you take that knowledge for the rest of your life that
that's somebody I can depend upon. Is there any substitute for putting your life at risk when
it comes to deepening bonds between people, particularly men? Going through hard things
together is what brings people together. And for sure, the harder things that you go through,
the tighter the bonds going to be. So if you take the military, for example, to start with the
military, well, the first thing you do is you put them through boot camp like we talked about.
Well, that's hard. And you go and you form bonds with people that other people that went through
boot camp, we all kind of have that common bond. Then you go to airborne school where you're going
to jump out of airplanes. And that's a little bit of a death defying thing. And you're going to be
the airborne crews are going to be a little bit tighter. You go to special operations training.
And all of a sudden, you've done something that's harder than that. And and and now the bonds are
a little bit tighter. Now you take that unit and you put them into combat zone. And their bonds
are going to be even tighter. Now you take that combat zone and you make it super intense,
those bonds are going to be even tighter. So there's no doubt about it. Now in the business
world, what that looks like, and especially mean I retired in 2010. So the companies that we
worked with a lot of them, the companies that we work with were many of them survivors of the
economic crash. And believe me, they talked about that, like, that was their battle zone.
That's where they formed these really tight bonds. And they weren't going anywhere. Now,
they were tight. So whether you can replace it, I don't really think so. I think the harder
strife you go through with someone, the tighter the bond is going to be. And maybe over time,
you form a strong bond. You know, if I had to rely on you for something and you came through for me,
and then you did it again and again, and then I did it for you and we stuck together. I mean,
over time, you can definitely form a really, really strong bonds with people. But I think the
harder something is, the stronger the bonds. If it doesn't fracture, if it doesn't break you.
Right. Well, then you have that guy you'll never speak to again, because where were you when I
needed you? Exactly. Right. My concern, though, I mean, let me just open up about the fact that
my least favorite phrase in the English language at the moment is, I've got your back. And the
reason is because I think it migrated from the military into civilian life, where civilians
have no idea what it means. They think that it's like, it's a good thing to say. It's like,
I really care about you and I don't want anything bad to happen, but it has nothing to do with,
I've actually got your back. Do you find that there is this kind of military envy and bleed
where people talk as if they're in these situations and it actually just doesn't match
in any way? I don't know if it's envier, if it's just slang terms that expand over time. I mean,
there's slang terms that we use all the time. Well, farming sports and the military provide
a lot of language. Right. Right. So I think, I don't think that when someone says, I got your
back, you know, you and I are, hey, can you, I'm going to go to McDonald's. Right. You know,
I got your back. You need anything? Let me grab you some chicken nuggets over here.
I don't think that my intent in saying that wouldn't be like, Hey, brother,
I got your back with the chicken nuggets deep. You know, I think it's just a slang thing that
people are throwing around. I think it comes up in the situation in which like, you know,
the boss is going to come and ask a bunch of questions and one guy says, I don't worry. I
got your back and he immediately folds because he did not even think about what he was saying.
And I think in part, one of the fears I have, and I don't know whether you resonate with this,
is that I think a lot of American men, men in the developed world, don't have any bonds
that are comparable to the bonds that you're talking about. In other words,
their closest friend is untested in any real way. Yeah, that's not good. That's not good.
You definitely want to have some friends that, you know, when you call them, they will answer.
And when you make a request, they will deliver. And you don't need a big group of friends like
that, but it's nice to have a few. And one of the things that I'm curious about is that I'm seeing
kids not be allowed to work out their own problems. And that they're taught if anything goes wrong,
immediately go find an authority figure. And as a result, I worry that these kids are never
going to have those strong bonds because you have to get into trouble and out of trouble
repeatedly with the same people. Do you think there's anything to that?
Yeah, definitely. You form good bonds, doing hard things, and also when you get in trouble.
Is there anything that you got in trouble for that you can discuss from like before you entered
the military? Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, just every other knucklehead thing that every other
boy was doing when they're 13, 14, 15 years old. Such as? Whether it was, you know, blowing up
fireworks, driving like maniacs, just every stupid thing, fighting, you know, big giant
street fights, just dumb stuff. And yeah, I did it all like an idiot, like a 14 year old boy,
like a 15 year old boy. Did you enjoy street fighting? Yeah. Okay. So there's a good example
of violence with probably very little point, but the pleasure of fighting, you know, I think it was
PGA Rourke who pointed me to, it's one of his writings that he said that we used to discuss
the drunk delight of battle before we decided that war was generally a bad thing.
You know, I think people like competition, right? And, you know, there's no
more heightened form of competition. Well, war is number one, whereas I'm trying to kill you,
then you take step down from that and where are you at? You're, oh, we're going to fight each
other. We're not going to kill each other, hopefully, maybe. But, you know, so people like to fight,
many people like to fight. It's the old, it's a very good challenge. And, you know,
especially when you're, when you're young, when you're 14, 15, 16, 18, 22, we're going to fight.
There's these people up in, where are they up in Oregon with their, their fighting each other,
protesting, wearing masks, all these guys up in Oregon, beating people up and whatnot. And,
everyone's all surprised. And I'd say, yeah, they're, they're guys beating people up. Yeah,
that's, that's normal. That's, that's what, that's what guys do. Oh, they're, but they're wearing
masks and stuff. Yeah. Okay. That's what they're doing right now. In the 50s, they didn't, right?
In the, well, you know, it's just, just a different, what are they trying to do? They're
trying to fight other people. They're, they're, they're tribal, you know, and, and DNA, they're
DNA, they're combative DNA is leaking out. They don't know how to control it because they're
young and they're going to go beat people up. So is fighting an important part, like physical
fighting an important part of human development? I think so. I'll tell you what I think. And,
again, this is, I don't, I don't want to sit here and talk like I'm making some sort of assertion
for mankind. And I think you might have just framed the question as if for human development,
right? Which for human development, I don't know. But let me tell you from my experience,
because I don't like to talk in broad, you know, statements for all of humanity as you would like
me to do right now. I, I, for me, there was, there was three things that really
helped me. I don't know, I gave a speech at my friend's wedding. Yeah. He was getting married
and he was a guy that I had trained Jiu Jitsu with a lot. He's a guy I went to combat with.
And in now I was at his wedding, he's getting married and I was giving the speech. And what
I said was there was three things in my life that sort of made me feel secure as a man. Okay. And
the first one was learning how to fight. So like learning Jiu Jitsu and knowing that, hey, if I
get into a fight with someone, I can handle myself. That was number one. Number two was going into
combat. Because when you go into combat, you, you want to know that you're going to perform
your duties and you're not going to cower and you're going to be brave and you're going to do your
job. So went to combat. I was good with it. I liked it. It was fine. And then the last one was I
got married and had kids and all of a sudden now I've got people that depend on me and I've got
people that are a higher priority than me ever, than I will ever be. And so those three things
were very important to me feeling secure. And, and you know, I always say when I was young and
stupid and didn't know how to fight, I used to fight all the time. And then once I learned how
to fight, I didn't fight anymore because I didn't have anything to prove anymore. You know, I'm not
trying to prove that I'm tougher than you and outside the 7-eleven. It's like, hey, if you want
to find out who's tougher, come to go to the gym and we'll, we'll get on the mat and see who's,
see who would win. But let's not do it in the street like, like dummies. So those three things
I think are helpful for people to do. They were helpful for me. I know that they were helpful,
you know, as a young insecure kid, which that's what that's what kids are. They're insecure with
who they are, you know, that no one's walking around at age 15 thinking, you know, I'm the man.
And when they project that, which I certainly tried to project, what they're really projecting is
I'm pretty insecure about what's going on right now. Okay, cool. How are you going to get over that?
Man, you know, learn how to fight, learn what that feels like, take responsibility for, you know,
when you have a wife and kids, you have a responsibility, a big one. So those are things
that I think move you in the right direction. So if I take that sequence, right, the first one is
learning theoretically to be capable in a fight so that you don't need to worry that if something
happens, you need to back down instantly, you can assess the situation, figure out
how you want to handle it on your own terms, hopefully. But then you say the second thing,
which is beyond being able to fight, I really enjoyed or combat helped make me who I am.
Can you talk about and feel free not to, if it's not right, what, what is the sort of the
poetry of combat that allows you to more fully develop, that allowed you to more fully develop
as a human being beyond the ability, let's say to just handle yourself in a fight where you're
actually applying this now with leverage in terms of weaponry, in terms of command, in terms of
strategy tactics in a life and death situation. You know, all that stuff that you just mentioned,
I absolutely love and I've spent my entire life trying to get good at tactics with weapons,
maneuver on the battlefield, combat leadership, and all those things are awesome. And that is
certainly the things in combat that you get to experience. But the bottom line is this,
when you go into combat, you got people that are trying to kill you. And at some point,
you realize, okay, I could die tonight. And if I die, bring it. And I think for me,
you know, the idea, you know, people, people go through life, they, they, they, you got death
out there in the future. And they either don't want to face it, or it's so far away that they,
they don't need to face it, or they put it in the back of their mind. Well, when you go into war,
it's coming to the front of your mind. And you get to answer that question that you,
some people wait their whole lives to answer, is what am I going to do when it's time to die?
And once you answer that question for yourself, then for me, I was like, okay,
you know, I, I, here we go. And if I die, okay.
You're familiar with this movie, No Country for Old Men?
Absolutely. Well, and I've, you know, read the book, Kormak McCarthy's
my favorite fiction author. Oh, is that right? Yes.
The famous gas station scene where Anton Chigur is this sort of methodical hitman of
potentially supernatural origin is offended that this guy transgresses a politeness boundary and
asks one too many questions. And he traps him into this coin toss. And he says, what's the most
you've ever lost on a coin toss? And the guy says, you know, I don't know. He's, he said, well,
you have to call the coin. He says, I didn't put anything up. And the hitman says, oh, you've been
putting it up your whole life. Every day as you leave the studio, you're going to be taking a
risk with your life as you walk across the street that somebody's on their phone texting and not
paying attention. And yet you don't, most people don't know that they, they imagine the death is
this incredibly remote thing. They don't see bodies with their fewer open caskets, probably.
We, we cremate people. We don't visit graves. They're all sorts of things that are keeping
us in an abstraction where death seems very, very remote. Are you saying that combat was
liberating specifically because you were forced to say, I am playing with the full stack and
I've accepted that and your comment, bring it. I mean, it's a terrifying thing to say in a life
and death situation. How do you, how do you, how do you see that if you crossed over some threshold?
I think it's a matter of acceptance, of accepting the fact that this is what is going to happen.
And, you know, you talk about not visiting graves. I mean, I visit my friends' graves all the time.
I go to national cemeteries and I see, you know, there'll be some, some person who died in,
like let's say the fifties or the forties and there are fresh flowers on that particular
grave and it's very moving. So I don't know if liberating is the, is the word, but perhaps it is.
But I think again, and, you know, Sam Harris, he, he asked a very pointed question on, on his
podcast. He said, you know, you talk about war being hell, which I do and, and being awful,
which I do and which it is. And then, you know, I say that combat was like the best time that
I've had in my life and he says, how do you reconcile those two statements? And, and what I
said to him was, I asked him if he ever knew anyone that had cancer and that had cancer and lived.
And he said, yes. And I said, and when you ask those people, they very often give the answer,
I'm glad it happened to me. This is what I learned from it. They had to face death. And once they
were through it, they realized, you know, they wouldn't wish it on their best, on their worst
enemy, but they're, they're glad that they went through it because they learned. And I think
that to me is what combat is like. You have to face your own mortality and you have to recognize
that, you know, you could die. And then when you're done, you get back and you realize that
the sun coming up in the morning is a beautiful thing.
Can imagine. What about, so you were most associated in my mind with,
with the Iraqi theater. And what I wanted to ask you about is what was in your estimation,
what was unusual and peculiar about operating in that theater at that time?
And, and what did you bring back from the particularity of that experience? It wouldn't
have been the same if you'd been in Afghanistan or posted somewhere else.
One thing that's interesting is I do two deployments to Iraq and, and the
amount that the battlefield changes all the time, how quickly the enemy adapts and then how
coalition forces have to adapt to what the enemy adapted to. And that's a cycle that just doesn't
stop. And so you're constantly trying to keep your eyes open and be humble about what the
enemy's doing and never underestimate what their capabilities are.
As far as the operating theater, my first deployment, I was all over the country. We,
we operated all over the place and I was living in Baghdad or we had our compound was in Baghdad.
And then, but I operated all over the place and we travel and fly and drive everywhere in Iraq
or to a lot of different places. And then my, my second deployment where we were in the battle
of Ramadi, I didn't leave Ramadi. I didn't leave that little, you know, three, four square miles
of neighborhoods. And so that was very different. And who were the belligerents on both sides?
Was ISIS on the other side? My first deployment, what it was was a bunch of
thugs, criminals, former regime elements, running around, causing problems,
and they were very disorganized. So that was in 2003, 2004. By 2006, when I went back to Ramadi,
or when I went to Ramadi, there was now a full fledged insurgency that was organized and financed
and led and they were operating as a paramilitary organization and same folks who'd gotten disciplined.
The same folks, but they had gotten disciplined. That's what I'm trying to figure out. Yes,
the same folks disciplined, but more important, they had leadership now because Al Qaeda started
bringing in foreign fighters, foreign leadership to go in and run and direct operations. And that's
when you, when you have a, an organization without leadership, isn't an organization at all.
And sure, they can, they can nip at you and they can do some random attacks and that'll be problematic.
But once you organize an element and you put leadership over them, then that's when they
can start to do real damage. And that's exactly what happened. And where was the experience
coming from? Was it Chechnya or? All over, all over from, yeah, from all over.
One of the things we talk about in World War II is the sense of being the good guys. And I think
in the era that followed World War II, we were less convinced that we were always
intrinsically the good guys, but you had the opportunity to go up against some of the
most horrible people we've ever seen in modern times. Is that a fair characterization of the,
of the enemy? Yes. Can you talk about, and I would actually like to do it somewhat unflinchingly,
what distinguished ISIS in terms of, I talk about a concept most people don't
react to called message violence, where the point of the violence is to be so picturesque
that it works its way into your mind and it won't let you go because somebody did something that
was unnecessarily unthinkable, just for the purpose of torturing your brain with knowing
that that's what's on the other side. Is that a fair characterization?
Yeah, so the term ISIS started being used around 2007. My last deployment ended in 2006,
but the characters are still the same and they weren't as organized as they became when they
became ISIS, when they started flying the ISIS flag. And then what you had was this recruitment,
this worldwide recruitment of sadistic, evil human beings coming to the caliphate,
to torture and murder and rape systematically, girls and boys. And yeah, what we saw in Ramadi
in 2006 was it's the worst nightmares that you can imagine from people being skinned alive,
people being beheaded, people being tortured in all manners, rape, you know, rape used as a weapon
of war, just everything, every horrible thing that you could imagine. Family members being
violated in front of other family members, right? Absolutely. And that's why, you know,
for us, when you ask, did you feel like the good guys? Oh yeah, we definitely felt like the good
guys. And we especially felt like the good guys because the local populace is who was enduring
this heinous, these heinous acts was the local populace, the local people that lived in Ramadi.
That's who was enduring and suffering these horrible acts. So when we came in and started
eliminating the insurgents, they were ecstatic and they were happy that we were there and they
believed me they wanted nothing more than for to help us get those insurgents out of the city
and out of the country. What is it that you think, you know, you mentioned the caliphate and my fear
is, is that the caliphate was sort of a remote dream and that what we allowed to happen
was that the caliphate came to be a potential reality in a world of people who hadn't been
used to thinking about it until recently, that in essence, there have been a couple of major
shifts in the Islamic world. One, for example, suicide bombing was an almost unknown before
the Lebanese barracks. And then it was perfected in Sri Lanka by the Tamil rebels against
against the Sinhalese populace. Well, and then it comes back to the not everyone in Sri Lanka.
I mean, the Sri Lankan, the Tamil Tigers, there was Tamils that were in the Sinhalese or that
were in the Sri Lankan army. Right. So it wasn't all it wasn't all it wasn't pure. It wasn't a pure
ethnic tactic was was very strange in the way in which it's been a relatively modern invention.
And then it came back to the Middle East and that together with the concept of the caliphate
started to animate a kind of sleeping Islamic identity that hadn't been wildly present. I mean,
I sort of analogize it to what would happen in Judaism if somebody started rebuilding the temple
and all of this code that has not never been run like where you can
reconvene the Sanhedrin's to meet out death penalties, according to Jewish law.
Thank God we don't have a third temple, right? But somehow we we let this idea go from fantasy to
some kind of reality. Is that is that wrong that somehow we allowed something to animate this portion
of the world? And it went very sadistic and psychopathic. I think it is wrong that we allowed
that to happen. And it was it was clear to people that had been in Iraq that there was embers of
the insurgency of this of this sadistic insurgency that there were embers that were still burning
when we pulled out. And so once we pulled out, all of a sudden, you know, the fire the firemen
there was a fire at a house, they came spread some water on it, the flames were gone and then they
left. That's what we did. Well, the fire is not out yet, right? And so then it didn't take long
for those embers to rekindle and start completely burning out of control. And then
we we we let it get to a point where I mean, in the city of Ramadi, we had people that we knew
who when when ISIS took over Ramadi, which Ramadi was peaceful from
2007 until 2014 2015, like completely peaceful. When ISIS came in, they rounded up about 500
families that had families members who had worked with the coalition forces, and they murdered them
all. Right. So just just sick, sadistic, subhuman beings that should never have been allowed to do
that. Now they did it. And once they did and they took Ramadi and they took Mosul, you know, when
Iraqi forces went back in with the support of heavy American firepower, they cleaned those
places out and and it took I mean, they wiped out about 40,000 ISIS fighters, which is pretty much
all of them. Pretty unique situation. Were they skilled fighters? Some of them were. But what
was interesting is you had them wearing uniforms, carrying flags and in trying to act like a
conventional military force in many ways, not always, but in many ways. And so, you know, you
want to get into conventional war with basically with America, that's not a good tactic. But it
was a good tactic for us for them to do that. Right. Because, you know, fighting an insurgency
is much more difficult than fighting an open conventional war. Now I have a very unpopular
opinion in this country, which is somewhat popular outside of it, which is that Saddam
Hussein, while horrible in all the ways that we claim he was horrible, was in fact holding together
some powder keg and that was using was a relatively secular government and that brought some order
to a potentially very chaotic communal situation. His sons, of course, were, you know, one in
particular was a stone cold psychopath and he, you know, Saddam Hussein did terrible, horrible
things by American standards. But if we evaluated him by the standards of the region,
we might come up with a different answer. Is there anything to that? He was obviously a bad guy.
He certainly provided stability for the region. No doubt about that. Yeah. Have you ever seen the
video by which he took over the bath party? No. So he shows up on stage smoking a cigar and he says,
we have a special guest today and this guy comes to the microphone and starts saying,
I've plotted against Saddam and I'm here to read the names of my co-conspirators
and you see panic takeover in the audience and names are called and people are let out of the
auditorium and people start to understand that everyone who's let out is going to be killed.
And so they start screaming like, you know, long live Saddam. We love Saddam in order to save their
own lives. My understanding is, is that the people who were left were given side arms to
execute the people who had been let out to consolidate power around a founding atrocity.
To me, that's an example of this message violence concept that for people who don't speak other
languages, violence and even sadistic language is their poetry and there's poetry in which
our fighters who are doing the right thing and are on the side, you know, the side of the angels
are engaging in brutal poetry and the other side is engaging in some sort of
very disturbing art form. Is there a way of looking at this that's profitable that people
who have not been in battle can understand about how these messages are used to hold together
societies that are dangerous and fragile? Well, as you pointed out, I mean,
all human beings have a guttural reaction to violence and violence is a language that every
single human being understands. You know, you were asking me earlier what languages I speak and I'd
said English and you said you didn't learn any Arabic and I said, well, I learned enough to say,
get down, show me your hands. But when I would speak those words in Arabic to,
you know, enter a building, enter a home and there's, you know, a military age male and I'd
be speaking to him in Arabic, he didn't even understand that I was even trying to speak Arabic.
A, because my Arabic is bad and B, because it's just he's not expecting that. And so
they don't respond. Very seldom would I have until we get them to calm down a little bit,
then I could maybe speak a little bit of Arabic to them. But in that initial moment of terror,
there's they don't understand, they don't understand what you're saying. They're not,
they're not ready to hear it. But when you have somebody that is resistant, clearly resistant,
there is some nonverbal communication that you can do that is violence and they will understand it
and the other people that see it will understand it. So there's no doubt that violence is a method
of communicating with people, a message stronger than words in many cases. And people like Saddam,
people like ISIS, they'll absolutely use that to the best of their ability. And then they'll exploit
when things happen, you know, one of the, one of the horrible strategic losses or strategic setbacks
we had in, in the Iraq war was the, the abuses that went on at the Abu Ghraib prison. Because now
we had photographs of these Americans with doing things that look like extreme torture
to the prisoners there and, and the al Qaeda elements just absolutely took those and ran with
them to make, to fuel that insurgency. And it did, it did a great job of fueling that insurgency.
So you have to be very, very careful about the way you treat your enemy, because if you treat,
if you mistreat the enemy, then the enemy will use that as propaganda and they would do that on
purpose. They, they would love nothing more for than, than for you to accidentally kill a kid
or, you know, drop a bomb on a mosque or drop a bomb. They love, they absolutely would love that.
And so we had to do everything in our power to prevent those things from happening,
because the strategic, the negative strategic impact was phenomenal when events like that occurred.
Did you watch the video of the Jordanian pilot who was executed by ISIS?
Yes.
So a lot of people stateside did not watch that video. And one of the things that I found
very interesting about it was that it had a point that was disguised by our unwillingness
to watch the video. Now, maybe it's important that ISIS not be allowed to communicate its point,
but the point was you're up there in the skies meeting out very particular forms of death,
in particular incinerating people and burying them in rubble. And our aim in this video is to
subject a captured pilot to the exact form of death that you are dispensing from the skies.
And so you're normally not here to see this, let this be your death. And, you know, it was
cinematically beyond belief. It was shot to be gorgeous and to be repugnant and sickening.
And that concept of a Hollywood style death filmed for real, a snuff film, if you will,
with a point. And then offering bounties showing the homes of the Jordanian pilots, you know,
by street, I think in Amman, Jordan. My sense was is that Americans didn't pick up anything
of what was going on, because we decided that we didn't want our population exposed to anything
coming from the other side. Even their propaganda informed us as to how they were thinking and
feeling. But it was as if we plugged our ears and didn't want to understand what we were watching.
Do you do you see that? I see. Yeah. And I would agree with the point that
when you disconnect people from war, it's they lose track, right? I mean, in America,
you know, we when I was in Ramadi in 2006, I was, you know, sitting in some combat outpost
in the middle of nowhere with mortar shells coming in. And meanwhile, everyone in America was,
you know, going to the mall and driving around their SUV in order in the Starbucks. I mean,
that's that's just the way it is. I'm not mad at that, but there's a definite detachment there.
I'm mad at that. No, here's why I'm mad at that. First of all, I think I'm slightly older than you
are. And so I have some memories of the Vietnam War as it was playing out on American television.
That's some of my earliest childhood memories. And let me say this, it was spectacularly gruesome.
What we saw on the TV during that period of time, I believe that my parents turned off the TV
when it showed an image of a GI's head on a pike. And it was just like, okay, this is too much.
And on the one hand, this was real information coming from the war. And on the other hand,
it was propaganda. It was meant to strike fear in our hearts. There was a self-hatred
that was playing out just as there was concern about the excesses of American kids being turned
loose in a jungle with too little discipline and supervision. I mean, there was so much happening
in Vietnam, which was hard to pull apart. And what I found was is that after that war, we never went
into a conflict the same way again. The embedded journalists didn't seem to
want to report in the same way that a non-embedded journalist did. And there's a need that we have
to be able to go to war without constantly second guessing ourselves and putting our own troops
in harm's way and not working through all of our psychological nonsense when we have people who
are definitely at risk in doing our work as the military. I don't know that we've ever really
come to grips with the lessons of Vietnam. We don't have a clear sense that we should go to
wars in nation where the newsreels should talk about our side versus the other side. We don't
know how to do this. Do you have a sense that, like my sense is that Vietnam really broke something
in terms of our ability to go to war? Vietnam was, and I've been lucky enough to have a lot of
podcast guests that were in Vietnam. And their experiences were all different. I mean, from
one guy, Captain Charlie Plum, who was shot down and was in the Hanoi Hilton for six years.
I've had SOG Special Operations or Studies and Observation Group guys that were fighting behind
the lines in Cambodia and Laos. I've had helicopter pilot that was shot down in the jungle prisons
for months and months being tortured and mock executed the whole nine yards. So
what was horrible, there's so many horrible things about Vietnam. I did a podcast about
the Milai Massacre, which really is by far the biggest atrocity that American troops have
ever committed. And it was absolutely heinous now. You could go to Sand Creek and maybe some of the
Native Americans. There were some significant horrible atrocities there as well.
Those generally weren't as clear cut. Most of those had American soldiers that were saying,
no, stop. Milai, for a while, for at least several hours, it was no one. No one was stopping.
So what you have, I think with the press and the media in Vietnam was you had a lens into what war
is. And in war, you're killing other people. Right. And when you're killing other people,
it's, you know, you just take one step back. If you don't know what that other person did
and you take one step back and you watch someone kill someone else, that is not going to go
over well in most people's stomachs. Most people are going to look at that and say, why is this
happening? Why are we doing this? So that's what happened in Vietnam. You take one step back and
you see, you take one step back and what you see is killing. You see human beings killing other
human beings and why in God's name are we doing this? And so that's what I think happened in
Vietnam. How it broke us. I mean, I don't know if broke us is the right word, but we certainly
are more cautious and should be more cautious always about going to war. I mean, you know,
you want to talk to the people that don't want to go to war. It's the people that have been to
war, the people that have had their friends get killed. Like they're the ones that don't want to
go to war unless it's absolutely necessary, unless we've tried every other method, unless we've
used every other technique that we could use to prevent us from going to war. Now that when you
have to go to war, like go to war and win. That's that's my attitude. We don't want to go to war
at all. If we have to go, go and win, win as quick as you can, use whatever means necessary to
achieve a quick dominant victory. I mean, there's so much in that so, so rich is an answer. I guess
where I want to go back to is I think that it's irresponsible for us as a nation
to allow this much insulation of the home front from the raw facts
of what we're doing abroad. And that if you're going to main, you know, if you take my assessment
that the United States is the most dangerous machine ever constructed, right? We do not have
the right to wield that power if we're not interested in what it looks like and what it means.
If we're not willing to celebrate heroes who come back from the battlefield, if we're not willing to
look at murderers and psychopaths who fought under our flag. I mean, you know, my belief is, is that
to have a mature relationship with your country requires being able to look at something like
Milai and seeing it for the horror that it was and still coming to an understanding that there's
going to be some amount of breakdown that looks something like that, maybe not that bad.
Anytime we deploy troops, that that's part of what it means to deploy troops
is that you can't monitor how every particular unit functions and particularly if there are no eyes
on them. One of the things that I've said before is that if you go to war, you have to be willing,
you have to have the will, the will for the following two things to happen. Number one is
you have to have the will to kill. And when I say kill, I'm not just talking about killing your enemy
because although you'll try and kill your enemy, you will absolutely have collateral damage in war
and innocent people are going to die. And if you think that you can pull off a war without killing
innocent people, you're wrong. So you have to be willing to do that. You have to make sure that
the cause, the reason, the why behind why you're going to war, you need to make sure that you
understand that you will kill innocent people and you have to be willing to do that. Even if you
net save innocent lives, there will always be innocent casualties. There will absolutely be
innocent casualties. And the other will that you have to have is you have to have the will to die.
And that is that no matter how surgical you are, no matter how good your weapons are, no matter
how good your technology is, when you go to war, you will have young American men and women
being killed in horrible ways, way too young over and over and over again.
And if you're not ready for those two things, then you need to stop and think about what you're
actually doing. Yeah. What do we do about changing the relationship between news media
and combat troops so that we have the ability to understand what we're doing abroad,
say thank you to the people who need to be thanked and welcomed home, keep an eye on what needs to
not happen, such as a place like Abu Ghraib. It seems to me that we've got a, we're developing a
fragility as a people that is incompatible with our level of lethality. And we have to
get information back to the home front. Am I wrong in this? I mean, we had embedded troops
in Ramadi. There was combat photographers. There was photographers. There was reporters.
They had very open access to everything that was going on. So I think I don't know
how many clicks on the websites the normal military news stories got compared to, you know,
whatever entertainment Hollywood gets. Let me give you an example of what I'm talking about.
This isn't strictly a foreign, foreign involvement, but when 9-11 happened, the most famous photograph
from 9-11 is this photograph called Falling Man of this inverted human being sort of doing a
weird kind of like bicycle motion and he's falling to his death. And I think it ran once
briefly in the morning. It was spiked and it didn't become the iconic photograph of 9-11.
If I think back to Vietnam, we all have the same set of 10 photographs seared into our minds.
And yet I don't know, you know, beyond like a statue being toppled, what we would associate
with Iraq, except for the Abu Ghraib photographs. So it didn't seem to have that kind of effect of,
in my mind, commemorating what that war looked like. How long were we there? How many troops did
we have? How many families, you know, lost somebody? I just, I feel like it sort of took
place out of sight. Yeah. And the interesting thing is there's thousands and thousands and thousands
of pictures. I just don't think they were, I don't think, I think more, I think the, I don't know,
call it a problem, but I think it's more the fact that people weren't clicking on those pictures and
remembering them because if you Google Iraq war, you'll see hundreds of thousands of pictures
from all kinds of news agencies all over the world. It's just people, maybe they're,
they've seen so many pictures that they're over it. I don't believe this actually, Daco. Here's my
take on it. If you think about what the cartels have been doing on our southern border, it is
spectacular. The violence is so graphic and so disturbing by design. And yet so many Americans
are unaware of just how bad the drug wars have been in Mexico because the information doesn't
percolate. And these photographs, if they were run, would capture the public's imagination. I don't
think there's any question. Okay. I see what you're saying now. I didn't quite understand that. It
makes good sense with the cartel because certainly they're down there. I think we're terrified to
show people the extremes of what life actually looks like anymore. Yes. And if that is a bad thing,
you are correct. Yeah, that is a bad thing. You are correct. Okay. It's taken me a while to
understand your point. I apologize. No, no, no, no. You are correct. And you should, people should
see what, you know, I would, when I would talk to young seals, even now, I have pictures of
me lie, color photographs of me lie, which you know, you don't see very many of those,
but they're absolutely horrible to look at, even for a, even for a young seal that's, you know,
in his mind, super hungry for combat. They see these pictures that I put up on the big screen
for them. And it's, it's stomach turning. Then so that's what they need to see. They need to
understand that you go a little bit off the wrong direction. If somebody doesn't step up and say no
when things start to go sideways, this is where it can end up. That's right. So yes, what you are
saying is correct. If you want people to understand what's happening, one of the best ways to do it
is the same technique that you're saying earlier that the enemy can use, which is a message of
violence. Here's what is happening on the southern border. These are the people that are
one mile away. And this is what they're doing to whole families in certain cases. Yes. Should that
be propagated? Absolutely. So that we understand the seriousness of the situation down there.
Same thing with when ISIS was acting this way. Anybody that looks, I mean, you know, here's
another good case was the Rwandan genocide, right? Yeah. 800,000 people in 100 days, mostly with
machetes. And we, I don't want to say we let that happen, but we could have intervened in a very
powerful way. And we chose not to. And part of the reason that we chose not to is because of the
very graphic images you're talking about from a year and a half earlier when Somalia took place
and they were dragging American soldiers bodies through the streets. And we got completely
turned off by that. And so when Rwanda happened, it's like, we don't want to, we don't know if we
want to do this again. This is really what offends me, which is that when you send somebody into
a position where they could have their body dragged through the streets by enemy combatants,
and they know that, and you turn away because like you sent them there, and then you can't
bear to look because of your delicate sensibilities, that strikes me as something very, very wrong,
as opposed to we know why we're someplace. And thank God we have people who are willing
to do this. And, you know, I mean, I appreciate the depth and the complexity of your perspective.
You're saying on the one hand, people who've been to war, the ones who don't want us to go to war.
On the other hand, you're saying that war can be more fun and more meaning than you could have in
the rest of your life. And these are, these are really not contradictions, but they're incredible
tensions. And instead of having this be part of our makeup, where people come back from the front
and they talk maybe in measured ways about what they saw, what they participated in, and what
they saw this is doing for our nation. I mean, I think that these things are very progressive in
a certain sense that we're standing up for people who, you know, might be completely defenseless,
what you're talking about in Ramadi. And in fact, I'm very worried that what you said was
that in Ramadi, the people who got killed were the people who had helped our coalition. And so,
did we have an obligation to stay there in order to make sure that the people who helped us weren't
in harm's way? We saw the same thing with the Marsh Arabs in the south of Iraq, where they were
told to rise up by a former president. And we saw the same thing in Vietnam. We saw the same
thing in Vietnam. I mean, it matters to me that we're engaged enough to realize, hey, we just
issued an instruction and people trusted us. And now those people are in a world of pain and hurt.
And where are we? And we need a tougher country.
There was a, it was sickening for me when I saw the black flag of ISIS flying over the
city of Ramadi. I mean, clearly, first and foremost, because of my own friends and my men
that were killed in that battle and wounded in that battle, then obviously the Marines,
the soldiers, the sailors, the airmen that fought alongside of us who made the same
sacrifices were killed or gravely wounded. And then I knew, you know, as soon as I saw that
flag flying, I mean, before we even got reports back, we knew what was going to happen to the
civilian populace. The civilian populace had been, was going to be, was going to be annihilated.
And that's exactly what happened. And they do it at the level of families, right?
Like somebody collaborated on an entire family, a whole family is done.
Right. So did we have an obligation in my opinion, which again, this is just one man's
opinion. In my opinion, absolutely. We absolutely had an obligation. I'm so glad to hear this.
And the fact that, that we didn't uphold that obligation, it's, it's not good. It's, it's,
it's a letdown. It's, and luckily we went back and they were able to take back the city and
Americans did support that. And, but the Iraqis, they did the bolt, they did the fighting,
which was very impressive because when we were in Ramadi in 2006, the Iraqis didn't, didn't want,
they didn't really have the stomach for the fight. But I have friends that were in Mosul
and the Iraqi troops were fighting hard. They were taking massive casualties. In fact, the
Americans were saying, look, I don't know if we're going to have enough Iraqis to do this.
And, but the Iraqis kept fighting. So, so that was a really positive thing to see that the
Iraqis were now fighting for themselves. But do we have a moral obligation? I think once we
commit to something like that, then we need to see it through. There's a certain amount of you
break it, you bought it. Especially because, you know, Leif, who, who wrote the books with me,
he went back to Ramadi in 2010. And during, so when, when we were there together, there was,
you know, there'd be one, two, three, four, five casualties a day, several of those wounded,
several of those killed every single day, just in the city of Ramadi. When Leif went back in 2010,
during his entire six month deployment, there was one fatality, one coalition fatality, it was
from a vehicle rollover. It wasn't combat incident. So it was completely settled down. It was, it
was peaceful. And we took that as, okay, we should leave now. And, and that was the wrong move.
That was the wrong move. And people say, how long are you going to stay there? Let's say,
we're still in Germany. Yeah, well, we are right. We're still in Japan.
So, I mean, this is the thing where I want us to think about total cost of ownership of a conflict.
And I want whoever is going to lead us. I mean, I was very concerned watching
the Democrat, I come from the Democratic side of the aisle,
watching these Democratic presidential nominees and wishing more people came from a tougher
perspective, knowing that American troop deployment is a real issue. And who are we going
to follow? Do they have the presence of mind, the gravitas to tell the country, hey, we are going
to go into something and you guys need to toughen up because otherwise we're going to be inconsistent
sending messages to the people who are deployed abroad and leading the interior of the country,
you know, which is going to the malls and just trying to figure out how to have a nice weekend.
And somebody's got to take us along. I mean, it's just irresponsible for
us as a country to be this focused on what's going, you know, keeping up with the Kardashians
when we have people in uniform and in arms ways. Am I off? No, you're definitely not off. And if
you don't understand what's happening overseas, then you're more willing to send more people
overseas. You're more willing to not think about the consequences of what you've started
and more willing to abandon those situations before they're finished. So I guess your entire
thread of this and I think I missed your point in the beginning is yes, absolutely Americans
should know and understand what is happening overseas so that we can make informed decisions
back here. And be able to stomach it. And have that will that I talked about earlier,
the will to kill and the will to die, which is what you need. Do you have some stories that
illustrate not only the will to kill the will to die, but also the genius of improvisation,
which is something I associate with our arm services in general, but also particularly
with our special forces where really brilliant stuff was hatched out and tried.
Yeah. I mean, like I said earlier, the entire war for me in Iraq, which for me, I only deployed
twice, which is not a lot, but the adaptations that were made all the time was, you know,
I've often said that war is an exercise in creativity. That's right. Because you're
constantly looking at you're looking outward at the enemy. You're seeing what they're doing.
You're seeing how you can adapt, what you can change, what you can overcome. You're looking at
your own troops saying, okay, how can I lead them in a way that they understand what's happening,
that they understand the value of what they're doing, that they're making the right decisions out
there on the battlefield by themselves. And they've got to make a decision where they're going to
kill somebody or whether they're going to let them live. That's a that's a 22 year old sniper
on a rifle with someone's life and death in their finger. And you've got to get them to a point. So
how can I get that message? Yeah. Combat is an absolute exercise in in creativity. And
which is one of the interesting things is, you know, you talked about earlier about who gets
promoted. Right. And certainly the person that conforms to what they're being told to do and
they follow instructions, they're going to get promoted to a point. They're going to do fine.
But they're not going to be exceptional. The really exceptional guys are the ones that look
at the situation and say, okay, here's what I know what we've been told to do. Or here's what
the the doctrine says to do. Here's what we're actually going to do. And here's why we're going
to do it. And so those are the people that you want to follow on the battlefield and those are the
people that truly step up and lead. And it's the same thing in the business world as well.
Who do you look up to as being a great improvisational commander that you served with?
I don't really want to name the names of people I served with. You know, Colonel David Hackworth
is a guy that that I espouse his methodologies and his philosophies all the time. He was a young kid
at the end of World War Two. He joined right at the end of World War Two. Then he fought in Korea
and he fought in Vietnam. He ended up writing a book called About Face because at the end of
Vietnam, he was the guy that that went on the prime time and said, if we don't change the way that
we're fighting this war, we are going to lose. He was the and he was a full bird Colonel when he
did that. And they drummed him out of the army in like a month. And he, you know, went to Australia
and and and he wrote this book called About Face and obviously part of the meaning of About Face
is he turned. But and he was very, very misunderstood, well, not misunderstood, but he was he was hated
right by the big army. And then what happened was he actually wrote an article later about
the chief of naval operations, a guy named Admiral Borda. And he said that he hadn't earned some of
his combat decorations and Admiral Borda committed suicide. And so he was hated. So
David Hackworth was hated by the Navy. He was hated by the army. And part of the reason why
is he was hated is because he called it like he saw it. Right. And he ended up writing this book
and and he's he explains and this book is not a leadership book at all. He doesn't talk about
leadership from a from a perspective of leadership only at all ever in the book. But the entire
book it's 800 pages long. The entire book is a leadership book because you see how he led his
troops, how he dealt with people up the chain of command. And, you know, he got to that point.
And that's that's one of the things you know, he played the game. And I talk about this often with
from a leadership perspective is, you know, if I work for you and you, you know,
you do some things that I don't really like. But you know what, I'm going to play the game because
I want to build a good relationship with you and I want to get your support and I want to give you
the support so that you give me more support so that I can go and accomplish my mission. Like
that's playing the game. And and he definitely played the game. You know, he was a soldier,
and he was he was absolutely adored by his troops. And even up the chain of command,
the people that he worked for, they loved him. And so but he played the game until he finally
got to a point in Vietnam, where he saw young men getting killed. And he said, you know what,
and he tried to change it. He went over there as a battalion commander, and he changed the way
they were fighting. And they turned things around for themselves. And he cut their casualties and
took the fight to the enemy did all those great things. But he got to a point looked at it from
a strategic perspective and said, Look, we need to change what we're doing. We need to change this.
And or we're going to lose. And and they drummed him out. So that's the guy I would say, from,
you know, from a grand perspective of who I look at and really try to emulate his leadership. And
I stole all kinds of things from him. You know, I I had a when I was assigned my task unit,
which is a group of two seal platoons, when I was assigned my task unit was called task unit
Bravo, which is which is the phonetic B, right, the phonetic letter B. And in Hackworth's book,
he changed the name of his units to something that he wanted to reflect what the guys were.
And so I changed the name of my task units task unit bruiser. And and we had that attitude of
we're going to go, you know, smash. But so that's one, you know, leader that I really
try to emulate. And then the other one was when I was in my in my second seal platoon.
And I won't mention any names, but I had a I had an officer that I worked for
who took over actually that we had a mutiny against our against our platoon commander.
And we rebelled against him and went before our commanding officer and told our commanding officer,
we don't want to work for this guy. He he doesn't listen to anyone. Wow. And our commanding officer,
who was a great guy said, this sounds like a mutiny. Get out of my office, go do what you're
supposed to do. And then a couple days later, he fired the guy and brought in a new a new platoon
commander. Yes. And when he brought in a new platoon commander, this guy was very, very experienced,
tactically, tactical genius, very skilled, you know, good shooter, just good athlete,
just just just an awesome guy. It was who was held in very high regard. And I thought, Hey,
this guy is going to come in and it's going to be like, we're just going to we're going to follow
this guy. And and he's going to tell us how to do things. But he wasn't like that at all. He came
in and said, Hey, why don't you guys plan this operation? And why don't you guys take ownership
of this? And why don't you guys lead this patrol? And was that like for you? It was awesome. Yeah,
it was awesome. That's when I realized, Oh, wow, if you actually give people ownership of things,
they take it and they do a better job. And that was like the that was the very first
kernel, the very first seed in my brain about leadership, seeing it from the perspective of,
Oh, if you're actually listen to people, then then they're going to want to work for you more.
And this was contrasted with the guy that got fired who didn't listen to anyone.
Well, this is this is something I'm glad you bring this up. I don't know whether this is
going to dovetail properly. But I always surprise people that I talk about followership
because we always talk about leadership. And I think we have a terrible relationship to it,
which is that leadership is like, Yeah, I'm kicking back. I'm in the corner office. I got this thing.
And in fact, I think that's nothing to do with leadership. I think that leadership involves
followership and that people who hate the idea of following other people can't lead themselves.
And so when you find that people have a finite they'll smirk, Oh, you're interested in followership.
Greatest gift I can give many people is saying, I'll take direction from you.
And you know, it's very weird. People think that they want to be in the top spot. As soon as they
have responsibility for somebody, somebody's sort of following their directions, they're not sure
that they love it. Yeah. Well, just to dovetail into that, people are generally surprised when I
build up and I'll be talking about build up the most powerful leadership, one of the most
powerful leadership tools that they have in their entire inventory of leadership tools
that they can they can utilize and they can exploit and they can take advantage of this tool
at the right time. And it's going to do wonders for them is to listen to people, right?
Like just be quiet as a leader and just listen to what people are saying. And if they have a
good idea, support their idea. Well, you know, it's sort of a weird thing to bring up because
it's not as intense as what you do. But when I have, when I work with an assistant,
one of the first things I do is to teach that person to tell me when I'm over a line. Like,
because if that person doesn't have the comfort with saying, Hey, you know, you're calling me on
a Sunday and this is not an appropriate reason to call me on a Sunday, you're at a line, then I
don't feel great because if I'm in a leadership role with that person, then I don't know if
they're doing these things because they want to be doing another thing is always like, can I get
you coffee? I want to make sure that somebody understands that if we're forming hierarchies,
it's not for the pleasure of working out, you know, love we didn't get as a child. It's because
we actually have to accomplish something and trying to take the sting out of it without taking,
you know, in some sense, the, the necessity of forming hierarchies. Because I think that most
people don't have an idea that if people below you don't want to follow you, there are a million
ways to sandbag you. Oh yeah, they'll, they'll, they'll sabotage you. They'll sabotage you. I
say this all the time, you know, it's like if, if, if I, if I'm in charge of you and I say,
Okay, Eric, here's what's going on. Here's the mission. Here's the vehicles I want you to take.
Here's the people I want you to take. Here's the weapons I want you to use. Here's the method I
want you to use. Here's the route I want you to take to the target. Here's the route I want you
to take home. And here's what time we're going to debrief. You take that plan and take ownership
of it and go execute it. And even a, even a really great guy in the back of their mind,
they're thinking, well, I would do this a little bit different. That's not the best way to execute
that. And so when you go out to execute the mission and you hit an obstacle, you, you instead of
trying to overcome the obstacle, you just call up and say, Hey, we couldn't accomplish the mission.
Sorry, we're coming home. You didn't think of this. Your plan wasn't quite what you thought it was.
So what I should do as a leader is and say, Hey, Eric, here's the mission we want to get
accomplished. Go get with your team, figure out how you want to do it. And here's some
things that I'm thinking about. Do you see any problems? Yeah, I wouldn't even, I would say,
well, it depends. Well, here's what it depends on. If you and I work together already,
you already know what those things are. You already know me well enough to kind of,
I've already educated, I've already trained you. So you're, you're, you already, I don't have to
say those things like, Hey, I'm thinking this, that you already know that. So I just say, Hey,
come up with a plan. You already know the parameters work within. So you come up with your own plan.
You actually, if you're a good leader, you go go with your team. And you say, Hey, guys, here's
the mission. How do you all think we should do it? And now we have a, now we have a plan that
your team came up with, you came up with. And now there's no talk of how do I get you to buy
into my plan, right? You, it's your plan. You're already bought in social team. When you bring it
back to me and you say, Hey, Jaco, here's the plan. Now I look at the plan and I say, Hey,
okay, that looks pretty good. And maybe there's a little nudge I give you. Maybe there's a little
course correction I give you, but it's still your plan. And, and now you go and execute the plan.
When you hit an obstacle now out in the field, you go over it, you go around it, or you go
through that obstacle because you have ownership of the plan. So no doubt about it. That's that,
that, that leadership thing of, I actually say, you know, people always talk about leading from
the front and that you got to lead from the front and, and you certainly do. But there's many times
where I want to lead from the rear a little bit. I want to lead from the back. I want to make you
lead. You know, this is really theory of follow me where you put the highest value person in
harm's way first. And it doesn't make sense initially, but then you realize, okay, well,
if he's willing to go over the side first, then maybe I'm going to take direction from him
because he's, he's putting it all on the line. Yeah. And there's, there are limitations to that
plan as well. Sure. Because if you're the most experienced guy and you have the most tactical
knowledge and you have a full understanding and you're going to be able to make the best decisions
in the shortest amount of time that's going to keep everyone alive and you decide you're the one
that's going to go first and you get shot in the first three seconds. That's right. Guess what?
It wasn't a good one. It didn't work. And even though I'm following you, I'm following you
into a bloodbath. So what I would rather have you do, and this, this happened all the time with me,
if, if I was approaching a building and I happened to be one of the first two guys,
three guys on the entry team, I would take one step to the side and my guys knew, my guys knew
exactly that they didn't know. But it was predicated on the idea that nobody, that everyone knew that
you were making a decision for a strategic or tactical reason. But in order to have that
known, you have to do something that demonstrates that you're not doing it for a personal reason.
Yes. And, and there are times, there are absolutely times where no one's going to move
until they see you move. And so you've got to, again, this is the dichotomy. You can't
lead from the front all the time. You can't lead from the rear all the time. Sometimes you got to
be up front. Sometimes you got to be in the rear. Sometimes you got to be in the middle.
You got to be able to modulate that appropriately for whatever situation you're in.
You know, it's very, it's very interesting. We get to watch some of these films from
Afghanistan and Iraq. And, you know, I remember particularly poignant films, one of which was
some convoy that they're trying to make a positive identification. They decide that it's enemy,
light it up, fire, fire along the convoy. And then, you know, there's sort of muted celebration,
job well done, blah, blah, blah. And you're like, wait, we're getting reports that they're friendlies
in the area. And you listen to just like how flipped out these people are about what they've
done in the interpretation. Another one, I remember the sniper was talking and something
to the extent of, you know, what do you think about this target? Yes, no, yes, no.
Somebody said something like, okay, well, here comes pink mist. And, you know, this human being
effectively evaporates, you know, with a well-placed sniper shot and the ambiguity of the situation
and the weight that comes from taking life as well as from putting your own life on the line.
You know, I think one of the things that those videos have done for me is to remind me of the
professionalism that we've moved towards and how seriously people are taking these decisions.
And I worry that in some sense, we need to update ourselves for how much we changed after Vietnam
in this context. Well, the opening chapter of the first book that I wrote, Extreme Ownership,
is about a fratricide that took place with my guys and I was in charge. And there was a chaotic
situation. I had multiple elements on the battlefield, including myself, all engaged in
firefights. And there was some miscommunication, there was some noncommunication, and there ended
up being a small element of friendly Iraqi soldiers attacking one of the positions that my guys were
in. And one of my guys shot and killed an Iraqi soldier, they were then attacked by the Iraqis
and then the army, who then who called in as a quick reaction force and engaged my guys
in a building with 50 caliber machine gun. I had one of my guys wounded. There was several other
Iraqis wounded. And all this took place in five minutes. By the time I went down, I was in it,
I was a couple blocks away. And when when my guys called in the what they called the heavy QRF,
the heavy quick reaction force, which was a section or two M1 Abrams tanks, when they called in the
heavy QRF, I told the guys I was with, I said, Hey, those are my guys, we're going. So we went down
there. And all this had unfolded in, like I said, in like five minutes. But so that that's the opening
chapters, how that happened. In the book Extreme Ownership, there's two other situations that
Laef wrote about another situation where the very situation you're talking about his sniper,
which was which was Chris Kyle was looking at a building, he sees an enemy with a sniper with a
with a scoped weapon. And he's asking, Hey, do we have any friendlies in that building? Laef,
who's the platoon commander calls the army and says, Hey, do you have any buddy in this building?
And the army says, Nope. And he says, Well, we see a guy with a scoped weapon, they're like,
take him out. Because, of course, we were losing guys to snipers the whole time. They're saying,
take him out. And Laef says, Well, can you confirm? He says, I'm confirming right now,
we have no one in that building. And Laef didn't feel comfortable with taking the shot. And Chris
didn't feel comfortable with taking the shot. And he didn't take the shot. And, and Laef said,
we're not going to shoot. He says, Can you send someone into that building? And the army guy is
mad on the on the horn thinking, Are you kidding me? Now you want me to send someone into that
building where there's a bad guy? He's like, fine. And there's continuing to watch that building.
And so we're sending the assaulters now and the assaulters leave the building that they were
looking at because it was a miscommunication on where the where the bad guys were. Wow. And then
the chat one of the chapters I wrote about is a similar situation. There was a Bradley fighting
vehicle with a 25 millimeter chain gun getting ready to engage armed sniper positions on the
rooftop of a building. And as I deciphered the situation and told them not to shoot and eventually
had them confirm exactly by literally I said, Count the buildings from where you are to where you
see the enemy. And they counted the buildings and they said, Stand by, we have an adjustment.
Oh my God. And guess who it was? It was my guys. So those horrible situations they unfold and
that's the that's the that's the reality of of combat. That's the harsh reality of combat. Well,
I wish more people understood that when we talk about leadership, it's not necessarily glamorous.
It's heart wrenching, heart in your mouth situations where you don't even know and
with incomplete information what to do. And there's no one there's no one to to lean on,
I would imagine. There's no one to lean on. And there's also no one to blame when you're in charge.
Every single thing that happens on the battlefield absolutely is on you. Well, and this is where
I want to sort of maybe close out this this sit down with you, although I'd love to continue
another time. As you know, this this podcast is known as the portal and the idea for the portal
is how to extricate yourself from wherever you feel trapped
towards some sort of more transcendent existence. And what I understand from everything that you
do and project and I just I feel very grateful that I was connected to you by some of our mutual
friends. This is our first meeting is this concept of liberation through extreme discipline.
And that sounds sort of counterintuitive. It looks like you have this oppressive life where
you get up in the morning at 430am, you're taking a picture of your wristwatch and there's sweat
everywhere. And the point is, you know, there's a path and you can fall off it. But if you get back
on it and you own it, there is freedom and liberation, even though it seems like an oppressive
regime. Can you talk about this as a portal and as a as a way out for people who haven't understood
what they're capable of doing by toughening their mind and sort of making use of all of these very
hard one lessons that you've decided to share with us from places they'll never go.
For me, when I was a young new guy seal, I wanted to be a good seal. That's what I wanted to do. I
wanted to be a good seal. And I looked at other seals that were respected for their operational
capability. And I, I'm not going to sit here and tell you that I did like a Tim Ferriss assessment
of breaking down each and everything and what what is it that makes them great. But I looked at them
as a young kid and said, What are they doing that's making them better? One of the things I
noticed that they were doing is they got to work before I did. Okay, so guess what? I'm going to
start getting to work earlier. I'm going to start getting up earlier in the morning. Guess what
else they do? They work out every day regardless of what's going on. They get that done. Oh, guess
what else they're doing? They're studying so they understand tactics. They train with the
weapon systems as much as they can. So they impose these disciplines on themselves. And
the more discipline they imposed on themselves, the better they were. So when you had somebody that
was hardcore disciplined, they ended up being a hardcore operator. I saw that and said, Okay,
I need to and I didn't even call it discipline. I just said, Oh, I got to get it get to work
earlier. Oh, I got to study more. I got to train more. And then the more I did that, guess what?
I'd go to a training event and I would have freedom there because I was in better condition
or I understood the weapons better. I understood the tactics better. So or I just was more prepared
because I had gotten to work at five o'clock in the morning and prep my gear and prep my dive rig
before anyone else did. So I was just a little bit ahead so I could spend a little more time
doing a chart study of the water I was going to be diving in. So I kind of got a better lay of the
land or of the ocean in this case. So these little disciplines that I imposed on myself
made me more equipped to handle what I was going to face in these training situations.
And then, you know, very soon you realize that the more discipline you impose on
just about every aspect of your life, the more freedom you end up with, whether it's
the example of financial freedom. If you want financial freedom, guess what? You got to have
financial discipline to get there. If you want to have more free time, guess what? You got to have
more discipline time management. And if you're part of a team, then the way that you, if you
saw my syllable tune, you'd see that we had discipline standard operating procedures for
just about everything that we did. And you might think that that constrains us on the battlefield,
but it actually gives us freedom. And that's the way that it is. That's the way that for me,
discipline in my life has given me, from my perspective right now, an immense amount of
freedom. Now, as far as the portal that, that allows someone to kind of transition,
for me, another thing that I talk about all the time is the ability to detach
from the chaos, detach from mayhem and detach from your emotions so that you can make good
logical decisions about what you're doing in your life in the world. And this is something that
I remember the day I learned it. I was on an oil rig and we were doing a training operation on an
oil rig and we approached one of the main deck of the oil rig with my platoon and everyone gets out
online on this platoon. We're all lined up waiting for a command to be made, whether to go left,
whether to go right, whether to go forward, and no one's making any decision. And I think this
was my first platoon, so I was a new guy. And I'm waiting and no one's making any decisions
because everyone's doing what I was doing, which is staring down the barrel of their gun,
looking for targets. And I stood there for a second and then three seconds, then five
seconds, and I said, okay, I'm just going to take a step back. So I lifted my gun into the
high port position so I wasn't looking down my weapon anymore. I took a step back, I looked to my
left, I looked to my right. I saw that no one was looking around to make a decision. And I said,
hold left, clear right, which was a common standard operating procedure. And everyone
repeated the call because that's what you do in the SEAL teams when somebody makes a verbal
call, everyone repeats it. So everyone says, you know, hold left, clear right, and then everyone
held left and we cleared right. And I realized at that moment, I was the least one of the least
tactically experienced people. But because I had taken a step back, I was able to see things with
a lot more clarity than anyone else on that line could. So that's the phrase you use, take a step
back, which essentially, as far as I can tell, means go metacognitive, witness the robot that is
you, yes, acting robotically and find something that is not the robot to evaluate the situation.
You have to, I just call it detach, you have to detach from all that chaos. And what you're
really doing, and this, you know, makes me think of your portal ideas, you're detaching from you,
right? You're taking a step, you're attaching from your own brain, and you're looking at things
from a different perspective. And the better you get at it, you know, it got to a point where I
don't even have to move, and I'm detached and I'm looking around. So that to me is one of the most
powerful tools you have as a leader and really as a person is to instead of be being constantly
in the in the firefight, right, take a step back, get out of the fight. This is like when
you're watching a football game on TV, you watch that football game, you wonder why these idiots
on the field can't see what you see. Well, it's because you're seeing it from nine different
angles or at least an elevated angle on the television, you can see everything that's
happening. So if you do that with your life, you detach, it's going to make it's going to give you
much more visibility on decisions you should make and directions you should go. So both at the
level of cognition and at the level of emotion and feeling. Absolutely. Absolutely. Well, this is
some incredibly powerful advice. I'm going to try to put it into action. By the way, if you've never
seen Jaco discussing a moment of weakness where he tried to resist eating a piece of cake, eventually
succumbed to eating a piece of cake and realized that he had to get back on the path. It is one
of the most powerful minutes because it's as if he's locked in combat somewhere in Iraq. And in
fact, he's simply in the same struggle that everyone else is making it human. Thank you so
much for being one of the first guests on the portal. I learned a ton and I would love to have
you back at another point if you'd be willing to do it. Absolutely. Thanks for having me on.
Appreciate it. Sorry to meet you.
