Hi. In this lecture, we're going to explore creating a scientific model of the solar system.
And a scientific model must be based on observations. We're going to keep it simple and use only
human eye observations, the observations you could do without a telescope. And we're going
to create the kind of model that you could create yourself. We're going to follow the
development of the ancient Greeks as they put together their model of the solar system
and we'll examine the perspective of an Earth-centered universe. The Earth-centered universe is
really the most natural and simplest of model. We call it geocentric, geomeaning Earth, Earth
at the center. And if you just observe the sky, it's the model you would come up with.
This image here shows a time lapse of the sun. We see it rise in the east, we see it
set in the west. It certainly looks like it's circling around Earth. At night, you can go
out and look at the stars. And here's a gorgeous image of stars in the area around the constellation
Orion. But if you look in the poles and you watch the stars over time using a time lapse
of the stars, you can see the stars also make circles in the sky all night long. So the
most natural model is that everything is circling around Earth. So this would be your first initial
model. The Earth would be here at the center and all the rest of the solar system would
be circling around Earth. Now, to make this scientific, we have to add in some specifics.
What are the sizes of the objects, what are their distances and how do they move? The problem
with the geocentric model in modern society is not really with the geocentric model, but
it's with the mythos that has developed around it. We have this idea that the geocentric
model was way too complicated, that the Tomeic system that was developed by the Greeks started
simply and then added in this feature and added in that feature and then needed this
feature and needed that feature and needed this feature and sort of collapsed under its
own weight. This is definitely not true. It's a nice story. It makes us feel good. Oh, we
don't believe such simplistic stuff anymore, but it's a disservice to science education
because the geocentric model has a lot to teach us, not only about the solar system,
but also how you construct a scientific model. The geocentric model and all scientific models
should be judged on whether they can account for observed behavior. Can you explain the
observations of the sky? You also need to be able to predict future behavior. The simplicity
and accuracy of the model that can explain observations and predict future behavior is
really all that's required. One question we'll also examine today is the truth of the model
really necessary. If the model can explain what we see, does it really matter if it corresponds
to reality? We'll start with the basic ideas. Let's just simplify things to the earth, the
sun and the moon. What can we tell by simple observations? One thing we can tell is that
the earth is round. Now, I know many of you were taught that Columbus showed the earth
was round when he sailed across the ocean. He gets way too much credit. Actually, it
was known the earth was round by the ancient Greeks and Aristotle in about 400 BCE could
offer several different arguments for why the earth must be round. Aristotle had this
thing for spheres, but he had some scientific arguments behind them. The easiest way to see
it is take a look at a lunar eclipse. A lunar eclipse is when the moon passes into the shadow
of earth. Here's an image that shows a time lapse. On the left hand side, you see the
full moon. As it progresses to the right hand side, the shadow of earth slowly creeps across
the surface of the moon. What you notice when you look at this is that the shadow of earth
is curved. If you look at many lunar eclipses and many parts of earth shadow, you find that
it is always curved. Aristotle reasoned that the only shape that would always cast a curved
shadow would be a sphere. Thus, he concluded that the earth was round. The moon can also
be used to tell us about the relative distances to it and to the sun. If you watch the moon
over a period of weeks, you see it change its phases. It goes from a crescent moon up
to a half moon to a gibbous moon to a full moon and then backwards through those same
things gibbous, half and to crescent. This is caused by the changing of the angles between
our direction to the moon and our direction to the sun. Basically, the lit part of the
moon varies according to the moon's orbit around earth. If you look at the half moon
and think about it, it actually is a special time because when the moon is half lit, that
means the sun is perpendicular to the moon, that there's a 90 degree angle between our
direction to the moon and the moon's direction to the sun. When you have a right angle, you
then get a right triangle and you can use trigonometry to deduce answers. Here's a simplistic
drawing of a triangle that would be formed when the moon is at half phase. The earth looking
directly at the moon sees the moon at half phase, the sun would be at 90 degrees. In
order to measure the sizes of the lengths of this triangle, it suffices simply to measure
the angle on the sky between the moon and the sun. If you can measure that angle, which
is going to be very large, almost 90 degrees itself, but if you can measure that angle,
you can then get the scale of this triangle and you can understand the relative distance
to the moon compared to the distance to the sun. Aristarchus was able to do this in about
270 BCE and I note that this was just after Euclid's Elements, the textbook of Geometry,
was published at about 300 BCE. He got his angular measure a little bit wrong and estimated
that it was about 20 times that the sun was 20 times farther away than the moon. Real
answer is it's about 400, but the method, the geometrical method was sound. We can get
the relative sizes of the moon and the sun by looking at solar eclipses. This is an image
of a partial solar eclipse and here instead of the earth shadow going across the moon,
we have the moon passing between earth and the sun and you can see the limb of the moon
passing in front of the sun. It turns out, and it's a very lucky coincidence, that the
angular size of the moon on the sky is about the same as the angular size of the sun on
the sky and when they pass directly in front of each other, we get a total solar eclipse
and this is a spectacular event and during that time the entire disk of the sun is blocked
out and you can see this wonderful corona around the sun, this amazing stuff that you
can't see at any other time, at least not with the human eye. The geometry of the solar
eclipse would look like this. Earth is over here, the moon is blocking the light from
the sun and we can form triangles again. There are two similar triangles here, the
earth and the diameter of the moon and the earth to the diameter of the sun. They form
similar triangles and because you can get a total solar eclipse where the moon just blocks
out the sun, that means that the size ratio of those diameters is the same as their distance
ratio. If the sun is 400 times farther away than the moon, then that means it's also 400
times bigger than the moon. Lunar eclipse can be used to get the relative sizes of the earth
and moon. If we take a look at this image, it shows you the full sequence of a lunar
eclipse. The moon starts out not being an earth shadow, it slowly passes through earth
shadow and then emerges from earth shadow and if you time the length of the lunar eclipse,
you can estimate the size of earth shadow and specifically you can estimate the size
of the earth shadow relative to the size of the moon. If you take a look at the geometry
of it, it's really just the same thing as before, the sun casting its light, the earth
creating a shadow and the moon moving through that shadow.
Parastarcus looked at this and he estimated that the size of earth shadow was about three
times the size of the moon. The real answer is that it's about four times the size of
the moon but the method again was sound and you're able to then tell that earth is about
four times larger than the moon by examining lunar eclipses.
The last piece you need to complete this basic model is the size of earth and you can get
this with a remarkable observation by when the sun is directly overhead. A man named
Eratosthenes was able to do this and he lived in Alexandria and he noticed that on a certain
day in Alexandria you could look down an entire deep well and see the bottom. The light from
the sun would go all the way to the bottom of a deep well. That meant the sun was directly
overhead. On that same day in a nearby city named Sain, the sun was not directly overhead.
If you put a vertical rod in the ground you could measure the shadow that it made. Looking
at the geometry of it you can see that the length of the shadow at Sain would enable
you to measure the angle between Alexandria and Sain along the circumference of the earth.
Then knowing the distance between Alexandria and Sain you could calculate the full circumference
of the earth and he was able to do this and get a very accurate estimate for the size
of earth. Combining these pieces of information you get the size of earth then you get the
size of the moon and the size of the sun and from that you get the distances to the moon
and sun and you end up with basically looking at eclipses and observations of the moon and
sun you could have a full model of earth, moon and sun. To make this into a more complete
scientific model you would also want to look at motions and motions can provide a basic
way on how to order the distances to objects the sun, the moon and the planets. If we look
at the periods of the various objects the moon goes through its phases in about 27 days
about a month, it's the origin of the month, Mercury about three months, Venus goes through
its period in about three quarters of a year, the sun in one year, Mars about two years,
Jupiter 12 years and Saturn about 30 years. Though we don't know at this point from the
human eye observations the distances to the planets, we can get the distances to the moon
and the sun, we can estimate which one is further away than the other from their motions.
It's really just basic idea that something nearby will move across your field of view
at a faster speed than something far away will tend to appear that it's moving slower.
So the basic structure, the ordering of the planets was determined by the periods and
so in the geocentric model the earth was at the center and the planets were around
it moving at slower and slower speeds, the moon and Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter
and Saturn. Now I've drawn them here as circles and that would be the basic way you would
model them but the motion that they make across the sky is not constant, it's not uniform
circular motion. The speed varies along its orbit and we can tell that by looking at the
sun's motion. The sun's motion can be measured by the seasons and the seasons are basically
spring, summer, fall and winter. They are measured by the equinoxes and the solstice,
the equinox being the start of spring, the infernal equinox being the start of spring,
the autumnal equinox being the start of fall, the summer solstice being the start of summer
and the winter solstice being the start of winter. And they, as you can see, they occur
in March, June, September and December, approximately three months apart and if you look at that
in a diagram of the sun's motion around earth, the solstices are opposite each other on the
circle and the equinoxes are opposite each other on the circle and they divide the circle
into four equal parts. If the sun were undergoing uniform circular motion then the length of
each season would be about the same, one quarter of a year or about 91 days. However, when
you look at the measured time for the seasons, you can see that they are not the same. In
this table I've added in the length of the seasons and spring is 92.8 days, summer is
93.7 days, fall is 89.8 days and winter is 89 days. The length of the seasons is not
the same and therefore the sun cannot be going through uniform circular motion. How are we
going to model that? Well, we're going to look at the model created by a man named Ptolemy
and this is a drawing of him and it is called the Ptolemaic model but that's really giving
him a little too much credit. What Ptolemy did is he took about 500 years of Greek astronomical
knowledge and organized it and put it into a systematic presentation. He based the geometry
of it upon that founding Euclid's elements and we're going to look at how they solved
these ideas of creating motion. So, if we look at the sun's motion and the real seasons we
can see that summer is much too long for this arc. This arc needs to be longer and winter
is too short for this arc. Winter needs to be shorter. How would you reconcile that?
Well, they came up with the idea that we're going to preserve uniform circular motion
for the sun but we're going to move earth off center. If you take earth and shift it
off center and then the solstices and the equinoxes shift with it, you can see that
you create a much longer arc for summer and a much shorter arc for winter and you can
justify the lengths of the seasons by uniform circular motion seen by an observer who's
not at the center. Now, this is a little bit exaggerated here but we have a more accurate
model to show it to you. This is the motion of the sun in an eccentric circle. The observer
is located here at O and the center of the circle is actually at Z. The green line is
the motion of the sun circling around Z and the blue line would be the mean sun, the sun
as if it were orbiting around the observer at O. Now, if I put this in motion, you can
see that the green line and the blue line move at different speeds. When, if I pause
it here, when the sun is closer to the observer, the green line catches up with the blue line.
It moves faster and actually gets ahead of it. Then, as the sun gets further away from
the observer, the blue line catches up to the green line and the sun observed in an eccentric
circle moves slower. This is what the eccentric circle allowed us to do. It allowed for the
sun to move faster when it was closer to the earth and move slower when it was further
away from the earth. So, the eccentric circle could explain the motion of the sun. What
about the motion of the moon? Well, it didn't quite work for the motion of the moon. For
that, we needed a different geometrical construct called epicycle and deferent. These are really
cool words. They're a little bit scary, but they really are a concept you already know.
If you think about a star and a planet orbiting around that star and then a moon orbiting
around that planet, you already know epicycle deferent because this construct of one object
orbiting another, orbiting a third, is exactly what epicycle deferent is about. We just have
to take this diagram and re-label it. For epicycle deferent, we have earth at the center,
the deferent circle is the first circle around the earth, and the epicycle circle is the
second circle around the point on the deferent circle. We're doing uniform circular motion
both in the deferent and in the epicycle, and this was used by Tommy in order to create
a basic moon model. We have that for you here. The observer, again, is at O. C is the point
moving around the deferent circle, and M is the point moving around the epicycle circle.
You can see that it makes an interesting motion, but if I only put turn on the trail, because
when you think about it, epicycle and deferent could produce some very complex motions, but
the motion done for the moon here, as the trail makes its first orbit, you can see produces
a relatively smooth orbit, relatively smooth here, and you're able to create a nice orbit
for the moon. Unfortunately, it doesn't explain the full motion of the moon. A single epicycle
really couldn't explain the speeding up and slowing down of the moon through its orbit
that we observed. Instead, he found he needed to use two epicycles. This is the diagram
of Tommy's full moon model, and it's a little complicated. We have the observer here at O.
We have the first deferent circle at Z. We have the epicycle around Z, C, which is also
serving as a second deferent circle, and then we finally have the epicycle M moving around
the point C. The strange thing about this model is that the interior epicycle is rotating
in the opposite direction of the exterior epicycle, and so the motion is kind of funky.
As a matter of fact, they refer to it as the crank mechanism necessary to get the moon's
motion. Let me turn that on. Now you can see the motion of the moon on the exterior epicycle,
and then it moving around the interior epicycle, and it's a little bit complex. If I turn
on the trail, you see that once again we have a relatively smooth orbit, even though it's
got a relatively complex behavior behind it. Okay, so you can see that the moon was modeled
by a double epicycle deferent because it had a much larger variation in its motion between
its slowest point and its fastest point in its motion. The interesting thing about the
epicycle deferent is that it's actually equivalent to the eccentric circle. You can construct
an epicycle deferent to exactly match the eccentric circle, and I go back to the sun
model, and you'll notice down here I have a slider that I can go to the eccentric version
of it, and so this is the eccentric version of the sun, but I can also take the slider
over to the epicycle version of the sun and produce exactly the same motion. A properly
configured epicycle deferent in which the rotation of the epicycle exactly matches the
rotation around the deferent can produce the same motion, and you can see that clearly
when I put the slider halfway in between, and in that case you can see both the epicycle
and the eccentric circle produce the same motion for the sun. So the epicycle deferent
is sort of like a generalization of the eccentric circle. There is still one more geometrical
construct that we need to finish off Ptolemy's model. It's called equant motion, and it's
sort of like an extension of the eccentric circle. This diagram here shows you circular
motion, and the motion, the time it takes to go between any one of these sections is
the same. That's basic circular motion. Then we can think about having that motion
respect to an off-center point. If we move the center of the circular motion off from
the center of the circle, then you can see these top arcs are shorter than these longer
arcs, and if it still takes the same amount of time to go between any of these two points,
then the planet must be moving slower between T1 and T2, for example, than it would be moving
between T4 and T5, because it has a shorter distance to cover between T1 and T2, and a
longer distance to cover between T4 and T5. Equant motion extend this just like a little
bit further by also moving the observer off-center, and so the center of the circle is here in
this gray dot, the center of the circular motion is this unfilled dot, and the observer
is here in this blue dot, the result of which is the equant motion observed by the observer
has a very strong differential from one side to the other. You can see that the distance
here between T1 and T2 is much, much shorter than the distance between T4 and T5. Again,
when the object is closer to the observer, it moves faster, and when it's further from
the observer, it moves slower. So we've got the sun and the moon, and now we're going
to add in the planets. The planets were modeled with the equant motion and the epicycle deferent.
You need the epicycle deferent because you've got to explain the strange motion of the planets.
The derivation of the word planets is wanderer. They were the objects that wandered across
the sky. The sun and the moon always moved in the same direction across the sky and
never in the reverse direction. The planets did not. Mercury and Venus, shown here, would
always be found near the sun. Whenever you see a picture of Mercury or Venus, you're
going to see it at twilight, either in the evening or in the morning, because it's always
found within a certain angular distance from the sun, Mercury about 28 degrees and Venus
about 46 degrees. And their wandering motion is that they would wander back and forth on
the sky around the point of the sun. You would never find them opposite the sun. They would
always be over in the same region of the sun, wandering back and forth. The other planets,
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, they showed a different kind of wandering motion, something we call
retrograde motion. And here's a diagram of the path of Mars in a retrograde motion.
And it is moving across the sky in the normal direction, same direction as the sun and the
moon move across the sky. And then it slows down and stops at what we call a stationary
point. And then it backs up and goes backwards relative to the stars, hits another stationary
point, stops and then moves forward again. And this retrograde motion was found to occur
when the planets were opposite the position of the sky of the sun. If the sun was over
here and Mars was over here, that's the time that Mars would go through retrograde motion.
And so with the equant and the epicycle deferent, you're able to model these motions for Mercury
and Venus and for Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. This is a model of the motion for Mars, Jupiter
and Saturn. And the observer here is at O. The center of the deferent circle is at D.
The equant motion offset is E. The center of the motion on the deferent circle is C.
And the planet is moving at P. Let me put this in motion for you. And you can see it
basically looks like the basic epicycle deferent. You can't really tell that the center of the
circular motion is at the equant point. It looks pretty much like a standard epicycle
deferent. The important point for these exterior planets is that when they come in the inside
part of their epicycle, they make that little curly Q. This is the time when you would see
the retrograde motion. The proper ratio of motion around the epicycle with motion around
the deferent produces these little curly Q's and produces the retrograde motion on the
sky. It also shows you why Tom only is famous. He invented Spirograph and he invented Spirograph
about 2,000 years before it came out as a kid's toy. Now this is how they produce the
entire model of the solar system in the geocentric model using these three basic geometric constructs.
The eccentric circle, the epicycle and deferent, and equant motion. And so to put it all together
we have a complete model of the Tamaic solar system. And so here we look at this and on
the exterior we see the sphere of the stars, which is basically unmoving it in this. And
the blue represents Saturn, the purple represents Jupiter, the red represents Mars. And we've
got a wonderful slider down here where we can move in closer because the scale of this
is much, much too large to look at in one thing. And we move down, we see the sun here
in blue, we see Venus here in green, going in further, we see Mercury here in red, and
the moon here in blue, and way down deep at the center we find the Earth. And the person
who created this model was cute. He added in Ptolemy's map of the Earth. This is a map
produced by Ptolemy as a texture onto the Earth. So let's back out a little bit and put
this in motion. So here you can see the moon working with its crank mechanism and its double
epicycle deferent. And as we pull out, you see Mercury in red moving with its epicycle
deferent. And then to Venus in green working with its epicycle deferent and the sun. And
moving in its eccentric circle. One thing to notice is that the epicycles for Mercury
and Venus, Mercury in red here and Venus in green here, are always aligned with the sun.
The motion on the epicycle allowed for this bounded elongation of Mercury and Venus, that
the planets would be able to go in front of the sun and behind the sun as long as the
center of the epicycle circle always pointed towards the sun. So the model naturally is
tied to the sun and explains the abounded elongation. We move further out. You see Mars
in red, Jupiter in purple, and Saturn in blue. Let me speed it up a little bit. And you can
see the eccentric motion of the epicycle, the sort of the curly cue motion. The other
thing you want to notice, if I pause it here, is that the position of Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn in their epicycles are tied exactly to the position of the sun relative to earth.
That allows the retrograde motion to occur at opposition. Put it back in motion again.
And you can see that the motion on their epicycles is tied to the sun's motion around the earth.
When viewed in this manner, the full Ptolemaic model looks very complex. But the secret is
that it's complexity derived from simplicity. Remember that there are just three geometric
constructs that underlight all the motions observed in this model. And in that manner,
and in many other respects, this should be considered a triumph. Not just because you
can create a complex model out of simple ideas, but because this was the first time that the
motions of the heavens had been scientifically predicted. And it could not just predict the
motions of the planets and the sun and the moon, it could also predict other events like
eclipses, which had never been able to be predicted before. Ptolemy did not think this was
a real physical model, but rather just a mathematical device for predicting. He entitled
his book, Mathematical Systematic Treatise. It was later called AmmaGest by Arabic astronomers.
This geocentric model provided accurate enough predictions that it remained the standard for
1,500 years. The only work I know of that lasted longer was Euclid's Elements, which
was a standard textbook of astronomy well through the 19th century. Matter of fact, the
geocentric model is the model you would derive today if you just based your observations on
what the human eye could see, you would come up with a model like this. And that shows a
basic tenet that underlies astronomy and all of science, that the universe is understandable,
that it's explainable, and that it is predictable. That is the construct of science. However,
this model leaves one question open. Is mathematical prediction enough? A scientific model that
can explain the observations is great, but one that actually represents reality would be
better. Does a model actually have to represent reality, or is just the mathematical prediction
enough? We'll explore that question in our next lecture. Until then, have a great day.
