Philosophers discuss truth and beauty.
Scientists discuss hypothesis and theory.
What happens in science when you have two competing hypotheses?
Then truth and beauty become part of science.
And which is more important?
And in science, how would you measure the truth or beauty of a hypothesis?
These ideas come into play as we look at the next perspective on the solar system, the
heliocentric hypothesis of Copernicus.
Heliocentric meaning sun-centered, helio being a root word for sun.
You'll notice that I said hypothesis and not fact, because I want to examine it in its
historical setting.
Although we now know that this is the correct model of the solar system, for about a hundred
years after it was proposed, it was still just a beautiful hypothesis.
Even one of science's greatest minds could not prove its truth.
The geocentric model had been successful for more than a thousand years, and it was
based on three geometric variations on circular motion.
If we have circular motion like this here, we would have uniform motion around a circle.
The eccentric circle was a variation where you viewed uniform circular motion, but from
a point off-center.
Then equant motion went a little bit further, and it not only took the observer off-center,
but also placed the center of the circular motion off-center.
Finally, the third construct was the epicycle indefinite, which was circular motion around
circular motion.
Together, these built up a wonderful model of the solar system where Earth was at the
center.
In the Middle Ages, however, that science was lost in Europe.
The knowledge of the geocentric model was carried on through Arabic astronomers.
Not only did they carry it on, they almost revered it.
They took Ptolemy's book and they called it Al-Mijisti, which comes down to us as Almagest.
They also improved some of Ptolemy's model to try and make it correspond more to reality.
There were some problems with Ptolemy's model, in particular because Ptolemy only thought
that it was a mathematical model designed to make predictions.
For example, if we watch this animation of the moon as it goes through its phases, you
can see that while the moon goes through its phases, it gets a little bit bigger and a
little bit smaller.
In Ptolemy's model, the variation of the moon in distance from the Earth was much, much
larger and would have produced a much larger amount of size change for the moon.
The Arabic astronomers improved not only the moon model, but also models for the outer
planets because the changes in size were true for them as well.
Here's an example of an Arabic model called the Al-Shatir model, and this is a model of
the outer planets.
If I put it in motion, you can see it has several epicycle deferents.
It's a rather complex model, but it was devised to make the size changes that actually observed
for the outer planets to match the size changes in the models.
They tried to improve it to make it correspond more to reality.
When the Renaissance came to Europe, the Ptolemaic models were rediscovered.
In 1175, there was a Latin translation of the Arabic translation of the Almagest, and
in 1515, shortly after the invention of the printing press, was the first printing of
the Almagest.
The other thing that came down in the Renaissance was the Aristotelian philosophy, that the idea
that the heavens were perfect, and that sphere and circles were the perfect shape.
There's a strong contrast in beliefs here of these two ideas that came down.
Ptolemy, believing that things are just a mathematical model, it's just a description
of movement in the universe, whereas Aristotle believed it was reality.
This model believed that there really were crystalline spheres in the heavens that guided
the motions of the sun, the moon, and the planets.
Into this, we bring the heliocentric model.
It is basically an alternative hypothesis to the geocentric model at this time.
If this is the geocentric model, you can see Earth is at the center with moon, Mercury,
Venus, the sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn orbiting around it.
The heliocentric model simply switches the place of Earth, and moon, and the sun.
The sun switches to the center, the Earth and the moon switch out there.
This is the model embraced by Copernicus, and it was presented in his book on the Revolution
of Heavenly Spheres that was published in 1543.
Incidentally, it was published the same year that he died.
There is an apocryphal story that says on his deathbed they brought him a copy of his
book, and he was able to see his life's grand achievement before he died.
We don't really know if that's true.
There's a lot else we don't really know that's true, because Copernicus did not keep notebooks.
We don't know much about what he did.
All we really know is that he worked part-time on his heliocentric model for more than 30
years.
In the absence of knowing what did happen with Copernicus, filling in the void, there
are many myths that have grown up about the heliocentric model.
And so instead of studying what we do know, which is kind of scant, let's take a look
at all these myths, which are probably almost as large or larger than what we do know.
Myth number one, the heliocentric model is much more accurate than the geocentric model.
This is not true, because Copernicus did not use any new mathematical techniques.
There were no significant advances in either observations or observing tools, and therefore
the heliocentric model provided no greater accuracy in predictions.
Myth number two, the heliocentric model is much simpler than the geocentric model.
Well, I would argue that the heliocentric model is definitely simpler in terms of philosophy.
In science, it's not really simpler, because Copernicus used the eccentrics and epicycles,
the same geometric tools that are in the geocentric model.
There were no new mathematical techniques developed for Copernicus' model, so really
from a scientific standpoint, it wasn't any simpler.
Myth number three, the center of the universe is the most important place.
The idea here is that the critics of the heliocentric model resisted demoting Earth from its place
in the center.
Well, if you look at the Aristotelian philosophy, it says actually the opposite.
Perfection in the universe flows upward, the imperfect flows downward.
Instead of the Earth being in a revered place in the center of the universe, the heavens
were the revered place, and the Earth was the opposite of that, so the Earth not being
at the center from the Aristotle point of view would actually be a promotion.
Myth number four, Copernicus delayed publishing his work for fear of reprisal from the church.
This I refer to as sort of the Galileo myth, because Galileo got in trouble with the church
for his heliocentric views, so of course Copernicus had to get in trouble with the church for
his heliocentric views.
And that's totally wrong as well, because Cardinal Schoenberg and Bishop Giza were two
major supporters of Copernicus, and they urged Copernicus to publish.
Copernicus even dedicated his book to Pope Paul III, and Pope Paul III accepted the dedication.
Myth number five, Copernicus viewed his system as only a mathematical device, not as representation
of reality.
This myth arises because Andreas Ossiander inserted an introductory letter, and in that
introductory letter, fearing reprisal from the church, he put forth the idea that this
was just a mathematical model, that they shouldn't take it too seriously, and please don't get
mad at us for doing this.
Bishop Giza found this to be horrible, and he attempted to get the letter removed from
the publishing of the book.
Myth number six, astronomers quickly embraced the heliocentric model.
Well, this was not true, at least not for about a hundred years.
The Copernicans were few.
There were not many people who were willing to embrace the heliocentric model, simply
because it didn't provide any better predictions than the geocentric model.
It offered no practical advantages to the astronomers.
So by the time of Galileo, there were some Copernicans, folks who believed in the heliocentric
model, but not many.
And finally, myth number seven, Galileo proved that the heliocentric model was correct.
This comes from the fact that Galileo was tried by the Inquisition and got into a lot
of trouble for espousing the heliocentric viewpoint, but he did not prove the heliocentric
viewpoint, and the reason why he failed illustrates a fundamental physical principle discovered
by Galileo himself.
So the heliocentric model, as it would have been studied in the time of Galileo, was viewed
as an alternative to the geocentric model.
It provided several advantages.
If we look at the circles of the heliocentric model, it makes much more sense that the smaller
sphere of Earth moves through the universe instead of the much larger sphere of the sun,
and certainly makes a lot more sense than the much, much, much, much larger sphere of
the stars orbiting around Earth once per day.
The smaller things moving makes much more sense than the larger things moving.
It also provides a natural explanation for the bounded elongations of Mercury and Venus.
As you can see in this diagram, they are interior planets.
They're in between Earth and the sun, and therefore they could never appear on the opposite
side of Earth from the sun.
They would always appear interior and towards the direction of the sun, which is exactly
what we observe for Mercury and Venus.
For the exterior planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, that would explain why they appear
largest and are closest to Earth when they are opposite the sun.
Because when they are near the sun, in the sky, they are far away, and when they are
opposite the sun, when the sun is on one side and they are on the other side, they are passing
closest to Earth.
It also provides a natural explanation for the retrograde motion of these outer planets.
In this diagram, the blue dot is meant to represent Earth, and the red dot is meant
to represent an outer planet.
Take Mars, for example, and as Earth in its inner orbit catches up and passes by the outer
planet, the outer planet appears to move forward across the plane of the stars, then backward,
and then forward again.
But it does not involve any true backward motion, it's just the perspective of an inner
planet overtaking the outer planet because it's moving on a faster inner track.
The final advantage of the heliocentric model is philosophical, that it's a physical model
representing nature and is not meant to be just a mathematical device.
Although the philosophical arguments don't carry too much weight in astronomy, if all
things are equal, we'd like to have both truth and beauty.
Now everything was not wonderfully for the heliocentric model, it also had several problems.
If I take this globe and I orbit it, I rotate it, if the Earth is spinning once per day,
a point on the equator has to go all the way around and back in 24 hours.
To do that, it has to be moving at absolutely absurd speed, you would have to be moving
at a thousand kilometers per hour, that doesn't make much sense.
Furthermore, if we take this Earth and put it in orbit around the Sun, well then the
entire Earth has to be moving at even more absurd speed, it has to be moving at a hundred
thousand kilometers per hour.
Come on, that doesn't make much sense to move Earth that fast through the solar system.
Also, if Earth is orbiting the Sun, we should see a parallax effect on the stars.
That's illustrated by this diagram, that if the Earth is on the near part of its orbit,
the angle to stars would be larger and when it's on its far part of its orbit, the angle
to the stars would be smaller.
The stars should appear to pull away and come closer, pull away and come closer as Earth
moves around its orbit.
This is what we would call a parallax effect, and it's not observed for the stars.
Now there is a simple answer argument that says, oh this shouldn't happen, that's just
to put the stars immensely far away, but that doesn't make any sense because then you would
have this huge empty space beyond Saturn and before the sphere of the stars, and that
was considered absurd in this day.
Finally, the most damning argument for the heliocentric model is that the scriptures
state in several places that Earth does not move.
This doesn't sound like a huge problem to a scientist today, but it was a big problem
back then when the church dominated not only the daily life, but also your intellectual
career.
All of these arguments, both for the heliocentric model and against the heliocentric model,
are essentially philosophical.
Some of them have a scientific basis, but they are simply the idea of which explanation
do you prefer.
Do you prefer to have Earth moving at this incredible speed of 100,000 kilometers per
hour, or would you rather have the Sun orbiting around?
Make your choice, which is a simpler argument to you.
The thing in terms of science is that the predictions are equivalent.
So if you are an astronomer at the time, what would you think?
Would you take an established working model that's been providing predictions your whole
life, or would you go with a more aesthetic alternative?
How would you choose?
Enter into this, this man, Galileo, the first telescopic astronomer, and his observations
with the telescope helped disprove the Aristotelian view.
The Aristotelian view came under attack just shortly before Galileo.
The idea that the heavens are perfect and immutable could demonstrably be shown to be
wrong.
In 1572, they observed a supernova explosion, the appearance of a new star that then faded
away.
That showed that the stars do indeed change.
Galileo's telescope revealed that the moon had mountains, and it showed that not all
bodies in the heavens are perfect spheres.
Furthermore, Galileo found the moons of Jupiter orbited around Jupiter, and that showed that
not everything orbited around Earth.
This break with Aristotle came about and was reflected in a new model of the solar system,
called the Tyconian model.
If this is the heliocentric model in which everything orbits the sun, the Tyconian model
would actually be a compromise.
It would take the Earth and make its stationary, and have the moon and the sun orbiting around
Earth, and then it would take all the other planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn, and have them orbit the sun.
It seems like a rather complex idea, but it had quite a lot of support at the time of
Galileo.
So here is where I come to a point what I call Galileo's Dilemma.
Galileo found that he could prove Aristotle wrong, but given the science of the early 1600s,
could he provide proof of the heliocentric hypothesis?
This question came up in 1615 when the Catholic Church reviewed Copernicus' book.
Even though Pope Paul III had signed off on the book 60 years earlier, it came up for
review because of Galileo's work, and they decreed that the heliocentric model could
only be referred to as a hypothesis.
Galileo was particularly cautioned not to hold or defend the ideas of heliocentrism.
However, there was a loophole.
There was an implied challenge that if Galileo could provide irrefutable proof of the heliocentric
hypothesis, the matter could be reopened.
Galileo could resist, and he took up the challenge of proving the heliocentric model.
He presented his arguments in 1630 in his book Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems.
For this book, he was tried by the Inquisition, forced to abjure, and placed under house arrest
for the remainder of his life.
What was his crime?
Well, his crime was providing a wrong proof of the heliocentric model.
His idea was that the Earth's motion produces the advance and recession of the tides.
As he put it, the ocean, because of its fluid nature, is the only thing that can indicate
the motion of the Earth.
If Earth were stationary, the tides could not occur.
In order to understand that argument, we first have to go through something called the Galilean
transformation, and that's simply the idea that in physics, the sum of two motions is
a vector sum.
If you have two different motions operating, you can combine them with a vector sum.
And to see this, let's take a look at the idea of a train.
So suppose you have a train conductor walking down the aisle of a train.
If you're sitting in the seat, you see him walk past you, say he's moving at about two
kilometers per hour.
However, if you are outside the train, you see the train moving down the track at, say,
30 kilometers per hour.
From your perspective, outside the train, you add together the 30 kilometers per hour
of the train motion and the two kilometers per hour of the conductor walking, and you
see his total motion as 32 kilometers per hour.
Which one's correct?
The answer is that they both are.
It just depends upon the frame of reference.
Measurements depend upon how you are moving with respect to what you are measuring.
Galileo applied this to his argument in the tides.
He argued that Earth's rotation and orbit combine to produce the tides, and the argument
looks something like this.
At the anti-solar point, the point farthest from the sun, Earth's rotational motion and
Earth's orbital motion combine to produce a faster motion.
So far on the opposite side of the sun, you're moving a faster speed.
At the sub-solar point, the rotational motion is going against the orbital motion and the
two subtract and you get a slower motion.
His argument was that that acceleration on the far side and deceleration toward the near
side created a sloshing of the ocean that created the tides.
Wonderful argument.
It's just plain wrong as a problem.
Problem with this is that the tides are in effect seen from the reference frame of Earth.
While the change in speed in his argument is only seen from the reference frame of the
sun, he is using a sun reference frame argument to explain an Earth reference frame effect.
Furthermore, the high and low tides that we see on Earth cycle in about 12 hours.
We get two high tides and two low tides every day.
In Galileo's argument, you should only get one high tide and one low tide per day.
The tides also are observed to occur relative to the sub-lunar and anti-lunar points, the
points closest and farthest to where the moon is at the time.
What's even more intriguing is that Galileo was aware of the correct argument that the
moon produces the tides.
In his book, he has the simpleton simplicio make this argument.
The moon, wandering through the sky, attracts and draws up toward itself a heap of water
which goes along following it so that the high sea is always in that part that lies under
the moon.
That's basically a correct argument.
However, the wise man, Segredo, in Galileo's dialogue dismisses it as those ridiculous
older opinions.
Galileo's proof failed because the shift from geocentric to heliocentric is just a transformation
of the heavens.
Motion is defined relative to some frame of reference and the various solar system models
are essentially equivalent because they are all just changes of reference frame.
To go from geocentric to heliocentric, you're changing from the reference frame of Earth
to the reference frame of the sun.
If you look at the Tyconian model, that's just a rotational transformation of the heliocentric
model, taking the heliocentric model and putting it in a spin about Earth.
To see that, let's take a look at this animation of the Tyconian model.
When you look at this, it looks somewhat like a heliocentric model.
It looks like the sun is at the center, but you'll note that there is a circle going through
the sun, and actually the Earth here is at the center, and the Earth is fixed.
If I put it in motion, you can see that the sun is orbiting around the Earth, but Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are orbiting around the sun.
This is the Tyconian sort of compromise model.
If I speed it up, you can see that you start to get sort of seasick, because it's like
a wheel that's out of balance and is wobbling around.
You see that same sort of curly Q motion that is produced by the epicycle and deferent in
the Ptolemaic model.
What we really have here is the sun working on a deferent circle, and the planets on five
epicycles around it.
This model was due to Tycho Brahe, and he was one of the greatest pre-telescopic observers.
He did his observations in a period from about 1570 to 1600.
He developed this model because he saw the beauty of the heliocentric model, and he appreciated
the explanations, the natural explanations for the bounded elongations of Mercury and
Venus, and for the retrograde motion of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
Yet, he could not accept the idea that Earth was in motion.
To him, it was still absurd that Earth should be spinning or moving around the sun.
In the end, all three of the models, the Ptolemaic model, the Tyconian model, and the Copernican
model were scientifically equivalent because they all produced the same observations.
They could not, one of them could predict the motions of the planets any better than
any other one.
And really, I think Galileo might have known this, because in his own copy of the dialogue,
he wrote this quote.
Take note, theologians, that in your desire to make matters of faith out of propositions
relating to the fixity of sun and earth, you run the risk of eventually having to condemn
as heretics those who would declare the earth to stand still and the sun to change position.
Eventually I say, at such a time as it might be physically or logically proved that the
earth moves and the sun stands still.
And in note, in his own copy, he was sort of admitting that he had not truly proved
his case.
The mistake that he felt the church had made was in calling the heliocentric model heretical.
And it wasn't until 1992 when Pope John Paul II produced a statement admitting that the
church had aired in condemning Galileo.
The philosophical arguments in favor of the heliocentric hypothesis are strong.
They are powerful in that it makes much more sense to have everything orbiting around the
sun.
But in science, they were not enough.
In science, in order to prove the heliocentric hypothesis, you would need better predictions,
better motions of the heavens.
And this would not come from better arguments as produced by Galileo, but instead would
come from better data as produced by Tico Brahe and then analyzed later by Johannes Kepler.
And we'll explore that in much more detail in our next lecture.
Until then, have a great day.
