If there's any one shape that can be used to evoke astronomy, I would think it would
be the silhouette of Saturn.
Just a simple circle, cross cut by a ring plane, and the audience knows the subject.
There are other shapes easily associated with astronomy, like stars and galaxies, but stars
have other associations, especially like Hollywood, and spirals occur many places in nature.
It is the rings of Saturn that are uniquely iconic of the heavens.
Now I gave a talk at a star party once, and a star party is when astronomers get together
and they gather and set up several telescopes for community observing.
And my wife has an engineering degree, and she took astronomy courses in college, and
she's heard me speak many times.
However, I've never seen her more genuinely excited than when she saw the rings of Saturn
through a good sized telescope.
We looked at Jupiter, we looked at Venus, we looked at a bunch of star clusters, they
didn't do it for her.
Saturn's rings were what moved her the most.
And yet, for all the symbolic stature, the details of the ring systems are not really
well known by the public.
And scientifically, we have a few outstanding problems as well.
This lecture will explore Saturn's rings, as well as the rings of the other giant planets,
and how they relate to the moons that we discussed in a previous lecture.
It will feature some brand new knowledge that we have gotten from the Cassini mission to
Saturn.
This Cassini mission has revealed the rings in unprecedented detail, and I think it's
safe to say that we'll be learning from that data for many years and even decades.
So in addition to the material in this lecture, you ought to check your newspaper or the internet
for late breaking updates.
Let's start with Saturn.
It has the most extensive ring system and supplies most of our knowledge about rings
in the solar system.
Here is an image of Saturn as seen from Earth, and the easily visible rings extend to about
1.5 Saturn radii.
If we look at these rings a little more close up, I can give you the basic structure that
we define for them.
And they are basically three rings, A, B, and C. The outer ring is called A, and in
between the A and B rings we have the Cassini division, and then B is the bright middle
ring, and then the faint ring on the inside closest to Saturn is C. Now you'll note that
the Cassini division is relatively transparent, because if you look here in the upper right,
you can actually see the limb of Saturn through the Cassini division.
The other thing I would like you to note is in the outer part of the A ring, there's
another gap, and this we call the Anki gap, and we'll come back to that later.
If instead we look at these rings close up, this is an image from the Cassini satellite,
you can see that the rings are definitely not solid.
Seeing them from Earth, you can't really tell what are they composed of.
Here you can see that they're composed of thousands of individual ringlets.
These are like grooves on a phonograph record, although that's for those of us who remember
phonograph records.
For those of you who grew up with CDs, well, ask your parents what a phonograph record
looks like.
These ringlets themselves are composed of bright, icy particles, and they're too small
to see individually.
They go from dust size to boulder size, a few tens of meters.
The scale here is if you look at this Cassini division, that's about 5,000 kilometers across.
That's the same as the diameter of Mercury, so basically the whole planet Mercury could
fit into the Cassini division, so you can see we definitely could not see boulder sized
objects on the scale of this image.
There are two other things that are apparent in this image.
First of all, is that there's an extra ring that we couldn't see from Earth.
This is the very thin F ring out here on the edge just outside the A ring.
The other thing is that you can see the Cassini division is not really empty.
There are many faint ringlets circling within the Cassini division.
The reason you can see them here is that this image was taken at a large reflecting angle.
Most of the times when you see Saturn's rings, the light is coming from the Sun, hitting
the rings, and bouncing back to Earth.
That's at a very shallow reflecting angle.
But Cassini is at Saturn, so the light comes from the Sun, bounces off the rings, and is
seen by Cassini, and it can be at a very much larger reflecting angle.
And due to the scattering properties of small particles, it's much easier to see these small
particles at large reflecting angles.
So we wouldn't be able to see these small particles unless we're actually at Saturn
to get these large reflecting angles.
You can see even more if the rings are totally backlit.
Now this is an absolutely amazing image of Saturn.
It's not a drawing.
This is a real image from Cassini, where Cassini, the spacecraft, is in the eclipse
shadow of Saturn.
The Sun is eclipsed by Saturn, and in that case you're able to see the incredible range
of the Saturnian ring system.
You can see the outer part of Saturn's atmosphere is illuminated, and you can see that the night
side of Saturn is lit by light scattered from the rings.
And like the total solar eclipse shows the solar corona, here we can start to see the
faint outer ring.
This is the E-ring wrapping around the outer parts of the ring system.
These are micron sized particles that they're seen well only when they are backlit.
So the full extent of Saturn's ring system goes out to about 5 Saturn radii.
Now if we come in a little bit closer on this image, you can see the E-ring that I just
talked about.
Then also just outside the main rings, you can see a thinner G-ring.
This is also micron sized particles, so that's only seen well in backlit.
And then very faint right in close to the planet inside of the C-ring there is the D-ring.
And again, these are seen only in backlit situations.
So a significant point is that the appearance of the rings of Saturn is different depending
upon the angle with the Sun.
There's a great example of this called the opposition surge.
Now in this image the Sun is almost directly behind the satellite and over time the Sun's
reflecting point will move up through these rings and you'll see how the appearance of
the rings changes depending upon the angle with the Sun.
The Cassini division appears either more filled or less filled depending upon the angle of
the Sun.
It also shows that you truly need a spacecraft in order to fully explore the rings of Saturn.
Now one really cool fact about Saturn's rings is that they are remarkably thin.
This image here shows Saturn's rings almost edge on.
The dark line across the planet is not the rings, but rather the shadow of the rings
because the rings here are edge on to Earth, not edge on to the Sun, so they still make
a bit of a shadow.
But you can see how very very thin they are.
The main rings are about 280,000 kilometers across, yet only 100 meters thick, less than
a kilometer thick.
This is flatter than a piece of paper.
What do I mean by that?
Well, this is a ream of paper, okay, 500 sheets, and it's about 2 inches thick.
So if it's 500 sheets and 2 inches, that makes an individual sheet about one 250th of an
inch thick.
Now the width of the paper is around 11 inches, so the ratio of its width to its thickness
is about 3,000.
For the rings, we're talking 300,000 to 0.1, and so the ratio of the width to the thickness
is about 3 million for Saturn's rings.
This piece of paper would have to be a thousand times thinner in order to accurately represent
the thickness of Saturn's rings.
Why would this be so?
Well, the reason is due to collisions within the rings.
The non-uniform motions would be damped.
If you scatter out of the ring plane, eventually as you cross the ring plane, you're going
to have collisions and you're going to be forced to go with the flow.
It's similar to a dense crowd leading a stadium.
Everyone's headed towards the exit, and if you say, oh, I have to go to the bathroom,
and you try to cross cut that crowd, it's really difficult because you keep slamming
into people and they start pushing you towards the exit.
It's very hard to move in other directions.
This is the same thing that happens within Saturn's rings.
Eventually particles that go onto non-uniform orbits will collide and be steered back onto
uniform orbits, and this is what produces the exceedingly thin ring structure.
So that's the basics for Saturn.
Now let's look at the other giant planets.
Here is an image of Jupiter's rings.
This is an equivalent eclipse image from the Galileo satellite, and it's not quite
as dramatic as what we see for Saturn.
You can see that Jupiter does have a main ring and that it's very thin, both in its
annular width, but also in its thickness, it's also a very thin ring like Saturn's.
Jupiter also has two other components.
They have a much larger, what they call the Gossamer ring, and that extends about twice
the size of the main ring, and then interior to the main ring, they have the halo ring,
which is some particles that appear to be lifted up, electrostatically lifted up from
the ring plane.
Now you can see that when you look in backlit images.
The top image here from New Horizons is as New Horizons was approaching Jupiter and the
ring of Jupiter was front lit, and the bottom image is as it was receding from Jupiter,
and it is backlit.
And in that you can see the halo particles.
Again, this indicates that we have dust size particle in the halo ring of Jupiter.
This image shows what Voyager saw at Uranus.
These are Uranus's rings, and they, like the ring of, the main ring of Jupiter, are very
small and thin rings.
Here we have several distinct rings.
They are quite narrow, only about 10 kilometers wide, and if you count them you can count
oh, maybe 10 rings.
However, let's use that backlighting trick again and see what we see.
Well, the top of this image shows the front lit view of Uranus's rings, and the bottom
shows the backlit view, and again you see much more structure when you're looking in
backlit.
There are many, many ringlets, and many dust bands.
You'll also note that on the left hand side here, this is called the Epsilon ring.
It doesn't seem to match up.
This is because the Epsilon ring is actually mildly eccentric.
It has a ellipticity to it, alright, so it is actually further away from Uranus in the
top image and closer on the bottom image, but it's still the same ring.
It's not an alignment problem of the images.
This next image shows us Neptune's rings, and again this is sort of like the eclipse
image for Saturn and Jupiter, but here we've actually just blocked out Neptune.
There are actually two images, one from either side, because you have to expose so much in
order to see these rings that any exposure of Neptune would blow out the image.
There are about five ring structures in Neptune's rings, and they are named after the men involved
in Neptune's discovery.
The brightest one here in the center is called Laverier.
The outer one is called Adams, and the inner one is called Gall.
Outside of Laverier, there are two faint ring structures named Lassel and Aragot.
Again, these are thin, faint, and very dark rings.
We have to expose a really long time in order to be able to see them.
So in contrast to Saturn, it has many bright rings.
The rings of the other giant planets are very few, very thin, and very dark.
The particles in these rings are as dark as charcoal, and that may be produced by particle
bombardment.
If the atomic particles smash into the ring particles, it can remove the bright ices and
leave dark organic residue that can be basically as black as coal.
So that sort of begs the question, why are Saturn's rings so bright?
Aren't they also being hit?
And why does Saturn have so many rings and the other giant planets don't?
Unfortunately, I don't really have the answers for you.
These are two topics of ongoing research.
Our next topic in this lecture is how the rings interact with moons.
Now the intellectual answer is, of course, that they interact through gravity.
That's how they're naturally going to happen.
But the visual answer can be really fascinating.
The first thing I want to do is establish that the rings and the moons share an orbit
plane, and we have a very beautiful way to do so.
This is a movie of Saturn when the rings were edge on to the sun.
So they're not quite edge on to the earth.
You can see a little bit of the ring plane, and there are three moons that are going
to move across the face of Saturn during this movie.
At the start, you can see the small moon here in the center.
This is Enceladus, and its shadow is stretched across the ring.
The moon to its left is Mimus.
It actually has a bit of an inclined orbit, so it's not going to cast a shadow on the
rings.
And then the real feature is going to be Dione down here that is going to swing across,
and you're going to see its shadow.
You'll also catch a little glimpse of Tethys in the upper right as it moves behind Saturn.
So here you can see Dione's shadow going across the left side of the rings.
While Mimus and Enceladus, there goes Tethys, have shadows on the surface of Saturn, and
Dione's shadow across Saturn, and then Dione's shadow swings across the rings of Saturn again.
These are moon shadows going across Saturn's rings, and it's something that happens only
once every 15 years.
It also shows us that the moons are in the same plane as the rings.
This is a diagram of Saturn's moons and rings, and it shows you the ABCDEF and G-rings, as
well as the various moons that orbit within that same region.
There are several small moons that orbit within the rings, and a bunch of more tiny moons
that are actually even not shown on this diagram.
This sort of begs a question when you look at this, is how small a particle can you consider
a moon?
And we have Mimus here, and Janus, and Epimetheus, and the other moons notated on this diagram,
but all of the particles in the rings also could be considered moons.
We often refer to them as moonlets.
Where is the dividing line between what constitutes a ring particle and what constitutes a moon
in the Saturn system?
The other thing you can see in this diagram is that the Cassini division is about halfway
out to Mimus, working from Saturn's surface.
The Cassini division's inner boundary is actually located at a 2 to 1 gravitational
resonance with Mimus's orbit.
That means that in a time Mimus makes one orbit, a particle at the inner boundary of the
Cassini division would make two orbits.
And these periodic gravitational tugs from Mimus may create waves that help clear out
the Cassini division.
However, we're not quite sure because we see other resonances in the Saturnian system
that are not cleared, and we even see some resonances where particles tend to accumulate
at those resonances.
The other strong resonance that we're sure of is the outer boundary of the A-ring, and
that's a 7 to 6 gravitational resonance with the moon Janus.
And Mimus and Janus are the two largest objects in this region, and it sort of makes sense
that resonances with them would help define some of the boundaries of the Saturnian rings.
Not all of the boundaries can be easily defined in this manner.
You can actually see that some moons are actually located within the ring system.
Here's an image of that enky gap that I mentioned before, and if you look inside it,
you can see the small moon Pan.
Pan orbits within the enky gap, and matter of fact, its gravity is what clears the gap.
Now, if you look down bottom, you can see that there's yet another gap in the outer part of the A-ring.
This is called the Keeler gap, and we'll get to that in just a second.
Let's explore the enky gap at a little bit closer look.
On the left-hand side of this image, you can see scalloping on the edges on the inner part of the enky gap.
You can also see sort of a spiral wave pattern.
These are created by Pan's orbit through the enky gap,
that it creates these spiral wave patterns that clump and move the ring particles,
and then create this scalloped pattern on the inside of it.
Now, let's go back to that Keeler gap.
The Keeler gap is also inhabited by a tiny moon.
This one is called Daphnis, and Daphnis is only seven kilometers across.
Really, the size of a standard asteroid type object.
But, you can see that its gravity is strong enough to produce ripples in the edge of the gap,
and Daphnis may even be pulling material off of the rings.
If we look really, really closely at this image, there's a faint spot next to Daphnis,
where it may be a creating material pulled from the rings onto Daphnis.
Let's move on to the Uranian system.
Here is a same diagram for Uranus' rings and moons,
and here you can see that most of the moons are outside the ring system.
The moons are named for the characters in a Midsummer Night's Dream,
while the rings, well, they have a sort of mixed up naming convention.
Some of them are named Greek letters, alpha, beta, gamma, delta.
Some of our numbers, four, five, and six, and one of them is designated as 1986 U2R.
Not a really coherent taxonomy for these rings,
but what I really want to point out is the two moons orbiting right next to the epsilon rings.
Here is a Voyager image of those two moons.
They are named Ophelia and Cordelia,
and the Voyager 2 discovered these moons in 1986.
They're tiny, only about 15 kilometers each,
and what they do is they act as shepherd satellites for the epsilon ring.
They are on opposite sides of the ring,
and their gravitational tugs keep the ring very thin.
These shepherd moons are not only on Uranus,
we actually see shepherd moons on Saturn maintaining Saturn's F ring,
and there's a wonderful movie of the interaction.
This will be Prometheus and Pandora moons going past Saturn's F ring.
Prometheus is on the inside of the ring, and Pandora is on the outside of the ring.
Now, these moons are larger than Ophelia and Cordelia.
They're on order 50 kilometers in size, and they produce larger effects.
You can see, as Prometheus swings along the inside,
the ripples that are created in the F ring.
These ripples are rather long-lasting,
and if we look at other structures in the F ring,
these are four images that Cassini has taken on the number of pictures
that show these strange structures in the F ring due to Prometheus and Pandora.
These four images here were actually taken within hours of each other,
but at different points around the F ring.
So these same structures were occurring almost simultaneously on the ring,
but they seemed totally different.
So I guess shepherding ring particles would appear to be a bit of a messy job,
because after you move them, it takes some time for them to settle into a line.
Another type of moon interaction can be seen at Neptune.
This is an image of Neptune's outermost bright two rings,
atoms and laverier, and the brightest and densest regions of the atoms ring
are really just partial arcs.
These ring arcs have been dubbed libertae, fraternité, and egalité,
which I think is rather strange because it was laverier who was French,
and atoms was English.
But, you know, who am I to tell people about their taxonomy?
The interactions that produce these rings are with Neptune's moon Galatia,
and in this diagram, you can see that Galatia orbits just inside of the atoms ring,
and these arcs are produced by the gravitational interaction with this 150 kilometer sized moon.
Now they tell me that the resonance is a 42 to 43 orbital resonance,
which really kind of blows my mind,
and that this resonance confines particles to these very short segments
that end up making up these arcs.
I just find it amazing that such a high order resonance, you know,
Mimus was a 2 to 1 resonance with a Cassini division, this is a 42 to 43 resonance.
It just seems strange that such a high order resonance would have such a striking effect.
Our last topic, and sort of the most direct influence of the moons,
is that some moons may be the source of the rings.
Here is the same diagram for Jupiter,
and what you can see in this diagram is that there are gaps in the ring system in the Gossamer ring
at the orbit of Thiebe and at Amalthea,
and that Metis and Adrastea are within the main ring.
Now, these are not clearing out the gaps, or they're not shepherding the ring.
Rather, the particle bombardment smashing onto the moon
are producing sources of dust-sized particles.
Jupiter has a very strong magnetic field,
so the particles will be traveling along the magnetic field lines,
they'll be moving up and down, smash into the moons,
the small particles will be sent into orbit,
and these form the faint dusty rings.
We have an even better example of this,
seen in some brand new rings we just discovered at Saturn.
These are the Saturn rings, again backlit, so we can see the dusty particles.
You can see the G-ring here, outside the main ring,
and then beyond that we have the E-ring.
Now, inside of the G-ring is a new ring.
This is associated with the moons Janus and Epimetheus.
This is the same distance as the orbit of Janus and Epimetheus,
and it appears that the particles coming off of those two moons have formed this new ring.
Further, there's an even fader, smaller ring way out here
that's associated with a brand new moon discovered by Cassini called Palin.
The Palin is only four kilometers across.
Now, I note that this bright dot here happens to be in the Palin ring,
but it's not Palin, it's actually just a background star.
The most striking example of a ring-creating moon is with Saturn's moon Enceladus.
Here is a mosaic of Enceladus, and what I want you to notice are these tiger stripes down bottom.
These are fractures in Enceladus, big ridges and troughs in the southern region of Enceladus.
Now, when we take a backlit view of Enceladus, we can see that they are geologically active.
These are like ice geysers, and we discussed this in a previous lecture.
This icy particles are spewing out the bottom of Enceladus,
and the connection to the rings is that these create the E-ring.
The entire outer E-ring comes from these icy emissions from the moon Enceladus.
So the moon's orbit within and around the rings, they not only gravitationally influence the rings,
they actively produce some of the rings.
So where did the rings come from, and how long will they last?
We sort of answered the second question a little bit, because many of the small particles in the rings won't last long.
They should be cleared in as little as a thousand years.
Some of these small particles will then just fall onto the planets, collapse on, their orbits will decay,
and they'll fall onto their planets in as little as a thousand years.
They needed a replenishing source, and those would be the moons themselves.
For the large particles, there are two main ideas.
One is that the rings may have formed with the planet,
and the idea is that as the planet forms, and it's orbiting, and you've got the moons forming around it,
there might be some moons that never really formed,
and the large particles would be with the remnants of a moon that didn't form as the planet was forming.
The main problem with this is how do you get these rings to hang around for billions of years?
Because if we do the math, the gravity and collisions and the decay of orbits,
well, that should collapse the rings.
I've seen an estimate that Saturn's A ring should collapse onto the B ring in timescales as little as 100 million years.
Well, for a solar system that's four and a half billion years old, that's kind of a problem.
The rings shouldn't hang around for that long.
So the alternative is that the rings come from the breakup of moons and comets.
Now, there are two ways.
One would be a collision breakup.
You take two things, smash them together, the pieces come off,
and the pieces then become the large particles in the rings.
The other way would be through tidal breakup.
If a moon is orbiting too close to its planet,
then the tidal stresses on that moon can actually break the moon apart,
and then the pieces would then become the rings that orbit around the planet.
The problem here is again that you need a resupply of moons and comets to break apart.
Where do these moons and comets come from?
And when the supply runs out, no more rings.
So theoretically, Saturn's rings should only be a few hundred million years old,
so that the objects that broke apart to form these rings
would have to keep coming over and over in order for the rings to last 4.6 billion years.
So we don't know how long the rings really last.
We do know that due to the forces on them, they're inherently a transient phenomenon.
There's one more really cool idea.
Mars has a moon Phobos, and its orbit is decaying.
It's estimated that it will decay and end up hitting Mars in about 50 million years.
But before it does, it will likely break apart.
And when it does, Mars will have a ring for a short while.
In our next lecture, we'll look at one resupply source for the rings.
These would be the icy vagabonds of the outer solar system, the comets.
Until then, have a great day.
