Our course so far has covered our solar system in depth.
We have explored the sun, the planets, their moons and rings, the asteroids, and the comets.
In the way, we have uncovered both new discoveries of the unexpected as well as new perspectives
on the familiar.
Now it is time for perhaps the greatest discoveries of recent times and the strongest change in
our perspective yet.
It is time to leave our solar system behind and to turn our attention to the other stars
in our galaxy.
We want to look for other planetary systems.
Do they exist?
How are they structured?
What kind of planets do they contain?
What we want to know is whether they match what we see in our solar system, whether there
are Earth-like planets there, and ultimately, if there is life.
The goal is to gain a broader perspective on how our solar system fits in with the other
planetary systems in our galaxy.
The main question here is where do we look?
Which stars are likely to harbor extrasolar planets?
And how do we know if planets form at all around other stars?
In the previous lecture, we discussed the formation of our solar system and we saw that
planet formation was coupled to the formation of the star.
Planets formed within a disk of material, the same disk that fed matter onto the protosun.
If that formation sequence is a general one, then looking for stars in formation and looking
for disks around them would be a good place to start.
Finding these disks would at least establish that the conditions for planet formation exist
elsewhere.
In truth, it shows us a good deal more.
We begin on scales much, much, much larger than solar systems, all the way out to the
scales of interstellar clouds.
These are the nebulae within our galaxy.
We will examine first the large-scale conditions within which stars form, and then we'll drill
down to looking at individual stars.
This is the Carina Nebula.
It is a star-forming region within our galaxy.
And the red glow you see here is typical of these regions.
It comes from hydrogen emission at a temperature of about 3,000 degrees.
Now clouds like this glow because stars have recently formed within them.
Only the hottest stars emit enough ultraviolet radiation to heat the gas to make it glow.
Such hot stars only live for tens of millions of years.
So when we see the glowing gas and infer the hot stars, we know that those hot stars formed
recently, and thus this is a star formation region.
We're going to examine this central region of the Carina Nebula, where there are diverse
examples of the various stages of star formation.
This is a Hubble image of the Carina Nebula, and it looks nothing like the large-scale
image.
Well, first of all, this image represents narrow filters that select wavelengths most
important to astronomers.
The red here corresponds to sulfur, the green to hydrogen, and the blue to oxygen emission.
On the right hand side of this image, you can see two knots of recently formed stars.
These star clusters are emitting a good portion of the ultraviolet radiation that makes the
surrounding gas glow.
They also emit very strong stellar winds.
Now you may remember that our sun's wind is the cause of the aurora that we see here
on Earth, and that the sun's wind also presses out into interstellar space and forms the
heliosphere, essentially a wind bubble around the sun.
The winds and radiation of these stars are so immense that they have blown a large bubble
clear across the nebula.
They have excavated this elliptical cavity some 10 light years across.
That's about 5,000 times larger than the sun's heliosphere.
Now down towards the bottom of this cavity, we can see a pillar of dark gas that is strongly
silhouetted against the background of glowing gas.
Dark clouds are dense clouds, and they are important because they are the real sites
of star formation.
A dense cloud at the top of this pillar is resisting the erosion of the stellar emissions.
The rest of the gas in the pillar, well, it may also be dense, or it may just be in the
shadow of the dense cloud at the top.
These pillars are sort of like gaseous fingers in the nebula, and they point directly towards
the nearby hot stars.
This connection between pillars and hot stars can be seen here in the Eagle Nebula.
These hot stars up here at the top are eroding the gas into pillars in several different
directions.
This group of pillars here, just above and to the right of center, are the source of
one of the most famous images in astronomy.
This is Hubble's image of the pillars in the Eagle Nebula.
And this image was really a watershed moment in astronomy, especially for someone like
me who works a lot with the public, because this image captured the imagination like no
other before.
This one picture truly showed the power of this Hubble Space Telescope, and it is for
Hubble sort of what the Earthrise image is for the Apollo missions.
Oh, but I digress.
These pillars, like the one in Karina, are about a light year in length, and they are
nicknamed the Pillars of Creation, because if you look at the top of the tallest pillar,
you can see little finger-like structures.
These fingers are about a thousand astronomical units across, a thousand times the distance
between the Earth and the Sun.
These are dense pockets of gas where individual stars are forming.
Within each finger, a star is about to be born.
Now back inside the Karina Nebula, we see another set of pillars.
This set of pillars has very bright edges around the dark gas.
The ultraviolet radiation is really illuminating the edges of these pillars.
You can also see that there are some fingers in these pillars, especially up here at the
top, but if we zoom in onto this finger, we can see direct evidence of star formation.
These two jets shooting out either side of the top of the finger are coming from the
protostar.
As a disk of material feeds onto the star, some of the energy released is directed perpendicular
to the disk in oppositely directed jets.
The connection can be made even stronger in the next two images.
On the left hand side is a visible light image.
It's an object called L1157, and really you don't see much here.
It's just a dark cloud.
On the right, however, is an infrared image of the central region.
Here you can see bright jets of emission going up and down, as well as a dark disk cutting
across the center.
You can plainly see the relationship between the disk of material in the center and the
jets of emission.
The disk is going around perpendicular to your line of sight, and the jets are shooting
out perpendicular to the disk.
These twin jets of star formation are the signature of what we call Herbig-Hero objects.
And here are four such Herbig-Hero objects.
They are observed in various wavelengths of light, and the scale bar on each image is
200 astronomical units across.
That's about twice the diameter of the Kuiper Belt in our solar system.
You can see in each one of these images that there is a dark disk across the center, and
jets shooting out either side.
This is common in star formation.
The jets are part of the birth pangs of stars, and indicate the energetic nature of the disk
interaction with the protostar.
So we can plainly see that disks of material play an important role in star formation.
Our picture of how the sun formed is the same as how other stars form.
But what about planets?
Can we see planets forming in these disks?
Unfortunately, the nature of these disks, as dense material accreting onto a protostar,
means that we generally see these accretion disks only in silhouette.
If instead we look at stars that have formed recently, but are still quite young, we should
be able to see the dusty debris disks around them, and those we could see in emission.
To see the emission from these disks, we use the technique of coronography.
This is the technique we developed to study the corona of the sun, but now we apply it
to other stars.
We do it like this.
We intentionally put a spot, a dark spot, in a light path of the telescope, and then
we position the telescope so that the star is directly behind this occulting spot.
The light from the star is blocked, and the light from the material around the star can
be seen.
This is one of the earliest dust disks that we found.
It surrounds the star Beta Pictoris.
The light of the star has been blocked, and it would be off the lower left of this image.
This image, when it was released in 1995, showed just how thin the dust disk around a star
is.
It's only about 10 astronomical units thick, and in comparison, it's hundreds of astronomical
units wide.
A later image from 2004 shows the full extent of one of these disks.
This one is around the star AU Microscopy.
It's a small red star, about 12 million years old.
This disk is similarly thin, and stretches about 200 astronomical units across.
If this were our solar system, the extent of the disk that we resolve here would go
from the giant planet region out to well past the Kuiper Belt.
Now it's significant that such disks are found around small red stars, because these
small red stars are the most numerous stars in our galaxy.
If we want to have lots of planetary systems in the galaxy, you've got to have them around
the most common stars, and this shows you that they do exist around red stars.
Now in contrast to those edge on disks around Beta Pic and AU Microscopy, here is an image
of a face on disk.
This one is around the yellow star HD 107 146.
This star is exciting because it's much like the sun, only it's a lot younger, it still
has its disk around it.
The image also shows you just how well coronography can work.
You can see there's just a really neat little hole taken out of the disk.
You just subtract the light of the star, and poof, the disk appears.
It's really not quite that easy, but the results are impressive.
This star is a bit further away than the stars that we previously looked at, and so we can't
see down into the planetary region, but we do find a full disk of dust out to a hundred
astronomical units, and we can even see the density decrease with radius.
As you look further and further out in this disk, you can see the density slowly falls
off.
Remember, as we talked about for the sun, we expect density gradients in these disks
around stars.
Now this is great, but what we really want to see is evidence of planet formation.
Around the star HR 4796A, we see a ring instead of a disk.
This ring is about 50 astronomical units across, and I was very excited to see this
ring back in 1999.
It screamed to me, oh, oh, Kuiper Belt around another star.
We were just filling out the Kuiper Belt in our own solar system, and here we are seeing
one, or what looked a lot like one, around another star.
This is a similar structure to what we were just discovering nearby.
And later I learned that that's important, but what's even more important is not the
ring, but the fact that it has an empty interior, because that suggests that planets have formed
and swept up all of the interior dust.
A really detailed ring observation can be seen around the star Fomalot.
And here is a wonderful image of it, although you'll notice there are a lot of radial striations
here, and that's due to effects of subtracting out the light of the star.
What's intriguing here is not the effects of the coronography, but the fact that the
ring is off-center.
We put some annotations on this image.
You can see this is the position of the star, it's at the center of the coronagraphic mask,
but the ring center is offset from that over here.
This implies that the ring is not a circle, instead it's an ellipse.
And how do you get an elliptical ring?
Well, we believe that the elliptical ring is due to interaction with a planet.
We see evidence for disk and planet interactions in many places.
The disk around this star, and this star's phone number is HD15115, is definitely lopsided.
You can see that the emission extends much further out to the right than it does to the
left in this image.
Now again, we can model this with an elliptical disk that has been perturbed by a planet.
But I have to caution you, there are also other models that can fit.
The other model that can fit is illustrated by this image.
Here we're back to our friend Beta Pictoris.
This is a different observation of Beta Pictoris.
And again, you can see the disk here, but if you look out at the edge of the disk, you
can see these four clumps.
They're marked A, B, C, and D in the image.
We have clumping, or rings within this disk, that need to be explained.
And on the right is a computer model, which can produce that clumping as these rings.
And the reason for the production of these rings in this computer model is not due to
a planet within the disk, but rather due to a passing star.
The star makes a close pass by Beta Pict, Beta Pict is in a region where there are relatively
close stars and pulls the material out of the disk and forms these rings.
So this is a small caution that we shouldn't get overzealous in trying to see planets everywhere,
because there are other explanations that can explain these observations.
However, in the case of Beta Pict, we have other evidence that tells us we probably are
seeing planets.
Here are two more observations of Beta Pict from Hubble.
The top one shows the broad disk, and you can see the lopsidedness here.
On the left hand side, you can see where it stretches out, and this is where the clumps
in the disk were found.
And on the right hand side, you can see it doesn't stretch out quite as far, and that
there's a little bit of lopsidedness on large scales, and this was what was being explained
by the passage of the star.
Now the bottom image is a higher resolution one, and this covers the planetary scales
out to the Kuiper Belt scales, so you can see the drawing of the solar system at the
bottom for comparison.
When we study this disk in even greater detail, we find clumping.
There are clumps in here that look like planets in formation, or at least gravitational disturbances
caused by planets that have already formed.
The clumps are found at 65 AU, which would be outside of a Kuiper Belt in our solar system,
40 AU, smack dab on where the Kuiper Belt is in our solar system, and 15 AU, which is
around the orbit of Uranus in our solar system.
Now evidence of these as yet unseen planets is seen in this image, and here you can see
that Beta Pict has both a primary disk as well as a secondary disk, a very small secondary
disk in towards the center.
And this secondary disk is suggested of a giant planet in a tilted orbit.
This secondary disk is tilted by about 4 to 5 degrees from the primary disk.
So this is very exciting, because Beta Pict is about 20 million years old, which would
be prime time for either planets to be forming or to have already formed.
This provides powerful evidence that these dust disks, which we see around many, many
stars, are associated with planet formation.
The story that I told you about how the solar system formed, well it appears that it's
supported by what we see elsewhere in the galaxy.
The last topic I want to cover today is a cautionary tale for disk and planet formation.
It takes place within the Orion constellation.
Now I'm sure many of you are familiar with the constellation of Orion, it's a wonderful
one to observe on a winter evening, late in January in the evening, it's just hanging
up there right up high in the south.
And these three stars across the center are Orion's belt.
And the three stars going down from its belt are his sword.
However, the middle star in his sword is not really a star, it is the magnificent Orion
Nebula, or as they used to call it, the Great Nebula in Orion.
I think it's a great name for it.
This is one of the closest star-forming regions and certainly the best studied.
On its largest scales, it has a bowl-shaped structure.
This has been carved out by hot stars, like what we saw in Karina.
The energetic emissions of these hot stars have blown away the gas or evaporated the
gas to create this bowl-shaped structure.
Here the hot stars, instead of being located at the center of the bubble, are actually
located up at the top of the bowl, and this region is called the trapezium.
Let's zoom in on the trapezium, and you can see the brightest emission is located right
up at the top in this fairly bright structure here, and it's due to the four hot stars in
the center.
The Orion Nebula is what we call a blister nebula, because it really is on the skin of
a much larger dark cloud that's lying behind.
As a nearby star-forming region, we can see protoplanetary disks in the Orion Nebula,
and we can see them in great detail.
Here is an image of four such protoplanetary disks, and we can see what we saw previously,
these dark disks, but we also see the newborn stars peeking through.
Here we can see the gas and dust flowing on, well we can't really see them flowing on,
we can see the gas and dust, imagine them flowing on to these new stars, and they have
just turned on.
These are baby pictures.
These are stars still in their stellar nurseries, they're only about two million years old.
Now, we can also see in the Terpezium region the evidence of how strong the stellar winds
from these hot stars are.
Now here are the hot stars in the center, and we're going to examine this star way down
here in the lower right.
Notice how far away this star is from the central hot star.
We look at this image, of the image of this star, this star is LL Orionis.
The winds from the hot stars are so strong that they create a bow shock in the gas around
the star.
Such strong winds which reach all the way across this nebula could wreak havoc on planetary
systems forming nearby.
Let's take a closer look at that Terpezium region.
Here you can see the four stars whose trapezoidal arrangement gives the region its name, and
the brightest one here towards the center is Theta 1 Orionis C, and it is the source
of most of the emitted energy that causes the gas of the Orion Nebula to glow.
If you look here in the lower left, you can notice this tadpole shaped object.
Its tail points away from Theta 1 C, and there are several more of these tadpole shaped objects
all across this image.
Each one of them whose tail point away from the hottest star.
What's going on here?
You've got these bright heads to these tadpole shaped things, and then these sort of dark
tails swooping away.
Well, the width of the heads of these tadpoles is several hundred astronomical units across.
This is the scale of planetary systems.
The gas that is collapsing to form these systems is being blown away by the wind from Theta
1 C. It's swooshing back and creating a tail behind it.
So if you try to form planets near a massive star, you not only have to contend with the
emission from the protostar, remember that the protostar emissions start to evaporate
the disk on time scales of tens of millions of years, so you've got to form your planets
quickly and avoid the radiation of the protostar, but in this region, you also have to deal
with an external wind from the nearby massive star.
And there is the chance that the gas and dust could be ablated away before planets have
enough time to form.
Here is an incredible movie that takes you on a flight through the trapezium and illustrates
what's going on.
Now this model is not an artist's imagination.
The three dimensional shape of the nebula and the star positions have been modeled as
accurately as possible.
So as we fly into the Orion Nebula, you can see the region on the left called the bright
bar, and then we enter into the very energetic region.
You can see the stars around Theta 1c in the center, and all of these tadpole shaped objects
with their tails pointing away from it.
You can also see sort of the potato chip structure of the blister nebula.
Now this tadpole here is fictitious, it was just added for illustration, so that we could
peel back the gas around it, and perhaps we would find a disk, and we would find jets
shooting off from the disk, and we would see planet formation in progress.
We don't know if planet formation is really in progress within these tadpoles, or if it's
adversely affected by the wind.
But we do see these tails in other star forming regions.
Here is one in a region called Ic 1396.
On the right hand side you can see the hot massive star, and in the center you can see
the small star being ablated away, and the tail of dust swooping off to the left.
I should mention this is an infrared image from the Spitzer Space Telescope, and in this
image we can see the tail stretching for half a light year or more.
Remember that one light year is as long as the famous pillar in the Eagle Nebula, and
here we have the dust from a star that's forming being swooped back to about the same distance.
In the Karina Nebula we find this beautiful collection of dark clouds.
Now I call this the archipelago, because it resembles islands in the ocean.
But these are dense clouds of gas immersed in an ocean of energetic radiation.
The radiation from the hot young stars in the Karina Nebula is slowly ionizing the gas
and eating away at the edge of the clouds.
This is what we call an ionization front, and it's a race of gravity trying to collapse
and form stars versus the ionization trying to get rid of the gas to see whether stars
and planets can form before the clouds are photo evaporated away.
Now we can see what we can give us, and star formation take it away.
Overall, what we have learned is that the disks around young stars are common.
We can see them in silhouette in herbig harrow objects.
We can see the infrared emission from dusty debris disks.
We can see structures in the disk resembling Kuiper belts, and providing evidence of planet
interaction.
So if disks are common, then planets should be common.
We now need to go out and find them.
And that is the topic of the next lecture, taking on the incredible observational challenge
of finding planets around other stars.
I'll see you then.
