I'm very excited to talk to you today, Andrew.
You are a rising star in the field for mathematics of consciousness science and to me, that's
no wonder.
And that's because I'm no philosopher, I know very little about philosophy, but I watched
your talks that are already on YouTube and I was able to understand them and they made
a lot of sense to me.
So I will link below the links to those talks that got me so excited and what really stuck
out to me with your work is the rigor that goes into your thinking and that even translates
into how you present your thoughts and the clarity with which you present and what drives
your thinking.
And this seems like such a welcome thing in the fields of consciousness that for a lot
of people seems to be characterized by the opposite by some kind of fluffiness.
And so this kind of rigor and clarity I think is solely needed.
And I got quite excited that one of your last talks when you believe that real progress
can be made by formalizing things about the structure of consciousness and phenomenal
experience.
So I'm very excited to hear about that today from you.
Thank you, Alex.
I mean, that's really nice for me to hear.
And yeah, I'm glad that the aim that I bring in my work is to have clarity and precision.
So I'm glad that's coming through.
Can you tell me how you got into this mess?
What got you interested in consciousness and also your academic vita that got you to this
point and what you're doing right now?
Yeah.
So I guess it started for me when I was 16 and still in high school.
And at that time, I was a fairly good student, but, you know, I wasn't really inspired by
any academic subjects.
I did find in my classes, but I wasn't really that interested in anything.
But then there were two things that really changed that for me.
So one was reading Goro Escherbach by Douglas Hofstadter.
And the second was reading David Chalmers on philosophical zombies and the heart problem
of consciousness.
Those two texts were really transformative for me.
And I guess after that, I just became fascinated by consciousness.
And I was really gripped by the fact that each of us is intimately acquainted with our
own conscious experiences, but it still was this phenomenon that remained little understood.
It was still one of these remaining great mysteries about the natural world.
So in that respect, I guess consciousness was the first thing that really sparked my
academic interest and that spark has never really fully left me.
Also, I really liked the purity and generality of analytic philosophy.
And I went into college wanting to study philosophy and consciousness in particular.
I was pretty lucky in my undergrad experience.
So I went to Brown University and there happened to be this community of undergrads that were
there at the same time that were also into philosophy and a bunch of us were into philosophy
of mind.
So we had this department undergraduate group where we met every couple of weeks and talked
about different philosophical topics.
And I felt like I was really able to benefit from just having lots of conversations with
peers, even when I was an undergrad.
And I mean, my interest in consciousness kind of stuck with me throughout the whole of college.
And I eventually decided to apply to grad school and to try to become a philosopher of consciousness.
And I was lucky enough to get into NYU for my PhD, where I was able to work with David
Chalmers, as well as Ned Block and Thomas Nagel, all of whom were some of my intellectual
heroes.
And I mean, so it's pretty common for people's interests to change during the course of grad
school, but consciousness never really left me.
And I mean, nowadays I do work on a number of philosophical issues outside of consciousness.
I've like tainted my peer record, but consciousness has always been at the heart of my philosophical
interests and the structure of consciousness in particular, that's at the heart of my interest
in consciousness.
Yeah, and what got you that is such an interesting thing because it seems that different people
from different parts of the planet at the same time started thinking along those lines.
So what was it about structure that got you the most interest about consciousness?
Yeah, no, it's a great question.
So to start, I guess I've just long thought that these sorts of questions, questions about
the structure of consciousness are both really interesting, but also really underexplored.
And I think maybe one reason for the why they're underexplored is that there are many people
in, including myself, who have been kind of seduced by classic philosophical questions
about the fundamental nature of consciousness, you know, like the heart problem, philosophical
zombies, Mary's room, all that stuff.
And I think I think that's great.
I mean, I care a lot about those sorts of questions and I think they're important questions.
I also think that consciousness research, and especially the philosophy of consciousness,
has been overly dominated by those sorts of questions.
I mean, there's so many interesting theoretical questions about consciousness that go beyond
the heart problem, including questions about the structure of consciousness.
And I think some people might have the impression that philosophy of consciousness is just about
those questions about the fundamental nature, but I think there's a whole lot more
there. And that's part of what I'm trying to develop and investigate and uncover in my own
research. I guess one thing is that, I mean, at the same time, investigating the structure of
consciousness is really hard. And maybe that's part of why these questions are underexplored as
well. It's oftentimes not obvious how to make progress. And, you know, if you, so if you
introspect your own conscious experience right now, you'll find that it's obvious that it's
richly structured, but how exactly to think about that structure, what kinds of models or
tools we should use for characterizing that structure, those are really difficult questions.
But I think these are also super important questions and the kinds of questions that we'll
need to tackle in order to really make progress in consciousness research. And in fact, if you
look at other sciences, you know, physics, biology, psychology, whatever, in general,
as a scientific field develops, it starts to move away from essence questions or questions about
the fundamental nature of the entity study and instead to structural questions or questions about
how the entities of the domain are related to each other, how to model those relations.
And right now, consciousness research is still dominated by a focus on essence questions.
You know, the biggest question in the philosophy of consciousness is, what is the fundamental
nature of consciousness? And the biggest question in the science of consciousness is,
what physical properties make a conscious, make a system conscious versus not? But
my, I suspect that if you look at consciousness research a century from now, if we were able
to do that somehow, we would see a much greater focus on structural questions.
It's very interesting, because often with that development in science has also been
the formalization and mathematician. And that is also something that you and other people
interested in the structure have been championing as well. And so there's an analog that often
leads to progress as well, because you're leaving behind the woolly words, you're boiling it down
to something that is much more rigorous. So I'm curious what led you into that direction to
use formal tools and combine that with your interest in the structure of consciousness?
I mean, I guess part of what led me in that direction is basically just agreement with the
thought that you were expressing that one of the best ways of sharpening and systematizing
our inquiry into a phenomenon is to figure out how to use mathematical tools for modeling it
or understanding it. And as I said, I think that's really hard in the case of consciousness,
but I think that quality spaces, which we'll talk about more later, that's one of the ways
in to start doing that in the case of consciousness. I guess also, maybe this is another way of
expressing why I was motivated and gravitated towards this kind of topic. So there's this
famous passage at the end of Thomas Naples, What Does It Like to Be a Bet?, where he says,
Investigating consciousness is really hard, but maybe it would be more tractable if we could
somehow develop an objective phenomenology or a way of understanding conscious experiences that
doesn't require one to have had the experiences under question. And this passage is really well
known, but most people react to it with thought that, well, that sounds cool, but what would this
look like? It's not clear what an objective phenomenology would be or whether that's even
coherent or makes sense. So one of my most recent publications is entitled Objective
Phenomenology and argues that it is indeed possible to develop an objective phenomenology
and that the way of doing so is to investigate the structure of consciousness. So basically,
my view is that purely structural facts about consciousness, for example, the kinds of facts
captured by mathematical models, those are objective phenomenal facts. And that's a way of
doing objective phenomenology. And the paper I mentioned of mine was published just last year,
but the basic ideas behind it have been a guiding thought and guiding motivation behind my work
for a number of years. So I think that's another way of explaining or justifying why
a focus on the structure of consciousness and in particular on figuring out ways to
mathematically model different aspects of consciousness experiences is interesting and
promising and maybe will help pave the way towards progress in consciousness research.
But this might come a little bit out of the left wing maybe, but there's something deeper,
almost mysterious in the fact that if you really boil down science and you really think about all
of this, it's almost like mathematics is all there is. I don't know, you can go as extreme as
Max Teckmark maybe to really say that it's almost ontological in nature, but isn't it,
what you said really brings so true in my thinking as well that when science is at its best,
it just comes up with a bunch of equations. And so it seems exciting that we might have
reached a point in consciousness research that we can use the same language. And so when Galileo
Galilei said the book of nature is written in the language of mathematics, that we now
reached a chapter where it comes to consciousness. And we can start maybe reading it in the same
language. So that seems very exciting at the same time mysterious maybe that just works.
Yeah, well, so a couple thoughts there. One is that I think we're still pretty far off from
actually being able to do that with consciousness, just because I think we're still very much in
the early stages of inquiring about consciousness and and figuring it out. So one analogy I like
to make is that we're sort of in this pre Newtonian stage in investigating consciousness,
a stage analogous to creating Newton and investigating the physical world where
part of what we're trying to do is figure out the basic insights that will enable
systematic mathematical theories in the future. And you know, it's really hard to break past that
basic stage. That's part of why like Newtonian physics was so remarkable. So I guess in my mind
we're very much at the early stages. And maybe we're on the cusp of developing more sophisticated
mathematical models. But I think there's still a lot of work in just figuring out how do we think
about the structure of consciousness in the first place and then what kinds of formalisms will be
useful for for thinking about that. But then to return to the first part of what you were saying.
So one of the lines of thought you might have about the physical world is you might
some people are sympathetic to a kind of Pythagoreanism where everything is just math,
there's no there's nothing more to the world than just mathematical structures. And similarly,
you might take a similar attitude towards consciousness. Maybe consciousness is just
more math. There's not all this like intrinsic Pauli stuff. It's just it's just mathematical
structures. And I'm somebody who's very pro investigating the structure of consciousness.
But I'm also somebody who thinks that there's more to consciousness than just structure. I think that
investigating the structure of consciousness will tell us a whole lot about consciousness. It'll
give us these frameworks for thinking about it more systematically, but it's not going to capture
everything. And I think part of what is in fact remarkable about consciousness and interesting
about it is that it's a phenomenon that consists of more than just structure. And even if we developed
the best mathematical models we possibly could, I think that they would still be leaving something
out, they wouldn't be inadequate, they might capture all the structural aspects of consciousness.
But I'm somebody who thinks that there's qualia in the most robust real sense that you might think.
If I may push on that a little bit, then what do you think of this idea that maybe when it comes
to science, though, that what science can explain might then maybe be limited to the structure,
maybe when it comes to the whole world and consciousness. So in other words, so maybe
it is true that there are things that are hard problems that beyond scientists reach, but at
least now we have something here that we can pull on and become more scientific about it. And it has
this promise that it falls into the fold of mathematical understanding of the world as we
have in physics and other disciplines. Yeah, I mean, I think that's a really interesting idea.
And I'm not sure what my own view on that is yet. So that's partly because I think
it's kind of up for grabs, what we think of as the nature of the science of consciousness
and the scope of scientific investigation in general. I guess I'm somebody who's
fairly sympathetic to the general thought that scientific investigation aims to tell us about
the structure of the world. But you might think that in the case of consciousness,
there's an exception. There's a different kind of epistemic relationship that we bear to our
own conscious experiences than that we bear to the external world. We're in direct contact with
our own conscious experiences in a way that we're not in direct contact with the external world.
And because of that, we're able to apply our knowledge, not just of the structure of the domain
under investigation, but also its intrinsic nature. I guess I do think that everything I just said
is true. But the thing that I feel unsure about is, how should we think about the scope of the
science of consciousness? Is it the case that in acquiring knowledge of and investigating the
qualitative character of our experiences, is that within the purview of the science of consciousness,
or is it not? And I mean, in some ways, I think this is, but you might think, for example,
scientific investigation by nature has to produce public knowledge, and we can't have
public knowledge of the qualities of one's own experiences. That's something that
is essentially private. So anyway, I guess my thought is that there's an interesting question
here that concerns both how we should think about the scope of investigation into consciousness,
but also just how we should think about the nature of science in general.
Oh, that's very interesting. In fact, Ken, push you on the more crazy things. So you brought up
Newton, right? And so there's an interesting piece of history there that maybe we can learn from.
And so my understanding is that it was quite important for him that he basically the way
discovered or invented calculus to then make progress in physics. And so the question that
I have is, do you think that we might also have to work on a mathematics side of things? And maybe
that will help us to learn what breakthroughs in the science of consciousness. Yeah, I think that's
a really interesting question too. I guess I don't see any positive reason for thinking that.
It seems to me that the difficulties with figuring out how to mathematically model our
conscious experiences don't lie on the side of, oh, we need more sophisticated or just novel
mathematical frameworks or formalisms, but instead that it's just really not obvious how to think
about the target of inquiry that we're trying to develop mathematical models of. So I mean, in the
case of quality spaces, it's not like the mathematical structures that we need to appeal to
are particularly new or novel or anything. They're like geometric spaces and things that are fairly
familiar. Maybe it's the case that there will be certain aspects of conscious experiences where
we just don't have anything in our current mathematical repertoire that adequately captures
that structure. But I guess in the absence of a compelling example, I'm inclined to think that
the default is to just assume that, well, the difficulty just lies on getting a better qualitative
understanding of the domain under consideration rather than on the tools that we have for modeling
that domain. Yeah, that's convincing. So maybe this might be a good point to lead into what you
prepared. We might have weathered everybody's appetite on how can this be done to talk more
formally about the structure of consciousness and quality of spaces. Okay, so I prepared a
brief presentation of the ideas in one of my articles, Vaudelay Mental Qualities, that was
published, well, I guess not last year, two years ago now, in the Journal of Philosophical Review.
And I'm going to just provide a pretty brief overview of the core ideas from this article
and mention a few of the interesting questions or applications that arise from the frameworks that
I developed. So I'll keep it pretty short and compact. So the central question that I'm
investigated that I'm interested in here is how do we model the qualities of
conscious experiences, qualities like those involved in seeing red or feeling pain,
smelling cinnamon. And my article is arguing that the standard approach for modeling these mental
qualities is inadequate, that it can't capture a certain core feature of our conscious experiences.
And then I develop a new framework that's more powerful and flexible and showcase some of the
applications of the framework. So maybe just start, let me introduce the concept of a quality
space model. This is probably familiar to many audience members, even if not by that name.
So a quality space model in general is a model of some domain of qualities, for example, colors,
sounds, smells. And the most famous example is the three-dimensional model of color experiences
that has huge saturation and brightness as dimensions. But there are quality space models
where at least potentially could be quality space models for just about any domain of
qualities, auditory, olfactory, and so forth. So these models are pretty remarkable for
people interested in consciousness. And in fact, I think this is a very under-explored
aspect of consciousness research. And one reason is that quality space models are one of the few
cases where we actually have systematic models of some aspect of conscious experiences and where
we know pretty well how to conduct empirical investigation and to develop mathematical formalisms.
Another reason is that quality space models are super general. Any domain of mental qualities
is going to be structured by similarity relations. And as soon as we have similarity, we can model
that domain of qualities using a geometric space. So if part of our goal is to map out the structures
and conscious experiences, then a significant part of that project is probably going to be
consistent developing quality space models for different domains of experiences.
Okay, so one very quick termological note. I'm using the term mental qualities here
and also in the article, but I'm treating that as synonymous with terms like phenomenal qualities
or quality. So the standard approach to quality space models, what I'll call the standard framework,
models mental qualities via points in geometric cold spaces, where the distances between points
correspond to degrees of phenomenal similarity. And you can kind of see this representation of
the three-dimensional model for color experiences in this picture here.
And the standard framework, it works pretty well, but one aspect of conscious experiences that it
doesn't really work so well for is what I call phenomenal precision. So to get a grip on precision,
think about the contrast between your full-view color experience of something as scarlet versus
your peripheral color experience of something as red. So your full-view color experience is more
precise than your peripheral color experience. And precision, in the sense that I'm using the term,
denotes a certain phenomenal property, a certain property of your experiences, namely the property
that contrasts your full-view color experience from your peripheral color experience.
Precision isn't just specific to color experience though. So think about, for example,
the phenomenal contrast between, say, hearing a sound that's muffled versus a sound that's clear
or touching a surface with your fingertips versus with your back. Those also plausibly
involve contrasts in precision. So there's this feature of an alvenology that is just an aspect
of our conscious experiences. And the standard framework has kind of an awkward time capturing
precision. And that's because the standard framework models mental qualities via points,
but imprecise qualities correspond to regions rather than points. At least that's a very
natural way of thinking about precision. There's more than I say in the paper to motivate this
appeal to regions. For example, some people think, well, couldn't we just add an extra dimension
before precision? And that would be one possibility, but I think that for various reasons, that
isn't the most appealing possibility for capturing precision. So a very natural move when we start
thinking about precision and quality space models is to move from modeling mental qualities using
points to using regions. And that's the move that I make in my paper. So it's a pretty basic idea,
represent mental qualities via regions and meaning sets of points instead of individual points.
But part of what I argue is that this pretty simple move is much more powerful and interesting than
you might initially think. And it enables rich new investigation into consciousness that's at the
intersection of philosophy and coccy and math. So there's a few constraints that we want on our
models if we are doing things in terms of regions rather than points. So first and foremost, we
want sizes of regions to correspond to degrees of precision. So the introduction of regions is
intended to provide a way of capturing precision. So experiences that are more imprecise will
correspond to bigger regions. And then we want one to one correspondence between what we call
permissible regions or regions that actually represent genuine possible mental qualities
and the qualities themselves. We want distance to inversely correspond to phenomenal similarity
and we want phenomenal identity when two qualities are indistinguishable to correspond to distance
here to occupy exactly the same location in the space. So in the paper itself, I go through
different elements of the regional framework and I explain how to think about them and the
substituted philosophical issues that arise. I'm not going to talk about that stuff. Instead of
all all I'm going to do here is I'm just going to mention a few interesting questions that arise
when we start thinking in terms of the regional framework and also some of the applications
that arise when we move to the regional framework. So here's one interesting question. We can ask
what kinds of regions actually represent possible qualities? So a region in my definition is just
any set of points and for any quality space model there's going to be all sorts of weirdly
structured sets of points where it's not obvious whether that's that corresponds to a real
phenomenal possibility. So for example you might wonder whether there could be experiences that
correspond to disconnected regions. Could you have a color experience that represents something
either as aquamarine or scarlet but no shades in between? You might wonder what that kind of
experience be like is such an experience possible? And those are philosophical and empirical questions
but what the regional framework enables us to do is to translate these into a more precise
mathematical language that allows us to ask these questions in a more precise way. And interestingly
it also makes it the case that different theories about the space and structure of possible
mental qualities will correspond to different formal constraints on the set of permissible regions.
So one thing to notice here is how the regional framework enables us to start theorizing about
the qualities of consciousness experiences more systematically. You know it would be difficult
to even formulate these questions in the first place without the use of this framework.
So I think that provides a glimpse of how the regional framework enables us to address
theoretical and empirical questions with greater precision and to raise new questions that we
previously lacked the conceptual tools to think about. That's one new interesting question that
arises when we move to the regional framework. Another interesting question concerns the metric.
So there's all sorts of ways of constructing a metric meaning a distance function on regions
assuming that we already have a well-defined notion of distance between points. So for example
one of the most commonly used metrics on regions is the least distance metric where the distance
between two regions is the distance between their closest points. Another common metric is the
average distance metric where the distance between two regions is the average distance between all
their points. And if we're seeking a metric that models phenomenal similarity then we're going to
need that metric to satisfy certain kinds of formal constraints. So for example we want every
region to have distance zero to itself since distance zero represents maximal similarity
meaning phenomenal identity. So once we identify these formal constraints it's a pretty substantive
and interesting question of figuring out which kind of metric on regions actually is the right one
for modeling phenomenal similarity. And one thing I argue in my article is that neither the least
distance metric nor the average distance metric work they systematically make incorrect predictions.
So instead I propose a new metric that I think generates the right kinds of results
which I call the qualitative similarity metric or the Paul metric. This is the
formal statement of the metric where A and B are two regions. And I'm not going to explain how
exactly the metric works but to give you some intuition you can basically think of it as a
more sophisticated version of an average distance metric. So the average distance metric works pretty
well most of the time but it turns out to lead to systematically incorrect results
for phenomenal similarity when we have cases involving overlapping regions. So for example
the average distance metric yields the observed result that every mental quality is less than
maximally similar to itself and that's because if you take the average distance from a region to
itself you'll get a non-zero value. So my Paul metric doesn't generate these sorts of absurd
consequences but still yields results that otherwise resemble average distance and more
generally it yields the right kinds of predictions across all the kinds of relationships that two
regions can bear to each other. So that's one thing that's kind of cool. We get this more
interesting sophisticated formalism for capturing phenomenal similarity. Also I think one thing
that's cool that comes out of the regional framework is that there are multiple dimensions
of phenomenal similarity and we can formally disentangle those dimensions. So alongside
qualitative similarity measured by the Paul metric there's also precision similarity.
Similarity with respect to how precise two experiences are which is measured by
a precision similarity metric. So for example think about a full view experience of red
and a full view experience of green versus a peripheral experience of red. The two full
view experiences are similar in a certain respect to each other in which they aren't to
the peripheral experience. So precision similarity on the way that I'm defining the metric is
measured by the ratio between the smaller region to the larger region. And again there's a lot more
that's said in the paper to walk through the metric into motivated. But stepping back thinking
about the big picture I think what's interesting here is that this is one case where I think
formalization can actually help with understanding the phenomenology. So what the regional framework
enables us to do is to pull part two distinct dimensions of phenomenal similarity and seeing
how they fall out of the formal structure of the regional framework this gives us a much more
precise and systematic understanding of phenomenal similarity than we would otherwise have.
Last thing I'll mention as an interesting application of the regional framework concerns
the phenomenal psorias. So a phenomenal psorias is a case where a subject cannot discriminate
an object alpha from an object beta or beta from gamma but can discriminate alpha from gamma. So
for example imagine that you're in a psychophysics experiment and you're seeing three
color shifts each of which is a different shade of gray. And you can discriminate the first
from the third but you can't discriminate the first from the second or the second from the third.
So if I I tried to actually construct a phenomenal psorias case here if I did it
aptly then you will be able to discriminate the shade of gray for of this first circle alpha
from that of gamma but not any of the pairwise circles. So alpha and beta might look to be the
same shade of gray and beta and gamma might look to be the same shade of gray. Okay so that's the
phenomenon that's a phenomenon that's well known. There's been a lot written about it. It's a phenomenon
that calls out for explanation. You might wonder what exactly is going on phenomenologically
in phenomenal psorias cases. And the idea that I had is that we can apply the regional framework
to the phenomenal psorias where the probability of a phenomenal psorias occurring I hypothesize
corresponds to the overlap structure of the relevant regions. So in other words the more
a and b overlap or the more b and c overlap the more likely it is that the subject would not be
able to discriminate the color of alpha from beta or beta from gamma and the less a and c overlap
the more likely it is that they'll be able to discriminate the color of alpha from gamma. So
that's the basic idea. So that yields this probabilistic model of the phenomenal psorias
that comes out of the regional framework. I'm not going to fully explain all this that would
require a bit too much time on technical issues but here's the basic idea. The regional framework
gives us this probabilistic model of how likely it is that a phenomenal psorias occurs where the
input to the model is the regions that represent the subjects experiences and in particular the
overlap structure between those regions. And the thought is that a phenomenal psorias is more
likely to occur when a and b overlap or or b and c overlap or or when a and c overlap less.
Okay so one exciting thing about this application in particular is that it has the potential to
inform future empirical investigation into consciousness but I won't talk about that more
for limits of time. So here's just a summary of what I've been talking about in this brief overview.
So the goal of this article of mine is to develop a new framework for quality space models where the
core idea is to represent qualities using regions and where size of region inversely corresponds to
degree of precision and the regional framework enables us to ask a bunch of interesting new
questions about phenomenology for example which kinds of regions represents possible mental
qualities how we construct the right similarity metrics and it also has a number of applications
for example the probabilistic model of the phenomenal psorias as well as a number of other
things. And there's an article link at the bottom if you're interested in taking a look at the details.
I wanted to end with a more general thought so I'm interested generally in philosophical
questions about the structure of consciousness and I have listed here some of the questions that I
think are especially interesting or important for making progress. These are mostly fairly
foundational questions but I think they're questions that we ought to explore to get a better
understanding of this topic and in fact all these questions are under explored there's not
yet much work in philosophy or the science of consciousness on these sorts of questions.
But I think this is also changing you know in recent years there's been more and more
attention being paid to the structure of consciousness and I think this is exciting and
I'm interested in seeing how things continue to develop in the future.
Yeah very cool I have so many questions and ideas coming out of all of this this is by the way this
is also really great this is very inspiring about these open questions and I almost feel like I would
like to put a poll below in the video what viewers might be most interested in and get you back on
to talk about one of these topics because each of these are really interesting questions.
Well these maybe it's worth mentioning that these first four questions I have written on or
and currently writing on the last four questions I'm interested in and I have thoughts about but
for me they're questions for future work so I've in my in my research program I've been slowly
trying to progress through this host of questions.
Great great so when it comes to the region's idea that you bring in it seems to me
it's one of these things that you go in hindsight everybody should go da because this whole idea
that your your qualia would be a point in some kind of space seems questionable in the first place
right because a point in a way as a mathematical object is infinitely small and it comes with
all kinds of problems but when people show color spaces they never show these points
they already show your regions right and so you're kind of duped into into thinking you're not
thinking as that as a discretized kind of point space so that's really interesting I also find
interesting that you you got the objection that sounded like that some people said well why why
not solve that by adding another dimension and so when it when it comes to the color space at least
it sounds to me that your idea and that's actually key is that let's say your peripheral
sensing your periphery quality of scarlet is less precise but if it's a region in color space then
that means that it can't be arbitrarily imprecise the neighboring colors in that space they determined
that impreciseness because that is where the imprecision can go to right if you if you just
add another dimension and the imprecision can be something other than that this redness that you
don't see it as precise as something at the fovea if you think of that as spreading being more
wide or more fuzzy in color space well that means that it has something to do with which other colors
are nearby yeah or I see so at least if you're thinking that connectedness or maybe complexity
is a constraint on the relevant regions if I'm understanding your question if you didn't require
connectedness then it doesn't really matter which other colors are nearby because you could have
you know some very yeah weirdly shaped regions so that I mean but I think that's just an
interesting open question and we don't really know the answer to this yeah so intuitively I just
assumed that it must be connected but it almost seems to me like an empirical question that we
might be able to answer right because you could show different kinds of shades of red and you
could basically explore the color space that's all around that redness you can do that at the fovea
and you can do it in the periphery and basically you if you can show more shades of red that are
all around this color space it's almost like you could map that region that you're talking about
yeah yeah so I think that's one of the ways in which this the regional framework that I developed
lends itself to empirical investigation because there's going to be different kinds of
predictions depending on for example what the structure of a given region is as far as whether
it's an empirical question whether the regions for a quality space are have to be connected or not
I think there's one question that's empirical which is how should we be thinking about the
regions for human color experiences what how should we be thinking about more generally just
the model of human color experiences but then there's also a more general question
how do we think about the space of all possible experiences where maybe it's the case that humans
just have a certain kind of cognitive architecture that only enables certain kinds of possible
color experiences and that wouldn't be surprising if if it were the case like maybe there's not
really much advantage to representing something as correspond in the way that like a disconnected
would so there's also this more general metaphysical question of what kinds of
experiences are possible in general independent of how human color experiences happen to be
and that's a that's a difficult question I'm not sure you know I'm not sure what
considerations would bear either way on that question but I think one cool thing is that
now we can actually formulate this question I wonder about it at least
yeah I don't know if you know but there are some human tetrachromats so they have four color
receptors and so that that color gamut should be wider and yeah it's very little work on that
actually so well so this also goes to I think some very underexplored and very interesting
questions about quality spaces about so there's tetrachromats there's also colorblind people
and then there's also just other creatures that seem like they might have color experiences but
perhaps with a different dimensionality right and there's an interesting question of how to
think about the relations between these different quality spaces for example should we think that
these all possible color experiences those for neurotypical humans and colorblind humans and
dogs and mantis shrimp are they all embedded in this bigger quality space that captures all
possible color experiences or should we think about the relations between these different
qualities of the same experiential domain but of different spaces in a different way I mean this
is something that I'm interested in thinking about more in the future I have some very speculative
thoughts at the moment on on this but I think that's an exciting topic to investigate there's
also I don't know if you ever heard about this but our lens is actually filtering it's basically a
low pass filter and so you can some people they lose their lens and they get just a glass replacement
that doesn't have the same properties and they can see parts of the ultraviolet spectrum that we
can't see just with a regular eye so we're capable of doing it but it's the lens that prevents us from
doing it that's interesting yeah it seems hard enough from what I read to find out whether those
people actually do see something other than maybe a very bright violet right so it's very
that's where we run into these limits unless maybe we can come up with more clever techniques
than what we have in terms of finding out whether they have color perceptions that that we don't have
yeah I mean so I was going to say that the hard part there then is figuring out what
the phenomenology for those people is but I mean one possible approach would be to just
first see whether they're able to make more discriminations than ordinary people are able
to make and that's I'm inclined to think provides some defeasible evidence in favor of thinking that
they actually do have more color experiences so I had a technical question so I really like the
way that you explain one of your equations was not just with a usual notation but you had the
discs basically showing the different set configurations and so the thought that popped
from my mind there is that I'm also very visual thinker and it's how much of the formalism that
you have depends on the and you kind of answered this already but how much of it depends on the
size of the shape so if it's like a disc like a ball like shape right then in reality it may
not be as you said that and and so would the metrics the work if it's not that yeah so so
basically it doesn't maybe I should pull up that and it's just for so really speaking when when I
envision that region just without further thought I would in my mind it would be something that's
more Gaussian or Gaussian than a solid disc where it seems that even the region itself is not homogeneous
but that the region itself might have like a bell curve kind of shape or something or something
equivalent in two-dimensional three-dimensional space yeah so let me let me speak to both things
that you were raising so for for the first thing how much does the way that this metric works
rely upon the assumption that the relevant regions are spherical and the the answer is that it
doesn't at all so you can you don't you don't even need to assume that the regions are disconnected
or sorry that the regions are connected so this this was designed to work with arbitrary regions
of all sorts of weird shapes and sizes and I mean when we're thinking about like very weirdly
shaped regions especially disconnected ones then there's not really clear intuitions anyway about
what the right results should be but what I aim to do in in developing this metric was to make sure
that it covered you know all sorts of weird cases and that included thinking a lot about what the
results would be when we're not assuming uniformity for the shapes or convexity or or anything else so
the answer to the first question is that this I I think is going to be fully general for the second
thing when you were talking about this Gaussian structure there's a part of my paper that discusses
this kind of briefly so what I say is that one thing you might think is that not only should we
move from the standard framework to the regional framework but we should move even further from
the regional framework to a framework where mental qualities are modeled not just by
subsets of a space but also by weighted subsets where each point is assigned some value and where
maybe there's more concentration in the middle than the periphery and so forth so one reason you
might be motivated to move to that kind of structure is that if you think that
that perceptual experiences have probabilistic contents and that that probabilistic structure
is reflected in the phenomenology then that might be reason to not give equal weight to all of the
different parts of the quality space that the relevant region covers so maybe there's more
concentration in for example maybe there's a quality that represents something as having
a high probability of being red but also some low probability of being orange and some low
probability of being purple with when all these like bands of color are of equal size so anyway
that would be a way of further developing this framework that will evolve like more sophisticated
structures than just regions and I think it's super interesting to think about how to develop
that further I mean there would need to be more sophisticated versions of the similarity metrics
I discussed for example and I think that would just be a further envisioning of our models of
quality spaces one thing that I feel myself agnostic about is just whether we do in fact
need that additional structure to capture the phenomenology to me that's just an open question
I think it's very obvious that there is such a thing as precision when we just think about the
contrast between full view experience and peripheral experience but it's not obvious
to me that we need something further not that I'm skeptical but I think it's just
more of an open question but I I'm thinking that this is something that might potentially be
something I'd like to work on in in the future this this field of qualia structure mathematical
phenomenology mathematical consciousness science do you ever feel for where it's headed if you
would have to put money on where things might be in five or ten years do you ever feel for that
there's a direction there I mean I hope that there will be more and more interest in these topics
in the near future and I think that that probably will be the case one thing I hope will happen
and I think there's a good chance of happening is for there to be more
unity across different disciplines right now it feels like I mean this could be said about
consciousness research in general too it feels like there's a lot of different people in different
fields that are sometimes developing research that has connections to each other but are working
in different literatures maybe using different vocabulary or methodologies so I think there's
room for more I guess dialogue across disciplines and more I guess standardization of terms and ideas
and literatures and I think that that would constitute a form of progress I guess I also hope
that more philosophers become interested in these sorts of topics it's the structure of
consciousness is not really a big topic in the philosophy of mind right now but I think it has
the potential to be and I think that there's a lot that philosophers can contribute to our inquiry
into these subject matters so I'm hoping that in the field of philosophies specifically that more
attention is paid to these topics in the future very related to that if somebody's watching this
and is a young student and interested maybe in this direction would you have any advice
for your younger self do you have anything that you could share with somebody like that
yeah well I guess for students interested in this I mean I think consciousness research is a growing
field and that I mean I bet that this is in the end going to be an exciting time in history to be
a part of that field I think that it's a field that is emerging where a lot of stuff is happening
where it's I mean it's only been recently that it's a subject matter that can be seriously
studied by scientists I mean consciousness used to be solely in the province of philosophers
but now there are people from a variety of disciplines you know philosophy, ecocide,
neuro, math even even CS who are focused on consciousness so yeah so I think right now
the field is fairly disparate and heterogeneous but I think it's going to probably become more
unified over time and partly because of that it's a great time to join the field because there's
exciting developments happening I guess maybe it's worth saying that academia is a very tough
career to pursue and that you know anyone who considers it should keep those sorts of practical
considerations in mind too but I really do think that this is an interesting time in history to
be interested and involved in studying consciousness and I suspect that the structure of consciousness
will be a bigger and more and more developed topic as as time goes on yeah I couldn't agree more
so I have a few things that maybe I'll add it out but I really wanted to hear what you think
and this is one thing it's a debate I had with Johannes Kleiner also which and you dropped it
at some point whether science has to produce public knowledge whether science has produced one
has to produce public knowledge so you said that very early on when we talked about whether we might
need new math and so you said that you think that maybe we have to also rethink what science is
and what qualifies as science and how science works and you brought that up that like one of these
points is whether science has to produce public knowledge and yeah and I find this such an interesting
question and so here's that thought experiment that that I thought at some point and I just want
to throw it off like that I bounce it off some people I want to bounce off you and see what you
think so the thought experiment is that it's like in that movie with Will Smith where the
world has ended and he's the only last person alive I imagine I think it's that movie and so
let's imagine this happened it's a zombie apocalypse or the rapture and there's one person left on the
planet that's the last survivor of mankind and that person just happens to be a brilliant scientist
somebody like Albert Einstein or Newton yeah and there's no more need for producing public
knowledge right so there's no more need to express science for others because there's
not going to be another human being anymore again and yet it seems that whatever the scientists
would produce would still be totally accepted as science by all of us yeah that's right although one
asymmetry there perhaps with the consciousness case is that in your scenario the knowledge
produced by the scientists is still in principle communicable and in principle public if there
happened to be like other humans created then he would be able to communicate his minds to
and that's what I question right because that's why it gets absurd right because like no you're
really the last survivor there's not anybody going to come so there's really no more need to even
in principle make it communicable and yet it still seems that then we would be okay with that
so it really seems that the need for making science public and communicable almost seems
more practical than a priori that's what I'm getting at it would be very weird to say that if
this person is doing science just for themselves that that wouldn't be science anymore just because
it can't be shared there's nothing that doesn't seem to be something fundamental about the act of
scientific knowledge being shared between two individuals that makes it scientific
yeah I mean I think that's right I mean I certainly agree that in the scenario you are
sketching then what the person is doing should count as scientific inquiry and scientific knowledge
it still seems to be that there are some asymmetries between that case and the consciousness case for
example even though the particular circumstance that the person is in happens to be one where
there will never be any communication of the findings it's still the case that the kind of
knowledge that the person is acquiring is the kind that could be communicated to other people
I mean maybe that's not a relevant asymmetry so I'm open to thinking that and I certainly think
that there can be first person investigation of conscious experiences that is scientific in many
relevant respects so I was really thinking of this as a largely verbal question of just like
how we define science I mean we could one option would be to think that there's like both first
person and third person science and it just has to be the case that almost all scientific
investigation is third person and that it also third person investigation produces certain
kinds of like benefits like communicability that are less obviously available in the first person
case that seems like a fine way of thinking about things to me yeah because some of your work
in a way does also rely on introspection right and so yeah so therefore I mean I it is it takes
first person science in this case kind of serious and and if you do then some of the issues in
consciousness science they actually kind of fall away because a lot of them they to me at least they
really come from very very hard insistence on third person science and public knowledge
that's right but part of part of what I was thinking about earlier is that
if I think there is a sense in which suppose we encountered like this alien species that
just had different kinds of experiences than us I'm inclined to think that there's going to be certain
things that we know about our own conscious experiences that we're just not going to be able
to communicate to them advice versa I think there's a lot that we could communicate to them for
example structural knowledge about right our own experiences but there might be certain facts about
the qualities of our experiences that are just inaccessible to them because of the way that
they're built and we you could imagine a scenario where we do in fact conduct systematic investigation
of those qualities maybe we like taxonomize and categorize them and and so forth
but I guess one question is just how to think about that kind of inquiry how to think about how
that kind of inquiry relates to normal scientific inquiry as it's normally
practiced and I guess it just seems to me kind of an open question but I mean maybe this is another
way of putting my view though I don't really know how we should think about like the nature of science
but I am confident that phenomenology is a thing that we can do that we can like make progress in
and that we can investigate systematically in the same way that we investigate other subject
matters and whether that's called science or not I don't really care but I'm interested in
figuring out how we can advance that mode of inquiry that's that's really beautifully put
because the next part of my conducting experiment would be let's say life of life after death right
and so if you would die and it would be life after death then in a way to me that's an empirical
question or like a scientific question so you die and then now you you know there's some kind of
life after death kind of things like nobody would say that this is somehow unscientific that you
now have that belief that there's life after death now that that has happened to you do you see what
I'm saying but it's a single person issue it's like only only you could have that empirical
experience and so so that that seems to me again it's a madness but it seems to me then if we if
we open consciousness science that we allow for a single person first person experiences to count
to gain knowledge for each of us on their own then some of these obstacles might go away so
maybe even you know some experiments like Mary's the famous Mary's room and so on it seemed
solvable to me when you when you drop this heart insistence on but it has to be third person has
to be communicable uh anyways uh I know there's a little out there but it does it does pertain to
the qualia space's question a little bit because it is more introspective than I think the push that
psychophysics did which is that was like the first aim to mathematicize phenomenology and it really
went out of his way to to not talk about any first person thing ever so there was no introspective
component and so it seems to me that some of the breakthrough that has happened or the progress
that's going on is by softening that requirement a little bit yeah I know I mean I think that
provides a nice way of seeing a bit about a bit more about my own attitude towards these
pathological points I guess I'm inclined to think that we ought to use a combination of both
first person and third person methods in investigating consciousness and that's what I try to do in my
own research and I mean I think this my work on quality space models is a nice example of that
because the motivation in my view for thinking that there is precision in the first place comes
from introspection just seems very plausible introspectively that foveal color experiences
are phenomenologically distinct from peripheral color experiences but then I think we can also get
third person support from that by looking at differences in discriminatory abilities of people
in say foveal vision versus peripheral vision where one of the natural explanations for why
there are those differences is because there are differences in the associated experiences
and then we can also apply formal methods and think about how do we capture all of this you
know mathematically and then apply those formal methods to you know further stages of inquiry so
I tend to be quite holistic in the the methodology that I think we should adopt and I mean one reason
is that you know consciousness is just really hard and really difficult to investigate and we
should use whatever tools are available to us and that's not to presume that all any of these tools
is like infallible or trumps all the others but we can still use a combination to try to like
figure out whatever we're trying to attain more knowledge of. Yeah and I think that the success
in a way also speaks for itself if you make progress and there's a success then you don't
have to question the premises even anymore. I guess one of my main projects right now is
on dimensions of consciousness and trying to develop a philosophical analysis of dimensions
of consciousness so that's a term that you sometimes see in the science of consciousness
and you sometimes see what are called multi-dimensional models of consciousness
there have been some proposals for what the dimensions of consciousness might be but what
nobody has really done yet is develop a systematic analysis of what the relevant
meaning of dimensions of consciousness is here and part of why I became interested in this is that
I think there's one natural sense of dimensions of consciousness where it's just obvious that
consciousness has an extremely high number of dimensions so in particular if you think of
dimensions of consciousness as just ways in which conscious experiences vary from each other
then there's going to be innumerably many ways in which conscious experiences can vary from each
other but I think there's also a sense of dimensions of consciousness where it might turn out that
consciousness in this sense has a low number of dimensions and where searching for the dimensions
of consciousness is going to be an important task for future consciousness research so one of my
projects right now is trying to identify what this more interesting constrained sense of dimensions
of consciousness is and articulating how this has implications for consciousness science
so how is this related to modality so you know having smell or vision those seem like natural
different dimensions that people think of is that is that part of what you're interested in or is
it more about that your the idea is that your consciousness could be graded and you could be
very conscious or less conscious so that's one axis yeah well I think both of those are related
so one observation is that I think it's fine to call different sensory modalities different
dimensions of consciousness but one thing that we should notice there is that these dimensions
are not themselves one dimensional so for example visual experiences like there's all sorts of
different ways in which visual experiences vary so visual experience itself it's going to be
very high dimensional so part of the task here is thinking about what the sense of dimensions
of consciousness is that allows us to make sense of these sorts of claims like different sensory
modalities are dimensions of consciousness you might wonder what justifies the claim that vision is
a dimension of consciousness but not like pink experience why isn't that why doesn't that count
as a dimension of consciousness but you also mentioned this idea about great ability and I
think that that's also connected to thinking about this issue so for example think about global
workspace theory you might have thought that there's an interesting sense in which say size
of global workspace might be a dimension of consciousness that is different from the sense
in which say color experience might be a dimension of consciousness it seems like the first property
gets closer to something more fundamental or more at the heart of what consciousness is
then the second thing I'm fascinated because it seems like a really difficult question to me
because I've always been struck when it comes to personalities people are at first glance dazzled
in the same way as you said that it seems that it's almost infinite dimensional because you said that
if you think about different people the same thing as you said if you have different experiences
they seem to be so distinguished from each other and so that screams many many dimensions right
but if you do careful empirical testing what you find is that all personalities of people can be
with I don't know how many 90 something percent of the variance can be done in five dimensions
and to me that's always been a very surprising result that it seems that if you would into it
you would think that the dimensionality space is much higher for personality and so that's right
so if we're trying to capture all differences in personality we're definitely going to need
more than just five dimensions but I guess these like the ocean model of personality is intended to
abstract away from certain differences while capturing some of the most robust and universal
differences in personality that there are and we could do the same thing for consciousness we could
develop a multi-dimensional model where we abstract away from certain differences
while trying to also identify dimensions that are as universal as possible I mentioned one more
thing though that is connected to the your mark about great ability because one of the other things
that I'm working on is on degrees of consciousness yeah and you know so if you spend enough time in
the conscious world you occasionally hear things like a human is more conscious than a fish or
people become more conscious while on psychedelic drugs and a lot of philosophers have been skeptical
of the coherence of these sorts of claims and have thought that well maybe people who are making
these claims are just kind of conceptually confused but my view is that we don't know whether these
claims are true or not but there's nothing semantically defective about these sorts of claims
these claims are still makes sense and so one of my recent publications titled degrees of
consciousness is arguing that is giving an account of what it means to say that consciousness comes
in degrees and arguing that most theories of consciousness actually entail that consciousness
comes in degrees and that's something that that's a publication that came out last year but I'm also
doing some follow-up work right now with Poppy Mankiewicz a philosopher of language at Bristol
on the semantics of gradable conscious expressions so for example sentences like a human is more
conscious than a fish and our goal is to examine more closely the semantics of these sorts of claims
using resources from philosophy of language and linguistics so that's that's another project that
I'm working on that's directly connected to the great ability stuff if I if I may jump in
there very quick so I saw some of you presented some of that on Naoto Kias YouTube channel and I
thought you did something interesting there which is that you said that consciousness may be graded
and at the same time the the issue that the the problem that that people often have with that
idea is that whether you're conscious or not seems so much of qualitative rather than just a
quantitative change and it's very hard to imagine that how can you go from zero consciousness to
some kind of consciousness that the moment that you even give it an infinitesimally small kind
of consciousness now you have something else it's conscious and in nature that doesn't seem to happen
right so in nature you talked about volume and other physical quantities in the end they are actually
not continuous all the way down in the end we know that there's a plank limit to everything
and there's a discrete jump from something to a certain amount of time a certain amount of space
and so on right and so it sounded to me like you're granting that for consciousness as well
that you're saying there might be almost like a plank limit and then once you go above it then
it's gradable but that doesn't mean it has to be gradable all the way down there could be some
not discontinuity between no conscious and some consciousness yeah so that's that's a nice way
of putting it in that's basically the view that i'm most sympathetic to so one question is whether
it can be indeterminate or vague whether an entity is conscious or not where it has just an
intermediate degree of consciousness meaning it's not yet conscious it's like on the borderline between
not conscious and conscious and speaking for myself i'm not sure how to make sense of that it
seems to me like that's conceptually incoherent but then another question is whether consciousness
comes in degrees meaning some entities are more conscious than others and it could be the kind
of picture that you just articulated where you get this instant jump from non-conscious to conscious
but once you're in the conscious domain then some creatures can be more conscious than others
yeah that's that's really in a way you solved i think a sticking point for a lot of people there
it is compatible it seems to me with integrated information theory and maybe some other theories
as well so it's really interesting well it's certainly compatible with iot i think it kind of
i mean i'm i'm the most people are either very pro or anti iot i'm somebody who's very neutral i
guess but i think this is one sometimes iot has been criticized on the grounds that they appeal to
degrees of consciousness they say that five values are a measure of how conscious an entity is
and some people have thought that well it's not clear that this even makes sense but my attitude
is that it does make sense it's fine for them to postulate that it could be that they're the
theories false but the mere fact that they're saying that some entities are more conscious than
others that's fine because if you really do think that what consciousness is is just having a
maximal degree of integrated information then it's natural to think that you know if you have more
integrated information going on in your system then i do then you're more conscious than me
cool so and what else are you working on you said dimensionality we got the
continuity how do you call it grading of consciousness uh degrees of consciousness
conscious maybe just one more thing i am working on something on consciousness and continuity
and whether we should think of our conscious experiences as having continuous or discrete
structures and in particular whether we have any introspective reason for thinking that
they're continuous so some some people have thought that you know if you think about your
experience of like the blue sky on a cloudless day there's no gaps in that experience so that
experience must be continuous because there's no there's in some sense no appearance reality
distinction in the case of consciousness and what it is for something to be continuous is
just for it to have no gaps but i think that that's a bit too hasty i think that introspection
just doesn't reveal to us whether our experiences are fundamentally continuous or discrete that
it's more of an empirical question and basically what that paper is doing is clarifying what it
means to say that an experience is continuous or discrete and providing what a discrete model of
those sorts of experiences like your experience of the blue sky and upon a cloudless day might look
like and arguing that we just don't really know at the moment which which view is correct
do you the the more natural way to go there would be time right the perception of time and
there's a lot of work on that yeah well what does it look like i think it does translate i'm
thinking about continuity in a general sense so it could be applied to temporal experience or
spatial experience or or any domain and when we're thinking about temporal experience it's a little
bit tricky we have to distinguish the timing of experience from the experience of time that's
how people would have put it sometimes so there's the objective time that an experience is
occurring during and then there's also what it feels like temporally to have the experience
and it could be that those two things come apart for example you could in principle have a view where
maybe experiences occur at an instant but each experience that occurs at an instant feels like
it's occurring over some extended period of time so i'm just concerned with the phenomenology
i'm concerned with in this case whether we have any reason to think that temporal phenomenology
is continuous as opposed to just to discrete whereas most work that has fallen under the label
of consciousness and continuity has been concerned with the timing of experience so the objective
time during which experiences occur and i think you could these two issues are related but they're
also conceptually distinct the i guess the other difference is that my concern here is mainly with
do we have any introspective reason for thinking that our experiences are continuous because some
people have thought that we could just know from introspection that our experiences have these
structures but i think that when we really think about what continuity means and what it would entail
for our experiences to be continuous i mean that would be kind of incredible if we could
like just introspect that our experiences have that kind of structure instead i think it's more
appropriate to think that we we just don't know from introspection whether our experiences are
continuous or discrete it this is again seems to be like a really important question because
if we're thinking about formalizing the structure of consciousness that is really important whether
you know this could all be done with discrete math or whether we have to deal with infinities
right that makes everything ugly and it's also maybe related to the people that come from cs
where everything is discrete by definition and we kind of learned that there's so much you can do
with just sticking to the discrete that maybe there is no need for for continuous
yeah well sometimes infinities make things ugly sometimes they make things easier
but i mean for example it's when we're thinking in geometrical or topological context it's much
more natural to be working with continuous structures than with discrete structures but
i think this also connects to interesting questions about quality spaces too so we might wonder
whether we should think of them as graphs or as as manifolds and i think that's a big question too
that's just kind of open yeah that's right but i think what i'm getting at is that like if your
math has this whole debate about you know there's the final test and so on but in a way it's funny
because when it comes to doing the actual calculations we typically just apply discrete math right so
we we just round pi to a certain decimal point and so on we'll do just fine we can do a lot of
geometry in a computer even though we can't deal with the infinite and so if if so in a way
if we think about that we want to do something similar with consciousness and structure of
consciousness it might help simplify that we could just break it down and deal with things
discreetly yeah no i think that's absolutely right and we should distinguish the question of
which kinds of models are most useful and what is the actual structure of the of the thing
we're investigating i mean the original idea of psychophysics is that perception is discrete
right so the the color space actually that that fechner envisioned was that it's very regional
actually right so that you have these just noticeable differences and then the point of
subjective equality so so actually in in the mind of a psychophysicist it's all like a step
function where you go from i can't tell a difference to now i can't tell a difference
and so yeah so it really does help i mean in that case when fechner came along it helped
because it gave rise to the idea that perception can't have numerosity and so for that you needed
that discreteness that i can't count in units of perception by saying it's thresholds you're just
noticeable differences go from one to two and so on and so yeah so it seems a really interesting
important question at the same time intuitively as you said that's really hard to have read your
to wrap your head around because it seems that yeah of course everything seems continuous
yeah so i i guess i think that once we think carefully about it it doesn't i mean i do think
we don't notice gaps in our experiences that's definitely right right but then whether we
should infer from that that our experiences seem continuous to us in the mathematical sense of
continuity that that that's the point that i want to resist and i think that for all we know
even though it is the case that our experiences aren't gappy they could still be discreet now
so the the empirical examples of gappy experiences like the blind spot and all of this
there you have filling in a certain way that would be interpolation and you could still argue it's
continuous space right so you have a gap it just gets intimidated yeah but you're going you're
going further and you're saying no it could actually it could be fundamentally pixelized
basically and you wouldn't know yeah that's interesting i mean one like way to put the
general thought is that to notice a gap you have to notice the things that would fill in the gap
right but then of course we can't experience we're not experiencing the things that would
fill in the gap because the it would mean that our experience is different than it actually is
it's it's also as a neuroscientist this is such an interesting thing actually because
neurons in a way are discreet right so they they fire action potentials and so if we think that
it's action potentials that are causing perception it's very hard to think that that would be a
really continuous thing because it is discretized at that level of information or whatever we want
to call it right so when it comes to a color perception that's what i'm thinking about explicitly
then i think again we get fooled because we're dealing with light as a starting point and that
discontinues the waveforms there but our color perception the way that that that i teach about
it is that we think of the three photoreceptors and how much they get activated and that's
discreet that isn't how many action potentials they fire so that space the color space that i
teach is a discrete space it can't be continuous because it has basically three three vectors
that have discretized activations yeah so then another angle from which to think about this
question is that if we did think that introspection reveals that our experiences are continuous
then you might think that that place is substantive constraints on what the physical
correlates of our experiences might be and rules out some of the most prominent possibilities for
thinking about those physical correlates but then that seems well that i mean that would be a pretty
substantive implication but yeah i guess i think that we shouldn't rule out those you're still
agnostic possibilities yeah that's interesting okay cool real brief maybe you said there's a fourth
one you're working on sure i mean maybe i'll just briefly mention so one thing i'm working on outside
the structure of experiences i have various kinds of work on the ethics of consciousness
i'm interested in understanding generally how consciousness is ethically significant both
with respect to our own welfare and with respect to morality and one of my new papers is called
consciousness makes things matter where i argue basically that consciousness is what makes an
entity the kind of thing that can be doing well or badly and i think relatedly is the basis for
moral status so that's a view that i think many people feel intuitively compelled by but which
hasn't actually received any sustained defense in the philosophical literature so that's
that's one new thing that i'm working on in the ethics of consciousness and just one example of
like i guess a bit of my work outside of the structure of consciousness oh wow you really
have a a knack for really interesting things i mean this is one where you really got me because
i'm very skeptical of of attributing functions to consciousness and yet as you said that is very
intuitive that is that is very compelling argument yeah it's very it's relevant to right as ai is
marching along as yeah i mean there's i mean there's been so much discussion like in the last
few months about about that sort of stuff in the context of ai and usually the people are just
implicitly assuming that consciousness is the basis for welfare and for moral status and i mean i
as i said i endorse those intuitions but i think it's also interesting thinking about
what the most careful philosophical defense of that view is interesting very interesting
wow yeah so that was a lot that was very cool so i hope we can repeat this at some point this is
very exciting so thank you so much again andrew that was really cool and did you have any parting
thoughts of ideas no i mean i'm looking forward to you know where your channel is going and yeah
i mean thanks a lot for bringing me on i really enjoyed the conversation and you've also inspired
me to you know maybe try to create my own youtube channel as i was saying at the beginning but yeah
i'm looking forward to what you do in the future with the channel and i think there will be as i said
it's an exciting time to be part of this this field yeah perfect and everything your website and
everything else will be in the description below for people to find so thanks so much thank you
