Hi and welcome to Global Governance Futures based out of the Global Governance Institute
at University College London. This is a podcast about the challenges facing humanity
and possible global responses. If you're new to the show and you want to get a list of our favorite
books, other resources, listen to past shows and join our community, go to ucl.ac.uk forward slash
global dash governance. We're really excited to have Dr Zach Stein join us today. Zach is a writer,
a futurist, a transformative educator, working to bring a greater sense of justice and sanity
to education. Alongside Daniel Schmackenberger who featured in episode 12, Zach is also a founding
member of the Consilience Project, a non-profit media organization aiming to improve public
sense-making and democratic dialogue. Zach received his PhD in education from Harvard
University where he studied educational neuroscience, human development and the philosophy
of education. He's published dozens of articles and two books, his most recent book and one which
really caught my attention is called Education in a Time Between Worlds and Grapples with the
Dangers posed by a profound learning and capacity deficit in the face of civilization-wide transformations.
It really is an incredibly rich and thought-provoking work and at the risk of oversimplifying,
Zach argues that the world as we have known it is rapidly disappearing and as a result,
radical transformation of our legacy education systems is now an urgent, even existential imperative.
As he puts it, we can no longer assume, if we ever could, the unproblematic intergenerational
transmission of essential human capacities for reasoning and reflection.
So, in the spirits of the philosopher John Dewey, we're going to discuss today why Zach believes
that at roots all current global crises might be best understood as crises of education
and why as educators, learners and concerned planetary inhabitants, we should all care about that.
So, we're super excited to get into this with you, Zach. Thanks so much for taking the time to
speak with us. It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you for inviting me. And before we get started,
I'll just ask the poll crew to say hello. Hi, I'm Jessica. I work on the research and
I'm very looking forward to hearing what Dr. Stein has to say today.
Hi, my name is Sam. I do the audio and the video editing and hopefully some of the thinking.
Hi, I'm Zoe. I help with the social media and running of the YouTube channel.
Great. Okay. So, to open, Zach, perhaps you can help us set the scene. You describe in the book
the years 2000 to 2050 as a critical turning point in the history of humanity and the planet.
So, what is so special about this 50-year stretch and how does this this interregnum,
how does this turning relate to the educational crisis?
Yeah, so that specific time period. I took that on the cue of Immanuel Wallerstein,
who was the creator of World Systems Analysis, which is this fascinating kind of approach to
doing big history, specifically long-term stretches of the development of the capitalist
world system. And he was actually following from complex dynamical system theory, like
prigazine and things like that. And he saw this kind of like rhythm of changing in the basic
organization of capitalism, this transformation of the hegemonic structure, as he called it.
And so, you know, one occurred when we went from having capitalism being rooted in basically Venice
to it being rooted with the Dutch and then from the Dutch to the British and then from the British
to the United States. And each time that kind of hegemonic world system transformation, as Wallerstein
would call it, occurred, whole swaths of culture, whole swaths of political life, whole swaths of
the ecology and the humanity were changed. And he saw this in several other kind of like people
doing actually quantitative analysis of large historical swaths of time, like Peter Turchin
more recently have seen these actual, their rhythms, their cycles of historical transformation.
And so Wallerstein says, Hey, we're about to be in one of these, we're about to be in a situation
where, you know, the British kind of and then the Americans and now the Americans and now what
basically is what Wallerstein saying is like the, the end of America as the dominant hegemonic force
in the capitalist world system, he's predicting. And he's saying that for the first time the system
is global. And that means that it's not clear that the hegemon can just move geographically,
that we may be approaching something that looks more like a transformation of a deeper, more
profound nature at the structure of the economic system itself. So this is where I got the idea.
And then I started looking around at other thinkers who are also like even, you know,
New Age thinkers and like futurists and, you know, anthropologists and other people pointing at the
same kind of time period, basically. And so yeah, I brought that I pulled that in there and put it
in the book just to make people aware that when I say we're in a time between worlds, like it's a,
it's a technical phrase. Like if there's a, there's poetics in it, but it's actually a technical
phrase. And it's referring to this basically almost inevitable historical unfolding of a very
significant transformation in the techno economic and political base of our world. And the argument
that I weave in there is that, hey, don't forget education. Like Wallerstein doesn't mention
education. And my argument is basically that all those other things, economics, politics,
warfare, technology, you don't get those without education. And it's interesting to me that people
neglect that insight, it shows how taken for granted, much of the processes of intergenerational
transmission have been. And so that's invisible when they become problematized in our society,
because we take it for granted. Each time the capitalist world system changed, the nature of
education itself changed. And so yeah, so that's, I'm pulling that bit out. And one thing that's
interesting is that great historian, again, of capitalism, Jason Moore, his book, Capitalism
and the Web of Life. It's an incredible book. He talks about not just like capitalist world systems,
but world ecologies, which is to say the way that capital shapes the nature of the planetary
biosphere, literally dams and canals and all of these things. And of course now, emissions and
transformations in weather as a result of this. So we're having, and I know this in the book,
we're having these crazy hockey stick patterns of major ecological transformation. At the same
time, the underlying techno economic base is fundamentally transforming at the same time
education is transforming. And I'm pointing at education as the thing that needs to be worked
on basically first or as most primary, or at least not put on the back burner, like it's going to
take care of itself. When in fact, most of the problems as you mentioned in the intro that we're
looking at are our issues of skill deficit, capacity deficit, personality disorganization,
low grade ubiquitous psychopathology. And so it's a complex psychological crisis, as much as it's
an ecological or technological or political or economic crisis. So that's a little bit about
that where that period came from. And I've been saying we were between worlds for,
you know, five or six years. And then when the pandemic hit, people were like, oh,
that's what you mean. I was like, yes. I was like, it's everything is fundamentally,
we're in a liminal space, we can't go back or stabilize the prior system.
We're going to be in a disequilibrated state. And this is Wallerstein's notion he's getting it
from privileging complex open dynamical systems, right, they go through periods of turbulence
before they restabilize. So we're in that period of turbulence and will remain in that period of
turbulence, I'm saying for, for decades, until something new locks in. And the concern we have
is that what's going to lock in is not going to be good. So there's a way to solve this problem that
looks, for lack of a better word, like totalitarian or authoritarian.
So, you know, the Consilience Project and my other work is trying to find a way to solve these
problems that result in an open society on the other side of this kind of reorganization of the
world system. So it's kind of like the broadest framing. Yeah, that's super helpful, Zach. Thank
you. So maybe we'll sort of drill down a bit now into a concrete example. So thinking about climate
change, I've been doing quite a bit of research recently on climate change. And there's a real
sort of focus on, I'd even say fetish for CO2 metrics. We have this kind of war on carbon.
And the solution ontology is really about sort of technology. So carbon capture storage, net
zero, very current at the moment, very lively debate there. But also, you know, state multilateral
agreement. This is a collective action problem. It's a political problem. If we can just,
if we just see our way through that impasse, we can solve climate change. But we're 30 years down
the road from Rio 1992, carbon emissions are yet to peak. And you argue in the book that the climate
crisis is at root, not a problem of pollution or habitat destruction is actually a crisis of human
decision making. So if you were speaking to some of our most highly educated elite decision makers,
experts, and there I said, academics, what is it that we're not getting right?
Yeah, there's at least kind of two ways to answer the question. One is that one of the things we're
not getting right is the communication and education of those people who are not academics
and who are not high level policy decision makers. So like, this is in part a decision making crisis
and a capacities crisis among those epistemic elites, let's call them, and decision makers,
who are laying out this solution ontology, right, inadequately. So there's something I'll get to
that point, like what's wrong with the highest level models about the global situation and why
those are inadequate. But prior to that, there's actually this issue that the degree of polarization
around climate change, for example, in the United States, the degree of intensity, even though it's
low grade, it will emerge again around escalating economic inequality. Like there's a series of
things that require really complex educational initiatives, not involving the most elite decision
makers, involving every citizen in an open society's understanding of the global situation.
That we have not provided educational systems that brought people up and into a mature and
complex view of the global situation. At least in the United States, you know, we're being entertained.
We should be being informed and educated by the media, we're being entertained and brought into
basically cultural war as a form of entertainment and catharsis. And so that's the first thing that
these epistemic elites need to consider is that the people, so-called, can't just simply be told
what to do when you figure out what the right policy is. This is the, remember, the scary
lockdown of excuse the terminology on the other side of being between worlds is the option where
we figure out the climate policy that works. We can't explain it to the people, quote unquote,
the masses. So we have coercive legislation that basically mandates their behavior change
without their understanding why the behavior change is necessary. And we saw this with the
pandemic a little bit because of the information warfare around science, right? So you get a
situation where people are being requested to do things that are reducing their quality of life,
but they don't actually have the epistemic insight. They don't have the knowledge they need to have
the law be understandable, justified. This goes way back in legal theory to like
Kant, if you will, you know, and forgive Kant his transgressions. But he did say that if you're
going to have a legal framework in something like a democracy, an open society, if you will,
it needs to be both, you know, have the force of law, which is to say you get punished if you
don't follow it, even if you don't understand it. But you also need to be able to be in a position
to understand that you need to have all the information you need as a citizen to see why this
law is valid, just appropriate. So if we don't solve that problem, which is to say, really educating
folks, the everyday person, and that requires changing the nature of the media. I'm getting
to the Consilience Project here, the nature of the media, the nature of how we understand
public sense making, public dialogue around complex scientific topics, for example.
Then we could be in a position where even if the epistemic elite get themselves in order
and start using much more comprehensive, you know, global frames and, you know, multicast
decision making procedures with second and third order effects and all these things we'd
like to see, even if they do that, if the people, as it were, the masses, are still in a media
environment that's completely saturated with disinformation and advertising and information
extraction, predatory social media, then we're going to end up basically being in a situation
where the epistemic elite feel that they have no choice but to coerce the vast majority of the
global population into following the laws necessary for humanity to survive. And then
we have a civilization which may not be worth actually living in, even though it's sustainable,
even though it is within planetary boundaries. So that's the first place where decision making
is key is that it's, yeah, we can be concerned about the epistemic elites, but until they become
more concerned with actually educating people instead of propagandizing them and entertaining
them and extracting profit from them, there'll be no way that we can actually navigate the
crisis in the context of an open society. If we turn to the epistemic elites,
then it becomes clear that we're still dominated by short-term thinking.
We're still dominated by certain ideologies that privilege reductive epistemics over
comprehensive and open epistemics, if I can put it that way. So reducing in all the carbon
emissions, for example, seeking only those approaches that can be measured in quantitative
terms, reducing the problem to a technical and scientific problem. This folds already into
what I explained, that they're mostly being worked on as a technological solution, often
somehow a technological solution that's actually going to come about as a result of competition
between entrepreneurial forces and the interest of seeking profit. So this is, again, a high-level
frame about the kinds of contexts in which basic research should be taking place to solve the problem
and a lack of coordinated effort, like, for example, we had around, let's say, the Manhattan
Project, where it wasn't like, oh, let's let private industry solve this problem. It was like,
no, this is a problem that needs the concerted effort of everybody. Note that they didn't
solve the basic problem that I mentioned earlier, which was a secret project. So I think
there's those two issues. There's a lot more to say about the kind of absence of comprehensive
epistemics among the elite decision makers and policymakers. And somehow that discourse often
feels captured to me or insincere to me. And at some point, you know, I don't know how to quite
get in there and look at that. But that's, I think, a deep issue. I remember Jonathan Ross and my
colleague at Perspectiva talking about finance. Just finance as one of the major profit centers
of our civilization is basically the manipulation of fictitious capital. And the way these things
down propagate into how people make decisions about very concrete things involving the ecology
of the planet, or even just local ecologies. So yeah, so there's some form of motivated reasoning
or kind of a very astute and studied blindness to certain issues, the like conspicuous absence of
comprehensive approaches. So anyway, we have to get more specific about certain models. And again,
I'm not an educator. So I'm thinking about the errors and they're thinking at a deeper level,
not about like, oh, they've got these statistics wrong about CO2, or they haven't thought through
the, you know, how difficult it is to actually make solar panels or all those technical questions
are important. I'm looking at the underlying structure of their arguments and epistemics,
essentially, and saying these are kind of flawed to begin with. So I'll leave it there.
Yeah, I think it's very helpful to actually dive down and expose those underlying structural
assumptions. Because it's very easy. I mean, I find myself doing all the time just getting
captured by an interest in, in a part of the problem to compartmentalizing, siloing. So to
actually step back and to try and get a sense of what are these larger macro structural forces in
play is crucial. And I'm not sure we're very good at doing that. But I just want to hand over to
Sam. Sam, Sam's got a question. Hi, thanks, Tom. And thank you, Zach. I just wanted to ask if we
say in a perfect word, we realize the two issues that you very articulately put. And so we have
an open society, let's say, for example, the United States of America, we have an open, educated
society, finance capitalism is the thing of the past. How do we move that out of the confines
of a kind of national paradigm? And could you talk a bit about obviously climate change is a
collective action problem, a global collective action problem? And is there a space for more
cosmopolitan education and working in a kind of global capacity or a cosmopolitan capacity
to solve some of these collective action problems so that we don't have one society that is,
you know, really clued up, but then constantly hitting up against brick walls around it?
Yeah, I mean, I would point to nationalism, at least certain forms of nationalism,
as one of those flaws and the highest level epistemic models that are plaguing the epistemic
elites. It's a lot of epistemics in there. But you see what I'm saying, like there's a
there's a bias towards certain ways of thinking about what the world situation is that makes
it seem like the Brenton Woods agreements are still completely relevant and stuff when they're
absolutely not, right? Or as if the UN actually somehow imposed a global order when it completely
didn't. So there's a misunderstanding of what the actual real politic is at the level of what's
going to take to solve these problems. And so it this isn't like, you know, we can't be naive
and think that there will be international cooperation. But we do need to think about
the forms of judgment, like as I was articulating, the forms of judgment that allow
certain people within certain nations to be truly cosmopolitan actors, to not say they're
acting in the interest of everyone, but actually be interesting, acting national interests,
but that certain countries will actually have to sacrifice their advantages, right? They'll
actually have to sacrifice their advantages in order to secure any possible viable future for
other countries who don't have an opportunity to actually save themselves because of the position
they've been put in by those countries who need to make a sacrifice, right? So there can't be
anything like good faith conversation between the global north and the global south,
until the global north is like, hey, we're going to make some sacrifices for you guys.
And so and that story can be said, you know, east west, like north south, like this is a
very complex situation. And so it requires a form of, let's just say, moral judgment,
post-conventional, post-formal operational, cosmo-centric, cosmopolitan moral judgment,
which is a rare human trait. I point to it in my book when I say, I can literally, as a human
development expert, I can point at those capacities that we're going to need, right? We're going to
need very complex forms of ethical self understanding, which position you within a local bioregion,
within some kind of national structure, within some kind of global structure,
probably within some kind of larger structure of universal value, ultimately. And that is not
something you get from the American public education system as it stands now, for example.
Like, we're not preparing post-conventional, dialectically thinking global citizens. We're
preparing basically simple minded consumers, sometimes consumers of cultural warfare, so
that they can participate in the entertainment of the culture wars. And so that's obviously an
adequate that's going to lead us to further into some kind of self terminating tribalization.
So you're pointing to the cosmopolitan consciousness as key. And it's going to be, like I said,
unequally distributed in terms of the cascade effects of risk, right? And Ulrich back pointed
this out in his work on the risk society, like that the risks are inevitably distributed.
Some people are kind of safe. Some people are relatively unsafe, right? And then the need for
getting out of your position of advantage and putting your position in a position of
basically sacrificing for the whole, that's going to be unequally distributed, right?
So it's become a very delicate situation where we need to avoid the pitfalls of those prior attempts
by the north and the west to try to like help out in the global south and elsewhere.
Well, we're going to need a way to flip that kind of relationship. And so, yeah, some of what's
taking place with social justice and kind of issues of race in the United States,
you know, these conversations will need to be expanded. Again, this is part of what I mean by
it's fundamentally an educational crisis. Even if we solve the technological problems,
we still have to resolve this history of injustice that we're living with.
Or else, who's going to want to join your future sustainable, super technologically awesome society?
Like it just doesn't make sense. Like we have to, there's a certain
healing at the level of culture and a willingness to somehow reengage in good faith again.
And so I don't know the kind of crisis that will ensue that will allow that
transformation of self understanding to unfold with a broad enough swath of people.
But yeah, I know as a human development person that it is, it is crises. It is crises and tragedy
often that can break the psyche open enough to actually transform.
So that would be one way to think about that.
I think it's incredibly helpful and important to bring history into this conversation.
Global history, which is something which has been somewhat missing from
the international relations scholarship in recent years. And there is a certain resurgence now
of a historical sensibility in the current scholarship. And the importance, of course,
of acknowledging militarism and economic imperialism. And I think what you just said, Zach,
there's a bracing clarity in understanding the ethical core of the challenge. And it reminds
me of Henry Shu, a prominent human rights scholar, writing in 1992 about the unavoidability of
justice when it comes to climate change and the crucial distinction between luxury emissions
and survival emissions. And that conversation has sort of crept in from time to time,
but it's rarely been at the foreground of how we actually deal with climate change,
the climate emergency. But I was curious to pick up on this idea of biases and the way
that we see the world. We're now almost halfway through this 50 year critical turning point.
So riffing on Wallerstein, but also say Gramski, is there more to what's going on right now
in the midst of COVID as well, than a host of morbid symptoms? You write in the book,
or you quote actually HG Wells, that the future is a race between catastrophe and education.
And you hold out the prospect of good educational futures emerging out of the present.
But it often seems to me or feels like there's not much space in the culture for exploring the
upside of risks and uncertainties. There's a certain sort of catastrophesism, that's the word.
And that in itself might be a kind of educational deficit. But I wonder then, how do we even get
started if our collective aversion to risk closes off the possibility of
accelerating in the direction of healthy radical transformation?
Yeah, this is interesting because I think there's two ways that there's two reactions
when you start to become aware of the existential risk landscape. I'll call them techno-optimist
and techno-pessimist. The techno-optimist basically talks themselves out of the idea that
there actually is a risk and puts a tremendous amount of faith in human problem-solving capacity.
And this is not an error. We're still here. We should maybe not be probabilistically
on many ledgers. It's actually a question, I think, for people who study existential risk.
Why are we still here? But that's a separate question. So with that, I think is a way to
avoid looking at the risk, really just having an overtly optimistic view of our ability to
solve these problems, usually with technology. The other way is also a way of averting looking
at the risk because you basically say there's nothing we can do about it and you go to the
techno-optimist view, which basically says it's over. It's done. Get ready basically to die.
Maybe we can reboot somehow after everything goes away, but technology has done us in.
And the truth is that when you look at the probabilities and you look at the extra landscape,
it's hard not to be pessimistic. So there's a huge moment of truth in the views. So there's
something about both of those extremes, which is partially right and partially wrong. And the bit
about education is a great example because this is what I'm doing my thinking. So right now,
I believe we have the most sophisticated communication technologies ever for delivering
propaganda directly into people's minds. Those very same tools could be used to make the most
powerful educational infrastructure that has ever been created. And so this is this notion of we're
getting exponential information technology in particular. It's disrupting the educational
dynamics of intergenerational transmission. It's making us go insane right now. We're all going
insane because we're being deeply propagandized by these things we're holding in the palm of
our hand that are basically making us addicted to staring at them. All of that same infrastructure,
were we to retool it, could be used to actually customize the delivery of truly educational
material. This is basically the crux of my argument that we're misusing the potentialities of the
digital. And we could potentially wield them in the interest of unprecedented education and
unprecedented kind of capacities for having a complex open society. And so many of the technologies
that we have have this double-sided nature to them. Artificial intelligence is another one.
You can go techno-optimist or techno-pessimist on the artificial intelligence thing.
And both of those are right and wrong. And the truth of the matter is that
yeah, there's always going to be
a lack of determinism around what the outcome of a technological innovation is. So this is my view,
like following Mumford and Marshall McLuhan and others. There are certain things that are laid out
that are that come with the technology. And then there's this space of freedom around the technology
as to where and how and when the technology gets used. And so I think right now we're not even close
to doing what the digital could do in the realm of education because we're using it for entertainment
and propaganda because it's profitable. But at a certain point, we're a group to decide like a
country-sized group or even like a city-state where a group decide to retool these things
precisely for education. They would have a tremendous asymmetric advantage very rapidly,
epistemically over the entire rest of the world who's misusing the tools.
So that's like a glimmer. And there's many of these glimmers of hope right at the heart of the
darkness like right in the place where all of the propaganda is coming from. It's like right in
there that there's actually the potential for profound educational possibilities. And I end
amending up sounding a lot like a Marxist here. I'm not a Marxist. But that idea that capitalism
builds out this massive global structure of technology and then right as it's about to lock in,
it flips and that same technology becomes the infrastructure of freedom. That's a very
interesting idea. So yeah, that's one way I think. Again, just one way to think about that.
Yeah, fantastic. Thanks Zach. Hope right in the darkness. That's a phrase to ponder I think.
Okay, I'm going to hand over to Jess. Jess, please. Yes. Thanks so much Zach for everything
you've shared so far. Coming off this idea of propaganda and the tech tools that deliver it to
us as a foremost teacher-lead authority in our society right now. How and if it is retooled
to become a source of mass delivery for education, how will it be established in a culture which is
often suspicious of authority claims? I mean, as a child growing up when the internet was just
becoming widespread, we were always told not to believe what you read on the internet. And I think
some kids have maybe lost that as it's become more and more ubiquitous throughout our lives.
But if it does in the future become something positive, quote unquote, or
you know, dependable, how do you think the population would react to that and will it be a
smooth transition? It's very interesting. And yeah, I have this term teacher-lead authority,
which I use a lot in my book and it hinges on this. It hinges on what's the nature of legitimate
teacher-lead authority and how do you know when you've got it in a context that's
saturated with illegitimate teacher-lead authority. And so the classic example is a school, right?
The school and their students and teachers, right? Students have to be there because they're forced
to be there. The teachers are there because they get paid. The teachers have teacher-lead authority
by virtue of their bureaucratic position in relation to the student, right? So most students
experience teachers as teachers, not necessarily because they're super smart and like really good
at being teachers, but because this is their job. And so we're in an environment where there's an
inorganic, let's call it inorganic, bureaucratically mediated teacher-lead authority, right? Now,
sometimes in those contexts, your high school teacher is a teacher. Like, he's brilliant and
he's really good at teaching you. And you've kind of fallen in love with the idea that like this man
can like change your whole mind. I'm speaking about one teacher, I'm remembering this teacher,
I had an high school, right? And so all of a sudden in this bureaucratically mediated teacher-lead
authority, where often you encounter a teacher who's lazy and you don't understand them and you
don't know why they became a teacher and you think it's bullshit. There is actually a beacon of
legitimate teacher-lead authority. And you can recognize legitimate teacher-lead authority
because one of the main things it's doing is trying to make itself obsolete. It wants you
to be able to do what it does. Like by definition, a good teacher is trying to get you up to their
level and maybe actually get you to go beyond their level. So one of the ways you know when
you're looking at like the media or you're looking at a pundit or someone who's speaking is,
are they actually encouraging you and giving you what you need to detach yourself from being
their student forever, right? Or are they addicting to you to them, excuse me, are they
are you becoming addicted to them as the only source of information you can trust and use,
right? So this becomes a very interesting dynamic when you look at the media landscape.
And when you look specifically at the discussion of science in the media and the disconnect between
the stories the media tell and the complexity of the science that's happening and their attempt to
run interference on readers so that you don't go to the primary source material, that you're not
actually equipped to be able to be smarter about the issue than this random journalist who actually
isn't a virologist, right? It's journalist, not a virologist. It's never studied vaccines, right?
Are they putting me in a position to actually understand the issue?
Are the actual major institutions involved giving me the information I need to be truly
informed about the issue or not? Or are they just basically telling me what to do pretending to be a
teacherly authority? So you're right, we've become suspicious of teacherly authority because we have
good reason to be. Most of what takes place in the fourth estate, which is supposed to be, you
know, journalism and the press and supposed to be an educational institution, most of what's
taking place there is not by any definition looking like legitimate teacherly authority.
And so, but the saving grace, and this gets to your point, the saving grace is that when that
high school teacher appears, he gets a posse, like students are like, that's the real deal.
Like that's someone who actually cares and is actually trying to empower us, like actually
trying to give us the capacities and the skills that we could become our own teachers, right?
So I do think that if you build the system correctly, and you have the kind of stepwise access
to deeper and deeper and deeper information and empowerment epistemically, where there's no
invisible ceiling of a epistemic asymmetry, where the populace is like, all right, on the other side
of this, those guys know what's going on, which is what it feels right now. Most people feel
like no one really trusts the media. We do what the media tells us because we're socially pressured
to use certain words and to have certain beliefs, especially in social media. But if you look at
the statistics, most people just simply don't trust the media. They have allegiance to certain
ones because they're useful in cultural warfare, but they don't actually really trust what's being
said by the media. And so when you have this kind of duplicity and this deep sense that, well,
somebody must know what's actually going on. And so there's this deep suspicion and this lays,
of course, the groundwork for much of the cultural dysfunction we're seeing around, you know, so-called
conspiracy theories and things of that nature, which emerge from the sense of somehow there's a
ceiling of epistemic asymmetry, that the main kind of media, like news media, social media,
the ways we're supposed to get up and into understanding the world, don't give or don't
kind of work in context of legitimate teacherly authority. So it's a widespread and deep problem
because now we're cynical about the idea that there could even be teacherly authority. So I
think to your point where someone said, don't believe what you read online. I don't think
kids forgot that. I think it's that they don't believe what they read online, which means they
don't believe anything because all they do is read online. So it becomes, it moves from like,
there's a true story and then there's this crazy online stuff to just like, there's just crazy
online stuff. And the idea that there's a true story somewhere, that's not even really an idea
anymore. I'm telling you, like, when you look at the epistemologies of people under 20, what you
end up getting is a kind of widely diffuse epistemic nihilism, you know, where there's this fusion
between entertainment and belief, and a fusion between a need to have in-group membership in a
cultural war and motivated reasoning to believe certain things. So the sense of like having
an integrist truth and an orientation towards ongoing learning and having access to stuff
that would allow you to do that and that would encourage doing that. These are cultures like
that are few and far between right now and hard to find, but they need to be created. And I think
when they are, I do think people will be attracted to them because most people don't trust the media,
but they want to know what's going on. Like people want to know, it's not that people don't want to
know, it's that there's a certain cynicism or nihilism about the prospect of success of knowing
that we've been disadvantaged in our ability to know. And there's a lot to say there, some of the
research I'm doing now is on the nature and the history of propaganda and information warfare
and communication sciences. And it's a long history, you know, decades and decades and decades,
we've been working on how to kind of like manipulate large populations through communication
science, often with a kind of technocratically benevolent notion that the masses need to be
helped in making the right decision. And that brings us back to that prior point I made about
the relation between the epistemic elites and the so-called people.
Yes, that point really resonated with me, especially it gave me the idea that it seems
that true education, where everyone can have access to a primary source, is mutually exclusive
from control and power. I was wondering if you had any thoughts on that and whether the epistemic
elite or high-level policymakers would ever be motivated to relinquish control and power that
has been designed and fueled through this structure of propaganda and entertainment media?
It's a very, very good question. The relationship between power and education and the relationship
between power and teacherly authority in particular. It's funny because I say teacherly
authority and everyone thinks like a school and I use that context, but actually it's the mother and
the child or the parent, the parenting one and the child, where you get that most basic, actually
most kind of like anthropologically primordial case of teacherly authority. And what you see in
that relationship is in fact the power, like the power of the mother over the child. Let's
talk about that. What kind of power is that? It's not the same power as what Roy Baskar and others
would call power over, like the political power, having access to the legitimate use of force
or the legitimate use of bureaucratic mechanism to punish basically. So the power of the mother
over the infant is actually the power of care. And so it's a legitimate asymmetry. The mother's
larger, stronger, literally provides sustenance to the child and then teaches the child all kinds of
things without even intending to do so. The child instinctively puts itself in relationship to the
mother as teacher. And so it's not about the absence of power that you get legitimate teacherly
authority. It's about a particular kind of power, a power of care or a power of love that binds people
in a relationship that's completely non-coercive. It's completely non-coercive. We associate power
with coercion and that's what most political power is. But there's actually a power, Habermas would
call it, like the unforced force of the better argument. That's an example of legitimate teacherly
authority. Or it's like, why do I agree with you? I'm not agreeing with you because you're going to
beat me up or because I get in trouble or I get shunned from my in-group. I'm agreeing with you
because that is a better argument than the arguments I've heard, the force of logic, right?
The force of reason compels me, not the force of physical. So the power of a strong argument
is an example of the power that's in legitimate teacherly authority. Now, when you try to merge
teacherly authority with bureaucratic power, that's when you get that situation where now you can't
tell. Am I doing what this teacher tells me because I respect them the way I might respect
my mother and am I vibing with them through love and teacherly authority? Or is it I have
to do this because otherwise I get punished? They have the legitimate use of bureaucratic force over
me as a student. And similarly with the media and social media, things of that nature. And of
course, political speeches and the communication scientists that kind of roll out political
platforms. There's always this question about the form of power that's in play. And
the degree to which we can say that we are consenting with full knowledge of what our
situation is or not. And so yeah, I think in an ideal world, you would have conditions of education
where there wasn't the opportunity to confuse those two forms of power. Where you gravitated to
particular teachers and you gravitated to particular courses of study because of the power of the
teacherly, of the power of the true argument, the power of the curiosity, the power of the
attraction between teacher and student, the epistemic humility and these kinds of qualities.
Whereas now it's often the case and has been with the public schools that
there is a certain, there's a certain coercion that takes place in just getting a kid to go to school.
You know, like literally you have to kid, like even if you don't want to. So yeah, so I think
those, the kind of like the power over the political power and then this other form of power
which we, which we're not as familiar with, like power gets a bad name and what I'm trying to say
is like there's actually this, there is this form of power. You know, like when you see Martin
Luther King speak, for example, it's a different kind of power, like there's a power of persuasion
that's not coercion or there's a power to educate that's not propaganda. And so these kinds of
distinctions are some of the stuff I'm working on for the Consilience Project because it becomes
essential as the information environment gets more complex for people who'd be able to tell
what's the difference here. Is this person sincerely trying to educate me or are they just
doing one of their shticks and trying to, you know, basically, so yeah, so this is a good question.
And again, I'm just like touching on it. There's, there's a lot of, a lot of complexity there.
Yeah, fantastic. Fascinating. Yeah, definitely. This idea of power as protein,
it's really something which often is difficult to grasp. There's a certain
allergic reaction to shifting the focus away from, say, the material, the tangible,
but clearly it's absolutely vital. Perhaps just to rip a bit on Jesse's personal reflection,
you know, as, as an academic, as a child of Fukuyama, I sometimes do wonder,
who are we as educators to tell future generations what to think or what to do
with this world that we're sort of leaving them? And as educators, what if our ideas about the
future are no longer relevant, which is a pretty disconcerting thought? And I wonder, how can we
distinguish between those legacy ideas and frames that must be salvaged and those that really we
should consider relinquishing? And it's disconcerting not only because it, because it leaves you
disorientated, but also perhaps because it feels disempowering to consider that it kind of undercuts
the conviction that you can change things for the better.
Yeah, this is, is a very foundational question in the philosophy of education,
which is, you know, what is the knowledge and skill and capacity, even the disposition,
dispositions and forms of personality? Like, what are those things that we should be
handing on to the next generation? It's a book by Margaret Mead. I want to say 61. I don't remember
exactly culture and commitment. It's the name of the book. And it's amazing. It's a fascinating book.
She talks about these three forms of culture, which is really talking about three forms of
intergenerational transmission. There's a post figurative culture. This is what human cultures
were forever. That's when what your dad-dads did, your dad did. That's what you're going to do.
Like, you can just know as an elder, like I will hand on to my kids what basically they need,
and things just don't change. And the kids can be like, they really know how the world works.
And it's a post figurative, right? And then there are what are called
configurative cultures. And that's where you have some of the post figurative stuff
and stuff going on within generations where you're changing what your parents gave you a little bit.
So you're getting peer-to-peer changes in technology, which slightly augment intergenerational
transmission. And so not just the sheer tradition of the post figurative, a certain amount of
innovation. And that's what began when, especially and took off with, again, back to Wallerstein,
the birth of the capitalist world system. Her argument is that there's a thing called a prefigurative
culture. And that's where basically, like, those bets are off because things are changing so rapidly
that the world that the children will inhabit is not understandable by the elders today.
Right? So it's a very, very novel situation in the evolution of human culture now. It happened
occasionally in the past when there was an invading army, or there was a massive storm,
or there was desertification. And in a generation or two, the entire life, you know, of a culture
changed when that was a rare cataclysmic event. Our technological development and economic development
and political development is such that now we are generating those types of total world
transformation within a single generation. And so what that means is that, to your point,
we have no idea really what to tell the kids about what Tamara is going to be like.
We actually need to find ways to have them listen to the future and then give them the
help that they realize that they need. So, and this has been seen by educators since the 60s,
when it became clear that you all are preparing these kids for jobs that will not be there in 20
years when they graduate. And that problem has compounded to the sense of that we can no longer
think simply about that form. But at an even deeper level, the intergenerational crisis is one of
both the children not thinking that the elders know how the world works, right, and being skeptical
that, well, aren't you the guys that messed up this world? Like, why should we learn from you?
You created this mess. But it's also the elders realizing that is the elders saying,
we're a failed, we're failed beings, like we're a failed species, like what have we done? How can
we teach the kids what to do? And so, and that's part of that prefigurative culture, like those
reflections are correct, but they're not quite fair to each side of the generational gap that
there's a situation that's emerged that came unplanned, but has basically left the youth kind
of stranded at the edge of history without any elders to tell them what tomorrow will look like
or how to handle it. So the elders, what they need to do is step in and hold education in a
completely different way. And this is kind of the argument of my book, that we need to
reground education of the youth in the communities that they live and in the concrete problems of
those communities, right, which is to say something a little bit more like guild systems and skill and
time sharing networks and non-age segregated classrooms and a whole bunch of other stuff
that allow the education system to be responsive to the novel insights of youth who
know more about what might emerge in the future than the elders can pretend to know.
And so I think that's, it's a lot to swallow, but it's completely necessary. And it doesn't mean
that there isn't a role for intergenerational transmission. It means that of the skills that
we have as elders, let the kids tell us which ones they believe are relevant. And so that's,
that's, I think, I think that's key. And then some of it's also the shifting of focus away from,
again, technical skills and into what might be called skills of wisdom or skills of ethics,
that a lot of what is needed from the elders is that, like, don't tell us how to solve these
problems or how to organize our future economic lives or anything like that, but please share
stories of human suffering, of human love, of human overcoming difficulty. The continuity of the human
is at risk. It's a strange way to say it, but this is has been reflected upon by technologists
and others that if the generation gap becomes acute enough, it becomes almost like a speciation
event where the youth become a new kind of being that almost can't be understood, that we can't.
Like if we were to genetically engineer superhumans, this would be the situation we would have
extincted ourselves by virtue of giving birth to a new species and that would be an intergenerational
gap that's unbridgeable. So that, you know, with the rate of technological change and specifically
the information technology and the neurological effects and the cascades of all those on human
physiology, yeah, the generation gap approaches almost unbridgeable speciation event. So that
means that, yeah, how do we educate those who will come after us who are not like us? It looks like
I said creating very different contexts and allowing more epistemic humility on the part of
the elders, but it's risky because the kids, they're just, they're still youth. It's not like,
I'm also not making an argument of like, you know, the indigo kids are like that they're instantly,
you know, adapting to the technology and that the millennials are like way smarter than any
other generation. They're going to figure it out. I'm also not saying that. Like there needs to be
intergenerational transmission. The prefigure of culture that I mentioned doesn't just throw its
hands up and say, let the kids do whatever it wants. It says no, it's we're in a fundamentally
different situation of intergenerational transmission. It's actually more attention is needed. We need
to be more careful to pulling out the responsiveness and the kind of native intelligence of the youth
than just giving them rote curriculum that we've been giving for a decade. So there's some asking
for more attentiveness on the part of the elders and the youth, more intergenerational
transmission, just of a different kind. And it's not the case that the youth are prepared
or instantly adapted or evolved for it. They're not. So yeah, the nature of our responsibility
as educators has changed. I think the the question of differences of generation is such an
interesting one. And I was wondering if we think of a hypothetical new generation in a
utopian society that is not a generation of knowers. So a generation that's been raised on
knowing stuff, knowing things, but a generation of thinkers, I think we've skirted around and
we've addressed as well some of the real benefits of that, you know, a generation of thinkers,
but I just wanted to red team for a second and think of what are some of the challenges
of having a generation of thinkers, because the instruments we have at our disposal
aren't geared towards a generation of thinkers. And I was just really interested to
get the kind of red team assessment of a generation of thinkers and how that might
what a diagnosis of that. That's interesting. I mean, there's a long so I've read a lot of the
history of education, you know, and, and some histories of education are triumphant, especially
about the American education system that, you know, we were made into a society of thinkers
and etc. Then you get other people like John Taylor Gatto, and like Jonathan Cozel and others,
even Chomsky and some foods, who would look at the American public education system as basically
doing the opposite. And so the argument there, you know, and even goes to the Dowdy Ching,
right, keep the people's bellies full, but their minds empty. I think that's how you govern
it by precisely not really educating. And I'm not saying that that view is true. I'm saying
there's enough people writing that history to suggest that at least one of the kind of like
functions of the educational system as we have known it is to simplify the range of diversity
of thought in the populace, right? Like, you can think about preparing them for the workforce,
you can think about preparing them to be consumers, but you need to basically be able to predict
what people are going to think. And part of that is to weave the culture together.
But part of that is to simplify the human side of the equation. And so it started
to happen with the internet, and it continues to happen, although the marketers have figured out
how to do a standardized differentiation. Instead of like the early modern one size fits all
homogenization, now we have the late modern or postmodern standardized differentiation,
where there's two dozen advertising groups that think you're unique, but you're not.
So they figured that out. But it's still the case that if you promote a culture of learning,
and you promote a culture not of ingesting and regurgitating, or in a culture of knowing and
knowing and resisting change of thought, but a culture where people are truly interested
in learning and thinking, then you better have a culture that's ready to have truly an open society
for governance and decision making, and an economic system that has true transparency
and visibility around commodity supply chains, and ethical responsibilities of corporations,
and the society that got transparency around law enforcement, and the criminal justice system.
There's a whole bunch of stuff that you can kind of keep a mess, like not in good order,
if you've got a society of folks who really aren't equipped to be paying attention,
but if you equip people to pay attention, then they're going to start paying attention.
And so that's part of the arguments that have been unfolding for such a long time
around this kind of negative view of education, that there's been a manufacturing of consent,
and kind of an arrangement of selective inattention, which is like a psychological defense mechanism,
right? So if I'm a neurotic person, and let's say I'm just not very nice to the people who
look close to me, I will selectively not attend to those behaviors, which disconfirm my view of
myself as being a good person. And so I'm so frustrating to be with someone who has these
neuroses, because it's so clear that you're doing this, that you can't see, because you're
defending yourself. It's a defense mechanism, selective inattention. And so similarly at the
cultural level, we're taught not to think about certain things. We're taught to studiously ignore
certain ways of framing problems. Selective inattention is part of the education system.
So if we start to remove those defense mechanisms, that's what you're talking about,
which is what you want to do in psychotherapy, but when that happens,
you know, you get a divorce, you change your job, like you move, like start having crazy dreams,
like your whole life changes, right? And so this is what we need. We need some kind
of cultural renaissance, if we need the equivalent of a midlife crisis or a resolution of the
adolescent identity crisis for the whole culture. But it will be, there'll be a reckoning,
there'll be a reckoning. And so that kind of has to happen. So that would be the downside,
it would be the reckoning, and that you can't predict what will happen,
in the way you can predict what will happen when you're systematically nudging everybody into
particular groups and then predicting what those groups will be, which is what's happening now.
Yeah, that question, what am I studiously ignoring? Maybe that's one to open up a seminar with.
So we're rolling, I think, to the close, that so much more we could discuss. I hope we might be
able to continue this conversation at some time down the road. But I'd like to hand over to Zoe
to lead us out. So I think my questions are still very much percolating in my mind.
So if I'm not as coherent or eloquent as the rest of you, I apologize. So we've kind of talked
about a society or like a generation of thinkers and knowers. But I'm also quite interested in
pulling on what you mentioned about the power through love. And so thinking about generations
of feelers, because I feel like, I mean, even in generations of people or like relatives, cousins,
and whatnot younger than myself, you mentioned nihilism, and it's almost like there's a competition
to see who can care the least. And caring and feeling is seen as sort of a weakness and something
that's that should be weeded out. So I guess my question is sort of, how do we make those younger
generations feel cared for and loved, in a way that they're not going to reject and be like,
oh, this is this is cringy. And I you don't understand me. So it's also into
tying into intergenerational gap. But I guess also across, you mentioned an epistemic elite.
And that's, in my mind, also, we are hoarding in the epistemic elites, the potential for intergenerational
transmission of these essential human capacities. And I do, for me, anyway, I do feel like a lot of
that will come from better handling of your emotions, and maybe de-celebritizing, actually
caring about things and being very vocal about caring without worrying that you would be seen as,
I don't know, vulnerable or weak or irrelevant. Sorry, if that's a bit all over the place.
Now, that's a very profound question. I mean, the one thing you said in passing was that the
epistemic elite were hoarding a certain command. That's a that's like a key insight that and there
has been for a long time, a false scarcity of cognitive supply, false scarcity of cognitive
resources, a artificially generated scarcity. And so that's important to get. And some of what has
been made scarce are the conditions for the possibility of love. I mean, this is one of the
main reasons in my book, I talk about these social miracles. It's really about creating a society
where people are don't have to be courageous to love one another, right? Because like,
if you don't love anyone, then you can't get hurt. Full stop. Like, if I love you a lot and you die,
I'm in a lot of pain. If I love you a lot and you do something that disappoints me, I'm in a lot
of pain. So there's a kind of defense mechanism psychologically to in a world where you can't
predict what's going to happen to the people that you love, right? Well, you can you don't even know
if you can get up to where you want to go to be economically or whatever, or to get the skills
you want to have the self understand, like, because of the sense of precarity that many people feel.
There is a and most of that I believe is economic and politically generated.
There is a there's a tendency, yes, to withdraw into the isolated atomized individual and take a
cynical view towards anything that would deepen connection and love because of the risk that's
there. So one of the things the elders can do is actually demonstrate the courage that it takes
to love in a world that's well, in a world that in an unworlded world, if I can say that,
in a time between worlds, right? And it's when you're in a world it's easier to love because you
can say, oh, here's how the world works. It's safe to love you because I've got this many years
before my life is disrupted or whatever, right? But right now, there's this danger. So we need
to do the opposite. And and and so the I do not like the phrase emotional intelligence. So I talk
about like emotional self regulation and emotional self awareness and the languages of emotional
self description and emotional connection. And these are as essential, if not more essential,
and especially to notions of ethical identity. So right, if you think about the situation we're
going to end up in, as the wheels start to come off, I talk a lot about, you know, that parable
of the Good Samaritan, like what do you do when you meet someone a stranger on the road between
civilizations, which means you're not beholden to the law of either of those civilizations or on the
road or in the wilderness, there's no cops going to show up, right? No one's going to come and tell
you you disobey the laws of the city, you're just a stranger in need on the road, just you and him.
And in the Bible, God, what do you do, right? We're going to be confronted with that kind of
situation, where we're meeting strangers on the road, and sometimes with those strangers that we
numerous. And it's not a it's not a cognitive question. It's not a calculation or a game
theoretic relationship that needs to be taken up. It's a problem of feeling. That's a problem of
the human heart and the ability of the human to see another human as a human. And so, yeah, those
are the deeper, the deeper kind of strata of the personality, which are also in play right now. So
I'm glad you raised that. And, you know, the approaches that I've seen in this area, social
emotional skills, mindfulness, education and things like those nature are good and important.
But again, to speak to them kind of psychotherapeutic context, we're going to need to learn how to
process intense emotion to not just to be calm, but to figure out how to deal with grief, sorrow,
tragedy, righteous anger, there's a whole bunch of stuff that we need to be able to work with,
aside from just like staying calm and I meditate a lot. But the point is that you need to be able to
to move emotion through you in a complex way. So, yeah, so that's a whole other,
whole other, you open to giant can of emotional worms there, but it's an important one. And I
can't see a way out of it without. And again, I've listed in my book, I can't remember which page,
but it's post-conventional ethics, but also like, you know, these really, really,
robust forms of emotional self-regulation and emotional self-understanding,
which allow for actual real empathy. So, yeah, thank you for, for bringing that up.
Well, thank you for such a comprehensive answer and just a really thought-provoking conversation.
It just stirred a lot of things in my mind and I'm sure I'll, I'll go in,
tell my mumble about it because I feel like she's very much, she's very much on the emotional
spectrum of things with, with me as so, so yeah, thank you very much.
Yeah, I'd like to echo that. Thanks so much for that. It's really a, kind of,
a very grounded, profound heartfelt conversation. We really appreciate it. And, you know, end on
that note that this is also a problem of feeling or of emotion. There is this tendency, I know,
well, to slide into kind of a full sense of objective detachment from these questions.
And, of course, as complexity science reminds us, there is actually no view from nowhere.
So, also, perhaps just to, just to end as to where we might go next in future conversations.
There clearly are insights and lessons to be drawn from other cultures here and what you
just reflected remind me a bit of Martin Prechtel's work, the Guatemalan spiritual teacher and his
impression of Western culture as drowning in kind of atomistic alienation. So, I think lots more
to explore there. And, yeah, there's a beautiful way to end this conversation on, on education
as, as the core challenge of our time. So, thank you. And look forward to picking this up again.
Thank you guys. This was a blast.
Thanks for tuning into Global Governance Futures. To get access to all of our content
and to stay up to date with future Zoom calls, workshops and events and more,
check us out at ucl.ac.uk forward slash global dash governance. And if you like this content,
please do leave us a comment and subscribe. Until next time.
