Well numbers slowly evolved into adjectives as in three apples, and different names for
the same quantity of different objects actually became into fashion.
For example, a brace of pheasants, a couple of days, a pair of dice, well, they all meant
two.
But moving from an adjective to the abstract noun two was a dramatic leap in the intellectual
development of humanity, and we'll see that leap for ourselves and enjoy it.
This leap leads us to the counting numbers, the familiar numbers that we use to count
things, which we'll call in this course the natural numbers.
The natural numbers, which are one, two, three, four, five, six, and so forth, are the numbers
that we can really count on.
We'll then investigate the challenges of communicating and manipulating these numbers.
It's one thing to count, and it's another thing to communicate, keep records, and perform
arithmetic.
And through these investigations, we'll see the notion of number expand yet further as
we witness our ancient ancestors struggle to understand zero and to understand negative
numbers.
Zero is no big deal.
Well, in fact, zero is extremely important.
Without zero, we face serious numerical conundrums.
For example, take a look at this number, a one followed by a one.
Is it eleven or is it a hundred and one?
Well, without zero, we don't know.
Zero, as we'll see, is extremely important, but should it be considered a number?
Here we'll see the first instance in which humankind was faced with the challenge of
expanding its notion of number and what number should mean.
Finally, we'll explore how individuals were moved to associate personalities, magic, and
even cosmic significance to numerical notions.
How numbers were believed to have warded off the plague and even appeased the gods.
Even Benjamin Franklin, as we'll discover, could not resist the magic of numbers.
Once numbers were born within our imagination, they took on a life of their own, following
the laws and nature of mathematics.
This brings us to the second part of our course, the lives within our numbers.
Here we move from the practical side of numbers as a means of counting and commerce to the
study of numbers themselves.
This area is known today as number theory.
We'll open our explorations by first discovering an amazing pattern in nature that was made
famous in a 13th century mathematician's book written by Leonardo de Pisa, better known
