It makes complete sense, commonsensical.
Now the other important lesson to keep in mind is that we should never be afraid of
making mistakes.
Failing is the road to creativity, understanding and enlightenment.
And we will see that as a recurring theme throughout this course because we will see
great minds throughout history fail and fail aggressively and fail again and again.
And we celebrate that failure because through every misstep we understand the truth and
we understand the correct path that will lead us to a new insight.
And so we'll see humankind's struggle with both failure and with bias in the context
of number throughout the whole course.
But I hope that it will permeate into our whole lives.
Well, part one of our course is entitled The Numbers Within Our Lives.
And in this series of lectures, we'll first focus on the very early attempts to quantify.
We will journey back to 30,000 BCE and see some of the earliest attempts to count.
Now, for example, suppose that we couldn't count very high.
Suppose that we couldn't even count to, let's say, five.
But the question is, how do we know if in fact I have the same number of fingers on this
hand as I do on this hand?
Well, of course, for us today, this is not a big deal.
We count one, two, three, four, five.
We count one, two, three, four, five.
They're both five.
They're the same.
But suppose we couldn't count that high.
What would we do?
Well, if we couldn't count that high, and this was, of course, the issue that early
civilization had, because they had no language for number, of course, before they were discovered
and invented, how could I compare and see if the number of fingers on this hand is greater
than or smaller than the number of fingers on this hand?
Well, it's so natural that even a child can do it.
They would just do this.
And we see we've paired up each finger from each hand with exactly one finger from the
other hand, and there are no fingers left without a partner.
And so we see through this pairing that, in fact, they're the same number of fingers on
this hand as this hand, and yet we have no idea of the notion of five.
Comparing collections rather than counting them is the dawn of numbers, and in fact the
key to unlocking infinity, as we'll see at the end of the course.
