it's false, there's no in fashion or out of fashion, the statement's false and then disregarded
within a mathematical realm.
All we care about in mathematics is the truth.
Well, let me return now to our journey, our journey through numbers, and let me say a word
about the archaeology of numbers.
Our knowledge of the early origins of number is very spotted and vague.
In fact, we must depend, obviously, on the relics that the archaeologists uncover for
us.
Thus the medium upon which early cultures used to record their thoughts and even the climate
dictate what we know and what we don't know.
Some ancient civilizations, for example, recorded their work on materials that stood the test
of time.
For example, in the dry climate of the Middle East, we can find carvings in stone, clay
tablets, and even forms of early forms of paper.
Other civilizations employed materials that over time disintegrated.
For example, the tree bark that was used in ancient writing in Asia was not able to survive
the humid climate.
Thus our knowledge of the early history of numbers is as fragmented as the ancient broken
tablets we try to piece together and understand.
As a result, in this course, we offer moments in time in order to produce a mosaic of small
pieces that, when viewed from afar, will allow us to see how numbers grew in our understanding
and sparked our imagination.
So in some paradoxical sense, to really appreciate this, we have to see it all at once.
And at the last lecture, we can finally step back and see the entire panoramic, which I
assure you will be quite spectacular.
In some sense, that mosaic is one that can best be appreciated at the end of the journey,
and we'll see it then.
These pieces will represent some of the major advances in our understanding of number.
Now remember, that mathematics is a game of very, very tiny steps.
However, here in this course, we'll only highlight some of the big and intriguing ones.
And so we're going to make quantum jumps, but we have to understand that behind the
scenes, in fact, what we have are in fact tiny, tiny, tiny steps, but we're only going
to highlight the ones that are quite exceptional.
Well, let's take a look at the journey ahead.
This course is really a mathematics course within a historical framework.
We'll meet many of the individuals that actually hammered within that copper orb that I mentioned,
in this case the copper orb of number, which is in fact where I live.
