And let me assure you that many of them are quite interesting characters, and they're
quite a number of interesting stories that will be revealed.
Our vignette scenes will attempt to offer a fluid conceptual development of the notion
of number.
At times, we'll travel back and forth through history, so we can appreciate and better understand
the concept at hand as our story unfolds.
It's important to remember that the main character in our story is number, and our main plot line
is to intuitively see the evolution of number from the dawn of human thought to today.
I now want to outline three main themes that will be with us throughout all the lectures.
The first one is that despite what most people believe, we'll discover that numbers are truly
difficult to define precisely.
Secondly, we'll also come to appreciate the notion of number as always evolving.
It's not a fixed idea, but in fact a moving target, and in some very real sense the fact
that this is an ever moving target for us is what makes this chase so exciting.
And finally, we'll see the recurring theme that what first appears familiar and common
place is in fact rare and exotic.
And conversely, what first appears to be exotic will later be viewed as the norm.
Now this theme will really challenge our intuition and show us that there's more to number than
meets the eye.
So we'll see quite often that our intuition and our initial guess isn't quite up to the
correct idea of number as nature laid it out for us.
In fact, I hope that these themes of this course will inspire a new found perspective
and a lens through which to see your life and entire world in a whole new way.
An agile mindset that is open to new ideas and change.
You know as human beings, we come to every issue with preconceived notions, biases and
prejudice.
And that's just the reality.
But our job as thinking individuals is to put those biases at our side.
And when we see reality and when we see truth, we need to realize that this could be potentially
a surprise.
A surprise is a wonderful moment.
It's a moment when our intuition runs counter to reality.
And it's a wonderful moment because it's a moment when learning can occur.
So we should constantly be searching for surprises.
And so when we see a surprise, our mission as thinking people is to not give into that.
But instead say now it's my opportunity to retrain my intuition so that what first seems
surprising and counterintuitive is now nonsensical.
