These subjects were the theory of numbers, geometry, music, and astronomy.
Now let me just say a word about geometry here.
Geometry in this ancient setting really also involved not just the geometric figures that
we've seen in our own geometry classes a long time ago, but also the measuring of lengths
and computing of areas.
And so in some sense, within the ancient sense of geometry, we really see also reflections
of number theory.
So in some sense, two of these four tenants were in fact number theory, half of them were
number theory.
Now years later, other subjects were included to this collection, and it became known as
the liberal arts.
And so thus we see the theory of numbers was in fact one of the cornerstones of the liberal
arts.
And so you can see this is really central in one's ancient view of the world, and certainly
central today.
It's remarkable how much of our modern customs, including the way we communicate and think,
have been influenced by our ancient ancestors' quest to understand and tame numbers.
Even the basic act of writing probably evolved from a basic desire to express numbers.
The notion of number permeates nearly every aspect of our lives and continues to inspire
the life of the mind today.
Of course, the numbers sit within the realm of mathematics, and so I wanted to say a few
words about mathematics and its frontiers before we really start our journey.
Now many people believe incorrectly that mathematics is totally understood, that we know it all.
In fact, most of mathematics remains totally mysterious to the research mathematicians
and to people from around the world.
Now what a research mathematician tries to do is to move the frontiers of mathematical
understanding outward and forward.
Now how does one go about this?
Well in mathematics the way we proceed is by actually proving theorems, and the theorem
itself is in fact required to have with it this notion of a rigorous proof.
And let me say a word about what those mean.
So in mathematics we consider statements.
A statement is a declarative sentence that's either true or false.
And if the statement is true, then in fact it is given the moniker of theorem.
And that's a great celebration for us in mathematics.
But it's not just enough to say that a theorem is true.
We have to prove it, and we have to establish it through this idea of rigorous proof, which
