Welcome to Zero to Infinity, a course that celebrates the history and evolution of the
notion of number.
In this opening lecture, we'll introduce the concept of number and foreshadow the interesting
paradox that while numbers are precision personified, a precise, accurate, and satisfying definition
still eludes us.
In fact, one of the central themes of this course is that the concept of number is not
a fixed, rigid idea, but instead an ever-evolving notion.
As these lectures unfold, we'll discover that throughout history, as our understanding
of our world expands and our capacity to abstract ideas grows, so does our view of
what number means.
We open our course with a series of lectures entitled The Numbers Within Our Lives that
offers the early conceptual underpinnings of numbers and how they were used to express
different ideas.
And throughout the cultures, not only do we see them happening one or two, but in fact
this multicultural contribution led to our current common notion of number.
We'll see numbers move from useful tools for measuring quantities to abstract objects
of independent interest and intrigue.
This transition brings us to the second part of our course entitled The Lives Within Our
Numbers.
This exploration of the life of numbers captures a desire that goes back to our ancient ancestors
to understand numbers and their beautiful structure for their own sake.
This leads us to part three of our course entitled Transcendental Meditation, the stories
of Pi and E, where we'll celebrate two of the most important numbers in human history
and use them to inspire the modern notion of transcendental numbers.
In part four, entitled Algebraic and Analytical Evolutions of Numbers, we consider two mathematical
perspectives on how to create different types of numbers.
The algebraic view naturally leads us to imaginary numbers, while the analytical view challenges
our intuitive sense of what number should even mean.
In our last part entitled Infinity, The Numbers Beyond Numbers, we explore the endless world
of the transfinite and discover that humankind's first method of counting holds the secret
to unlock infinity.
Exploiting that ancient simple idea leads us to a totally surprising and counterintuitive
discovery.
Infinity, just as the numbers that came before, comes in different sizes.
Thus we close our journey with startling new insights into the infinite that only came
into focus after thousands of years of studying numbers and which paradoxically required us
to return to the very dawn of the human notion of number.
