today as Fibonacci.
From here, we'll focus on the nature of numbers themselves.
By the 6th century BCE, the Pythagoreans were studying numbers as objects in their own
right rather than solely as tools for calculation and record keeping.
The Pythagoreans may have been inspired by the religious sect in India known as the Jains.
It appears that the Jains were the first number theorists.
Different cultures all share their common passion for number theory.
And the more we explore, the more our field of vision of number widens.
Here we see ratios of natural numbers and discover the existence of numbers that are
not ratios, the exotic so-called irrational numbers, a notion that was so disturbing it
may have driven the Pythagoreans to murder.
That's right.
I don't think that this is going to be a humdrum course on numbers, but in fact, there's
a lot of drama.
And that's a pretty good cliffhanger right there, don't you think?
Well, next we'll celebrate two of the most important numbers in our universe.
Pi, famous in geometric circles, and E, a more modern, extremely important number used
to measure the growth and decay of populations and for computing compound interest rates.
Both numbers help us better understand nature and our universe, and we'll explore them
and enjoy them in some depth.
We'll then use these famous quantities, Pi and E, as the inspiration to see subtle distinctions
between different types of numbers.
This will lead us to the mysterious modern world of what's called transcendental numbers.
We'll consider two different mathematical approaches to number, an algebraic view based
on solving equations.
This leads to new imaginary numbers, and then an analytic view based on using numbers to
measure distances and closeness.
Now, this point of view will actually lead us to a parallel universe of number, unlike
anything we've ever seen before.
In fact, through these new and strange numbers, we might better be able to empathize with the
Pythagoreans who were unable to accept certain disturbing quantities as numbers, although
I hope it won't drive us to murder.
Along the way, we'll also study the most beautiful and famous formula in all of mathematics,
one that elegantly connects the five most important numbers of our universe.
Well, finally, at the close of the course, we will journey beyond the universe of numbers
and delve into the at first forbidding world of infinity.
Using the very first method for counting, we'll discover that just as with numbers,
