really goes back to Euclid as we'll see in a future lecture.
And the idea here is that we use logical reasoning to write a deductive argument that takes us
from points that we already know to a new place.
So we build on the previous work, the work of others, and we use previous results to
move the forefront of mathematics forward.
Now this process is extremely slow moving.
And new discoveries in mathematics are actually built by building on the work of others that
came before.
In some sense, here's how I think about it.
I'll share with you how I view my own mathematical work and mathematics in general.
Imagine if you will, a very large copper orb.
The mathematicians live inside this copper orb, and that copper orb represents the boundary
of our mathematical understanding.
And every little mathematician is equipped with a ball-peen hammer.
And what we're doing is we're just hammering inside this copper orb, and just as you would
make a pan out of a copper, slowly, slowly we put these dimples, and the dimples and
dimples upon dimples, and slowly the orb begins to grow.
Well, it's that slow growth that expands our understanding in the frontiers of mathematics.
And in fact, that's how I view moving mathematics forward, is slowly making these tiny progress,
and slowly dimple upon dimple, we see the light.
Now, the interesting paradox here is that the more we learn, the more we realize we don't know.
In fact, it's funny.
Every time we take one tiny step forward toward the frontier of mathematics, that insight
reveals far more unanswered questions than the question we just answered.
In some sense, every tiny step we take, and we look and we think that we're closer to
the frontier, the frontier, in fact, jumps out another hundred miles.
And so it seems like we're losing ground, even though we are, in fact, moving forward.
In fact, moving mathematics forward is an art that requires both imagination and creativity.
Mathematicians are at once artists and explorers.
We're explorers in that we're trying to understand the truths in nature and in the universe based
on the logic of mathematics and the nature of mathematics.
But we're also artists, because to carefully construct and create the proofs requires a
tremendous amount of creativity, imagination, and originality.
And so we walk a fine line.
On the one hand, we're trying to be explorers and discover truth, and on the other hand
we're being artists.
And unlike within the arts, if we have a statement that we particularly like, but it turns out
