infinity can be understood and holds many surprising features.
This theory was constructed essentially by one man, Georg Cantor, in the late 1800s.
And it was so controversial and so counterintuitive that his work was not accepted by many of his
peers until years after he introduced his ideas.
Here we'll see the very human drama of a wildly imaginative individual who was also troubled
and who set the mathematical community ablaze with his incredibly original discovery.
Well, I want to say just a couple of words about the overarching objectives of this course
together.
Well, at some points, our discussions will become a bit mathematically technical.
I assure you that those details are not the central focus of this course.
No one should be alarmed or overwhelmed by the digits.
So when you see big numbers, or every once in a while, and there won't be a lot, but
every once in a while I'll show a little something that looks more mathematical than not.
The goal here is for us to take these mathematical moments and allow them to wash over us.
We can appreciate the creativity within a mathematical context, just as we would appreciate
a piece of music or a piece of art.
We can sit back and take in whatever we can.
But I invite you, and I encourage you, to take out as much as you can.
I urge you to push a little bit, and if it gets a teeny bit mysterious, that's fine.
We can let it go, but always be open.
But I assure you that we will not be technical, per se, and that is certainly not the thrust
of what we're going to be doing here.
So stay with me, and trust me.
Now I have to close by saying that I'm a number theorist, and so personally I'm extremely
excited to have this opportunity to share with you what I believe are some of the most
incredible and stunning ideas of human history.
The great 20th century British number theorist, G. H. Hardy, once wrote,
A mathematician, like a painter or poet, is a maker of patterns.
The mathematician's patterns, like the painters or the poets, must be beautiful.
The ideas, like colors or the words, must fit together in a harmonious way.
Well, thus, while my hope is that our journey will be both uplifting and rewarding, my main
goal is that for all of us to realize that the study of number is a beautiful one that
has captured humankind's imagination throughout the ages and continues to inspire us to explore
its endless frontiers.
