Well, welcome to the world of numbers.
Now before I say too much and go any further, I want to pose a conundrum for you to consider,
and it's in the form of a question.
What is your definition of number?
Now I want to make right here on the onset a subtle distinction between the word number
and the word numbers.
In my mind and throughout the course, number will mean a more abstract notion, a more abstract
idea of all of numbers and all the ideas of numbers put together in whole, whereas numbers
themselves will usually refer to a particular collection or group of numbers.
This is similar to the distinction between the words humanity and human beings.
Often humanity refers to all humankind considered as one abstract collective whole, while human
beings often refer to a specific group of individuals.
And I'll make that distinction here between number and numbers throughout the course.
So the question is, what is your definition of the abstract idea of number?
And in fact, if you're so inclined, I actually invite you to stop and jot it down before
continuing on if you so take the challenge.
The reason why I raise this challenging question, as we'll discover, is that in reality it is
a very difficult, very difficult task to precisely define number.
In fact, this difficulty was eloquently articulated over 2,500 years ago by the great number enthusiast
Pythagoras, an individual we'll later study in some depth, when he said, number is the
first principle, a thing which is undefined, incomprehensible, and having in itself all
numbers.
So first of all, you can see that even Pythagoras made the distinction between number and numbers,
and this abstract notion of number he claims, in fact, is undefined and incomprehensible,
but within that realm, within that abstract world resides all the numbers.
And in some sense, we haven't made an awful lot of progress since Pythagoras over 2,500
years ago, because we still struggle with the notion of what numbers mean, and the notion
of number in an abstract sense.
Now, it's interesting to think that numbers are at once a practical and abstract, it's
an interesting dichotomy.
They're one of the most important notions in our everyday world, and yet remain mysterious
objects of our imagination, and throughout this course, we'll see that interplay between
the abstract and the practical.
Before our ancient ancestors could even write, they were contemplating quantities.
Historically, the study of numbers was a central component of one's advanced education.
For thousands of years, learned individuals studied four subjects, and these four areas
collectively were known as the quadrivium.
