Welcome to Zero to Infinity, a course that celebrates the history and evolution of the
notion of number.
In this opening lecture, we'll introduce the concept of number and foreshadow the interesting
paradox that while numbers are precision personified, a precise, accurate, and satisfying definition
still eludes us.
In fact, one of the central themes of this course is that the concept of number is not
a fixed, rigid idea, but instead an ever-evolving notion.
As these lectures unfold, we'll discover that throughout history, as our understanding
of our world expands and our capacity to abstract ideas grows, so does our view of
what number means.
We open our course with a series of lectures entitled The Numbers Within Our Lives that
offers the early conceptual underpinnings of numbers and how they were used to express
different ideas.
And throughout the cultures, not only do we see them happening one or two, but in fact
this multicultural contribution led to our current common notion of number.
We'll see numbers move from useful tools for measuring quantities to abstract objects
of independent interest and intrigue.
This transition brings us to the second part of our course entitled The Lives Within Our
Numbers.
This exploration of the life of numbers captures a desire that goes back to our ancient ancestors
to understand numbers and their beautiful structure for their own sake.
This leads us to part three of our course entitled Transcendental Meditation, the stories
of Pi and E, where we'll celebrate two of the most important numbers in human history
and use them to inspire the modern notion of transcendental numbers.
In part four, entitled Algebraic and Analytical Evolutions of Numbers, we consider two mathematical
perspectives on how to create different types of numbers.
The algebraic view naturally leads us to imaginary numbers, while the analytical view challenges
our intuitive sense of what number should even mean.
In our last part entitled Infinity, The Numbers Beyond Numbers, we explore the endless world
of the transfinite and discover that humankind's first method of counting holds the secret
to unlock infinity.
Exploiting that ancient simple idea leads us to a totally surprising and counterintuitive
discovery.
Infinity, just as the numbers that came before, comes in different sizes.
Thus we close our journey with startling new insights into the infinite that only came
into focus after thousands of years of studying numbers and which paradoxically required us
to return to the very dawn of the human notion of number.
Well, welcome to the world of numbers.
Now before I say too much and go any further, I want to pose a conundrum for you to consider,
and it's in the form of a question.
What is your definition of number?
Now I want to make right here on the onset a subtle distinction between the word number
and the word numbers.
In my mind and throughout the course, number will mean a more abstract notion, a more abstract
idea of all of numbers and all the ideas of numbers put together in whole, whereas numbers
themselves will usually refer to a particular collection or group of numbers.
This is similar to the distinction between the words humanity and human beings.
Often humanity refers to all humankind considered as one abstract collective whole, while human
beings often refer to a specific group of individuals.
And I'll make that distinction here between number and numbers throughout the course.
So the question is, what is your definition of the abstract idea of number?
And in fact, if you're so inclined, I actually invite you to stop and jot it down before
continuing on if you so take the challenge.
The reason why I raise this challenging question, as we'll discover, is that in reality it is
a very difficult, very difficult task to precisely define number.
In fact, this difficulty was eloquently articulated over 2,500 years ago by the great number enthusiast
Pythagoras, an individual we'll later study in some depth, when he said, number is the
first principle, a thing which is undefined, incomprehensible, and having in itself all
numbers.
So first of all, you can see that even Pythagoras made the distinction between number and numbers,
and this abstract notion of number he claims, in fact, is undefined and incomprehensible,
but within that realm, within that abstract world resides all the numbers.
And in some sense, we haven't made an awful lot of progress since Pythagoras over 2,500
years ago, because we still struggle with the notion of what numbers mean, and the notion
of number in an abstract sense.
Now, it's interesting to think that numbers are at once a practical and abstract, it's
an interesting dichotomy.
They're one of the most important notions in our everyday world, and yet remain mysterious
objects of our imagination, and throughout this course, we'll see that interplay between
the abstract and the practical.
Before our ancient ancestors could even write, they were contemplating quantities.
Historically, the study of numbers was a central component of one's advanced education.
For thousands of years, learned individuals studied four subjects, and these four areas
collectively were known as the quadrivium.
These subjects were the theory of numbers, geometry, music, and astronomy.
Now let me just say a word about geometry here.
Geometry in this ancient setting really also involved not just the geometric figures that
we've seen in our own geometry classes a long time ago, but also the measuring of lengths
and computing of areas.
And so in some sense, within the ancient sense of geometry, we really see also reflections
of number theory.
So in some sense, two of these four tenants were in fact number theory, half of them were
number theory.
Now years later, other subjects were included to this collection, and it became known as
the liberal arts.
And so thus we see the theory of numbers was in fact one of the cornerstones of the liberal
arts.
And so you can see this is really central in one's ancient view of the world, and certainly
central today.
It's remarkable how much of our modern customs, including the way we communicate and think,
have been influenced by our ancient ancestors' quest to understand and tame numbers.
Even the basic act of writing probably evolved from a basic desire to express numbers.
The notion of number permeates nearly every aspect of our lives and continues to inspire
the life of the mind today.
Of course, the numbers sit within the realm of mathematics, and so I wanted to say a few
words about mathematics and its frontiers before we really start our journey.
Now many people believe incorrectly that mathematics is totally understood, that we know it all.
In fact, most of mathematics remains totally mysterious to the research mathematicians
and to people from around the world.
Now what a research mathematician tries to do is to move the frontiers of mathematical
understanding outward and forward.
Now how does one go about this?
Well in mathematics the way we proceed is by actually proving theorems, and the theorem
itself is in fact required to have with it this notion of a rigorous proof.
And let me say a word about what those mean.
So in mathematics we consider statements.
A statement is a declarative sentence that's either true or false.
And if the statement is true, then in fact it is given the moniker of theorem.
And that's a great celebration for us in mathematics.
But it's not just enough to say that a theorem is true.
We have to prove it, and we have to establish it through this idea of rigorous proof, which
really goes back to Euclid as we'll see in a future lecture.
And the idea here is that we use logical reasoning to write a deductive argument that takes us
from points that we already know to a new place.
So we build on the previous work, the work of others, and we use previous results to
move the forefront of mathematics forward.
Now this process is extremely slow moving.
And new discoveries in mathematics are actually built by building on the work of others that
came before.
In some sense, here's how I think about it.
I'll share with you how I view my own mathematical work and mathematics in general.
Imagine if you will, a very large copper orb.
The mathematicians live inside this copper orb, and that copper orb represents the boundary
of our mathematical understanding.
And every little mathematician is equipped with a ball-peen hammer.
And what we're doing is we're just hammering inside this copper orb, and just as you would
make a pan out of a copper, slowly, slowly we put these dimples, and the dimples and
dimples upon dimples, and slowly the orb begins to grow.
Well, it's that slow growth that expands our understanding in the frontiers of mathematics.
And in fact, that's how I view moving mathematics forward, is slowly making these tiny progress,
and slowly dimple upon dimple, we see the light.
Now, the interesting paradox here is that the more we learn, the more we realize we don't know.
In fact, it's funny.
Every time we take one tiny step forward toward the frontier of mathematics, that insight
reveals far more unanswered questions than the question we just answered.
In some sense, every tiny step we take, and we look and we think that we're closer to
the frontier, the frontier, in fact, jumps out another hundred miles.
And so it seems like we're losing ground, even though we are, in fact, moving forward.
In fact, moving mathematics forward is an art that requires both imagination and creativity.
Mathematicians are at once artists and explorers.
We're explorers in that we're trying to understand the truths in nature and in the universe based
on the logic of mathematics and the nature of mathematics.
But we're also artists, because to carefully construct and create the proofs requires a
tremendous amount of creativity, imagination, and originality.
And so we walk a fine line.
On the one hand, we're trying to be explorers and discover truth, and on the other hand
we're being artists.
And unlike within the arts, if we have a statement that we particularly like, but it turns out
it's false, there's no in fashion or out of fashion, the statement's false and then disregarded
within a mathematical realm.
All we care about in mathematics is the truth.
Well, let me return now to our journey, our journey through numbers, and let me say a word
about the archaeology of numbers.
Our knowledge of the early origins of number is very spotted and vague.
In fact, we must depend, obviously, on the relics that the archaeologists uncover for
us.
Thus the medium upon which early cultures used to record their thoughts and even the climate
dictate what we know and what we don't know.
Some ancient civilizations, for example, recorded their work on materials that stood the test
of time.
For example, in the dry climate of the Middle East, we can find carvings in stone, clay
tablets, and even forms of early forms of paper.
Other civilizations employed materials that over time disintegrated.
For example, the tree bark that was used in ancient writing in Asia was not able to survive
the humid climate.
Thus our knowledge of the early history of numbers is as fragmented as the ancient broken
tablets we try to piece together and understand.
As a result, in this course, we offer moments in time in order to produce a mosaic of small
pieces that, when viewed from afar, will allow us to see how numbers grew in our understanding
and sparked our imagination.
So in some paradoxical sense, to really appreciate this, we have to see it all at once.
And at the last lecture, we can finally step back and see the entire panoramic, which I
assure you will be quite spectacular.
In some sense, that mosaic is one that can best be appreciated at the end of the journey,
and we'll see it then.
These pieces will represent some of the major advances in our understanding of number.
Now remember, that mathematics is a game of very, very tiny steps.
However, here in this course, we'll only highlight some of the big and intriguing ones.
And so we're going to make quantum jumps, but we have to understand that behind the
scenes, in fact, what we have are in fact tiny, tiny, tiny steps, but we're only going
to highlight the ones that are quite exceptional.
Well, let's take a look at the journey ahead.
This course is really a mathematics course within a historical framework.
We'll meet many of the individuals that actually hammered within that copper orb that I mentioned,
in this case the copper orb of number, which is in fact where I live.
And let me assure you that many of them are quite interesting characters, and they're
quite a number of interesting stories that will be revealed.
Our vignette scenes will attempt to offer a fluid conceptual development of the notion
of number.
At times, we'll travel back and forth through history, so we can appreciate and better understand
the concept at hand as our story unfolds.
It's important to remember that the main character in our story is number, and our main plot line
is to intuitively see the evolution of number from the dawn of human thought to today.
I now want to outline three main themes that will be with us throughout all the lectures.
The first one is that despite what most people believe, we'll discover that numbers are truly
difficult to define precisely.
Secondly, we'll also come to appreciate the notion of number as always evolving.
It's not a fixed idea, but in fact a moving target, and in some very real sense the fact
that this is an ever moving target for us is what makes this chase so exciting.
And finally, we'll see the recurring theme that what first appears familiar and common
place is in fact rare and exotic.
And conversely, what first appears to be exotic will later be viewed as the norm.
Now this theme will really challenge our intuition and show us that there's more to number than
meets the eye.
So we'll see quite often that our intuition and our initial guess isn't quite up to the
correct idea of number as nature laid it out for us.
In fact, I hope that these themes of this course will inspire a new found perspective
and a lens through which to see your life and entire world in a whole new way.
An agile mindset that is open to new ideas and change.
You know as human beings, we come to every issue with preconceived notions, biases and
prejudice.
And that's just the reality.
But our job as thinking individuals is to put those biases at our side.
And when we see reality and when we see truth, we need to realize that this could be potentially
a surprise.
A surprise is a wonderful moment.
It's a moment when our intuition runs counter to reality.
And it's a wonderful moment because it's a moment when learning can occur.
So we should constantly be searching for surprises.
And so when we see a surprise, our mission as thinking people is to not give into that.
But instead say now it's my opportunity to retrain my intuition so that what first seems
surprising and counterintuitive is now nonsensical.
It makes complete sense, commonsensical.
Now the other important lesson to keep in mind is that we should never be afraid of
making mistakes.
Failing is the road to creativity, understanding and enlightenment.
And we will see that as a recurring theme throughout this course because we will see
great minds throughout history fail and fail aggressively and fail again and again.
And we celebrate that failure because through every misstep we understand the truth and
we understand the correct path that will lead us to a new insight.
And so we'll see humankind's struggle with both failure and with bias in the context
of number throughout the whole course.
But I hope that it will permeate into our whole lives.
Well, part one of our course is entitled The Numbers Within Our Lives.
And in this series of lectures, we'll first focus on the very early attempts to quantify.
We will journey back to 30,000 BCE and see some of the earliest attempts to count.
Now, for example, suppose that we couldn't count very high.
Suppose that we couldn't even count to, let's say, five.
But the question is, how do we know if in fact I have the same number of fingers on this
hand as I do on this hand?
Well, of course, for us today, this is not a big deal.
We count one, two, three, four, five.
We count one, two, three, four, five.
They're both five.
They're the same.
But suppose we couldn't count that high.
What would we do?
Well, if we couldn't count that high, and this was, of course, the issue that early
civilization had, because they had no language for number, of course, before they were discovered
and invented, how could I compare and see if the number of fingers on this hand is greater
than or smaller than the number of fingers on this hand?
Well, it's so natural that even a child can do it.
They would just do this.
And we see we've paired up each finger from each hand with exactly one finger from the
other hand, and there are no fingers left without a partner.
And so we see through this pairing that, in fact, they're the same number of fingers on
this hand as this hand, and yet we have no idea of the notion of five.
Comparing collections rather than counting them is the dawn of numbers, and in fact the
key to unlocking infinity, as we'll see at the end of the course.
Well numbers slowly evolved into adjectives as in three apples, and different names for
the same quantity of different objects actually became into fashion.
For example, a brace of pheasants, a couple of days, a pair of dice, well, they all meant
two.
But moving from an adjective to the abstract noun two was a dramatic leap in the intellectual
development of humanity, and we'll see that leap for ourselves and enjoy it.
This leap leads us to the counting numbers, the familiar numbers that we use to count
things, which we'll call in this course the natural numbers.
The natural numbers, which are one, two, three, four, five, six, and so forth, are the numbers
that we can really count on.
We'll then investigate the challenges of communicating and manipulating these numbers.
It's one thing to count, and it's another thing to communicate, keep records, and perform
arithmetic.
And through these investigations, we'll see the notion of number expand yet further as
we witness our ancient ancestors struggle to understand zero and to understand negative
numbers.
Zero is no big deal.
Well, in fact, zero is extremely important.
Without zero, we face serious numerical conundrums.
For example, take a look at this number, a one followed by a one.
Is it eleven or is it a hundred and one?
Well, without zero, we don't know.
Zero, as we'll see, is extremely important, but should it be considered a number?
Here we'll see the first instance in which humankind was faced with the challenge of
expanding its notion of number and what number should mean.
Finally, we'll explore how individuals were moved to associate personalities, magic, and
even cosmic significance to numerical notions.
How numbers were believed to have warded off the plague and even appeased the gods.
Even Benjamin Franklin, as we'll discover, could not resist the magic of numbers.
Once numbers were born within our imagination, they took on a life of their own, following
the laws and nature of mathematics.
This brings us to the second part of our course, the lives within our numbers.
Here we move from the practical side of numbers as a means of counting and commerce to the
study of numbers themselves.
This area is known today as number theory.
We'll open our explorations by first discovering an amazing pattern in nature that was made
famous in a 13th century mathematician's book written by Leonardo de Pisa, better known
today as Fibonacci.
From here, we'll focus on the nature of numbers themselves.
By the 6th century BCE, the Pythagoreans were studying numbers as objects in their own
right rather than solely as tools for calculation and record keeping.
The Pythagoreans may have been inspired by the religious sect in India known as the Jains.
It appears that the Jains were the first number theorists.
Different cultures all share their common passion for number theory.
And the more we explore, the more our field of vision of number widens.
Here we see ratios of natural numbers and discover the existence of numbers that are
not ratios, the exotic so-called irrational numbers, a notion that was so disturbing it
may have driven the Pythagoreans to murder.
That's right.
I don't think that this is going to be a humdrum course on numbers, but in fact, there's
a lot of drama.
And that's a pretty good cliffhanger right there, don't you think?
Well, next we'll celebrate two of the most important numbers in our universe.
Pi, famous in geometric circles, and E, a more modern, extremely important number used
to measure the growth and decay of populations and for computing compound interest rates.
Both numbers help us better understand nature and our universe, and we'll explore them
and enjoy them in some depth.
We'll then use these famous quantities, Pi and E, as the inspiration to see subtle distinctions
between different types of numbers.
This will lead us to the mysterious modern world of what's called transcendental numbers.
We'll consider two different mathematical approaches to number, an algebraic view based
on solving equations.
This leads to new imaginary numbers, and then an analytic view based on using numbers to
measure distances and closeness.
Now, this point of view will actually lead us to a parallel universe of number, unlike
anything we've ever seen before.
In fact, through these new and strange numbers, we might better be able to empathize with the
Pythagoreans who were unable to accept certain disturbing quantities as numbers, although
I hope it won't drive us to murder.
Along the way, we'll also study the most beautiful and famous formula in all of mathematics,
one that elegantly connects the five most important numbers of our universe.
Well, finally, at the close of the course, we will journey beyond the universe of numbers
and delve into the at first forbidding world of infinity.
Using the very first method for counting, we'll discover that just as with numbers,
infinity can be understood and holds many surprising features.
This theory was constructed essentially by one man, Georg Cantor, in the late 1800s.
And it was so controversial and so counterintuitive that his work was not accepted by many of his
peers until years after he introduced his ideas.
Here we'll see the very human drama of a wildly imaginative individual who was also troubled
and who set the mathematical community ablaze with his incredibly original discovery.
Well, I want to say just a couple of words about the overarching objectives of this course
together.
Well, at some points, our discussions will become a bit mathematically technical.
I assure you that those details are not the central focus of this course.
No one should be alarmed or overwhelmed by the digits.
So when you see big numbers, or every once in a while, and there won't be a lot, but
every once in a while I'll show a little something that looks more mathematical than not.
The goal here is for us to take these mathematical moments and allow them to wash over us.
We can appreciate the creativity within a mathematical context, just as we would appreciate
a piece of music or a piece of art.
We can sit back and take in whatever we can.
But I invite you, and I encourage you, to take out as much as you can.
I urge you to push a little bit, and if it gets a teeny bit mysterious, that's fine.
We can let it go, but always be open.
But I assure you that we will not be technical, per se, and that is certainly not the thrust
of what we're going to be doing here.
So stay with me, and trust me.
Now I have to close by saying that I'm a number theorist, and so personally I'm extremely
excited to have this opportunity to share with you what I believe are some of the most
incredible and stunning ideas of human history.
The great 20th century British number theorist, G. H. Hardy, once wrote,
A mathematician, like a painter or poet, is a maker of patterns.
The mathematician's patterns, like the painters or the poets, must be beautiful.
The ideas, like colors or the words, must fit together in a harmonious way.
Well, thus, while my hope is that our journey will be both uplifting and rewarding, my main
goal is that for all of us to realize that the study of number is a beautiful one that
has captured humankind's imagination throughout the ages and continues to inspire us to explore
its endless frontiers.
