if you were to hold it, not to accuse anyone here of being dishonest, but one could imagine
that maybe that person were to take some pebbles away and say, well we only agreed upon this
much barley, and so that's how much grain that we agreed upon. So you could see a problem
with this. So the way they resolved this problem was to take some soft clay, and they would
take the clay and form it into a jar, and this was called a pebble jar. They would shape
it into a jar, and then they would take the tokens that we agreed upon, you know, these
actual Calculi, and they would put the Calculi in the jar, and then we'd seal it up so it
would look, in fact, like a sphere, like a ball, like a clay ball, and that clay would
then harden. Okay, so that way there was no doubt at all about, you know, what the deal
was, because we could just, in fact, know we can't tamper with it because we have hardened
clay that's completely sealed up like a vault, early, early instance of a vault. Well, the
problem with this is clear. The problem is that if, in fact, we want to now see exactly
what we agreed upon, we now have to crack open this hardened clay jar, and then look
at the pebbles, look at the Calculi inside, and then we have to reseal the jar, make a
new jar, and so forth. So you could see this was a nuisance. This was, in fact, a big problem.
Well, here was the ingenious moment where something dramatic happened within the imagination
of humankind, because what was realized was that, in fact, we could avoid the breaking
up of this clay jar, by the pebble jar, by simply taking the tokens, taking the Calculi,
and before we put them in to this softened jar, let's just take the Calculi and make
an imprint on the side, on the outside of this jar, and then throw it inside. Take the next
Calculi, the next pebble, make the imprint, and throw it inside, and do this for every
single pebble that we have. So when we're done, we'll have all the pebbles safely inside
the jar, we'll seal the jar up and it will harden, but there's no need for us to actually
break the jar open to see what's inside, because in fact, these tokens actually have their impressions
on the outside of the jar, and soon the impressions themselves actually became the unit of measure.
There was no need to actually look inside the jar anymore. Now, if you think about this,
this is a dramatic moment in our understanding, because now an actual icon was actually used
in order to denote a quantity. There's an image now, an image, an abstract image that's
now associated with a particular quantity that was now pressed in to this clay container.
