fact, this was fair, what we do is they would take the tally stick and they would actually
break it in half like this. So the marks are made, and then they would break it in half
like this. And then you would have one, and I would have one. And that way, neither can
cheat because if I mark mine, when I come back, the one-to-one pairing will not match
up perfectly. So it was a wonderful way to keep track of transactions and to make sure
that both parties were being honest. Now, in fact, you can think of these tally sticks
as a stock, a stock of wood, and really when you actually hold on to it, you are, in fact,
a stockholder. And that's where the word stockholder actually comes from. From our ability to try
to look at a one-to-one pairing, our ability to want to count, and yet to make sure that
the transaction is going to be fair and honest, and so you hold the stock. This is also where
the phrase bank stock comes from because banks would actually do the same operation they
would give you one of these stocks, and so you would have bank stock. It's amazing how
much of the language in our everyday world that we take for granted really, in fact,
has origins in our understanding or our desire to understand numbers. Really fantastic. And
so stockholder is a wonderful word to remember, and especially to remember its origins. In
fact, from the 1300s all the way up to 1828, the British government made tax demands and
gave receipts in the form of tally sticks. This is actually how they did it, all the
way up until the 1800s. Now in 1834, after the system was replaced, the government decided
to burn the enormous number of sticks that were kept in the vaults of the houses of parliament.
You can just imagine after all these generations, there were just enormous piles of these wooden
sticks which were no longer of value. And so they set these on fire and, in fact, generated
an enormous inferno so large that, in fact, the buildings themselves, the houses of parliament
burned down. And in fact, the great artist William Turner painted several paintings called
the Burning of the Houses of the Lords and Commons, 16th October, 1834. And Turner himself,
in fact, witnessed this inferno from a boat on the Thames River. So you could see, if
you're going to try to mess with numbers and get rid of them, you are in for some serious,
some serious havoc. Anyway, another early method of counting that was used was through
the notion of the idea and the actual action of knotted strings. Now in order to make
the one-to-one correspondence physical, the Incas as well as cultures along the Pacific
