In this lecture, I want us to consider the dawn of numbers. Suppose we were Sumerian
shepherds with no knowledge of numbers. How would we keep track of our sheep? How would
we know if all our sheep returned after grazing in the pasture? Humans have an innate capacity
to accurately compare small quantities. However, to compare large quantities, early civilizations
employed the idea of a one-to-one pairing. Notched bones, knotted strings, and piles
of pebbles allowed them to keep track of their animals and to conduct commerce.
While the human hand is in many ways one of the most fundamental counting tools, studies
of primitive cultures reveal subtle use of the entire body in counting practices. Some
of these early counting techniques actually led to important number systems and even persist
in modern times.
Human kind has been counting for at least 30,000 years. But are humans the only creatures
to possess a number sense? Here we see that even some animals appear to have the capacity
for numerical concepts. Next, we'll turn to the development of the abstract notion
of number. When did the adjective three sheep, three apples, become the noun three?
While there's no precise moment, of course, evidence of abstract numbers in Mesopotamia
dates back to 3300 BCE. We'll examine some of the early counting tools as a means to
determine how humanity's understanding of numbers initially developed. By understanding
early cultures' use of one-to-one pairings, we will, in fact, be laying the foundation
for understanding how a twentieth century mathematician named Georg Cantor unlocked
the secrets of infinity.
Well, let's begin with the motivation to count. Thousands of years before there was
even writing or even numerical systems or symbols, well, shepherds tending flocks had
to keep track of their sheep. As agricultural societies developed, people needed to measure
and divide land, keep track of livestock, record harvests, and collect census data.
Growing populations and clashing cultures led to, of course, inevitable conflict, thus
requiring armies to face the logistics of arming and feeding their soldiers. Producing
bountiful agricultural harvests required counting days and lunar cycles as part of calendars
to better predict the change in seasons, annual floods, and dry spells. And these were, in
fact, the initial motivations for counting.
Long before our ancient ancestors figured out how to count, they used the innate number
sense that's within us all to instantly compare small collections of objects. So we returned
to the Sumerian shepherd. If he had a very small flock, he could easily keep track of
them without the need for counting. For example, it's easy to see the difference between a
herd of four sheep and a herd of three sheep without actually counting. Now, with a larger
herd, we're unable to determine by simply looking at them whether the collection of
sheep we have after they return from grazing is the same size as the collection with which
we started. This limitation is often referred to as the limit of four. We can look at small
collections of things, usually up to four, and just see how many are there without actually
counting them. But beyond four, we traditionally end up counting. In fact, this limit of four
might underlie the barred gate system of counting that we still use today. This is where we
write a notch, you know, mark one, two, three, four. But now instead of marking five, which
would be hard for us just to look at and visualize, we put the gate across, boom, and call that
a five. And then we'd add more, one, another one, another one. If we stopped there, we
could easily see this is just three, and here we have five, and so we have a total of eight.
So in fact, we could see that very easily. And that's, in fact, why we have this barred
gate system because of this limit of four. Well, are we the only animals that have this
innate sense of number? Well, studies with goldfinches reveal that when presented with
two small piles of seeds, they usually pick the larger of the two piles. So goldfinches
have a sense of number in this sort of generic sense. Another illustration comes from the
late 1700s, when the scientist Gilbert White performed an experiment involving plover eggs
in a nest. So he would secretly approach the nest, and he would remove one egg from the
plover nest. And the mother, a bird, would then later realize that in fact she was deficit
an egg, and she would lay another egg to replace it. She was able to detect that in fact the
number was off. If he didn't remove an egg, she would not lay another. But if he removed
another egg, she would again produce and lay another one. So this plover actually seemed
to have a sense of the number of eggs in her nest. Crows have been known to distinguish
between collections of sizes 1, 2, 3, and even 4. And I must tell you about the wonderful
story of a squire who was determined to get rid of a pesty crow who made its nest in the
watchtower of his estate. So this crow made a nest at the watchtower, and every time the
squire would approach in order to shoot the crow, the crow would fly away and go to a
distant tree, and then stay there and watch until the crow saw the squire leave, in which
case then the crow would return back. And so finally the squire had the brilliant idea
of bringing a friend along. So two people went into the tower, and of course the crow
flew away, and then he sent his friend out so the crow would see the one person leaving.
But the crow realized that two went in and one went out, it wasn't the same, and so the
crow waited until finally the squire gave up, and the squire left, and the crow returned
to its nest. Well, then the squire brought two friends, so three of them went in and
the crow flew away, two of them came out, and the crow still was able to tell that wasn't
the right number. Well, four came in, so him and three of his friends came in, three of
them left, the crow watched, but the crow was still able to detect the difference between
three and four. Well, finally the squire brought four of his friends, so all five went in,
the crow flew away, four came out, but now the crow wasn't unable to detect the difference
between the four and the five, it seemed as though maybe five had left, and he sadly returned
to his perch and his nest, and let me just say that was the end of the crow. So sadly
the crow exhibited our limit of four as well. Well, do animals have a notion of number as
an abstract object? I mean, can horses really perform addition by tapping their hooves,
as we see in circuses and in side shows? Well, evidence suggests that the answers are really
no. And a famous example from the 19th century is Clever Hans, a horse whose trainer taught
him to count and to add. Instead of actually performing addition by counting with its hooves
up and down, experts now believe that the horse was actually responding to subtle and
subliminal responses, most likely unintentional visual clues from his over-enthusiastic trainer.
And so that was what the horse was responding to rather than this innate sense of arithmetic.
Well, let's now move from animals to children. Interestingly, a child's development of the
concept of number appears to mirror humankind's historical development of number, which is
really quite fascinating, really. It's a microcosm of the entire scope of the entire history.
Ordination comes first. That is, the ability to see that one collection of objects is larger than
another. In other words, we first learn to order objects according to their size before
we learn how to actually count them. This is ordination. Now, learning ordered lists
is a standard component of early education. I mean, children are taught to recite the
alphabet, numbers, and even the days of the week, often well before they understand the
meaning of these sequences, but they get the sequence down, ordination. Then the child begins
to grasp the idea of the natural numbers, which are the ones we count with, one, two, three,
four, five, and so on. And finally, true counting, or what we call coordination, is mastered,
in which the objects in a collection can be counted or paired up with the objects from another
collection. In our discussion of infinity in lecture 20 at the end of the course, we'll
actually revisit these notions of ordination and coordination. So now let's return to the
first form of counting, counting via comparing. Well, many societies use various forms of
tally sticks as counting tools to record a one-to-one correspondences. So this was a
stick, a device, in fact, I have one right here, where in fact marks would be made like
this to denote whatever it is that they were trying to quantify, what they were trying to
keep track of. Now, in fact, we see evidence of this early on. Notched bones from as long
ago as 30,000 BCE have been found in Western Europe. So we see the desire to count dates
back tens of thousands of years. It's quite a really old and important idea. Now, notched
sticks, such as the one that I have here, have been used for millennia, and they may
have, in fact, inspired the development of the Roman numerals, really, if you think about
it for a second or maybe even turn it on its side. But this is something we're not sure
of. Now, a wooden tally stick would be marked like this, and let me explain to you how this
would work. So suppose that you and I were going to make some kind of business transaction.
Maybe we were going to make some deal where I was going to purchase some grains of some
kind of substance like wheat or barley or something. Okay, so we agree upon the amount.
We don't know how to speak these numbers yet, but we do so on this tally stick. Well, of
course, now, who holds the tally stick? Well, if I hold the tally stick, then, in fact,
I might add some more notches on while you're not looking, and I say, well, look, the deal
we made, you actually have to give me this much more. Or if, in fact, you held the tally
stick, then somehow you might either try to erase some of these marks and then say, well,
in fact, I only owe you this much, which was less than the deal. So to ensure that, in
fact, this was fair, what we do is they would take the tally stick and they would actually
break it in half like this. So the marks are made, and then they would break it in half
like this. And then you would have one, and I would have one. And that way, neither can
cheat because if I mark mine, when I come back, the one-to-one pairing will not match
up perfectly. So it was a wonderful way to keep track of transactions and to make sure
that both parties were being honest. Now, in fact, you can think of these tally sticks
as a stock, a stock of wood, and really when you actually hold on to it, you are, in fact,
a stockholder. And that's where the word stockholder actually comes from. From our ability to try
to look at a one-to-one pairing, our ability to want to count, and yet to make sure that
the transaction is going to be fair and honest, and so you hold the stock. This is also where
the phrase bank stock comes from because banks would actually do the same operation they
would give you one of these stocks, and so you would have bank stock. It's amazing how
much of the language in our everyday world that we take for granted really, in fact,
has origins in our understanding or our desire to understand numbers. Really fantastic. And
so stockholder is a wonderful word to remember, and especially to remember its origins. In
fact, from the 1300s all the way up to 1828, the British government made tax demands and
gave receipts in the form of tally sticks. This is actually how they did it, all the
way up until the 1800s. Now in 1834, after the system was replaced, the government decided
to burn the enormous number of sticks that were kept in the vaults of the houses of parliament.
You can just imagine after all these generations, there were just enormous piles of these wooden
sticks which were no longer of value. And so they set these on fire and, in fact, generated
an enormous inferno so large that, in fact, the buildings themselves, the houses of parliament
burned down. And in fact, the great artist William Turner painted several paintings called
the Burning of the Houses of the Lords and Commons, 16th October, 1834. And Turner himself,
in fact, witnessed this inferno from a boat on the Thames River. So you could see, if
you're going to try to mess with numbers and get rid of them, you are in for some serious,
some serious havoc. Anyway, another early method of counting that was used was through
the notion of the idea and the actual action of knotted strings. Now in order to make
the one-to-one correspondence physical, the Incas as well as cultures along the Pacific
Rim and in Africa actually used knotted strings. And the idea was that there would be a string
and they would put a knot in it when they actually wanted to represent one unit. And
so the more knots they put in would designate the more elements they'd have in that collection
they're trying to keep track of. And sometimes these became very intricate and quite beautiful.
They're now in museums. In the fifth century BCE, Herodotus of Greece wrote in his book
called History that Darius, the king of Persia, used knotted cords as calendars. And so we
could see even evidence in the literature that these knotted strings were really used
as a value before we had a notion of the numbers themselves. It was again this one-to-one correspondence,
this one-to-one pairing. Now this tradition actually continues to this day with the knotted
strings. Catholics, Muslims and Buddhists, Rosaries and prayer beads actually allowed
the devout to recite the appropriate number of litanies without the need for counting.
And so you see here, for example, with this Rosaries that I would actually use my thumb
and that would be the way for me to keep track of the litanies without actually counting
them. And in fact, this is in some sense a harbinger of a one-to-one pairing or a one-to-one
correspondence. Well, let's return now to our Sumerian Shepherd and his flock. Well,
as early as 3200 BCE, he may have kept track of his sheep by having them pass through a
narrow passage while he paired them up with a collection of pebbles. So the idea here
is that as each sheep would go by, he would take a pebble and put it in a container. And
so all the sheep would be out to pasture and as the sheep were to return, but what happened
is he would then remove a pebble by pebble, one for each sheep. Again, notice it's a one-to-one
pairing, a one-to-one correspondence. One pebble represented one sheep. So at the end
of the day, if there were pebbles left over, well, the shepherd knew that he has to go
out and try to find the missing sheep. But if they worked out just perfectly and there
were in fact no pebbles left over, then in fact he knew that he had his entire flock.
Now in the eighth century BCE, Homer wrote how Odysseus blinded the Cyclops, who then
kept track of his sheep with a pile of pebbles that he kept at the entrance to his cave.
So even in the classic ancient literature, we see mentions of this method of using the
pebbles. In fact, we can even, if we fast forward just a little bit, we can even find
a poetic joy within the notion of the one-to-one correspondence. The 19th century Austrian poet
Albert Stifter used a one-to-one pairing of apples to represent the days before he was
to be reunited with his great love. Now I don't know why he's a poet, so I don't know
why he had to go off and leave his great love, but for some reason he did. And so what he
did was he filled a sack of apples with the exact number of days that he was going to
be away, and every day he would eat one of these apples, and so the correspondence here
was he would eat an apple for the day, and so therefore when there were no apples left,
that meant that he returned back. And he wrote to his beloved a wonderful note where he talks
about the numbers of apples left, and he writes the following, when I wrote my last letter
to you, there were only twenty-one. Tomorrow there will be only thirteen. Finally, only
one apple will be left, and when I have eaten that, I will shout for joy. And so here we
can really see the joyful reflection of a one-to-one correspondence as well as seeing
it's a very powerful way to count without numbers. Well, of course we carry with us
the most convenient device for one-to-one pairings, namely our bodies. Now the human
hand is a natural counting tool, and we use it all the time to this day, and in fact the
limit of four that I mentioned earlier in the lecture made the five-digit hand particularly
useful for counting and led to the use of five as a basic grouping for counting. And
in fact the popularity of the Bard-Gate tally system, which we continue to use today that
I mentioned before, where we notch one, two, three, four, and then put a gate across it
for the five, actually may be due to this basis of counting by fives. Now, of course
the ten digits on our two hands may have led to the modern dominance of the base ten
numerical system, and this is actually what we use today. Now we'll describe and explore
the base ten system and other such systems in greater detail in the following two lectures.
So let's not worry about it now, except that it is based in a ten system which seems very
natural to correspond to the ten digits that we have. Well, what if we want to count more
objects? Well, no problem at all because we can just add in our toes, and in fact this
is what people do. So toes are the obvious extension of the hand as a counting tool.
But you know, given the hands convenience, some cultures actually extended their counting
to include the joints of the fingers, and so you can actually count quite high with your
fingers, with your hand. Let me just show you how they would do this. So they'd say one,
two, three, four, five, and then they would count at the joints six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and then even here, the knuckles, sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty. So you could actually count to twenty on one hand,
and this is actually a device that was used to keep track of larger numbers without the
need of using one's toes. Well, now let's see how the Sumerians took the notion of
a one-to-one pairing one step further. So here is the first point. We're going to see
a movement in our ability to abstract and to move the notion of number forward. So it's
a very exciting moment for us because soon what we'll see is a departure from the one-to-one
pairing into something totally new. Okay, well, let's now go back to the Sumerians.
Now as early as 4000 BCE, the Sumerians actually created a different clay token called Calculi
to represent quantities of different items, and different shapes actually represented
different and various things. For example, various grain measures, a unit of labor, a
sheep, a unit of oil, a garment, a unit of honey, and so forth. And so these images,
these tokens were actually used to depict these objects and thus allowed for the ease
of transactions or the ease of keeping records. Now the word Calculi means pebbles, and from
this root we actually get the words Calculate, Calculus, and Calculator. Now if you think
about it for a second, it's absolutely fantastic that these fundamental words that we use for
computation, Calculate, Calculus, Calculator, all come from Calculi, meaning pebble, which
was the very first attempt to try to quantify, humankind's first effort to actually articulate
a quantity through this one-to-one pairing and these different shaped tokens. Now to
record a quantity of goods, such as measures of grain in a storehouse, the Sumerians as
early as 3,200 BCE would do something quite spectacular. So here's what they would do.
You see, if we just take these tokens or these clay pieces, then what we'd see is, okay suppose
that we're going to make a transaction right now. Okay, so we agree upon a certain amount
of barley that I'm going to purchase from you, and so we do this with these tokens.
So what would happen now? Well what would happen is that I would have these tokens to
represent the amount that we agreed upon. Well if I kept the tokens, if I kept these pebbles,
these Calculi, then I might, when you're not looking, add some more and thus say, well
you owe me this much barley, this was the deal we made, and this is not so good. And
if you were to hold it, not to accuse anyone here of being dishonest, but one could imagine
that maybe that person were to take some pebbles away and say, well we only agreed upon this
much barley, and so that's how much grain that we agreed upon. So you could see a problem
with this. So the way they resolved this problem was to take some soft clay, and they would
take the clay and form it into a jar, and this was called a pebble jar. They would shape
it into a jar, and then they would take the tokens that we agreed upon, you know, these
actual Calculi, and they would put the Calculi in the jar, and then we'd seal it up so it
would look, in fact, like a sphere, like a ball, like a clay ball, and that clay would
then harden. Okay, so that way there was no doubt at all about, you know, what the deal
was, because we could just, in fact, know we can't tamper with it because we have hardened
clay that's completely sealed up like a vault, early, early instance of a vault. Well, the
problem with this is clear. The problem is that if, in fact, we want to now see exactly
what we agreed upon, we now have to crack open this hardened clay jar, and then look
at the pebbles, look at the Calculi inside, and then we have to reseal the jar, make a
new jar, and so forth. So you could see this was a nuisance. This was, in fact, a big problem.
Well, here was the ingenious moment where something dramatic happened within the imagination
of humankind, because what was realized was that, in fact, we could avoid the breaking
up of this clay jar, by the pebble jar, by simply taking the tokens, taking the Calculi,
and before we put them in to this softened jar, let's just take the Calculi and make
an imprint on the side, on the outside of this jar, and then throw it inside. Take the next
Calculi, the next pebble, make the imprint, and throw it inside, and do this for every
single pebble that we have. So when we're done, we'll have all the pebbles safely inside
the jar, we'll seal the jar up and it will harden, but there's no need for us to actually
break the jar open to see what's inside, because in fact, these tokens actually have their impressions
on the outside of the jar, and soon the impressions themselves actually became the unit of measure.
There was no need to actually look inside the jar anymore. Now, if you think about this,
this is a dramatic moment in our understanding, because now an actual icon was actually used
in order to denote a quantity. There's an image now, an image, an abstract image that's
now associated with a particular quantity that was now pressed in to this clay container.
Well, the token, in fact, the markings on the side by the token, in fact represented
the quantities for themselves. And in fact, when you think about it, it actually then
eliminated the need for the tokens being put inside. So in fact, they don't even have to
put the tokens or the pebbles inside. All they have to do was press the tokens on the
outside. That was all that was needed in order to keep track of this. Well, this really is
a brilliant idea, because soon what they realized was, in fact, we don't even need the jar.
All we need to do is to take a piece of softened clay and lay it out flat, and then impress
inside the clay, in fact, the images of these tokens. And that will represent the quantity
of a transaction or the quantity of units of grain in storage, or whatever quantity
we want. We have an abstract visualization of that quantity rather than actually counting
the stones themselves and putting them in a one-to-one pairing with the quantity itself.
Now this was a dramatic moment in the life of the mind for us, because we now move to
an abstract symbol that represented the idea and the notion of a quantity. And if you think
about it, so much of our culture is based on our desire to understand and record numbers.
In fact, you can think of the phrases that we saw, like stockholder and bank stock, which
now really have some serious significance to us. We understand that really corresponds
to this one-to-one pairing idea that was early civilization's answer to counting before we
even had numbers. But now we see a movement forward, a step beyond, where, in fact, now
an abstract image, an icon, if you will, could be used to replace the one-to-one pairing.
Now in the next lecture, we'll actually see how these Sumerian markings led to one of
the first numerical systems. And consequently, to what we may be, in fact, consider the very
first form of written language. Amazing. In fact, the written language may have its origins
in our desire to express quantity. Numbers are even behind our writing. We'll see that
in the next lecture.
