Long before our ancient ancestors figured out how to count, they used the innate number
sense that's within us all to instantly compare small collections of objects. So we returned
to the Sumerian shepherd. If he had a very small flock, he could easily keep track of
them without the need for counting. For example, it's easy to see the difference between a
herd of four sheep and a herd of three sheep without actually counting. Now, with a larger
herd, we're unable to determine by simply looking at them whether the collection of
sheep we have after they return from grazing is the same size as the collection with which
we started. This limitation is often referred to as the limit of four. We can look at small
collections of things, usually up to four, and just see how many are there without actually
counting them. But beyond four, we traditionally end up counting. In fact, this limit of four
might underlie the barred gate system of counting that we still use today. This is where we
write a notch, you know, mark one, two, three, four. But now instead of marking five, which
would be hard for us just to look at and visualize, we put the gate across, boom, and call that
a five. And then we'd add more, one, another one, another one. If we stopped there, we
could easily see this is just three, and here we have five, and so we have a total of eight.
So in fact, we could see that very easily. And that's, in fact, why we have this barred
gate system because of this limit of four. Well, are we the only animals that have this
innate sense of number? Well, studies with goldfinches reveal that when presented with
two small piles of seeds, they usually pick the larger of the two piles. So goldfinches
have a sense of number in this sort of generic sense. Another illustration comes from the
late 1700s, when the scientist Gilbert White performed an experiment involving plover eggs
in a nest. So he would secretly approach the nest, and he would remove one egg from the
plover nest. And the mother, a bird, would then later realize that in fact she was deficit
an egg, and she would lay another egg to replace it. She was able to detect that in fact the
number was off. If he didn't remove an egg, she would not lay another. But if he removed
another egg, she would again produce and lay another one. So this plover actually seemed
to have a sense of the number of eggs in her nest. Crows have been known to distinguish
between collections of sizes 1, 2, 3, and even 4. And I must tell you about the wonderful
story of a squire who was determined to get rid of a pesty crow who made its nest in the
