Albert Stifter used a one-to-one pairing of apples to represent the days before he was
to be reunited with his great love. Now I don't know why he's a poet, so I don't know
why he had to go off and leave his great love, but for some reason he did. And so what he
did was he filled a sack of apples with the exact number of days that he was going to
be away, and every day he would eat one of these apples, and so the correspondence here
was he would eat an apple for the day, and so therefore when there were no apples left,
that meant that he returned back. And he wrote to his beloved a wonderful note where he talks
about the numbers of apples left, and he writes the following, when I wrote my last letter
to you, there were only twenty-one. Tomorrow there will be only thirteen. Finally, only
one apple will be left, and when I have eaten that, I will shout for joy. And so here we
can really see the joyful reflection of a one-to-one correspondence as well as seeing
it's a very powerful way to count without numbers. Well, of course we carry with us
the most convenient device for one-to-one pairings, namely our bodies. Now the human
hand is a natural counting tool, and we use it all the time to this day, and in fact the
limit of four that I mentioned earlier in the lecture made the five-digit hand particularly
useful for counting and led to the use of five as a basic grouping for counting. And
in fact the popularity of the Bard-Gate tally system, which we continue to use today that
I mentioned before, where we notch one, two, three, four, and then put a gate across it
for the five, actually may be due to this basis of counting by fives. Now, of course
the ten digits on our two hands may have led to the modern dominance of the base ten
numerical system, and this is actually what we use today. Now we'll describe and explore
the base ten system and other such systems in greater detail in the following two lectures.
So let's not worry about it now, except that it is based in a ten system which seems very
natural to correspond to the ten digits that we have. Well, what if we want to count more
objects? Well, no problem at all because we can just add in our toes, and in fact this
is what people do. So toes are the obvious extension of the hand as a counting tool.
But you know, given the hands convenience, some cultures actually extended their counting
to include the joints of the fingers, and so you can actually count quite high with your
fingers, with your hand. Let me just show you how they would do this. So they'd say one,
