Rim and in Africa actually used knotted strings. And the idea was that there would be a string
and they would put a knot in it when they actually wanted to represent one unit. And
so the more knots they put in would designate the more elements they'd have in that collection
they're trying to keep track of. And sometimes these became very intricate and quite beautiful.
They're now in museums. In the fifth century BCE, Herodotus of Greece wrote in his book
called History that Darius, the king of Persia, used knotted cords as calendars. And so we
could see even evidence in the literature that these knotted strings were really used
as a value before we had a notion of the numbers themselves. It was again this one-to-one correspondence,
this one-to-one pairing. Now this tradition actually continues to this day with the knotted
strings. Catholics, Muslims and Buddhists, Rosaries and prayer beads actually allowed
the devout to recite the appropriate number of litanies without the need for counting.
And so you see here, for example, with this Rosaries that I would actually use my thumb
and that would be the way for me to keep track of the litanies without actually counting
them. And in fact, this is in some sense a harbinger of a one-to-one pairing or a one-to-one
correspondence. Well, let's return now to our Sumerian Shepherd and his flock. Well,
as early as 3200 BCE, he may have kept track of his sheep by having them pass through a
narrow passage while he paired them up with a collection of pebbles. So the idea here
is that as each sheep would go by, he would take a pebble and put it in a container. And
so all the sheep would be out to pasture and as the sheep were to return, but what happened
is he would then remove a pebble by pebble, one for each sheep. Again, notice it's a one-to-one
pairing, a one-to-one correspondence. One pebble represented one sheep. So at the end
of the day, if there were pebbles left over, well, the shepherd knew that he has to go
out and try to find the missing sheep. But if they worked out just perfectly and there
were in fact no pebbles left over, then in fact he knew that he had his entire flock.
Now in the eighth century BCE, Homer wrote how Odysseus blinded the Cyclops, who then
kept track of his sheep with a pile of pebbles that he kept at the entrance to his cave.
So even in the classic ancient literature, we see mentions of this method of using the
pebbles. In fact, we can even, if we fast forward just a little bit, we can even find
a poetic joy within the notion of the one-to-one correspondence. The 19th century Austrian poet
