In this lecture, I want us to consider the dawn of numbers. Suppose we were Sumerian
shepherds with no knowledge of numbers. How would we keep track of our sheep? How would
we know if all our sheep returned after grazing in the pasture? Humans have an innate capacity
to accurately compare small quantities. However, to compare large quantities, early civilizations
employed the idea of a one-to-one pairing. Notched bones, knotted strings, and piles
of pebbles allowed them to keep track of their animals and to conduct commerce.
While the human hand is in many ways one of the most fundamental counting tools, studies
of primitive cultures reveal subtle use of the entire body in counting practices. Some
of these early counting techniques actually led to important number systems and even persist
in modern times.
Human kind has been counting for at least 30,000 years. But are humans the only creatures
to possess a number sense? Here we see that even some animals appear to have the capacity
for numerical concepts. Next, we'll turn to the development of the abstract notion
of number. When did the adjective three sheep, three apples, become the noun three?
While there's no precise moment, of course, evidence of abstract numbers in Mesopotamia
dates back to 3300 BCE. We'll examine some of the early counting tools as a means to
determine how humanity's understanding of numbers initially developed. By understanding
early cultures' use of one-to-one pairings, we will, in fact, be laying the foundation
for understanding how a twentieth century mathematician named Georg Cantor unlocked
the secrets of infinity.
Well, let's begin with the motivation to count. Thousands of years before there was
even writing or even numerical systems or symbols, well, shepherds tending flocks had
to keep track of their sheep. As agricultural societies developed, people needed to measure
and divide land, keep track of livestock, record harvests, and collect census data.
Growing populations and clashing cultures led to, of course, inevitable conflict, thus
requiring armies to face the logistics of arming and feeding their soldiers. Producing
bountiful agricultural harvests required counting days and lunar cycles as part of calendars
to better predict the change in seasons, annual floods, and dry spells. And these were, in
fact, the initial motivations for counting.
