Well, the token, in fact, the markings on the side by the token, in fact represented
the quantities for themselves. And in fact, when you think about it, it actually then
eliminated the need for the tokens being put inside. So in fact, they don't even have to
put the tokens or the pebbles inside. All they have to do was press the tokens on the
outside. That was all that was needed in order to keep track of this. Well, this really is
a brilliant idea, because soon what they realized was, in fact, we don't even need the jar.
All we need to do is to take a piece of softened clay and lay it out flat, and then impress
inside the clay, in fact, the images of these tokens. And that will represent the quantity
of a transaction or the quantity of units of grain in storage, or whatever quantity
we want. We have an abstract visualization of that quantity rather than actually counting
the stones themselves and putting them in a one-to-one pairing with the quantity itself.
Now this was a dramatic moment in the life of the mind for us, because we now move to
an abstract symbol that represented the idea and the notion of a quantity. And if you think
about it, so much of our culture is based on our desire to understand and record numbers.
In fact, you can think of the phrases that we saw, like stockholder and bank stock, which
now really have some serious significance to us. We understand that really corresponds
to this one-to-one pairing idea that was early civilization's answer to counting before we
even had numbers. But now we see a movement forward, a step beyond, where, in fact, now
an abstract image, an icon, if you will, could be used to replace the one-to-one pairing.
Now in the next lecture, we'll actually see how these Sumerian markings led to one of
the first numerical systems. And consequently, to what we may be, in fact, consider the very
first form of written language. Amazing. In fact, the written language may have its origins
in our desire to express quantity. Numbers are even behind our writing. We'll see that
in the next lecture.
