we learn how to actually count them. This is ordination. Now, learning ordered lists
is a standard component of early education. I mean, children are taught to recite the
alphabet, numbers, and even the days of the week, often well before they understand the
meaning of these sequences, but they get the sequence down, ordination. Then the child begins
to grasp the idea of the natural numbers, which are the ones we count with, one, two, three,
four, five, and so on. And finally, true counting, or what we call coordination, is mastered,
in which the objects in a collection can be counted or paired up with the objects from another
collection. In our discussion of infinity in lecture 20 at the end of the course, we'll
actually revisit these notions of ordination and coordination. So now let's return to the
first form of counting, counting via comparing. Well, many societies use various forms of
tally sticks as counting tools to record a one-to-one correspondences. So this was a
stick, a device, in fact, I have one right here, where in fact marks would be made like
this to denote whatever it is that they were trying to quantify, what they were trying to
keep track of. Now, in fact, we see evidence of this early on. Notched bones from as long
ago as 30,000 BCE have been found in Western Europe. So we see the desire to count dates
back tens of thousands of years. It's quite a really old and important idea. Now, notched
sticks, such as the one that I have here, have been used for millennia, and they may
have, in fact, inspired the development of the Roman numerals, really, if you think about
it for a second or maybe even turn it on its side. But this is something we're not sure
of. Now, a wooden tally stick would be marked like this, and let me explain to you how this
would work. So suppose that you and I were going to make some kind of business transaction.
Maybe we were going to make some deal where I was going to purchase some grains of some
kind of substance like wheat or barley or something. Okay, so we agree upon the amount.
We don't know how to speak these numbers yet, but we do so on this tally stick. Well, of
course, now, who holds the tally stick? Well, if I hold the tally stick, then, in fact,
I might add some more notches on while you're not looking, and I say, well, look, the deal
we made, you actually have to give me this much more. Or if, in fact, you held the tally
stick, then somehow you might either try to erase some of these marks and then say, well,
in fact, I only owe you this much, which was less than the deal. So to ensure that, in
