two, three, four, five, and then they would count at the joints six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and then even here, the knuckles, sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty. So you could actually count to twenty on one hand,
and this is actually a device that was used to keep track of larger numbers without the
need of using one's toes. Well, now let's see how the Sumerians took the notion of
a one-to-one pairing one step further. So here is the first point. We're going to see
a movement in our ability to abstract and to move the notion of number forward. So it's
a very exciting moment for us because soon what we'll see is a departure from the one-to-one
pairing into something totally new. Okay, well, let's now go back to the Sumerians.
Now as early as 4000 BCE, the Sumerians actually created a different clay token called Calculi
to represent quantities of different items, and different shapes actually represented
different and various things. For example, various grain measures, a unit of labor, a
sheep, a unit of oil, a garment, a unit of honey, and so forth. And so these images,
these tokens were actually used to depict these objects and thus allowed for the ease
of transactions or the ease of keeping records. Now the word Calculi means pebbles, and from
this root we actually get the words Calculate, Calculus, and Calculator. Now if you think
about it for a second, it's absolutely fantastic that these fundamental words that we use for
computation, Calculate, Calculus, Calculator, all come from Calculi, meaning pebble, which
was the very first attempt to try to quantify, humankind's first effort to actually articulate
a quantity through this one-to-one pairing and these different shaped tokens. Now to
record a quantity of goods, such as measures of grain in a storehouse, the Sumerians as
early as 3,200 BCE would do something quite spectacular. So here's what they would do.
You see, if we just take these tokens or these clay pieces, then what we'd see is, okay suppose
that we're going to make a transaction right now. Okay, so we agree upon a certain amount
of barley that I'm going to purchase from you, and so we do this with these tokens.
So what would happen now? Well what would happen is that I would have these tokens to
represent the amount that we agreed upon. Well if I kept the tokens, if I kept these pebbles,
these Calculi, then I might, when you're not looking, add some more and thus say, well
you owe me this much barley, this was the deal we made, and this is not so good. And
