watchtower of his estate. So this crow made a nest at the watchtower, and every time the
squire would approach in order to shoot the crow, the crow would fly away and go to a
distant tree, and then stay there and watch until the crow saw the squire leave, in which
case then the crow would return back. And so finally the squire had the brilliant idea
of bringing a friend along. So two people went into the tower, and of course the crow
flew away, and then he sent his friend out so the crow would see the one person leaving.
But the crow realized that two went in and one went out, it wasn't the same, and so the
crow waited until finally the squire gave up, and the squire left, and the crow returned
to its nest. Well, then the squire brought two friends, so three of them went in and
the crow flew away, two of them came out, and the crow still was able to tell that wasn't
the right number. Well, four came in, so him and three of his friends came in, three of
them left, the crow watched, but the crow was still able to detect the difference between
three and four. Well, finally the squire brought four of his friends, so all five went in,
the crow flew away, four came out, but now the crow wasn't unable to detect the difference
between the four and the five, it seemed as though maybe five had left, and he sadly returned
to his perch and his nest, and let me just say that was the end of the crow. So sadly
the crow exhibited our limit of four as well. Well, do animals have a notion of number as
an abstract object? I mean, can horses really perform addition by tapping their hooves,
as we see in circuses and in side shows? Well, evidence suggests that the answers are really
no. And a famous example from the 19th century is Clever Hans, a horse whose trainer taught
him to count and to add. Instead of actually performing addition by counting with its hooves
up and down, experts now believe that the horse was actually responding to subtle and
subliminal responses, most likely unintentional visual clues from his over-enthusiastic trainer.
And so that was what the horse was responding to rather than this innate sense of arithmetic.
Well, let's now move from animals to children. Interestingly, a child's development of the
concept of number appears to mirror humankind's historical development of number, which is
really quite fascinating, really. It's a microcosm of the entire scope of the entire history.
Ordination comes first. That is, the ability to see that one collection of objects is larger than
another. In other words, we first learn to order objects according to their size before
