calculation so in this direction we haven't made an awful lot of progress. Now they did
have a symbol for zero but used it solely as a place holder and did not view it as a
number. Well now in all these and the other number systems it's important to note that
the utility dictates the level of complexity and the naming conventions of numbers. Primitive
cultures may function very well with words only for one, two and many. They don't have
billion dollar gross national products to actually record. In their world they only
need to be able to count up to say two. In fact according to the 19th century anthropologist
the Boracundos from Brazil would count up to four and then express many by pointing to
their hair and the implication here what they were saying was beyond four things were as
countless as the hairs on my head. Again we see this limit of four as a recurring theme.
Moving from hairs on our body to looking at our entire bodies we consider how the body
has influenced the development of the language of number. For the lingua people of Paraguay
words for numbers reflected body counting. The word for ten literally means finished
both hands which is a great image we've counted through both hands. I love this one the word
for fifteen means finished foot so we've got the two hands and one finished foot which
gives us fifteen. In Indonesia lima means five even though it literally means hand and
so you could see the reflections of our body within the notion of number. In some languages
the word for whole person is the same thing as twenty. Now as we move toward language
the language of numbers used today we discovered that there are many echoes of early references.
The Spanish word trace for three and the French word tray for very much derived from
the Latin word tress which means among other things beyond the ideas you have one two and
then beyond that's where we see very much or three. The word three in English is derived
from the Anglo-Saxon three which is related to the word throp which means a pile or a
heaping and we'll see more about these piles in the context of numbers a little bit later.
In the days of Romulus around 750 BCE the Roman calendar had ten months starting with
March and the last five months of the year the months five through ten were named in
order to describe their distinction in the position of the year. So they were called
Quintillus five, sextillus six and then maybe some that you've heard of September for seven,
October for eight, November for the ninth and December for the tenth. It's amazing
that September, October, November, December have within them the reflections of numbers
at least as they were positioned in the calendar year back then. Now January and February were
