on sand tables and this is really the earliest form of the abacus and so pebbles were used
inside the sand in various columns to mark the ones and the tens and so forth and moved
the pebbles back and forth to depict the addition or the subtraction. Perhaps this
is the inspiration for our place based decimal system. By the way it's another possible origin
for the zero symbol because when we take out a pebble it leaves an indentation around dimple
if you will in the sand and that of course means we have nothing there and perhaps that's
where we get zero. Well the sand table led to the abacus. The classic Chinese abacus
came to use in China during the 14th century CE. However long before that time the Chinese
as well as Egyptians, Romans, Greeks and Indians used simpler calculating boards similar to
the sand tables as early as 450 BCE. Now the use of these abacus varied from culture to
culture. In fact the 5th century BCE Greek historian Herodotus is credited with the
observation that the Egyptians move their hands from right to left in calculations while
the Greeks move from left to right. Well the abacus allows a very fast way of calculating
things and we still use it today. Well I want to close this lecture with the evolution of
the symbols that we use for numbers today. Our modern 10 Hindu Arabic numerals the symbols
0 through 9 arose from a mysterious mixing of traditions from two cultures. The origins
of the numerals themselves can be traced back to India and evolved from 400 BCE to 400 CE
and they grew out of the Brahmi numerals. These symbols were introduced to European nations
through the writing of Arab and Persian mathematicians and scientists. Today we refer to these symbols
digits as the Hindu Arabic numerals. And where do these origins come from? Well one we understand
this one. Two if you look back to the Chinese for example we see those two lines. If you
connect those two lines very quickly you get a two and the three hash marks if you connect
them you actually get a three. But historians actually disagree on the origins of the remaining
numerals so those still remain in mystery those actual symbols. Now writing these numerals
actually became a form of art as we see in the work of a variety of artists. The 10 Hindu
Arabic numerals actually formed the heart of our current decimal system and that system
is one that finally allows humankind with an efficient means of performing calculations.
Now we'll describe this powerful decimal system an example of what is referred to as a place
based or positional system in our next lecture. But for now let's just enjoy the evolution
of the abstract idea of number.
