But historians aren't really sure why they actually used 60 although this is a property
about the number 60.
Well in cuneiform we see two different symbols, the so-called nail which represented the number
one and the dovetail which represented the number ten.
So you can see that the circle was replaced by the more interesting and artistic looking
dovetail which stood for ten.
Well their number system was both additive like the Roman numerals, we'd add up the symbols
we see, but also positional like the decimal system that we use today and I wanted to illustrate
both of these qualities for you with a couple of just quick examples.
So in this example here we see two dovetails and three nails.
So we add like we would with Roman numerals and so we'd see two dovetails, that means
ten and ten is twenty, three nails would be another three, so we add and we get twenty-three
just as we would with Roman numerals.
In this example here it's a very large number, we see one, two, three, four, five, five dovetails
that's then fifty, we add them all up and we see nine nails, so that's nine, so that's
fifty, fifty-nine.
But also there was a positional quality in cuneiform which is very similar to the way
we write numbers now, we've got a unit spot and then a ten spot and then a hundred spot
and so forth.
So in this case we have to remember that they were units using a base of sixty which means
that when we moved over to a spot it wasn't the tens spot but it was actually the sixties
spot, a little confusing.
But let's take a look at this example.
Here I see two nails in the sixties spot, so I have two sixties which would be 120 and
then I have one nail in the unit spot and so this number represents 121.
Now with this number written in cuneiform we see that we have ten dovetail in the sixties
spot and so that would be 600 and then in the unit spot I see a ten and a one which
is an eleven, so this represents the number 611.
Now you'll notice it's really important that we have the appropriate spacing, spacing here
is crucial and in fact there's actually some ambiguity since there was no symbol for zero,
zero wasn't even a number yet.
