of iron. They were unable to leave an heir in the form of children who would pronounce
their name but they made for themselves an heir of the writing and instruction they made.
I mean the truth is writing is our true link to our past and indeed a great monument perhaps
even more significant than the pyramids. I mean really I'm an educator so I'm biased
toward this but education really endures. Now we'll actually see the impact and the
influence of the rind papyrus and its scribe Ames and what they had on the world of numbers
throughout the entire course so we will continually return to Ames and the rind papyrus. If we
now move to ancient China we discover that the Chinese appeared to have had a number
system involving powers of ten since as early as 1400 BCE. Now with symbols for one through
ten in addition to having symbols for a hundred and a thousand. Now unlike the clay or papyrus
that we've seen in the very dry Middle East much less survived the humid Chinese climate
making their historical record of number development and their use much much sketchier.
However there is one thing that we have evidence of and that is that the ancient Chinese used
the words for large numbers in a poetic manner in order to create new words they would make
compound words using the words for large numbers and I wanted to give you some examples of
these which I think are really quite beautiful. For example they would take the number one
hundred and then put it together with thing so one hundred thing meant everything. You
see how the large number was actually depicting this everything all things. One hundred times
think that meant prime minister right someone of a great wisdom. One hundred worker meant
working class. One thousand direction meant versatile which I think is maybe my favorite
thing it really captures the image you know one thousand direction really is versatile
you're all over and a hundred thousand month meant antiquity. So again a very very poetic
way of using the words of numbers to capture what we mean. Now if we move to Central America
we find that the Mayans had a numerical system by the third century CE. Now their system
involved a powers of twenty and use symbols involving dots and lines. Now dots and dashes
still remain with us today if you consider the symbol that we use for noting the division.
If you take a look at these symbols what you actually notice here is certainly this limit
of four because we get to four and then the fifth thing you see the symbol actually changes
we go from the dots and the lines begin to come together and again we see reflections
of the barred gate method of counting that we actually use today. Now their system was
certainly more compact than some of the others we've seen but it still was cumbersome for
