Here might be the moment when numbers were first viewed as nouns rather than adjectives.
Even fairly recently, different words were used for the same number of different objects.
There's a wonderful quote by the 20th century British philosopher and logician Bertrand Russell.
It must have required many ages to discover that a brace of pheasants and a couple of
days were in both instances the number two, again moving from these actual counting of
things to an actual noun rather than an attribute.
These pictographs created by a reed-stem stylist in clay were developed by the Sumerians and
Babylonians collectively known as Mesopotamians and I want to show you how this actually worked.
So for example, here we'd see a clay tablet and they would use a reed stylist similar
to this and they would just make an impression in the clay.
So for example, they would just do this or this or this and these circular impressions
you could see, well these actually represented the units 10, so each of these were 10.
And then they noticed something really interesting that if they took the stylist and instead of
imprinting straight in to get a circular image, they were to put it at an angle, a little bit
of a skew, then in fact they would see an image that looked like this or this or this
and these these a skew images actually stood for the number one.
So in fact this right here would represent well 10, 20, 30, 31, 32, 33.
This would represent 33, perhaps 33 units of oil for example.
So this is how the symbols used and you can see that with one instrument they were able
to produce two different styles of writing and they each took on a value.
Well soon what they did was they actually sharpened the reed stylist and it gave way
to a pointed stylist and therefore we were able to create more delicate shapes and in
fact these number symbols evolved into what is called cuneiform and may have been the
first instance of writing in human history all coming from our desire to articulate and
express numbers.
If we journey to Babylonia then we find that the Babylonians developed a system that used
symbols for powers of 60, so one, then 60, then 3600 and so forth.
So what's so special about 60, why were they using 60?
Well it happens to be the smallest number that can be divided evenly by two, you can
cut it in half by three, by four, by five and by six.
So it's a very convenient number if you're going to chop it up into equal pieces.
