added later and Quintillus and sextillus were renamed Julius and Augustus in honor of the
two famous or infamous Caesars. So numbers arose out of utility however once the notion
of number came alive in our imagination it took on a life of its own and this gave birth
to number theory and that birth took place in India. By the sixth century BCE members
of a religious community in India called the Jains or the Janna were exploring mathematics
with a new and sophisticated perspective. The Jains classified numbers into different
categories and including at least four different types of infinity. Well we'll delve into
infinity at the beginning of lecture 20 toward the end of the course. Now many argue that
in some sense the Jains were the first number theorists that is the first group of individuals
to study number as an independent abstract object of interest. Now the Jains were really
a religious sect and thus they viewed number and mathematics more as a means toward their
religious studies than an end which is really a shame for the math community because with
their insights their contributions could have been even more dramatic than they actually
were. Now during the same period there was an interesting character trying to find his
way in life as well as find his way in numbers. This character was the influential Pythagoras
who was born in Samos off the Turkish coast in 569 BCE and traveled extensively including
to Egypt and to Mesopotamia before finally settling in the south of what we now know
as Italy so quite beautiful part of the world. Now Pythagoras led the ancient Greek movement
in the study of the abstract notion of number. In fact some believe that Pythagoras as well
as Plato might have been inspired by the work of the Jains and so again we can see cultures
coming together within the context of number. The Pythagoreans were among the first to consider
numbers as abstract objects rather than as tools and to prove theorems involving numbers.
Now we'll study the Pythagorean Brotherhood and their seminal work in greater detail in
lectures five and eight. Now this period truly represents the birth of the life of numbers.
Up to this point number meant by the way the natural numbers that is the collection of
numbers one, two, three, four and so forth. So when did the negative numbers enter the
scene? Again the development came at different moments in history in different cultures.
In the first century BCE the Chinese solved systems of equations simultaneously using
negative numbers. There's evidence of calculation with negative numbers in India between 200
BCE and 200 CE. In the third century CE the great Greek mathematician Delfantis described
an equation equivalent to an expression and the answer turned out to be negative five
