and so he called this equation absurd because the answer was a negative number which to
him made no sense. Now this equation I can actually say in modern language it would
look like 4x plus 20 equals zero. So here's the first equation we see but don't worry
about it. The point is there's an unknown value for x and we have to figure out what
value of x would make that equation be true. Well the way we could actually solve this
is to subtract 20 from both sides and so that would then give us 4x equals negative
20 and then we could simply just divide both sides by four to undo the multiplication by
four in the x and I see that x equals negative five and therefore since this wasn't a number
in the mind of Delfantis he called this absurd. In the seventh century India negative numbers
were used to represent debt so you can really see that this was a sophisticated point of
view. In fact the great astronomer Brahma Gupta was the first to offer a systematic
treatment of negative numbers during this period. Well while negative numbers have been
around for over 2,000 years as late as the 18th century some important mathematicians
discarded negative solutions to equations because they viewed them as unrealistic. Today we
define the collection of integers that's the word we're going to use to describe the
collection of all the natural numbers together with their negatives and with zero. So the
integers consist of zero, one, two, three, four and so on together with negative one,
negative two, negative three and so on. That's the collection we're going to call the integers.
It's interesting to consider that just 200 years ago or so mathematicians dismissed negative
numbers as unrealistic. Today we consider these numbers of course very real and almost take
them for granted. Here again we see the challenge of expanding humankind's notion of number,
a recurring theme throughout our course. Given that we mentioned solving equations I thought
it would be fun to take a minute to enjoy some moments in ancient arithmetic from a
variety of different cultures. So from Sumerians let's consider some early division. One of
the oldest recorded division calculations dates from 2650 BCE in Sumeria and here was
the challenge. You have a granary with a given amount of barley that is to be distributed
so that each man gets seven sila of barley which was a unit of measurement. The question
was how to determine how many men there were. And in fact it's interesting because historians
actually conjecture that this division calculation was performed using the calculate, the tokens
that we mentioned in the previous lecture. Well let's now look at the early Egyptians
and we'll consider multiplication. They had a brilliant way of multiplying numbers and
