And so we have an ambiguity here, let me show you what I mean with an example.
If we take a look at this, what do we see?
We see two nails that are spread apart.
Well are they spread apart so that in fact that first nail is in the sixties spot, in
which case the number would be 60 plus one or 61, or is that nail actually further over
and in fact in the 3600s spot in which case this number would be 3600 one.
So you could see that there is definite ambiguity here without the utility of R0.
Now while this positional system was developed and put into effect by the second millennium
BCE it wasn't until about 300 BCE that they actually had a symbol for zero but it was
just as a placeholder.
In fact it was not considered a number and we'll talk more about the positional systems
and the importance of zero in the next lecture so we'll hold that off for now.
If we now move to ancient Egypt we see that the Egyptians also employed pictographs for
numbers as early as 3500 BCE but with the invention of papyrus which is an early form
of paper made from the papyrus plant the Egyptians were able to record more complex
bookkeeping and calculations. The famous rind papyrus from around 1650 BCE contains many
calculations and includes hieroglyphics for addition and subtraction.
Now this important document is our principal source of information about Egyptians' understanding
of numbers this is really a significant document.
The author is conjectured to be Imhopetep an architect and builder of the Sakara Pyramid.
Now the scribe of the rind papyrus the person who actually put pen to papyrus and wrote
it down was named Ames. Now the work actually opens in a very dramatic style which gives
you an indication of the import and of the magnitude of such a document so in fact the
rind papyrus opens with the following. Accurate reckoning the entrance into the knowledge
of all existing things and obscure secrets it is the scribe Ames who copies this writing
so very dramatic very important and he actually includes his name in this document which just
shows you that he was really very proud of this work. Now in fact scribes of the time
were also considered teachers they were the equivalent of teachers in fact back then and
there's a wonderful ancient quote about scribes as teachers that I wanted to share with you
now.
As for the learned scribes they did not make for themselves pyramids of copper with tombstones
