In the previous lecture, we discovered that our number sense began with the idea of a
one-to-one correspondence.
Here in this lecture, we'll examine the words and symbols that early cultures employed
to represent numbers as abstract quantities.
Early advanced societies, including the Sumerians, the Egyptians, Mayans, and Chinese, developed
sophisticated numerical systems.
The Babylonians used counting tokens that led to one of the earliest forms of writing,
cuneiform.
While each of these different systems offered a means of keeping records, very few provided
an efficient means of calculation.
The desire to calculate led to the development of arithmetic aids, such as counting boards,
the precursors to the abacus.
Here we'll consider how these important arithmetical tools may have laid the groundwork for a place-based
number system that we use today.
Now where did our Arabic numerals, the ten symbols, zero, one, two, three, all the way
out to nine, where did those numerals come from?
The surprising answer is India.
But what about cultures whose primitive number language remained primitive?
Here we'll see connections between our modern world and societies whose number language
never progressed beyond one, two, many.
But even early societies are fully employed numbers to create sophisticated calendars,
keep track of agricultural production and record commercial transactions, but they still
struggled with a complex arithmetic idea, especially calculations that involved fractions.
The age-old struggle to perform complex arithmetic ran parallel with the age-old struggle to
devise an appropriate means to represent numbers.
Well, let's begin our study of early number systems in Mesopotamia.
We recall from the previous lecture the pebble jar used by the Sumerians as a means of counting
was one where tokens were used to later stamp markings on the jar itself.
Then the tokens were replaced by the stamped images in the soft clay.
Like 3500 BCE, the round jars evolved into flat tablets and with symbols embedded in
these tablets known as pictographs.
