In this lecture, we'll celebrate the dramatic impact the digits had on our understanding
of number.
Have you ever tried to multiply using Roman numerals?
How would you write the number 10,030 without using zero?
A compact place-based or positional number system with a symbol for zero opens the floodgates
for arithmetic calculations and the discovery of new numbers.
With only 10 symbols, we have the machinery to describe new numbers that grow beyond our
imagination.
Here we'll explore the origins of zero and the development of our modern decimal system.
With a powerful positional number system in place, humankind was finally equipped with
the tools necessary to begin the development of modern mathematics.
Along with the commonly used decimal system, we'll consider the binary number system,
a system that has roots in ancient China and India.
Binary numbers are the basis for modern computers.
Who would have imagined that the basic structure utilized by today's computers is the basis
for the same structure used in the ancient Yi Cheng?
We close our discussion by contemplating other base systems, including the base 60 system
employed by the Babylonians and the base 3 system known as the ternary number system.
Well, I want to begin with the downside of the ancient additive systems.
Well, most of the systems that we've studied in the previous lecture required the repetition
of symbols.
For example, the Roman numerals XXIII equals 23, and we'd add up the two X's, 10 each,
and then the three I's, and get 23.
In fact, also recall the dovetails and nails that the Babylonians used, we'd add them
up.
Now, although computation with the additive systems was fast using tools such as the abacus,
those systems required a very long list of symbols to denote larger and larger numbers,
and this was a problem in practice.
Additive systems made it difficult to look at more arithmetically complicated questions,
and thus slowed the progress of the study of numbers.
In order to move to what we call a positional system, we need a new number, and this inspires
a philosophical question.
