that that leftmost nail, now remember the Babylonians used this peculiar base 60 system.
So instead of being in the 10 spot like we would think today, that's actually located
in the 60s spot.
So that one nail is 60 and then the other nail produces the one and so we see 61.
That is now different from this number where we actually see the symbol and icon for zero
in between which means that we have no 60s but we have that nail located in the 3,600
spot.
So we see 3,601 nail or 3,601 and so you can see the power of this symbol to represent
a place holder.
Now the Mayans also had a symbol for zero that they also used only as a place holder
and here you see this eye shaped symbol.
Now the evolution of the symbol for zero is actually very difficult to chart.
As we remarked in the previous lecture, the modern symbol zero may have arisen from the
use of those sand tables for calculations.
Remember that we had this sand table that were used to calculate things where pebbles
would be placed in and moved back and forth for addition or subtraction and what we'd
see is when a pebble would be removed, we would have an indentation or a dimple in
the sand which reflects a zero that we used to see, that we see today.
In fact calculations performed on the sand tables may have actually led to the development
of the placed based number systems that we're about to describe and consider.
Remember in the second century CE, Ptolemy used the Greek letter omicron which looks
like an O in fact to denote nothing.
Now so this is the symbol for zero, the O that we see the circle but I want to make
it very clear that Ptolemy did not view this as a number but merely as the idea of nothing
but you can see again these things are coming together, they're slowly moving together.
Well zero as a number really occurred in India most likely and by the 7th century the
Indian astronomer Brahmagupta who as we saw in the previous lecture offered a treatment
of negative numbers actually understood zero as a number not just as a placeholder.
In fact he actually studied zero divided by zero and one divided by zero and actually
decided erroneously that zero divided by zero equals zero but he actually just didn't
know what to conclude about one divided by zero.
Well here again we see a couple things, first of all we know today that we can't divide
