So the question is, how many items do you see are in this box?
Well, is your answer a number?
This is the question, right?
This is the question about zero.
Now in the Rhined Papyrus from 1650 BCE, the scribe Ames referred to numbers as heaps.
This tradition actually continued through the Pythagoreans, who in the 6th century BCE
viewed numbers as a combination or heaping of units.
Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans will be highlighted in the next lecture, and their view of number
will be explored further in lecture 8.
Here even Aristotle defined number as an accumulation or heap.
Again we see the word heap.
Also recall from the last lecture, the word three, derived from the Anglo-Saxon word a
throp, again meaning pile or heap.
Well, okay, so because we can't have a heap of zero objects, right?
Zero objects, there would be no heaping at all, zero was not viewed as a number.
So this notion of having zero be a quantity didn't make any sense at all because we were
thinking in terms of heaps.
Okay, well the lack of zero caused many challenges.
Now as we saw in the previous lecture, a careless Sumerian scribe could cause ambiguities since
in cuneiform different spacing between symbols can actually represent different numbers.
The Egyptian system, on the other hand, did not require a place holder like zero, but
their additive notation was cumbersome.
Again, they had all the symbols together and we had to add them all up.
As a result, in the 2,000 years of the Egyptian numeral system, they made very little progress
in arithmetic or more generally in mathematics.
Meaning to see how the notation really drives our understanding and our intuition and our
further quest to consider number.
Well, zero first appeared as an empty place holder rather than a number.
As we noted in the previous lecture, the Babylonians had a symbol for zero by 300 BCE.
And it was a place holder rather than a number because, again, they were thinking heapings
but they needed to distinguish between numbers.
For example, if we just see these two nails spaced apart like this, then we would understand
