by zero, if we divide by zero in fact it does not yield a number so we leave the realm of
numbers so we can't do that, no dividing by zero, we've learned that in school but we
also see a wonderful thing, here Brahmagupta this very important great mind always making
a mistake again something that is to be celebrated rather than to feel embarrassed about he didn't
get it quite right that's okay his contributions were enormous.
So finally we see that humankind expanded its view of number to actually include and
embrace zero.
Well given the relatively late inclusion of zero in our world of numbers a more chronologically
accurate name for this course would actually be one, two, many, zero to infinity.
I mean that is really how the notions developed together.
Now let me say a few words about this nothing number in terms of language.
In the from the sixth to the eighth century Sanskrit we actually see sunya which meant
empty to represent zero as we think of it by the ninth century in Arabic we have cipher
by the 13th century Latin we have Zephyrium 14th century Italian we have Zephyro and
by 15th century English we have zero and so we can see the evolution of just that word.
Now because of zero's power in computation some viewed it as mysterious and nearly magical
and as a result the word zero has the same origins as another word that means a hidden
or mysterious code and that word of course is cipher and so we can see that cipher actually
came from the mysterious qualities that that zero possessed to our ancestors.
Now so with zero firmly planted in our hearts and minds as an actual number we're ready
for at long last the positional number systems and let's start with the familiar base ten
a numeral systems that we use in our everyday lives.
Now as we previously mentioned in the other lecture the base ten or decimal system uses
the ten Hindu Arabic numerals zero one two three four five six seven eight and nine and
these are called digits.
Now the word digit actually comes from the Latin digitus which means finger again quite
a nice image because remember this is early counting with our fingers coincidentally Baskara
the first the great seventh century Indian mathematician is credited as the first person
to write these numerals including a circle for zero so wonderful contribution there.
Now the position of a digit in our system indicates by which power of ten that digit
is to be multiplied by so either one the unit spot or the ten spot or the hundred spot or
the thousand spot and as we move further and further to the left that we multiply by bigger
