Welcome to the magical and spiritual allure of number. Numbers were not only important
tools in early civilizations, but they were also a source of mystery, entertainment and
even spirituality. Once humankind named numbers, there grew a curiosity to study them in their
own right. How did numbers capture the imagination of our ancestors? Perhaps even the most primitive
thinkers recognized that numbers hold the key to enormous power. Numbers were used to name the gods
in Mesopotamia. In ancient Greece, the Pythagoreans, perhaps inspired by the religious sect the
Jains from India, were the first to view numbers as abstract objects and elemental in all matter
and living things. They also discovered that the most fundamental harmonies in music arose from
ratios of natural numbers. Numbers that were connected with triangles and squares were thought to
have special powers. In this lecture, we'll look at some of the ideas of the Pythagoreans
and other practitioners of number mysticism. So-called perfect numbers and amicable numbers
are notions that originated in ancient Greece and continue to capture the imagination of individuals
around the world today. Games involving numbers date back as early as 2000 BCE. One of the most
popular and persistent number challenges is the so-called magic square. Over 3,000 years old,
magic squares have been used to ward off the plague, appease the gods, and entertain the curious.
Here we'll explore some of the fascinating appearances of magic squares throughout history,
including in the work of Benjamin Franklin. While entertaining and thought-provoking,
number recreation draws humanity into explore many more serious and subtle properties of number.
Well, let's begin our journey into number mysticism with a look at some rituals and beliefs
involving numbers. The Babylonians associated a sacred number to each of their gods. 60 was the
number associated with Anu, their all-important god of heaven. Now, now recall that the Babylonians
had used a base 60 number system, and so 60 was their most important number, and perhaps that's
why they associated it with their most important god. 30 was the number associated with Sin,
the lunar god, because the Babylonian month was 30 days long. Now, as we saw earlier, many modern
religions specify the number of prayers to be recited, and hence the use of the rosary beads
that we saw in a previous lecture. In Islam, the number five is a good omen. There are five
elements of the Muslim profession of faith, five daily prayers, five keys to the mystery
in the Quran, five senses, and many more, perhaps five more. The number four is avoided in Japan
because the word for four, she, sounds very similar to the Japanese word for death.
Of course, many cultures today, there's a well-known superstition about the number 13. Many people
dread Friday the 13th. Many people, in fact, don't like staying in hotels that have a 13th floor.
