decimal expansion, you'd see 1.618033 and so on. It continues forever. Well Pythagoras' wife,
Theano, was a mathematician whose best work is said to have been in the golden ratio, although
none of her writings have been uncovered, and maybe because she didn't write since this was
more of an oral tradition. But we have no evidence of it, but this is the conjecture.
The Pythagoreans studied special numbers that had certain geometric or arithmetic aesthetic appeal.
One such collection is the figurant numbers. Now figurant numbers are those that can be
visualized in particular geometric ways, including triangles, squares, pentagons, and pyramids.
For example, triangular numbers are numbers for which if you took that many dots, you could form
perfect equilateral triangles. For example, the smallest triangular number would be three,
because three points, of course, can produce a perfect equilateral triangle. And then the next
triangular number would be six, because we take these three and then add three more numbers here
to get a larger equilateral triangle, and you can build larger and larger such numbers.
The perfect squares, the square numbers, four is the smallest one because four points will
generate a square. And then the next one would be nine, which would be one, two, three, one,
two, three, one, two, three, forming a three by three square. So the next square number is nine
and so forth. And those are the perfect squares that we actually are familiar with. And then the
pentagonal numbers would be five at first, because five points will form a perfect pentagon.
And then the next pentagonal number is 12, as you can see, because you put them together to
make a larger pentagon. Okay, well, a perfect number is a number that's actually equal to the
sum of its proper divisors. Now, remember, a proper divisor is a number that divides evenly
into a number, and proper means that it's not the number itself. So a proper divisor is a number
that's smaller than a given number that divides into it evenly. Let's take a look at an example
to really solidify this idea in our minds. Let's consider six. Well, six is actually considered
a perfect number, because let's first of all find all the divisors or all the numbers that divide
in evenly into six. Well, there's one, one divides into evenly into everything, two, because six is
even, and then three, because three divides evenly into six. So the only divisors of six are one,
two, and three. And notice something really amazing. What if you add up those numbers?
One plus two plus three equals six. And that makes it a perfect number. Let's take a look at
another example. Let's take a look at 28. I claim that 28 is another example of a perfect number.
Well, let's find all the numbers that divide evenly into 28. We always have one, then there's two,
four divides evenly into it, as does seven and 14. So we have a bunch. But what happens if we just
