In fact, some hotels don't even have a 13th floor, and in fact, Scottish airports have no gate 13.
Instead, what they have are gates 12B, so there you have it. We now turn our attention
to the famous cult of Pythagoras. In the 6th century BCE, Pythagoras, perhaps as we noted in
lecture three, inspired by the religious sect known as the Jains in India, ushered in the dawn
of a new era in how people viewed and studied numbers and mathematics in general. The Pythagoreans
elevated the study of numbers to the highest intellectual level. Now, they actually had a
distinction between what they called arithmetic, which was the study of numbers, the abstract
study of numbers that we're partaking in right now. They separated that from what they called
logistic, which to them was the practice of using numbers for calculation. They really focused on
the more abstract notion of arithmetic and left the calculation issues aside.
In their studies overall, they actually focused on four disciplines, arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music. Let me just say a word about geometry in this context. Here,
the ancient Greek sense of geometry also included the measurement of lines and computing the areas
of objects. Embedded within geometry, in fact, it was number theory. Number theory was part
of geometry. When we say geometry, in the Greek sense, that was also number theory. We see arithmetic
geometry, astronomy, music, two of those actually contained number theory. Those four subjects
formed what was known and continues to be known as the quadrivium. Later on, this evolved into
what we think of as the liberal arts. Here we see that, in fact, the foundation of the liberal arts,
really half of the foundation sits on number theory. We see how central it is in our understanding
of things. Now, they studied numbers as abstract objects, the Pythagoreans, exploring their intrinsic
properties. Now, why do they put so much energy in understanding the abstract notion of number?
This is an important question for us to think about. Well, one of the Pythagoreans' core beliefs
was that the divine ideas which created and maintained the universe are those of number. Thus,
the way to obtain perfection and become closer to the gods was to study arithmetic. In fact,
Pythagoras himself is said to have said, number is the first principle, a thing which is undefined,
incomprehensible, and having in itself all numbers. Here we can see really how Pythagoras viewed
number in the same incomprehensible and undefined light that he actually might have viewed the gods.
So we see this connection. Now, to place their number contemplation in context, I'd like to say
a few words about the group known as the Pythagoreans. Now, Pythagoras himself founded a community of
scholars that he called the Brotherhood. Now, in fact, the Brotherhood was not a collection of men,
but really a community of families. And in fact, some scholars conjecture it was the inspiration
