cable TV. So who knows? Okay, well, much more interesting are the grids of numbers known as
magic squares. Magic squares have been a source of fascination, entertainment and superstition
for over 3,000 years. A Chinese book, Lo Xu, the book of the River Lo from 10 from 1000 BCE,
tells the story of a turtle emerging from the river with a pattern of dots carved into its back.
And as the legend goes, the 21st century BCE emperor, Yu, found a divine tortoise while he was
bathing. The markings on the tortoise's shell formed a three by three grid of numbers in the form
of dots, of course, since we had no numbers at the time. And that was considered to be a message
from the heavens, instructing the emperor how to govern. So I don't think this method is used
anymore. But back then, this is how heaven would relate to the emperor. Well, if we write the grid
of numbers down from the turtle's back. Now notice, in fact, if you look at it, for example,
in the upper left corner, you see four dots in the form of square, that's number four,
right next to it, to the right of it, you see a long line of dots. If you count them, there's nine.
And next to it, you see two dots. That's two and so forth. The middle one, for example, has a little
cross type thing, which with five dots, since that's the number five. So we see the numbers four,
nine, two, three, five, seven, eight, one, six. Well, by the fifth century BCE, it was noticed
that the nine numbers in the grid exhibited some amazing arithmetic properties. First, each number,
each digit from one to nine appears in the grid and appears exactly once. Take a look and see
for yourself. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. They're all there and they all
appear once. And secondly, and perhaps more profoundly, the sum of any row or column or
one of any of the two diagonals, if you add up those sums, it always equals the same value
15. In fact, check it out. If you look at the first column, you see four plus three plus eight,
and you see 15. And that holds for all the columns, all the rows, and the two diagonals.
Now, when they discovered this, this amazing, incredible structure, it was viewed with magical,
mathematical, and spiritual interest. And today, as a result, we call these grids magic squares.
More generally, any time we take a natural number n and consider the square, an n by n square grid,
it's called a magic square. If we can arrange the numbers from one out to n squared in such a way,
so that each column in each row contains exactly n numbers, and if you sum any row, any column,
or the two diagonals, the answer you get is always the same. You get the same sum.
In fact, the great German artist, Albrecht Dürer, included a four by four magic square in his
engraving, Melancholia. And it's what's really neat about this particular magic square is that,
first of all, the sum of each row, column, and diagonal turns out to equal 34. So that was the
