Well, when you add up those numbers, you get the first number, 220. So you can see that 220 is
sort of linked up with 284, but it has to work the other way as well. So let's consider the
proper divisors of 220. Well, they turn out to be, there's a lot of them, by the way. There's one,
there's two, there's four, five, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55, and 110. All those numbers divide
unevenly into 220. What happens when you add all those up? You get the second number, 284. So you
can really see these two numbers come together, and that's why they're called amicable. They're
very friendly to each other. Now, again, there are many open questions about amicable numbers.
Are there infinitely many pairs of amicable numbers? To this day, we don't know. We only
know finitely many examples. And are there any odd, even pairs of amicable numbers? That is,
are there any pairs where one is an odd number and one's an even number, and yet they're amicable?
No one knows if that's possible or impossible, and no one has an example. Well, questions involving
perfect and amicable numbers remain some of the oldest unanswered questions in all of mathematics.
So we're really seeing things that still capture the imagination, even though they come from
antiquity. Well, let's leave these open questions of the cult of Pythagoras for the moment,
although we'll return to the Pythagoreans and their view of number in lecture eight. But now
let's enjoy some recreation with numbers and just have some fun. Now, to generate a random number
for games and things, we have been known to toss dice. In fact, this is a really ancient tradition.
Dice made of fired clay dating from 3000 BCE have actually been found in northern Iraq.
And at the time, of course, the ancient players didn't have symbols for numbers. The dice were
actually before the numbers. And this is perhaps why they marked the sides of their dice with dots
to denote the quantities. And amazingly, we use the same configuration for our modern dice today.
5,000 years later, what we see, in fact, are the same exact configurations that they used so many
millennia ago. Absolutely amazing. That's where this comes from. So the reason why we have dice,
dots on dice is because we didn't have numbers. The dice came first. Well, some number games only
require the digits on our hand. Here's an ancient one that the Egyptians played with their fingers.
It was called Mora. And it was played as early as 2000 BCE. So you have two players. I'll be both
players, but they each at the same time would extend one hand and some number of fingers.
And simultaneously, each player would yell at a number. And if that number matched with the
number of fingers that was shown when you add them up of the two players, then that person gets a
point. For example, if the person would say six, then they would lose. But if the person would have
said three, they would have gotten a point. Not a very exciting game. But remember, this was before
