for Plato's Republic. Again, we see evidence where the emphasis on number really generated
something extremely significant, such as Plato's Republic, which seems to be outside the realm
of mathematics. Again, number has influenced so much of our history and our culture. Women
were included in this Brotherhood as scholars, which was very unusual and extremely progressive
for the time. In fact, after Pythagoras' death, his wife, Theano, and his daughters,
led the Brotherhood. So we see this evidence of women being equals in this endeavor.
Now, the Brotherhood believed that the numbers, now remember from the Pythagorean point of view,
numbers were the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so on. Well, they believed that these
numbers were basic to all qualities of matter and living things. Now, they kept their studies secret,
passing down beliefs and results in the oral tradition. Now, in fact, let me just say a word
about how the studies would take place. When a new member of the Brotherhood would enter,
they would take a vow of silence, and so they would sit quietly and listen to the more senior
scholars speak and pontificate, and then after some unit of time, the junior members would then
be allowed to speak. This might sound strange, but really, it mirrors a traditional education
as we know it, if you think about it for a moment, because traditionally, students come into a
classroom and they say nothing, they're very quiet, and the instructor pontificates on the subject,
and then once the students graduate, they're allowed to speak, I guess. But you can see a
reflection of that, I think that's what was going on during this period. Well, since they really
adopted an oral tradition, our knowledge of Pythagoras' work is based on the writings of
scholars in later generations, including Euclid and Aristotle. Now, in many ways, they were a
peculiar group. The community had many strict and unusual rules, including, for example,
a prohibition on eating beans, that was not allowed. You couldn't go hunting, and you were not
allowed to wear wool. Now, they dressed in white, and they slept on white linen bedding, and they
were vegetarians, and members who betrayed the Brotherhood's secrets were severely punished,
and we'll talk about that in a future lecture, in fact. Now, the Pythagoreans believed that
numbers were the secret principle of reality, and as such, numbers had individual traits and
characteristics, and they actually took on almost a personal human form, and I thought I would share
with you some of the numbers and the characteristics that the Pythagoreans held. Now, the most important
number to the Pythagoreans was the number one, which they call the monad, which to them meant
unity, and in fact, we still use the word unity to represent one quite often. And this was the
generator of all numbers, which makes sense, because if you take one and add it to one, you get two,
