and if you add it to one again, you get three, and this was their notion of number, was the
counting numbers, and so one gave birth to all the numbers, so it was the most important, and also
was given the assignment of being the number of reason. So one was the number of reason. The
number two, they called the dyad, which represented diversity and opinion, and even the diversity
of opinion, and this was also the first female number, so this is the first number that actually
has a sex associated with it, and in fact, the idea of having the female number hooked up with
this notion of diversity of opinion might, in fact, be the inspiration of the old adage that
it's a woman's prerogative to change her mind. It really might have come out of this Pythagorean
sense of the number two. The number three was referred to as the triad, and it represented
harmony, and I really like this, because it represents harmony, because three is actually
two plus one, and two meant diversity, and one meant unity, so if you take diversity and add
unity, you do get harmony, so a really beautiful way to see the number three. Also, three was
considered the first male number, so the first male number, so this is so much for the progressive
nature of the Pythagoreans. They believed that if you took a woman, which was two, and added reason,
which was one, you got male, so now this wasn't my, this is not in my opinion, I'm just reporting
the news here, so so much for the progressive nature. The number four was associated with a
square, since you can use four dots to actually produce the corners of a square, and four also
stood for justice or retribution, so that was the quality that was assigned to four, and we actually
see reflections of this today in our expressions, the squaring of accounts, or let's get the issue
squared away. You see again, we see reflections where numbers actually ended up being the
key ingredients to even phrases that we use in our everyday lives. The number five stood for
marriage, which makes sense if you think about female being two, and male being three, and if
you take two and three and add them, you get five, so that was marriage. The number six stood for
creation, quite possibly because if you take a female and a male, that's a two and a three,
and then you add a child, an offspring, that sum would be six. Now the number ten, which they
called the tectractus, was the most important and most holy number to them. It represented
the four elements of the universe in their eyes, fire, water, earth, and air. Now geometrically,
the tectractus was represented by ten dots arranged in an equilateral triangle, we have one dot on
top, and then two, and then three, and then four. Notice that if you add up those dots, one plus two
plus three plus four, it actually yields ten. The ten lines that form this triangle, or the numbers
one plus two plus three plus four, those four numbers, are what represent the fire, water, earth,
