add those numbers? What if we add one plus two plus four plus seven plus 14? Well, we actually get
28, an amazing coincidence. 28, therefore, is a perfect number. Well, you might be saying,
gee, it sounds like perfect numbers are all over the place. Well, they're quite scarce indeed.
Let's take a look at an example that's not a perfect number. Let's consider 10 and wonder if,
in fact, this is perfect or not. Well, what are the numbers that divide in evenly into 10,
the proper divisors? Well, there's one, there's two and five. Those are the only numbers that divide
in evenly into 10. Those are the proper divisors. What happens when you add up one plus two plus five?
You get seven and you get eight. And so you actually see that you don't get 10. So not so good,
not so good. Now, perfect numbers have actually captured the imagination of individuals throughout
the history and for centuries. The fifth century church father, Saint Augustine of Hippo,
was so moved by the perfect number six that we just saw that he actually declared, and I want to
read this to you because this is an amazing quote showing how important this religious man took the
number, the perfect number six. He said, six is a perfect number in itself. And not because God
created the world in six days, rather the contrary is true. God created the world in six days because
this number is perfect. And it would remain perfect even if the work of the six days did not exist.
A really dramatic sentence for a religious individual saying that six being perfect,
it almost trumps the number of days required to create earth in this religious context.
Well, numbers that, well, in fact, there are many, let me just say that there are many open
questions about perfect numbers that are still unanswered. Are there infinitely many perfect
numbers? We only have finitely many, we only know finitely many, and we don't know if infinitely
many perfect numbers exist. And no one knows an example of an odd perfect number, which is quite
mysterious. So do they exist or not? No one knows. Well, numbers that also attracted the attention
of the Pythagoreans were what are called amicable pairs of numbers. Now a pair of numbers, so if
we take two numbers together, we call them amicable. If a very peculiar thing happens, if in some sense,
if we look at the proper divisors of one and add them up, we actually get the second number.
And conversely, if we take the second number and look at its proper divisors, when we add those
up, we get the first number. So we kind of see a little reflection of the perfect number, but
not quite. We need two numbers here. Let's look at an example. Let's consider 220 and 284. I claim
these are amicable numbers, and let's verify that. So we have to do a calculation. First, let's find
all the proper divisors of 284. It turns out those divisors are 12471 and 142, which means that each
of those numbers divides unevenly into 284. Well, what happens when you add up those numbers?
