and air. In fact, the Pythagoreans had a chant that they would actually use, a prayer, if you will,
that actually was to the number ten and to this tectractus, and I wanted to share with you a
translation of that prayer that the Pythagoreans would use. Oh holy tectractus, thou that contain
us the root and the source of the eternally flowing creation, for the divine number begins with the
profound pure unity until it comes to the whole four, then it begets the never-tiring holy ten,
the key-holder of all. So you could see that they really liked ten, ten was a biggie. Well,
moving beyond the numbers of the gods in the Pythagoreans' minds, which were the
natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth, the Pythagoreans
actually admired the relations between certain ratios of natural numbers and musical harmonies
as well as aesthetic proportions. Now they didn't consider ratios, in other words fractions,
to be actual god-given numbers. Fractions had no real existence to them beyond ratios of natural
numbers, and let me just say a word about that. It's a little bit peculiar because we think of
fractions as numbers just like we think of seven as a number, but remember the Pythagoreans lived
in a tightly different world, they had a different view of the cosmos, and so while here it seems
peculiar that a number like one-half wouldn't be considered a number, we have to put ourselves back
in a time where in fact that would make sense, where in fact the numbers were clearly defined as
one, two, three, four, five, and so on, and one-half was merely a combination of one and two in an
interesting way, looking at that ratio. So they saw them as ratios and not as god-given numbers.
Now in their study of music, they observed that strings with lengths in a ratio of one to two
vibrated in octaves, and strings with lengths in a ratio of two to three vibrated in a perfect
fifth. So they discovered several such fundamental musical ratios, and you could see the mathematics
actually incorporated in the sound, in the music that they produced.
The Pythagoreans were among the first to study the golden ratio. Now two numbers are in the golden
ratio if the ratio of their sum to the largest is equal to the ratio of the larger to the smaller.
So let me say that again. So if we have two numbers, we have a large one and a small one. Now if we
take a look at the ratio of the sum of these two to the larger one, then that ratio should
be equal to the ratio of the larger one to the smaller one. When we have two numbers that actually
enjoy that equality, then we say they're in a golden ratio. Now we can actually use the quadratic
formula to actually solve for what that golden ratio is, and while we won't do it here, it's not
important. Let me just report that the golden ratio numerically works out to be one plus the square
root of five all divided by two. And if you were to work this out on a calculator and look at the
