sum number that they all agree upon. But the really neat thing that I like is that he put a coded
message in here, and the code was that if you look at the two numbers in the middle and the bottom row,
that indicated the year of the engraving that the engraving was made, 1514, which is really neat.
Well, magic squares were thought to protect against the plague, and even Benjamin Franklin
enjoyed the challenge of constructing magic squares while he was a clerk in the Pennsylvania
assembly. Apparently, the Pennsylvania assembly wasn't as interesting as constructing mathematical
objects such as magic squares, and he actually produced at least two eight by eight magic squares.
Now, modern mathematicians have proved many results about magic squares that we won't go into.
Existence theorems that exist of all sizes, results involving related structures such as
Latin squares or even orthogonal Latin squares, if you can imagine such things. Now, the current
hot game is the game of Sudoku, which may appear to resemble the magic squares, but there's no
sums involved in Sudoku. In Sudoku, the numbers are just placed in a particular way, and so
they're just abstract symbols, really. There's no arithmetic involved. We have to make sure
that every row and every column and every row has the numbers from one to nine embedded in it,
and every little small three by three square has all the numbers from one to nine inside of them,
too. So, really, it's a game of logic rather than a game of arithmetic, and so, in fact,
there's no reason to actually have the symbols per se, except, in fact, we can replace the
symbols of the digits by any symbol, and it would still be a fine Sudoku puzzle, but here we're
using the ordination property that we're so comfortable counting, one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, that we can immediately see which digit is missing.
Hard to do if we use other symbols. So, again, we see how numbers are so innate
in everything that we do and even how we think. Anyway, the great magic and mystical allure of
numbers continues to us with us till this very day, and it has a long and interesting human tradition.
