It's a word problem, if you will.
A certain man had one pair of rabbits together in a certain enclosed place and wishes to
know how many are created from the pair in one year, when it is the nature of them in
a single month to bear another pair, and in the second month, those born to bear also.
Well, quite cryptic, in fact, and let me say what's going on here in our own words.
Our goal here is to count how many rabbits will be in the enclosed space at the end of
12 months.
Now the question, I hate to admit, is not particularly well posed.
So we'll make some assumptions as to as to the question.
First we'll assume that every pair of rabbits born consists of a male and female rabbit,
so therefore reproduction is possible, and no pair of rabbits will die prematurely before
the year is out.
And we'll also assume that the first pair of rabbits with which the man starts is a
pair of babies, thus at the end of the first month we would still have just one pair.
Let me try to actually enact this out, but this would be a totally wholesome reenactment.
Well, we begin with the babies.
So here we have a baby pair of rabbits, the very beginning of the first month.
Now at the end of the first month, all they do is mature because they're too young to
actually reproduce.
So I'll put them over here, but at the end of the first month we actually see that they
are all grown up.
So this is now the same pair of rabbits, but now a month later.
Well now that they're matured, they can actually produce offspring, and they decide to do so
in the next iteration.
So in the next iteration, of course, they're still around.
So here they are.
They're still around, and they're wonderful, but now they produce some offspring, and here
are the offspring.
Aren't they cute?
Little pair.
One boy, one girl.
Great.
Now what happens at the end of the following month?
Well, of course, this pair is still here.
It will never, ever go away.
That pair is always here.
Now this pair actually grows up and now is mature enough for the following month to reproduce.
But this pair reproduced as well, because every month they're going to reproduce for
now on, now that they're adults.
And so they actually reproduce themselves, not themselves, but they reproduce yet again,
and they produce another pair of babies.
Now what happens now in the next iteration?
So in the next iteration, both of these adult pairs live on and reproduce.
