Once our ancestors identified and named the abstract objects known as numbers, they gave
birth to ideas that immediately took on a life of their own, attracting the interest
and capturing the imagination of the curious minds throughout human history.
In this part of our course, we'll explore the early steps of that historical journey
to discover and appreciate the structure and beauty of numbers in their own right.
We'll start with the realization that numerical structure, beauty, and pattern existed long
before our ancestors named the numbers.
We'll open the life of numbers with an exploration into numbers within nature by considering the
uninviting rough facade of a pineapple and simply counting.
From there, we'll move to some beautiful flowers.
Our studies of fruit and flora will lead us to discover the famous Fibonacci numbers.
Some believe that this sequence was discovered in India over 2,000 years ago.
We'll see how Leonardo de Pisa, also known as Fibonacci, came upon this sequence of numbers
as an answer to a question he posed involving the reproductive habits of rabbits in his
influential arithmetic text published in 1202.
His seminal work actually introduced the Hindu-Arabic number system to the West.
We'll return to this beautiful pattern that both nature and Leonardo incorporated in
their works and make a striking observation first established by Edward Zekendorf in 1972.
Every natural number can be expressed as the sum of different Fibonacci numbers.
Thus we'll see that every natural number in some sense is either a Fibonacci number or
a not-so-distant cousin of several different Fibonacci numbers.
This attractive observation demonstrates that not only are the Fibonacci numbers a natural
part of nature, but also a natural part of the natural numbers.
Well, it seems fitting to open our exploration into the nature of numbers by considering
the numbers in nature.
Now, one life lesson we take away from the study of numbers is that the best way to understand
our world is to examine it closely.
In this case, we'll focus on an ordinary pineapple.
So if you happen to have a pineapple handy, this is an excellent time to grab it.
That's what I'll do.
So if I grab a pineapple right here, quite often just looking at things closely reveals
structure and in a numerical context we look and we see if we see quantities within the
side of the pineapple and we quickly actually see some.
For we see that there are spirals that are going up in this direction and then if we
look really closely, we actually see that we have spirals going up in the other direction,
namely this way.
Well, one of the most powerful ways to understand our world better through number is just to
ask how many.
How many is an excellent way to actually make progress in understanding?
So in this case, I want to ask how many spirals are there going up this way on this facade
and how many are actually going up this way on the pineapple?
Now, of course, a pineapple doesn't know right-handed spirals from left-handed spirals,
so we'd expect the same number of spirals to occur in each way.
