Well, let's now verify that by just simply counting.
So let's count and see what we see.
Well, so I'll try this right now.
Now this is like one of those cooking shows where I've done this in advance because it's
pretty hard to count them, but I made it a lot easier by actually marking them with a
ribbon.
Isn't that pretty?
And if you look closely, you can see the spirals really in quite dramatic depth and you might
notice that one of the spirals actually is marked with these yellow dots.
It's there because I once tried to count the spirals without those yellow dots and I counted
for about three days.
So this allows me to know where I start and so that I will know when to stop.
So we'll start right in the yellows and we'll count together and see how many we see.
Well we see one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and notice now we're back to
where we started.
So there's eight going in this direction.
Okay, great.
Let's now count the spirals in the other direction and see if we get eight as well.
So if we try that and voila, here we are.
Let's count the spirals in this direction and we'll start with the yellows.
So we see one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, oh, oh, more than eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen.
So we're getting thirteen in this direction, which is really surprising.
Well of course, as we said at the onset of this course, a surprise is a great moment
because it's a moment where in fact our intuition runs counter to reality and it's a great moment
of learning because now in fact we can retrain our intuition and actually make new discoveries.
So this is now a great moment.
Well now before we talk more about the pineapple, let's turn our attention to the beautiful
flowers we see around us and in particular I want us to look at the daisy and the cone
flower.
Now when you look at these, we're now immediately attuned to the spirals in their center.
If we focus on the daisy for example, the yellow spirals we see there, we see two sets
of interlocking spirals.
And now of course, what must we do?
We can't curb our enthusiasm.
We have to count.
We have to count those spirals and see.
Do we think that we're going to have the same number of spirals going one way versus the
other way?
We can't count no because in our experience with the pineapple, our thinking is that in
fact the spiral counts may be different.
So already you can see by counting, we get to have a new world view and so our intuition
is no.
