will, in fact, generate two sets of spirals and those spiral counts will be numbers on
our list.
That's a mathematical theorem.
Well, it's amazing to see that we might have a description for why the pattern in nature
actually occurs.
But let's take a moment now to consider the history of these special numbers and how they
fit into our story of number and let the actual nature of it drift into the background.
The third century BCE Indian poet, Pingala, included these numbers in his commentary on
Sanskrit grammar.
This was to help the devout understand and attain a better purity in the cadence of certain
Indian ritual chants.
Later, also in India, in the 6th century CE, mathematician Virahanka studied meter patterns
of long and short syllables and showed how some meter counts actually corresponded to
these lists of numbers.
Now today, this famous sequence of numbers is known as the Fibonacci numbers.
They're named after Leonardo de Pisa, an Italian mathematician who made many believe,
in fact, was one of the greatest European mathematicians of the Middle Ages.
Leonardo's father was named Bonacci and Fibonacci is a shortening of the Latin Phileus Bonacci,
which translates to the son of Bonacci.
In 1202, Fibonacci published an influential text entitled Libre Abakai, which means the
Book of Calculating, that actually introduced the Hindu-Arabic numerals to the West.
He also strove to popularize this system which we now use.
In fact, his book opens with a very dramatic quote.
His book opens with, the nine numerals of the Indians are 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
With these nine figures and with the sign zero, which in Arabic is called Zephiram, any desired
number can be written.
Very dramatic beginning to this.
And as an aside, it's interesting to note that Fibonacci refers to zero here as a sign
rather than a number.
You can see that even though zero is considered a number here, there is a distinction between
zero which came along so later in our understanding of number, even here in 1202.
Now his text explained how to perform arithmetic using this decimal system that we use today,
rather than the analogous calculations using the more cumbersome Roman numerals, which
were still popular in Italy at that time.
Of course, in fairness, old habits are hard to break and even Fibonacci, who championed
the cause of the base 10 system that we use today, actually returned to the more familiar
Babylonian base 60 system of the time to actually solve an equation during a mathematics competition.
So even though he was touting this great message, there were moments where he actually revert
back to the way he learned as a child, which again makes some sense, I would think.
While we're turning now to the Fibonacci numbers themselves, in chapter 12 of his book, he
posed an intriguing question involving the reproductive habits of rabbits.
Now here is the translation of his question.
It's a little bit cryptic.
