In other words, let's compare two of the adjacent Fibonacci numbers as we go further
and further out in our list by looking at their relative size or their ratio.
So let's divide.
We'll divide 1 divided by 1, the first two Fibonacci numbers, then 2 divided by 1, then
3 divided by 2, 5 divided by 3, 8 divided by 5, 13 divided by 8, 21 divided by 13,
to compare how these numbers are growing relative to each other.
Now, if we look at the decimal expansion for that, we see some interesting structure in
the decimal.
For example, notice that 13 over 8 is equal to 1.625, 21 over 13 has a decimal that begins
1.615, and if we go a little further out, we see 144 divided by 89 equals 1.6179 and
so forth.
And even further out, 610, a large Fibonacci number divided by 377, the Fibonacci number
right before it, equals 1.618037, which notice agrees to the golden ratio's decimal expansion.
To five places.
Well, in fact, the further out we go, and you might want to enjoy trying this as an exercise,
to see that if we take two consecutive Fibonacci numbers, the larger they are, when we look
at their ratio and divide the larger by the smaller, we get a number that's getting closer
and closer to this magical golden ratio.
Now, two comments about this observation.
Well, the golden ratio we now see, in some sense, is intrinsically involved in nature.
Many people believe that the golden ratio appears in works of art and has aesthetic value.
And this remains open, although some artists have been known to deliberately incorporate
these numbers, this number, the golden ratio in their artistic works, even in works of
music, for example.
But for our purpose here, the interesting foreshadowing is that we have a collection
of rational numbers, a collection of fractions, which are heading closer and closer and closer
to this more complicated number.
And this is an interesting point that will actually be the key to unlocking more complicated
numbers.
That when a number is exotic and complicated, what we tend to do is, in fact, try to approximate
it by simpler numbers, in this case, by fractions.
And so this theme that we can approximate a complicated number by a succession of simple
numbers is a very important one that will allow us to move the frontiers of mathematics
and number theory forward.
Well, for Fibonacci fans, it might be sad that there are natural numbers that are, alas,
not Fibonacci numbers.
The smallest example of this would be four.
Notice that four is not on our list of Fibonacci numbers, nor is six or even seven.
So this could be a source of some strife for those who are real fans of the Fibonacci numbers.
Well, happily, in 1972, Edward Zeckendorf proved a beautiful theorem, and his result
states that if a natural number is not itself a Fibonacci number, then it can be written
uniquely as a sum of non-adjacent Fibonacci numbers.
Now, this is a mouthful, but it's basically saying that you're either going to be a Fibonacci
