But also this baby pair is now a come of age, so they actually now are grown up.
But don't forget that these two pairs of adults have reproduced yet again, so now we see two
pairs of bunnies, which I'll just fit in here.
I think we can fit them in here.
As you can see, this little pen of space, this confined space, better be large enough
for all of them.
But let's see the pattern in how many rabbits we have during the months.
We start with the one, at the end of the month we still have one, then we have two, then
we have three, then we have five, and you can actually see that at the end of the next
month we're going to have eight.
Why?
Well, because all the three adults are going to reproduce three new pairs.
And all these pairs are going to live.
So we have one, two, three, four, five, and then we add three, we see eight.
Well, following the rules, we see that the number of pairs of rabbits present are always
equal to Fibonacci numbers.
Now how many do we have at the end of the year?
Well, I could leave this to you to figure out if you want, but I'll just give you a
hint.
It's 233 pairs in the man's enclosed place, so I hope the enclosed place is sufficiently
large.
Now, this solution was the first time that this list of numbers appeared in the literature
of Western mathematics, even though nature has held this list much, much earlier.
Fibonacci numbers throughout the ages have been a source of inspiration and continue
to attract the attention of mathematicians and math enthusiasts from around the world.
There are many results about the Fibonacci numbers, new theorems involving the Fibonacci
numbers continue to be discovered by mathematicians today.
This is a very, very active area.
In fact, there's a mathematics journal named the Fibonacci Quarterly, where people publish
articles on the Fibonacci numbers.
Now, the Fibonacci numbers are connected to the ancient and aesthetically appealing
golden ratio, studied by the Pythagoreans, and I want to remind you of what the golden
ratio is and then try to elucidate that connection.
Well, the golden ratio is a number that is equal to 1 plus the square root of 5 all divided
by 2.
If we were to calculate that number, we would see a decimal 1.6180339 and the number decimals
continue.
Well, what does this very cryptic, mysterious number have to do with the more natural Fibonacci
numbers, all of which are examples of natural numbers?
Well, we saw consecutive Fibonacci numbers appearing in the spirals of nature, so we
see them two next to each other, one and then the next one appearing in the spiral counts.
Well, let's figure out, in fact, how fast they're growing by taking a look at the relative
size of two consecutive spiral counts.
