number if you're a natural number, or I can write you as a sum of Fibonacci numbers in
a particular way.
So let's take a look at an example to have this make a little bit more sense than to
be real for all of us.
Let's pick four, which, of course, we already saw was not a Fibonacci number.
Notice very easily that there are two numbers that are Fibonacci numbers that sum to four,
in particular three and one.
Three plus one equals four, and you'll notice that three and one are the only two ways that
we can add non-adjacent, different Fibonacci numbers to produce four.
Notice that they're non-adjacent in the sense that there's a Fibonacci number sandwiched
between one and three, in particular two.
What about six?
Well now we can write six as five plus one, two Fibonacci numbers, and that's the only
way to write six as distinct Fibonacci numbers that aren't next to each other.
Seven also can easily be written as five plus two.
So we see what we mean by taking a non-Fibonacci number and expressing it as a sum of Fibonacci
numbers, and Zekendorf actually proved that, in fact, there's only one way of doing this
if you, in fact, do not allow repeats and do not allow the Fibonacci numbers to be next
to each other.
Now this expression of natural numbers into decomposing natural numbers and expressing
them into Fibonacci numbers is now known as the Zekendorf decomposition, and I want
to explain to you why this is true and how you can actually express any natural number
you wish as the sum of Fibonacci numbers in this way.
It's actually a neat process that illustrates an interesting idea.
So to express a natural number in this manner, we apply a divide and conquer strategy, which
will be very important in our next lecture.
So the rule is we first find the largest Fibonacci number that's less than the natural number
we wish to express.
So think of it this way.
We have this number that we wish to write as the sum of Fibonacci numbers.
We start going backwards in our list of natural numbers until we hit the very first Fibonacci
number.
So that's the largest Fibonacci number smaller than our number.
And we take our number and write it as this Fibonacci number plus whatever we need to,
so add a remainder if you will, to make it equal to the original number.
Now we've actually made progress, and this is the divide and conquer idea.
For example, let's take a look at 30, which is a fairly large integer, a natural number.
The first thing I do is I go backwards from 30 until I hit my very first Fibonacci number,
and we'd see 21.
Then I ask, okay, that's a Fibonacci number.
What do I have to add to 21 to make it equal 30?
Well the answer is 9.
So I've made some progress.
