Before the two, I'd see a one because that would be the number when I add to two generates
three.
And what would come before that one, it'd be another one because one plus one would give
me the two.
Well, this pattern of numbers can be used to better understand our physical world and
this is the power of math because what we do now is we look at the world and we see structure,
we see number.
When we abstract it and when we abstract, all of a sudden, we see structure that we
didn't see before and with that abstract structure, we look back into our everyday world and we
see that world with a greater clarity.
In this example, if we look at a giant sunflower, we could guess the spiral counts and we might
guess fifty-five and eighty-nine and for the spirals of a certain size, for the certain
sized sunflowers, we actually see fifty-five and eighty-nine.
This image that, in fact, we're seeing is actually an image that I took when I was in
Greece, a very romantic place where I was actually running a course on number theory
and the theory of numbers.
So a wonderful place, of course, as you can imagine, to talk about numbers.
Now, why do nature spirals and their counts often appear on this list of special numbers?
Well, let me give you one theory which seems to be plausible.
Now, the daisy is an example of what's called a composite flower.
That means that each little floret that we see, each one of those little yellow dots,
is in fact an individual flower and they grow from the very center of the stem and gradually
move outward.
So the image we should have is if this were, in fact, the image of the flower, that in
fact the baby florets are pumped in in some sense right in the center and then they slowly
move out.
So the florets on the very, very outer part near the yellow part, near the white flowers
out on the perimeter, in fact are the oldest and the florets right in the center are the
most recently born flowers.
Well, okay, biologists have hypothesized that these florets position themselves to have as
much room around them as possible.
So, in fact, we have this circular flower and the little florets are being pumped into
the center and then, of course, as more are being pumped in, these current flowers are
being pushed away and they migrate out to the boundary, but they migrate and position
themselves in such a way they jostle, if you will, so they have as much room around them
as possible.
And this actually makes a little bit of sense when you consider that, in fact, they might
need photosynthesis and they have the sun affecting their growth and so they might want
as much space around them as possible to get as much light around them as possible.
It's a reasonable theory.
Well, if we assume that theory, we can actually prove mathematically that if we now pack the
disc so they fill up space in this circular region in this fashion where they keep juggling
and jiggling until they totally pack space in that constrained space, that the florets
