Well let's count.
So we'll count in one direction.
Let's see what we get.
Here we go.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one.
So we have twenty-one in this direction and now let's count the other direction.
See what we have.
This is pretty fast.
Let's see if you can keep up.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four,
twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, wow, thirty-one, thirty-two,
thirty-three, thirty-four.
Okay, finally.
So our modified intuition was correct.
Different number.
If we were to consider a pine cone, we could count the spirals on its side if we found
one like walking in a park.
And we'd see on a small pine cone three going up one way and five going up the other way.
Well, now, what if we now list our numbers that we just found in order of their size?
And let's now move from the numbers in nature and consider the nature of these numbers.
So let's just look at these numbers now abstractly.
What we see are three, five, eight, thirteen, twenty-one, thirty-four.
Now let's look at these numbers and see if we see any pattern here.
Well, we see an amazing coincidence.
If we add any two adjacent numbers from our list, that sum is the next number appearing
on our list.
Eight plus thirteen equals the next number, twenty-one and so forth.
Well, this amazing coincidence actually can be generalized.
What if this pattern were to continue?
Well, then we could actually extend the list indefinitely.
The next number would be fifty-five because that's twenty-one plus thirty-four.
The number after that would be eighty-nine because that would be the sum of thirty-four
plus fifty-five and so forth.
We'd see one hundred forty-four.
We then see two hundred thirty-three and so on.
You can see the numbers are getting bigger and bigger.
Even more interesting, we could also extend our pattern in the other direction and actually
figure out what comes before, right?
What would come before the three if the pattern were to continue?
Well then, it would have to be some number that when I add to three, I get five.
That would be a two.
