I wrote 30 as 21 plus 9.
Now alas, 9 is not a Fibonacci number.
But notice two things.
First of all, I have a Fibonacci number 21 in the picture, and 9 is a number smaller
than my original 30.
This is why I divided and conquered.
All of a sudden I've reduced the complexity of my question to an easier one.
Now what do I do?
What I do is I look at 9 and I say, how can I express 9 as the sum of Fibonacci numbers?
I use the same process, so I divide and conquer again.
I start at 9 and I go backwards in my list of natural numbers until I hit my very first
or the largest Fibonacci number, that's less than 9.
In this case, it's easy to see that number is 5.
What do I have to add to 5 to make it equal to 9?
Well the answer is 4.
So now I see that 30 equals 21 plus 5 plus 4.
Now I have 21 and 5, which are both Fibonacci numbers, but 4 unfortunately is not.
But we see what to do.
We divide and conquer again.
And we see, as we saw before, that the number 4 is equal to 3 plus 1.
So I see that 30 can be expressed as 21 plus 5 plus 3 plus 1.
And there I've written 30 as the sum of Fibonacci numbers using this method of finding the biggest
Fibonacci number that's smaller than my number and continually dividing and conquering.
And Zekendorf proved, it's a theorem, that in fact this method always works.
There's only one way to represent numbers in this fashion.
And in fact, if you force that the numbers are never, that are always different from
each other, and in fact never next to each other, the Fibonacci numbers that we use are
never next to each other, this way of writing the numbers is in fact unique.
And this result can be proved in general, and that's what Zekendorf did, although you
can see how the method can be used to work in any way.
Well this notion of expressing natural numbers in terms of smaller, special natural numbers
really foreshadows one of the most important ideas from number theory.
An idea whose genesis can be found in the ancient work of Euclid.
And Euclid's historic observations are really at the heart of the next lecture.
For now, we should appreciate that all around us there's not only beautiful nature, but
within that nature there are beautiful patterns and those patterns involve number.
