How many primes are there up to a thousand from one to a thousand?
How many primes are in that list of natural numbers?
Let's call that p of a thousand.
So whatever that number is, we'll denote it as p of a thousand.
Similarly, if I'm given any natural number n, let me call p of n the representation of the number of primes that are less than or equal to n.
So, for example, p of five would equal three because there are three primes that are less than or equal to five, namely two, three, and five.
There are three primes, therefore, p of five, the number of primes that are less than or equal to five, would equal three.
Similarly, we have that p of 20, which represents the number of primes less than or equal to 20, would actually equal eight because there are eight primes that are less than or equal to 20,
and they are two, three, five, seven, eleven, thirteen, seventeen, nineteen.
So we see, in fact, that many.
P of a thousand, which I'm not going to recite for you, is equal to 168.
That means that there are 168 prime numbers between one and a thousand.
So that's what this function means.
Now, the question is, is there a formula for p of n in general?
That is, is there a formula that tells us how many primes there are up to any given point?
Well, this question remains unanswered to this very day.
Many mathematicians throughout the ages contemplated this question, including the great 19th century mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Gauss is considered by most mathematicians today to be one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.
And really, the father of modern number theory, as we know it.
Gauss once wrote that number theory is the queen of all mathematics.
And given this royal theme, along with the stature and respect that the mathematics community has for him,
Gauss is often referred to as the prince of mathematics.
So you get a sense of the royalty that the math community has bestowed upon this great mind.
Well, let's now return back to this p of n, the number of primes there are up to a number n.
Many individuals, including Gauss himself, notice that the number p of n was closely approximated by something very interesting.
And the number is n divided by the natural logarithm of n.
Now, what is the natural logarithm of n?
For our purpose, it's not that important, but let me just say a word about it.
First of all, if you want to compute the natural logarithm, you can just do it on a calculator so you can get the value fairly easily on any scientific calculator.
But if you want to think about what it means, basically what the natural log of a number is is roughly how many digits that number has.
More precisely, it's approximately 2 times the number of digits.
In fact, even more precise, the natural log of n is equal to around 2.3 something times the number of digits of n.
For our purpose here, let's just think of the natural log of n as roughly speaking the number of digits that's required to write the number n out.
So, for example, the number 362 would have a value around 3 because there are 3 digits.
For our purpose, that's fine.
Well, the conjecture, the observations that people made was that the number of primes up to the point n, p of n, is approximately equal to n divided by the natural log of n, or roughly the number of digits that n has.
