We have to prove infinitely many things exist in only finitely many steps.
So we have to be really clever.
Happily Euclid was very clever for us.
So instead of actually tackling this harder question,
let's warm up to it to build some intuition into Euclid's wonderful idea by trying to do something very, very simple.
Remember when we're faced with a hard challenge, let's not do it.
Instead let's retreat, do something easy.
So we'll attempt to simply find a prime number larger than 3, which seems a little frivolous
because you could immediately say, well how about 5?
Well yes, but by that method you're using the fact that 3 is a small prime and we know facts about small primes.
Well, what I'd like to do is just use the primes 2 and 3 and try to find another prime,
but never using the fact that 2 and 3 are small and familiar to us.
For if we could craft an idea that never used the fact that 2 and 3 were small and we could build another prime,
then we could maybe extend the idea to prove this for any number of primes.
Well, Euclid's idea was to create a number that is not a multiple of 2 or 3.
Now let's think about that for a second.
Suppose that Euclid could build a number that is neither a multiple of 2 nor 3.
Well, that natural number by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic has to be able to be written as a product of prime numbers.
But if 2 and 3 are not factors in this number, then 2 will not appear in this list of primes,
3 will not appear in the list of primes, and yet we know that there is this list of primes.
So that list of primes must be primes that are not 2 or 3.
We've just found a prime that's not 2 or 3.
That's his idea, to build a number that definitely will avoid 2 and 3 as factors.
Well, here's what he did.
He first multiplied the 2 primes 2 and 3 together.
Well, 2 and 3, if you take that product, of course, that is a multiple of both 2 and 3,
so it seems like this is not a good choice, but then he does something truly ingenious.
He adds 1.
So he looks at 2 multiplied by 3 and then adds 1.
Now, let's just first note that that number is 7, and notice that 7 is indeed a prime number that's neither 2 nor 3.
So that's exactly what we're trying to do.
But I want us to think about this abstractly and not actually compute the fact that these numbers are so small we can see 7.
Let's look at the representation of 7 as 2 times 3 plus 1.
How can I look at just that number and see that 2 is not a factor of it?
Well, because we could see that the plus 1 means that 2 won't divide in evenly into 2 times 3 plus 1,
because I have a remainder of 1.
