Similarly, because that 3 is being multiplied by the 2 in front there,
I see that 3 can't be a factor of this number because there's a remainder of 1 again when I divide by 3.
So therefore, without even computing the number 7,
I see that neither 2 nor 3 can be a factor of 2 times 3 plus 1, because the plus 1 messes up the works.
Therefore, there must exist a third prime.
Now in this case, the number 7 happens to be prime itself,
but that just happens to be a happenstance of the small number.
Now using this idea, we can now prove Euclid's theorem in general.
So let's consider this.
We're going to take the exact same idea.
This is now the complete proof that Euclid came up with.
Suppose we have a finite list of prime numbers.
For example, 2, 3, 5, 7, and all the way out to a last prime number.
I don't know what that last prime number will be called.
I'll call it P.
So I'll use the letter P just to distinguish the last prime number on this finite list.
Maybe there's 20 of them, maybe there's a million of them,
but it's a finite list of prime numbers and P will denote the last one.
Well, we now wish to show that there exists a prime number that's not on this list.
What do we do?
Well, we apply Euclid's idea.
We consider the number that we get by taking 2 and multiply it by 3
and multiply it by 5, by 7, all these primes up to P.
We look at that product and then what do we do?
We add 1.
So we add 1 to this number.
And we notice that none of the primes on our original list can divide evenly into this number
because there's always this remainder of plus 1 at the end.
So if we divide this big number by 5, because 5 occurs in this product,
that plus 1 is going to be the remainder.
So it doesn't go in evenly, 5 doesn't go in evenly into this number,
nor does the last prime P that we have.
Because again, we see a remainder of 1 when we divide this product plus 1 by P.
Now, by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic,
we conclude that there has to be a prime dividing this number
because every natural number can be expressed as a product of primes.
