Well, the primes that evenly divide a number reveal intrinsic features of that number.
For example, if the prime two evenly divides a particular number, that tells us that the number must be even.
Thus, the primes will allow us to discover in some sense the personality of natural numbers
or the makeup of the numbers, an arithmetic personality, if you will,
rather than the more human personalities that the Pythagoreans associated with numbers.
The trivial fact that any number can be viewed as itself multiplied by one,
for example, six equals one times six, leads to no new insights into that number.
Therefore, one shouldn't be viewed as a prime number.
The more theoretical explanation, which isn't so important for us here,
is that one is the only natural number whose reciprocal, whose inverse, namely one over one, which is one,
is also a natural number.
Because of the special property, today we refer to one as a unit, which comes from unity from the Pythagoreans.
And in advanced mathematics, units are never considered as prime numbers.
Well, we now celebrate the work of the great Greek mathematician Euclid.
Euclid, around 300 BCE, was the first to prove theorems involving the prime numbers.
Now, he was the author of 13 books known as the Elements of Geometry.
And many believe these to be some of the most important treatises ever written.
Euclid pulled many ideas together for the first time into a unified hold
and established the notion of rigorous proof that actually remains with mathematics to this very day.
Euclid's books, seven, eight, and nine of the Elements, contained over 100 theorems from number theory.
Again, remember that the Greek sense of geometry included number theory
because they were concerned with measuring lengths.
That's how they viewed number as lengths of things.
Now, his proposition 14 stated that every natural number greater than one
can be expressed uniquely as a product of prime numbers, except for possibly rearrangement of the factors.
Let's look at an example. Take 12.
Well, we could write 12 as 2 times 2 times 3.
Those are all prime numbers.
Now, we could also write it as 2 times 3 times 2, or even 3 times 2 times 2.
But notice that in all those cases, all we did was rearrange those factors.
We always had two copies of the prime 2 and one copy of the prime 3.
There's only one way to write 12 as a product of primes if we ignore the order that we write the factors in.
Well, this important result is now known as the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
And in mathematics, fundamental doesn't mean easy or basic, it means important.
So this is in some sense one of the most important theorems from arithmetic.
By the way, we note that the uniqueness aspect of this result would no longer hold
