And while many mathematicians believe this statement to be true, no one has yet to produce a complete proof.
And remember in mathematics, just because we think something is true is not enough, we have to prove it for certain.
Another famous unsolved question is known as the Golbach conjecture.
This question asks, can every natural number greater than 4 be expressed as the sum of 2 odd prime numbers?
Notice for example that 6 equals 3 plus 3, 2 odd primes.
8 equals 3 plus 5, again, 2 odd primes.
24 equals 5 plus 19, again, 2 odd primes.
Even 1,000 can be written as 3 plus 997, and 997 is the prime as is 3.
So the question is, can every even number bigger than 4 be expressed as the sum of 2 odd primes?
A tricky question because usually prime numbers are multiplied together as in the fundamental theorem,
and here we're doing something peculiar, we're trying to add them.
Well this question first stated in a letter by Prussian mathematician Christian Golbach
to the great Swiss mathematician Lienhard Euler on June 7th, 1742,
remains one of the oldest unanswered questions in mathematics today.
And it's known, this conjecture which is known as the Golbach conjecture,
it's known to actually hold for every single even number up to 3 times 10 to the 17th.
That means that if you imagine the number 3 and put 17 zeros after it,
all the even numbers before that number can be expressed as the sum of 2 odd primes.
But even this enormous number doesn't prove that it's true always.
Maybe out there in the stratosphere of natural numbers there's a counter example
an even number that can't be expressed in this manner.
There's actually a bounty on this question.
There's a million dollar prize to the first correct and complete proof of the conjecture.
But I urge you to consider other investment opportunities
before investing your time in working on this notoriously hard question,
unless you enjoy the quest of thinking about prime numbers,
which then a totally worthy endeavor.
But don't do it for the money.
The prime numbers are a wonderful collection of numbers that form the atoms of our natural numbers.
They've been studied since Euclid and remain a fascination to all that think about them.
