In this lecture we'll introduce the concept of prime numbers, those natural numbers greater
than one that cannot be written as a product of two smaller natural numbers.
The formal study of prime numbers dates back to the ancient Greeks when Euclid first established
the fact that there are infinitely many primes.
In fact, Euclid's proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers is considered by many to
be one of the most elegant arguments in all of mathematics.
Here we'll also discover that the prime numbers are the fundamental multiplicative building blocks
for all natural numbers that exceed one.
In other words, every natural number larger than one is either a prime number or can be expressed
uniquely as a product of prime numbers.
Well, there appears no particular pattern to the prime numbers.
Great mathematical minds including Carl Friedrich Gauss wondered how many primes there were
between one and any given number.
The answer, now known as the prime number theorem, was given independently in 1896
by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Valier-Poussée.
The study of primes remains a very active area of research today,
and this area is known as analytic number theory.
We'll close this lecture by describing several questions involving the prime numbers that remain unanswered to this day.
Well, let's begin by carefully describing these special numbers.
In the last lecture, we saw how we could divide and conquer the natural numbers
using the Fibonacci numbers and addition.
Here we'll continue this divide and conquer theme, but leave the Fibonacci numbers behind
and now focus on multiplication rather than addition.
We define a prime number as any natural number larger than one
that cannot be written as the product of two smaller natural numbers.
So, for example, five is a prime number because we can't express it as the product of two smaller natural numbers.
Six, on the other hand, is in fact not a prime number because six can be expressed as two times three.
Two natural numbers each smaller than six whose product yields six.
Five is prime, six is not.
The first few prime numbers are two, three, five, seven.
Now nine is not a prime because nine is three times three, two smaller natural numbers that give nine,
so we don't include nine, but 11 and 13, 17, 19, 23.
These numbers cannot be divided and conquered and in some sense they're the atoms of the natural number.
They're the atoms of the natural numbers. They're the smallest, smallest pieces.
Now, why isn't one a prime?
How can we always talk about these numbers that are greater than one?
