So there's a prime that's a factor of this number and divides in evenly into this number,
and yet it can't be any of the primes from our original list from 1 to P.
This implies that there must exist at least one other prime that's not on our list.
And because this argument can be applied to any finite list of primes,
not just up to P, but any number you want,
we conclude that, in fact, the number of primes can't be bounded by any number.
Therefore, they're infinitely many.
If we think they're only finally many, we take their product and add 1,
and there must be a prime dividing that enormous number,
and that prime is not on our list, so we miss that.
And we can do this for any finite collection.
Therefore, they're infinitely many primes.
Now, this theorem is truly beautiful and elegant, and why?
Well, because we're proving a dramatically profound mathematical result,
a result that really allows us to understand numbers in a richer way.
And yet the argument itself, while complicated and requires some serious contemplation to take it all in,
the idea is very beautiful in that it's so basic.
We just take a product of numbers and add 1.
Now, you might look at this later and say,
gee, that seems straightforward, I guess,
but the genius was to come up with the idea of multiplying all those numbers together and adding 1.
That's by no means obvious.
Once a mathematician sees that idea,
she can certainly go through and complete the proof,
but finding that idea really requires some genius.
So this is considered one of the most beautiful arguments,
theorems in all of mathematics.
Now, I want to offer a few words about some modern advances in our understanding of the prime numbers.
Well, how many primes are there up to a certain point?
We know by Euclid's theorem that we just talked about that there are infinitely many primes.
But is there a way to know how many primes there are up to any particular number?
For example, how many primes are there up to five?
Let's call that number of primes p5 or p of five.
We read that as saying p of five.
How many primes are there up to 20?
Let's call that number of primes up to 20 p20 or p of 20.
