if we considered 1 as a prime number, because then we could write 6 on the one hand as 2 times 3
and on the other hand as 1 times 2 times 3.
So if 1 were a prime, we'd no longer have unique factorization.
Well, we now arrive at the age-old question, how many primes are there?
Well, Proposition 20 of Book 9 states the following.
Prime numbers are more than any assigned magnitude of prime numbers.
Well, I want to pause here to see exactly what this means.
Prime numbers are more than any assigned magnitude of prime numbers.
That means any assigned magnitude.
Suppose we think of a collection of prime numbers, let's say 100.
So we look at 100 prime numbers.
Euclid's theorem states that the prime numbers are more than that, which means there are more than 100 primes.
Okay, let's consider a different number, maybe a million.
Okay, so the assigned magnitude will now be a million.
Well, Euclid's theorem says that the prime numbers are more than a million prime numbers.
So what he's saying here in today's language is that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Now Euclid wasn't thinking in the language of infinitely many,
because infinity really was not a notion that was being considered at the time,
but this is how he phrased it.
Any magnitude you think of, the primes will be even greater than that.
Today we'd say there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Euclid's proof, which we'll see for ourselves in just a moment,
is considered by most mathematicians today to be one of the most elegant proofs in all of mathematics.
Perhaps it's a little surprising upon first blush that there should be a notion of aesthetics
or beauty in mathematics and in mathematical proof, but indeed there is.
And we'll see for ourselves several theorems and their proofs that are considered aesthetically appealing to mathematicians.
Now I'll try to articulate what the aesthetic appeal is so we can hone our own sense of aesthetics
within a mathematical and a numerical realm.
Well, let's now consider the beautiful idea of Euclid that allowed him to rigorously prove
that there are in fact infinitely many prime numbers.
Now one strategy would be to say, well let's just list them all.
Well of course that's not a good argument because if there really were infinitely many, as we'll show,
then that list would take us forever to write.
And a mathematical argument in fact has to be a finite number of steps of logic, reasoning, and previous theorems.
The proof has to end.
So we're up against an interesting challenge.
