Now, I'll tell you what the number is. Let me just describe the form first.
It's going to be 2 raised to a really big exponent, and then I'm going to subtract 1.
And so the number is 2 raised to the power 32,582,657.
So take 2 to that really big power, take your answer, and subtract 1.
That number has over 9,800,000 digits.
If you decide to print out that number in a 12-point font, it would require over 2,500 pages to have that printed out.
That number is prime, and that's the largest prime that we know of today.
But of course, we also know that there are infinitely many primes, so there are many more out there.
In fact, most of them are still out there waiting for us to find them.
Well, this large prime is an example of what's called a Mersenne prime.
That's a prime that's of the form 2 to a power minus 1.
Any prime of that form is called a Mersenne prime, named after the 17th century French monk, Marin Mersenne, who studied primes of this form.
Again, this is a typical form of the large primes that we tend to generate in today's age.
Well, in fact, after the 23rd Mersenne prime was found in the late 1960s,
the members of the Department of Mathematics at the University of Illinois at Urbana were so excited that they actually put that number on their postage stamp.
That number, by the way, was 2 raised to the power 11,213, and again, minus 1.
By the way, the largest prime known today, that prime that has over 9,800,000 digits, is only the 44th Mersenne prime known.
So this large one that we just found was the 44th Mersenne prime.
Now, while we know that there are infinitely many primes, no one knows if there are infinitely many Mersenne primes.
That is, no one knows if there are infinitely many primes of the form 2 to a power minus 1.
Again, we see this as a refined question because we know that there are infinitely many prime numbers,
but the question is, are there infinitely many prime numbers that have a certain look?
Well, another refinement comes from considering pairs of prime numbers.
Now, notice that beyond the prime number 2, the closest 2 adjacent or 2 consecutive primes can be from each other is 2,
because between every prime number, we have to have at least one even number.
After 2, all the primes are odd numbers.
We couldn't have a big even prime number because then 2 would divide into it evenly and we could break it apart into smaller pieces.
So all the primes are odd after 2, and therefore the closest they could be apart would be 2 apart
if there's one number in between them.
Well, 2 primes whose difference is 2 are called twin primes.
So for example, 3 and 5 are twin primes because they're both primes and they're 2 apart from each other.
5 and 7 are also an example of twin primes as are 11 and 13 because they differ by 2.
These are all twin primes, but 7 and 11, even though they're consecutive primes,
they're not twin primes because their distance from each other is not 2.
Well, one question that is still open to this day is, are there infinitely many twin primes?
Well, the twin prime conjecture states that in fact indeed there are infinitely many twin primes.
