Now, this statement was finally declared to be a theorem in 1896 when two mathematicians working independently offered a proof of the result.
Now, today, this important result is known as the prime number theorem, and it was proved by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Valier-Poussin.
Now, the interesting thing here is that they prove this totally independently in the same year. Amazing, right?
Well, remember my copper orb.
When our understanding of mathematics grows to a certain point, then these big questions naturally are ready to fall.
And before that point, we need a dramatic big new idea before we can make progress.
So, here, mathematics and our mathematical understanding, humankind's understanding of math, got to a point where this prime number theorem was ready to fall to be proven.
And it turned out that two individuals, two different places at the same time, saw that insight and proved the theorem.
This happens quite a bit in mathematics when the orb goes out.
Well, the prime number theorem gives us that n, as n gets larger and larger, as the number gets larger and larger,
the number of primes between 1 and n gets closer and closer to this funny number, n over the natural log of n.
Now, how can we make that more precise? Let me try to actually state the theorem in some precision.
How would we know if two numbers are the same?
We know that two numbers are the same, one way, is if we divide one into the other and we get the answer of one.
For example, one way, a silly way, to see that seven is the same as seven, is to divide seven by seven and we get one.
If two numbers are identical, their quotient will yield one.
Well, in our context, the theorem actually says that if we look at the ratio of the number of primes up through a certain point,
and look at the ratio between that and this other thing, n over the natural log of n,
that ratio will get closer and closer to one, will be coming closer and closer together, as n gets larger and larger.
In fact, the prime number theorem actually can be stated as that this function p of n, the number of primes up to n,
divided by n over the natural log of n, if we take those two quantities and compare it, as n gets larger and larger,
this ratio approaches one, so these two values are getting closer and closer to each other.
That's the actual statement of the theorem, in fact.
Well, because this ratio only approaches one, for any particular fixed value of n that you think of,
there's always going to be a little gap between the actual value of primes up to that point and this peculiar number n over the natural log of n.
And this gap is often viewed as the error or an error term.
And exploring how the error in this result is shrinking, as the n gets bigger, is a very active field of study.
In fact, an important part of analytic number theory.
And it's in fact connected to one of the most famous and important open questions in all of mathematics today,
known as the Riemann hypothesis, named after Bernhardt Riemann, the great 19th century mathematician who first conjectured an answer.
Well, it's interesting that even after thousands of years of serious study, many questions remain unanswered about the prime numbers.
Even though there are infinitely many prime numbers, you might wonder what is the largest prime number that we know is prime today?
Now, finding the largest prime number known to date is an ongoing quest that has captured the imagination of thousands of people and computers.
And because the methods used to establish these numbers are indeed prime, the numbers typically have a very special form.
So these large numbers that are established to be prime look the same way.
Now, the largest prime known today was found in September 2006, using a number of supercomputers all collaborating and working together.
