If we have n times n, then every prime factor in n is going to appear twice, one in the
n and the other in the times n.
So in fact, all the primes appearing in n squared are going to appear an even number
of times.
Because I have a copy of n and another copy of n, every prime here is going to actually
appear here.
So we have an even number of primes.
This is also true when we look at the primes of m squared in its factorization.
So in particular, what we see here is that we have an even number of the prime 2 appearing
in the prime factorization of m squared.
m squared has an even number of the prime 2 appearing in its factorization.
So there could be no factors of 2, there could be 2 factors of 2, 4 factors of 2, 6 factors
of 2, and so on, but an even number of factors of 2.
On the other hand, the number 2n squared must have an odd number of factors of 2 in its
prime factorization.
Why?
Because we know that n squared by itself will have an even number of factors of 2, and then
there's one more factor of 2 right in front.
So an even number plus 1 produces an odd number.
And so what we see here is that the number of factors of 2 of 2n squared must be an
odd number.
But remember that 2n squared equals m squared, and we have a contradiction, because we have
the same number, and on one hand we have an even number of factors of 2, and on the other
hand we have an odd number of factors of 2, and Euclid tells us that in fact the factorization
is unique.
There's only one way except for rearranging, and you can't rearrange an even number of
factors and all of a sudden make it an odd number.
You can't do that.
And so we have a contradiction.
Well this contradiction implies that something's wrong.
In mathematics we don't like contradictions.
However, every one of our mathematical steps was in fact correct.
So what's wrong?
Well the only assumption that was made without proof was the Greek intuitive belief that
all numbers were rational.
And we now see that that assumption led to a contradiction, a logical impossibility.
Therefore that assumption must be false.
In fact the length square root of 2 is not a rational number.
