of ratios of lengths of strings on musical instruments.
So this was a very common theme throughout their studies.
The Greeks believed that every two lengths, in other words, every two numbers, were commensurable.
Thus, the Greeks believed that all lengths were either natural numbers or ratios of natural
numbers, what we call today rational numbers.
Well, all is well with this Greek view of number until we attempt to measure a length
of a certain line segment, and I want to share with you the story of how this line segment
came to be.
So let's suppose we consider a square where each side has a one unit in length.
So each side is a one by one by one by one square.
Now, if we draw a diagonal on that square, then we can measure its length, of course,
because it's a line segment, it has a length.
Well, in view of the Pythagoreans' belief that all lengths are rational, the length
of the diagonal of this square must equal a rational number.
It must be a fraction.
The Pythagoreans, however, were in for a very big surprise, because that length is not a
rational number.
Now to verify this claim, we're going to actually follow the Pythagoreans' footsteps
as they made this disturbing discovery for themselves.
So we're going to do a little teeny bit of mathematics here, but stay the course because
we're about to make an amazing discovery.
Let's first of all give that length a name.
Let's call it h.
So let's let h represent the diagonal of that square.
We don't know its value yet, but we'll find it soon, I assure you.
Well, given the Greek's belief, we have that h must be a rational number.
So we're going to assume that.
We're going to assume that h has a rational length, and let's call it m over n for some
natural numbers, m and n.
So h is now equal to m over n.
Well we now recall the famous Pythagorean theorem that we studied in geometry class.
The Pythagorean theorem states that the sum of the squares of the lengths of the legs
of any right triangle equals the square of the length of the remaining side, which is
the hypotenuse side.
So for example, if we take a look at this right triangle, we see the sides are 3, 4,
and 5.
And notice that when we take 3 squared, we get 9.
When we take 4 squared, we get 16.
