That's not a fraction.
So we have constructed a line segment whose length is not a number, according to the Greek
notion of number as rational.
Well this argument, which is very similar to Euclid's original proof, shows that the
square root of 2 is not a rational number.
And this argument is considered by many to be one of the most elegant proofs in mathematics.
Now we've actually seen another famously elegant proof which was the proof of the infinitude
of primes that Euclid also proved.
Interesting that Euclid got two of his results and proofs to be in the parthenon of great
and elegant results.
Quite a lucky individual.
Well no, not really lucky because he was enormously talented but quite remarkable.
Now when we think of this result what makes it so elegant?
Well if you look back at the argument you see that even though it's tricky it involves
the Pythagorean theorem, we had to take a square root which is always scary.
The truth is the argument just involved us looking at a length of a diagonal, a very
basic object.
Again basic doesn't mean easy, it just means foundational.
And by measuring that length and by using this wonderful result about the unique factorization
of natural numbers, we run into a logical impasse.
Now that point of view really leads us to question an assumption that was so deeply
ingrained in the Pythagoreans and the ancient Greeks that they couldn't even accept it.
So this very simple in a way argument allowed us to or challenged the Pythagoreans to rethink
their entire notion of number.
This is why this argument is considered to be so important and so beautiful.
Once we understand the reasoning of this mathematical argument which takes time by the way, we must
face a new world view.
The square root of 2 is not a fraction, it's not a rational length.
Despite the aesthetically appealing ideal of a rational world of numbers, we have now
seen that there are lengths that are not rational, that are not fractions.
Intuitively it seems clear that the length of any line segment of course should be a
number.
Thus the Greeks found themselves at an impasse.
The length of the diagonal, the square root of 2, is not a number since it's not rational,
so from their point of view it wasn't a number.
Yet the square root of 2 does represent a length and all lengths should be numbers.
You see the problem.
Because we must expand the Greek notion of what number means so that it now includes
