Welcome to the rational and not so rational world of numbers.
When we count objects that are themselves comprised of smaller parts, we run into trouble
when we try to count one, two, three, and so forth.
For we may have a quantity that's more than two but less than three.
Thus we'd have two and some portion but not the whole of another.
This counting conundrum was resolved early on in humanity by extending the notion of
number to include fractional parts.
Both Babylonians and Egyptians used fractions perhaps as early as 2000 BCE.
The collection of fractions known today as the collection of rational numbers satisfied
the ancient Greek aesthetic of commensurability and divisibility, dividing objects into a certain
number of equal pieces.
Although the Pythagoreans did not consider these ratios to be God-given numbers, they
were convinced that all lengths could be measured in terms of natural numbers and their ratios.
That is, the Pythagoreans viewed the rational numbers as a gapless list that corresponded
to a line.
The Pythagoreans were forced to let go of this aesthetically appealing notion of number
when they discovered lengths whose measure could not be a rational number.
Applying the Pythagorean theorem from geometry on a very special right triangle, we'll see
such a length and discover that the square root of 2 is not a rational number.
In other words, it's not a fraction.
This unattractive reality further challenged the Pythagorean notion of number.
In fact, they did not consider these measures as numbers.
Today we call these very real numbers that are not rational numbers, irrational numbers,
literally numbers without ratios.
The discovery of such perplexing quantities brought to light the surprising subtlety and
delicate structure within the world of number when viewed as lengths and measures.
Embracing this expanded view of number is a challenge, in fact a great challenge, for
all who face it for the first time, whether they encountered this notion today or as in
the case of the Pythagoreans over 2,000 years ago.
Well, let's begin with the history of ratios of natural numbers.
In order to define what we mean by a rational number, first let's recall that the integers
which we saw in a previous lecture are the collection of natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, together with 0 and their negatives, negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, negative 4, negative
5 and so forth.
All those collectively are known as the integers.
A rational number can now be defined as any ratio m to n or m over n for which m is an
integer and n is a natural number.
The number m is called the numerator and the number n is called the denominator of m over
