lay end to end and see an exact number of copies to produce exactly this and similarly
that same measurement or same ruler, if you will, can be used to measure a natural number
of copies of the second.
Now in this case, if I use this red segment as my unit of measure, what I see here is,
let's see.
Well, here's one unit, two units.
So here I see that in fact two copies of this, a natural number of copies, produce
this line segment and what about here?
One, two, three.
So again, we see that there's a certain number of copies that will produce both this and
this.
That's what it means for these two segments to be commensurable.
Let's talk about the numbers behind these segments by considering their lengths.
So let me call the length of this shorter line segment A and let me call the length
of this longer line segment B and let me call the length of our little red unit C.
Well, then we see that there exists a natural number such that C times the natural number
gives me A. In this case, the natural number we can see is two.
Two times this length equals this length.
And similarly, we see there's a natural number, in this case three, one, two, three.
If I multiply the red length by three, I produce all of B. Now, let's think about these numbers
together.
If we actually look at the ratio, we have that A first of all equals C times M or in
our example, A equals C times two and B, the length of the longer, would be C times three.
Now, if we observe the ratio of A to B, what do we see?
Well we see that A over B or A to B is equal to Cm over Cn.
Now notice that we have this common factor of C, this particular length, which now cancels
out from this fraction and we're just left with M over n, which is a rational number.
Even though this number might have a funny length, this length might have a funny, funny
number.
It turns out that M over n, since everything in sight were natural multiples, we see that
that's a number.
So we say that two numbers, we're now going to generalize from the line segments to numbers,
we say that two numbers A and B are commensurable if A over B or A to B is a rational number,
is a fraction.
In our example, we have that ratio being two-thirds, two over three.
And that corresponds to the length fact that A is two-thirds the length of B, and you can
see that here.
Well, this idea of commensurability is connected to the Pythagorean study of harmony in terms
