n.
And for thinking purposes, this might sound a little confusing, just think of rational
numbers as fractions, natural number divided by natural number, but you're allowed to put
a negative sign in front of it or 0.
The rational numbers are also, of course, known as fractions and that's what we're familiar
with.
Well, we don't know the first example of rational numbers.
We find evidence of fractions in Babylonian and Egyptian writings from 2,000 BCE.
A unit fraction is defined to be any fraction that's having 1 as a numerator.
So one half, one third and one fourth are all examples of unit fractions because they
have a 1 over something.
The Ryan Papyrus, one of the oldest mathematical documents in existence dating back from around
1650 BCE, contains sums of unit fractions.
Ames, the scribe who wrote the Ryan Papyrus, who we've seen throughout the course, denoted
unit fractions by a dot over the denominator.
So for example, if you were to use the Hindu-Arabic numeral that we used to use now, if he took
a five and put a dot on top of the five, that would signify one-fifth.
Now this dot notation actually derived from the hieroglyph for an open mouth.
This is really interesting because this symbol provides evidence that fractions were used
to divide up rations of food and drink.
In fact, many questions from the Ryan Papyrus concerned dividing up loaves of bread and jugs
of ale.
It sounds quite attractive, doesn't it?
In addition, the Ryan Papyrus contains a table that shows how for any odd natural number,
let's call it N, from five all the way up to 101, fractions of the form 2 over N can
be written as the sum of different unit fractions.
That is, any number of the form 2 over N, where N is an odd number in that range, can
be written as 1 over a number plus 1 over a number.
Now this calculation is by no means trivial.
For example, let's just consider the first example, two-fifths, two over five.
How can we write that as the sum of two fractions each having a numerator of one?
Well, it's not obvious, but it turns out that two-fifths is the sum of one-third and one-fifteenth.
That is, two-fifths equals one-third plus one-fifteenth.
You can check that by getting a common denominator.
We multiply the top and the bottom there by five, and we see five-fifteenths plus one-fifteenth
is six-fifteenths, and if we simplify, we see in fact two-fifths.
So amazing, highly non-trivial.
Now an Egyptian fraction is defined to be the sum of distinct unit fractions.
