Pretty serious business.
But the writing of Proclius is beautiful because he says, and the guilty man who fortuitously
touched on and revealed this aspect of living things, it is true that these numbers are
not ratios but the fact that he had confessed this and admitted this in public cost him
his life.
A wonderful legend.
Well, while we'll probably never know for sure how the Pythagoreans viewed this counterintuitive
notion of irrationality for certain, it is clear that this discovery moved our understanding
of number a quantum leap forward and we're greatly indebted to their work and their discovery.
Now some years later around 370 BCE the Greek astronomer and mathematician Eudaxus who was
actually a student of Plato offered a definition of irrational numbers that beautifully foreshadowed
the work of the 19th century German mathematicians Karl Weierstrass, Georg Cantor and Richard
Dedekin.
Now we'll see this refined and elegant number development in lecture 18 but for now it's
interesting to see that even in ancient times we see reflections of the rigor that was later
required to move the frontiers of mathematics forward even offered at that time.
Today the collection of all numbers that represent measures of all possible lengths along with
their negatives are known as the real numbers.
So the real numbers are any number that represents length on a line or the negative of it and
of course zero and we'll explore these numbers in greater detail in our next lecture.
Well even thousands of years after the Pythagoreans were faced with irrational lengths, irrational
numbers continued to disturb, intrigue and bother mathematicians.
Again we see the difficulty in widening our intuition of number to include that which
first appears as strange and exotic.
But how strange and exotic are these disturbing numbers?
The surprising and perhaps even more disturbing answer to this question will be revealed in
the next two lectures.
The irrational numbers challenge our imagination to take what appears to be abstract and foreign
and embrace it as real.
This challenge was beautifully articulated by the great 17th century mathematician Gottfried
Leibniz who once referred to the notion of irrational numbers as a miracle of analysis,
a monster of the ideal world, almost an amphibian between being and not being.
Enjoy the irrational thoughts of irrational numbers.
