values that are not rational numbers.
Thus we discover irrational numbers, numbers that are not expressible as ratios of integers
and we discover that these numbers exist.
In fact the word irrational in fact comes from without ratio and as an aside we recall
that sometime between 2000 and 1650 BCE the Babylonians computed rational approximations
to the square root of 2 but it was the Greeks who were the first to prove that this value
is irrational, not a ratio, not rational.
Well as we've seen with zero and with negative numbers it's always a great challenge for
humanity to face the strange looking and counterintuitive numerical objects and try to imagine an
expanded view of number that includes and embraces these new objects.
In this direction I'd like to share the reaction of the secret society of the Pythagoreans
to the irrationality of the square root of 2.
The Pythagoreans were genuinely perplexed by the irrationality of the square root of
2.
In fact some scholars believe that they never accepted the square root of 2 as a number
in their sense.
They called irrational numbers alogos which translates into unspeakable or inexpressible.
Now there are many legends and theories about the Pythagoreans and how they interpreted
this discovery and how they reacted to it.
Now one of the most popular was that the Pythagoreans took an oath, remember this was a secret society,
and they took an oath to never share with anyone outside of their brotherhood the existence
of these irrational numbers that they found.
Perhaps maybe they thought this would wreak havoc in the street if people realized that
not all numbers were natural numbers or ratios thereof.
So they were afraid and maybe they were trying to protect people or maybe they just didn't
want to have this ugly truth revealed.
Perhaps this is why they actually called these quantities alogos unspeakable.
You are not allowed to speak of these numbers outside of the brotherhood and anyone who
would reveal this secret would be put to death.
Now the legend is that actually one Pythagorean did make public this secret and the great philosopher
Proclius around 5th century CE gave a brief account of the dark episode in the Pythagorean
Brotherhood and I want to share that story with you.
It is well known that the man who first made public the theory of irrationals perished
in a shipwreck in order that the inexpressible and unimaginable should ever remain veiled.
And so the guilty man who fortuitously touched on and revealed this aspect of living things
was taken to the place where he began and there is forever beaten by the waves.
In other words, the Pythagoreans took the guy out into a boat, threw him overboard and
he drowned.
