Welcome to the rational and not so rational world of numbers.
When we count objects that are themselves comprised of smaller parts, we run into trouble
when we try to count one, two, three, and so forth.
For we may have a quantity that's more than two but less than three.
Thus we'd have two and some portion but not the whole of another.
This counting conundrum was resolved early on in humanity by extending the notion of
number to include fractional parts.
Both Babylonians and Egyptians used fractions perhaps as early as 2000 BCE.
The collection of fractions known today as the collection of rational numbers satisfied
the ancient Greek aesthetic of commensurability and divisibility, dividing objects into a certain
number of equal pieces.
Although the Pythagoreans did not consider these ratios to be God-given numbers, they
were convinced that all lengths could be measured in terms of natural numbers and their ratios.
That is, the Pythagoreans viewed the rational numbers as a gapless list that corresponded
to a line.
The Pythagoreans were forced to let go of this aesthetically appealing notion of number
when they discovered lengths whose measure could not be a rational number.
Applying the Pythagorean theorem from geometry on a very special right triangle, we'll see
such a length and discover that the square root of 2 is not a rational number.
In other words, it's not a fraction.
This unattractive reality further challenged the Pythagorean notion of number.
In fact, they did not consider these measures as numbers.
Today we call these very real numbers that are not rational numbers, irrational numbers,
literally numbers without ratios.
The discovery of such perplexing quantities brought to light the surprising subtlety and
delicate structure within the world of number when viewed as lengths and measures.
Embracing this expanded view of number is a challenge, in fact a great challenge, for
all who face it for the first time, whether they encountered this notion today or as in
the case of the Pythagoreans over 2,000 years ago.
Well, let's begin with the history of ratios of natural numbers.
In order to define what we mean by a rational number, first let's recall that the integers
which we saw in a previous lecture are the collection of natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, together with 0 and their negatives, negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, negative 4, negative
5 and so forth.
All those collectively are known as the integers.
A rational number can now be defined as any ratio m to n or m over n for which m is an
integer and n is a natural number.
The number m is called the numerator and the number n is called the denominator of m over
n.
And for thinking purposes, this might sound a little confusing, just think of rational
numbers as fractions, natural number divided by natural number, but you're allowed to put
a negative sign in front of it or 0.
The rational numbers are also, of course, known as fractions and that's what we're familiar
with.
Well, we don't know the first example of rational numbers.
We find evidence of fractions in Babylonian and Egyptian writings from 2,000 BCE.
A unit fraction is defined to be any fraction that's having 1 as a numerator.
So one half, one third and one fourth are all examples of unit fractions because they
have a 1 over something.
The Ryan Papyrus, one of the oldest mathematical documents in existence dating back from around
1650 BCE, contains sums of unit fractions.
Ames, the scribe who wrote the Ryan Papyrus, who we've seen throughout the course, denoted
unit fractions by a dot over the denominator.
So for example, if you were to use the Hindu-Arabic numeral that we used to use now, if he took
a five and put a dot on top of the five, that would signify one-fifth.
Now this dot notation actually derived from the hieroglyph for an open mouth.
This is really interesting because this symbol provides evidence that fractions were used
to divide up rations of food and drink.
In fact, many questions from the Ryan Papyrus concerned dividing up loaves of bread and jugs
of ale.
It sounds quite attractive, doesn't it?
In addition, the Ryan Papyrus contains a table that shows how for any odd natural number,
let's call it N, from five all the way up to 101, fractions of the form 2 over N can
be written as the sum of different unit fractions.
That is, any number of the form 2 over N, where N is an odd number in that range, can
be written as 1 over a number plus 1 over a number.
Now this calculation is by no means trivial.
For example, let's just consider the first example, two-fifths, two over five.
How can we write that as the sum of two fractions each having a numerator of one?
Well, it's not obvious, but it turns out that two-fifths is the sum of one-third and one-fifteenth.
That is, two-fifths equals one-third plus one-fifteenth.
You can check that by getting a common denominator.
We multiply the top and the bottom there by five, and we see five-fifteenths plus one-fifteenth
is six-fifteenths, and if we simplify, we see in fact two-fifths.
So amazing, highly non-trivial.
Now an Egyptian fraction is defined to be the sum of distinct unit fractions.
So it's not clear why the Egyptians chose this method of expressing fractions.
Now much later, Fibonacci showed that every positive rational number can be expressed
as the sum of distinct unit fractions.
So in fact, even Fibonacci, all the way out to 1202 when he wrote his Lieber Abakai, was
returning to the same ideas that the Egyptians were considering.
Well, as we've already seen, the ancient Greeks, in particular the Pythagoreans, were
one of the first cultures to explore rational numbers as objects of independent and abstract
interest.
Now, given their interest, I want to say a few words about how the Greeks viewed ratios
and their notion of rationality.
Well, as we've already seen, the Greeks had a complicated view of number.
Now of course, that complicated view is only from our vantage point.
Remember, it's a different world, a different culture that we live in today.
Back in the cosmos of the Pythagoreans and Euclid, their view of the world was so different
that their number sense made sense to them.
Today it seems complicated and it's our job to put ourselves in a mindset where that mindset
of number makes sense.
Well, they believed that the natural numbers were the true numbers since they were God-given.
And the rational numbers were really only ratios of natural numbers.
They weren't as real as the natural numbers.
However, in their eyes, the rational numbers formed a gap-free list that could correspond
to a line of numbers.
In fact, the Pythagoreans viewed these numbers as a flow of quantity, which really gives
a beautiful poetic way of expressing their view and their idea of number.
It was Euclid who later made the Greek notion of rational numbers much more rigorous.
Now, he describes the rational numbers in an interesting way.
It's going to be a very geometrical way, but as you remember, in ancient Greece, geometry
and number theory really came together.
Numbers were considered as lengths.
So not surprisingly, to describe ratios, it's going to be in terms of lengths.
Well, in Euclid's elements, this famous collection of books, he declares that two line segments
are called commensurable if there exists a third line segment such that some number
of copies of the third, when laid end to end, produces the first segment and similarly
for the second segment.
Let's take a look at an example to make this make some sense.
Well, here I see two different line segments.
And the question is, are these two line segments commensurable?
Well, if they are, that means that I could find a third line segment for which I could
lay end to end and see an exact number of copies to produce exactly this and similarly
that same measurement or same ruler, if you will, can be used to measure a natural number
of copies of the second.
Now in this case, if I use this red segment as my unit of measure, what I see here is,
let's see.
Well, here's one unit, two units.
So here I see that in fact two copies of this, a natural number of copies, produce
this line segment and what about here?
One, two, three.
So again, we see that there's a certain number of copies that will produce both this and
this.
That's what it means for these two segments to be commensurable.
Let's talk about the numbers behind these segments by considering their lengths.
So let me call the length of this shorter line segment A and let me call the length
of this longer line segment B and let me call the length of our little red unit C.
Well, then we see that there exists a natural number such that C times the natural number
gives me A. In this case, the natural number we can see is two.
Two times this length equals this length.
And similarly, we see there's a natural number, in this case three, one, two, three.
If I multiply the red length by three, I produce all of B. Now, let's think about these numbers
together.
If we actually look at the ratio, we have that A first of all equals C times M or in
our example, A equals C times two and B, the length of the longer, would be C times three.
Now, if we observe the ratio of A to B, what do we see?
Well we see that A over B or A to B is equal to Cm over Cn.
Now notice that we have this common factor of C, this particular length, which now cancels
out from this fraction and we're just left with M over n, which is a rational number.
Even though this number might have a funny length, this length might have a funny, funny
number.
It turns out that M over n, since everything in sight were natural multiples, we see that
that's a number.
So we say that two numbers, we're now going to generalize from the line segments to numbers,
we say that two numbers A and B are commensurable if A over B or A to B is a rational number,
is a fraction.
In our example, we have that ratio being two-thirds, two over three.
And that corresponds to the length fact that A is two-thirds the length of B, and you can
see that here.
Well, this idea of commensurability is connected to the Pythagorean study of harmony in terms
of ratios of lengths of strings on musical instruments.
So this was a very common theme throughout their studies.
The Greeks believed that every two lengths, in other words, every two numbers, were commensurable.
Thus, the Greeks believed that all lengths were either natural numbers or ratios of natural
numbers, what we call today rational numbers.
Well, all is well with this Greek view of number until we attempt to measure a length
of a certain line segment, and I want to share with you the story of how this line segment
came to be.
So let's suppose we consider a square where each side has a one unit in length.
So each side is a one by one by one by one square.
Now, if we draw a diagonal on that square, then we can measure its length, of course,
because it's a line segment, it has a length.
Well, in view of the Pythagoreans' belief that all lengths are rational, the length
of the diagonal of this square must equal a rational number.
It must be a fraction.
The Pythagoreans, however, were in for a very big surprise, because that length is not a
rational number.
Now to verify this claim, we're going to actually follow the Pythagoreans' footsteps
as they made this disturbing discovery for themselves.
So we're going to do a little teeny bit of mathematics here, but stay the course because
we're about to make an amazing discovery.
Let's first of all give that length a name.
Let's call it h.
So let's let h represent the diagonal of that square.
We don't know its value yet, but we'll find it soon, I assure you.
Well, given the Greek's belief, we have that h must be a rational number.
So we're going to assume that.
We're going to assume that h has a rational length, and let's call it m over n for some
natural numbers, m and n.
So h is now equal to m over n.
Well we now recall the famous Pythagorean theorem that we studied in geometry class.
The Pythagorean theorem states that the sum of the squares of the lengths of the legs
of any right triangle equals the square of the length of the remaining side, which is
the hypotenuse side.
So for example, if we take a look at this right triangle, we see the sides are 3, 4,
and 5.
And notice that when we take 3 squared, we get 9.
When we take 4 squared, we get 16.
And when I add those two numbers together, I get 25, which notice is in fact the hypotenuse
5, but squared.
5 squared is 25.
And you can see the Pythagorean re-in theorem at work.
Well in our particular right triangle with the square, we actually see that each side,
each leg of the right triangle has length 1.
So this would be a very easy calculation happily.
We see that 1 squared plus 1 squared is the hypotenuse squared, which is h squared.
Well 1 times 1 is 1, so we're just basically adding 1 plus 1, which even I can do.
That's 2.
What we see here is that 2 equals h squared.
But remember, the Pythagoreans believe that h is a rational number.
We're calling it m over n.
So we see the important equal equality, 2 equals m over n all squared.
Well, in other words, 2 equals m squared divided by n squared.
And I want us to remember this equation just for a moment.
We're going to come back to it in just a second.
But as an aside, I want to note that we could actually solve for the number m over n.
I see that 2 equals m squared over n squared.
So if I take the square root of both sides, I discover that m over n is equal to the square
root of 2.
In other words, we actually computed the length of the diagonal.
It's in fact the number square root of 2.
And the Pythagoreans believe that this number is in fact a rational number.
The fraction m over n.
Well, now let's return to the equation 2 equals m squared over n squared.
That is the equation we had before we actually took the square root.
Well, we can see that the natural numbers must satisfy a new relationship if I just multiply
that equation through by n squared.
If I multiply both sides by n squared, the equality remains.
And I'm left now with 2n squared equals m squared.
Well, we're now going to apply Euclid's proposition 14, which states that every natural number
greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers.
Now let's think about this because this is the really tricky part.
Because we are squaring m and n, every prime factor or prime divisor of m squared and
also n squared must appear an even number of times.
Let's think about it.
It's kind of like Noah's Ark in a way.
If we have n times n, then every prime factor in n is going to appear twice, one in the
n and the other in the times n.
So in fact, all the primes appearing in n squared are going to appear an even number
of times.
Because I have a copy of n and another copy of n, every prime here is going to actually
appear here.
So we have an even number of primes.
This is also true when we look at the primes of m squared in its factorization.
So in particular, what we see here is that we have an even number of the prime 2 appearing
in the prime factorization of m squared.
m squared has an even number of the prime 2 appearing in its factorization.
So there could be no factors of 2, there could be 2 factors of 2, 4 factors of 2, 6 factors
of 2, and so on, but an even number of factors of 2.
On the other hand, the number 2n squared must have an odd number of factors of 2 in its
prime factorization.
Why?
Because we know that n squared by itself will have an even number of factors of 2, and then
there's one more factor of 2 right in front.
So an even number plus 1 produces an odd number.
And so what we see here is that the number of factors of 2 of 2n squared must be an
odd number.
But remember that 2n squared equals m squared, and we have a contradiction, because we have
the same number, and on one hand we have an even number of factors of 2, and on the other
hand we have an odd number of factors of 2, and Euclid tells us that in fact the factorization
is unique.
There's only one way except for rearranging, and you can't rearrange an even number of
factors and all of a sudden make it an odd number.
You can't do that.
And so we have a contradiction.
Well this contradiction implies that something's wrong.
In mathematics we don't like contradictions.
However, every one of our mathematical steps was in fact correct.
So what's wrong?
Well the only assumption that was made without proof was the Greek intuitive belief that
all numbers were rational.
And we now see that that assumption led to a contradiction, a logical impossibility.
Therefore that assumption must be false.
In fact the length square root of 2 is not a rational number.
That's not a fraction.
So we have constructed a line segment whose length is not a number, according to the Greek
notion of number as rational.
Well this argument, which is very similar to Euclid's original proof, shows that the
square root of 2 is not a rational number.
And this argument is considered by many to be one of the most elegant proofs in mathematics.
Now we've actually seen another famously elegant proof which was the proof of the infinitude
of primes that Euclid also proved.
Interesting that Euclid got two of his results and proofs to be in the parthenon of great
and elegant results.
Quite a lucky individual.
Well no, not really lucky because he was enormously talented but quite remarkable.
Now when we think of this result what makes it so elegant?
Well if you look back at the argument you see that even though it's tricky it involves
the Pythagorean theorem, we had to take a square root which is always scary.
The truth is the argument just involved us looking at a length of a diagonal, a very
basic object.
Again basic doesn't mean easy, it just means foundational.
And by measuring that length and by using this wonderful result about the unique factorization
of natural numbers, we run into a logical impasse.
Now that point of view really leads us to question an assumption that was so deeply
ingrained in the Pythagoreans and the ancient Greeks that they couldn't even accept it.
So this very simple in a way argument allowed us to or challenged the Pythagoreans to rethink
their entire notion of number.
This is why this argument is considered to be so important and so beautiful.
Once we understand the reasoning of this mathematical argument which takes time by the way, we must
face a new world view.
The square root of 2 is not a fraction, it's not a rational length.
Despite the aesthetically appealing ideal of a rational world of numbers, we have now
seen that there are lengths that are not rational, that are not fractions.
Intuitively it seems clear that the length of any line segment of course should be a
number.
Thus the Greeks found themselves at an impasse.
The length of the diagonal, the square root of 2, is not a number since it's not rational,
so from their point of view it wasn't a number.
Yet the square root of 2 does represent a length and all lengths should be numbers.
You see the problem.
Because we must expand the Greek notion of what number means so that it now includes
values that are not rational numbers.
Thus we discover irrational numbers, numbers that are not expressible as ratios of integers
and we discover that these numbers exist.
In fact the word irrational in fact comes from without ratio and as an aside we recall
that sometime between 2000 and 1650 BCE the Babylonians computed rational approximations
to the square root of 2 but it was the Greeks who were the first to prove that this value
is irrational, not a ratio, not rational.
Well as we've seen with zero and with negative numbers it's always a great challenge for
humanity to face the strange looking and counterintuitive numerical objects and try to imagine an
expanded view of number that includes and embraces these new objects.
In this direction I'd like to share the reaction of the secret society of the Pythagoreans
to the irrationality of the square root of 2.
The Pythagoreans were genuinely perplexed by the irrationality of the square root of
2.
In fact some scholars believe that they never accepted the square root of 2 as a number
in their sense.
They called irrational numbers alogos which translates into unspeakable or inexpressible.
Now there are many legends and theories about the Pythagoreans and how they interpreted
this discovery and how they reacted to it.
Now one of the most popular was that the Pythagoreans took an oath, remember this was a secret society,
and they took an oath to never share with anyone outside of their brotherhood the existence
of these irrational numbers that they found.
Perhaps maybe they thought this would wreak havoc in the street if people realized that
not all numbers were natural numbers or ratios thereof.
So they were afraid and maybe they were trying to protect people or maybe they just didn't
want to have this ugly truth revealed.
Perhaps this is why they actually called these quantities alogos unspeakable.
You are not allowed to speak of these numbers outside of the brotherhood and anyone who
would reveal this secret would be put to death.
Now the legend is that actually one Pythagorean did make public this secret and the great philosopher
Proclius around 5th century CE gave a brief account of the dark episode in the Pythagorean
Brotherhood and I want to share that story with you.
It is well known that the man who first made public the theory of irrationals perished
in a shipwreck in order that the inexpressible and unimaginable should ever remain veiled.
And so the guilty man who fortuitously touched on and revealed this aspect of living things
was taken to the place where he began and there is forever beaten by the waves.
In other words, the Pythagoreans took the guy out into a boat, threw him overboard and
he drowned.
Pretty serious business.
But the writing of Proclius is beautiful because he says, and the guilty man who fortuitously
touched on and revealed this aspect of living things, it is true that these numbers are
not ratios but the fact that he had confessed this and admitted this in public cost him
his life.
A wonderful legend.
Well, while we'll probably never know for sure how the Pythagoreans viewed this counterintuitive
notion of irrationality for certain, it is clear that this discovery moved our understanding
of number a quantum leap forward and we're greatly indebted to their work and their discovery.
Now some years later around 370 BCE the Greek astronomer and mathematician Eudaxus who was
actually a student of Plato offered a definition of irrational numbers that beautifully foreshadowed
the work of the 19th century German mathematicians Karl Weierstrass, Georg Cantor and Richard
Dedekin.
Now we'll see this refined and elegant number development in lecture 18 but for now it's
interesting to see that even in ancient times we see reflections of the rigor that was later
required to move the frontiers of mathematics forward even offered at that time.
Today the collection of all numbers that represent measures of all possible lengths along with
their negatives are known as the real numbers.
So the real numbers are any number that represents length on a line or the negative of it and
of course zero and we'll explore these numbers in greater detail in our next lecture.
Well even thousands of years after the Pythagoreans were faced with irrational lengths, irrational
numbers continued to disturb, intrigue and bother mathematicians.
Again we see the difficulty in widening our intuition of number to include that which
first appears as strange and exotic.
But how strange and exotic are these disturbing numbers?
The surprising and perhaps even more disturbing answer to this question will be revealed in
the next two lectures.
The irrational numbers challenge our imagination to take what appears to be abstract and foreign
and embrace it as real.
This challenge was beautifully articulated by the great 17th century mathematician Gottfried
Leibniz who once referred to the notion of irrational numbers as a miracle of analysis,
a monster of the ideal world, almost an amphibian between being and not being.
Enjoy the irrational thoughts of irrational numbers.
