And when I add those two numbers together, I get 25, which notice is in fact the hypotenuse
5, but squared.
5 squared is 25.
And you can see the Pythagorean re-in theorem at work.
Well in our particular right triangle with the square, we actually see that each side,
each leg of the right triangle has length 1.
So this would be a very easy calculation happily.
We see that 1 squared plus 1 squared is the hypotenuse squared, which is h squared.
Well 1 times 1 is 1, so we're just basically adding 1 plus 1, which even I can do.
That's 2.
What we see here is that 2 equals h squared.
But remember, the Pythagoreans believe that h is a rational number.
We're calling it m over n.
So we see the important equal equality, 2 equals m over n all squared.
Well, in other words, 2 equals m squared divided by n squared.
And I want us to remember this equation just for a moment.
We're going to come back to it in just a second.
But as an aside, I want to note that we could actually solve for the number m over n.
I see that 2 equals m squared over n squared.
So if I take the square root of both sides, I discover that m over n is equal to the square
root of 2.
In other words, we actually computed the length of the diagonal.
It's in fact the number square root of 2.
And the Pythagoreans believe that this number is in fact a rational number.
The fraction m over n.
Well, now let's return to the equation 2 equals m squared over n squared.
That is the equation we had before we actually took the square root.
Well, we can see that the natural numbers must satisfy a new relationship if I just multiply
that equation through by n squared.
If I multiply both sides by n squared, the equality remains.
And I'm left now with 2n squared equals m squared.
Well, we're now going to apply Euclid's proposition 14, which states that every natural number
greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers.
Now let's think about this because this is the really tricky part.
Because we are squaring m and n, every prime factor or prime divisor of m squared and
also n squared must appear an even number of times.
Let's think about it.
It's kind of like Noah's Ark in a way.
