So it's not clear why the Egyptians chose this method of expressing fractions.
Now much later, Fibonacci showed that every positive rational number can be expressed
as the sum of distinct unit fractions.
So in fact, even Fibonacci, all the way out to 1202 when he wrote his Lieber Abakai, was
returning to the same ideas that the Egyptians were considering.
Well, as we've already seen, the ancient Greeks, in particular the Pythagoreans, were
one of the first cultures to explore rational numbers as objects of independent and abstract
interest.
Now, given their interest, I want to say a few words about how the Greeks viewed ratios
and their notion of rationality.
Well, as we've already seen, the Greeks had a complicated view of number.
Now of course, that complicated view is only from our vantage point.
Remember, it's a different world, a different culture that we live in today.
Back in the cosmos of the Pythagoreans and Euclid, their view of the world was so different
that their number sense made sense to them.
Today it seems complicated and it's our job to put ourselves in a mindset where that mindset
of number makes sense.
Well, they believed that the natural numbers were the true numbers since they were God-given.
And the rational numbers were really only ratios of natural numbers.
They weren't as real as the natural numbers.
However, in their eyes, the rational numbers formed a gap-free list that could correspond
to a line of numbers.
In fact, the Pythagoreans viewed these numbers as a flow of quantity, which really gives
a beautiful poetic way of expressing their view and their idea of number.
It was Euclid who later made the Greek notion of rational numbers much more rigorous.
Now, he describes the rational numbers in an interesting way.
It's going to be a very geometrical way, but as you remember, in ancient Greece, geometry
and number theory really came together.
Numbers were considered as lengths.
So not surprisingly, to describe ratios, it's going to be in terms of lengths.
Well, in Euclid's elements, this famous collection of books, he declares that two line segments
are called commensurable if there exists a third line segment such that some number
of copies of the third, when laid end to end, produces the first segment and similarly
for the second segment.
Let's take a look at an example to make this make some sense.
Well, here I see two different line segments.
And the question is, are these two line segments commensurable?
Well, if they are, that means that I could find a third line segment for which I could
