This lecture is an invitation into the world of so-called real numbers.
In order to build some intuition into this extended notion of number, we'll visualize
these values through the use of a relic from our own mathematical past, the number line.
While we find evidence of the number line dating back to the 16th century, its first
appearance may have come even earlier.
This geometric point of view offers us a very useful description of real numbers.
Each point on the line corresponds to a real number determined by its distance from a point
marked zero, and whether it's to the right of zero, in which case we say it's positive,
or to the left of zero, in which case we say it's negative.
The number line also provides a means of writing real numbers, namely as a decimal expansion.
Just as with the natural numbers, here we'll discover that we can express real numbers
in bases other than our familiar base ten, or decimal expansion.
As we'll see, these alternate expansions actually can be visualized on the number line
itself.
Decentral expansions of real numbers will lead us to several surprising and perhaps
counterintuitive discoveries.
For example, we'll prove that the decimal number, 0.99999 forever, is actually equal
to one.
This potentially disturbing reality will have a silver lining.
We'll use this observation to uncover a very attractive property that the decimal expansions
of rational numbers possess.
As we'll see, the rational numbers are precisely those numbers whose decimal expansions eventually
repeat forever.
Thus we'll find that the number line together with decimal expansions offers an elegant
and powerful means of expressing and better understanding the real numbers.
Well, the collection of real numbers is a very difficult collection to precisely define.
Although we can define it and describe the numbers in a more informal manner.
The name itself, real numbers, captures the idea that these numbers represent real lengths
of real objects together with their negative values, and was probably coined in response
to the discovery of the more abstract, so-called imaginary numbers that do not represent any
actual lengths.
We'll actually see imaginary numbers for ourselves in Lecture 16, and in Lecture 18 we'll actually
offer a historical overview of the 19th century formalization of the real numbers, but for
now we'll offer a geometric means of viewing these real numbers.
One view that Pythagoreans held for number was a flowing quantity, and even though they
were unable to accept irrational numbers as numbers, their intuition about a flowing
list of numbers was correct.
We now view this flow in the form of a line, and the collection of real numbers can be
viewed as the collection of points on the number line.
It appears that the 16th century Flemish mathematician Simon Stevan may have been the first to explicitly
describe the number line.
He discusses a number line in a text he authored in 1585 that introduced a systematic approach
to the arithmetic of decimal numbers.
In further historical context, I want to note that René Descartes in 1637 described the
famous Cartesian coordinate system from geometry that implicitly utilizes the number line,
in fact two number lines that meet at right angles.
As the number line became popular as a means of viewing numbers, we see an interesting
shift in our perspective.
Let's recall that to the Greeks, the number one unity was the generator or starting point
of all numbers, because from one, if you add to one, you get two, add another one, you
get three, and we could build all the numbers that were God given in the Pythagorean's eyes.
But now, with the number line, we see zero taking center stage.
Everything is surrounded by zero, everything is centered around zero.
Are you to the right of zero or to the left of zero?
Now we see that zero has replaced one in prominence, and this new perspective is a clear movement
away from the ancient Greek sense of number.
The notion of number had evolved yet again.
Well, with the number line, we have a continuum of numbers which Stévan described poetically
as a flowing like a river of magnitudes, which really is a beautiful way of seeing the line
without any breaks at all.
Now there's an important connection between a points on the line and the decimal expansion
of real numbers that I want us to now explore a little bit.
This connection will at last lead to a precise definition of the real numbers.
Stévan was the first to offer a thorough account of decimal expansions of real numbers.
For our purposes here, we'll define the real numbers as the collection of all objects that
can be written as an endless decimal expression.
So as long as you put down a dot and an endless list of digits to the right of that, we'll
call that a real number.
For example, three is a real number because I can express it as three point zero zero
zero zero zero forever, an endless run of zeros is three.
Or I'll consider it a real number because I can express it as an endless decimal expansion.
Seven and a half or seven point five is a real number because I can write it as seven
point five zero zero zero zero zero forever.
A third is a real number because I can write it as zero point three three three three forever.
The square root of two, which we studied earlier, is a real number because it has decimal expansion
that begins one point four one four two one three and so forth.
Even a random number like negative four point zero one two is a real number because I can
write it as negative four point zero one two zero zero zero and so forth forever.
And the famous number pi that we'll study in a future lecture is equal to three point
one four one five nine two six and so forth.
So it's a real number.
Anything that can be expressed with an infinitely long decimal expansion is a real number.
These are all examples.
Well, as an aside, I want to say a word about the evolution of the notation that we use
today for writing decimal numbers.
Stevan's original notation foreshadowed our current decimal notation.
In particular, in Stevan's system, he would have expressed the number sixty one and eight
hundred thirty eight hundred eight hundred thirty seven one thousandths as the following.
He'd write it as a sixty one then a space and then an eight with a roman numeral one
and a superscript and then a space and then the number three, digit three, with a roman
numeral two as a superscript and then another little space with a seven and then a roman
numeral three.
So we see that he's trying to indicate the positional system of where the tenths, hundreds
and thousands go by these roman numerals.
By sixteen fifty three, the notation had evolved so that this same number would have been expressed
as sixty one with a colon eight three seven.
And as an aside, this notation is still used to denote Bible chapters and verses.
Today we use a radex and simply write sixty one point eight three seven, but you can see
how naturally and beautifully that notation evolved from the early early attempts to express
these decimal numbers.
Let's now use the decimal expansion of a real number to locate that number on the number
line.
For example, suppose we want to find the real number one point four one seven and locate
that point on the number line.
Well what do we do?
Well I see that the number is between one and two.
I look to the left of the decimal point and that tells me which two consecutive integers
this number is going to be in between, in this case one and two.
So we look between one and two.
And now since this is base ten or decimal, I take the interval from one to two and I
cut it into ten equally spaced intervals, each having length a tenth.
And then I label them zero one two three four five six seven eight nine.
And I ask myself which the next digit, where do I see that next digit coming in?
Well I see the next digit is four.
And so where do I go?
I go between a four and a five.
So now I know that the number is going to be somewhere in that interval.
Okay that's great.
So again it's a divide and conquer approach.
Now within that tiny interval that has length a tenth, I repeat the process.
So I take that interval and I cut it up into ten smaller intervals each of length one hundredth.
And I label them zero one two three four five six seven eight nine for the digits we have
in base ten.
And I look at the next digit in our number, which in this case is a one, and that tells
me that I'm going to be between the one and the two.
And so I look in that tiny interval there, and what do I do?
I repeat.
I take that small interval, cut it into ten equal pieces.
I label the intervals zero to nine, and then I put my point right on the seven.
So I see one point four one seven.
And I've located that point by whittling down, always dividing by into ten equal pieces.
Here again we see the importance of the positional number system as a way of honing in on the
number.
In fact, Stevan saw the practical value of the decimal system and argued that the monetary
system should be decimal based rather than as fractions which were used at the time.
In fact, he wrote the following.
In view of the great usefulness of the decimal division, it would be a praiseworthy thing
if the people would urge having this put into effect so that the state would declare the
decimal division of the large units legitimate to the end that he who wished might use them.
It would further this cause also if all new money should be based on this system of tenths,
hundredths, thousandths, etc.
Well, it took over 200 years before governments came to see the wisdom of Stevan's suggestion
and adopt a decimal system in their currency.
Of course, there's nothing particularly special about the decimal expansion, although desi
implies base ten.
Just as we saw in lecture four with the natural numbers, here we'll see that we can write
real numbers in bases other than ten and locate them on the number line.
In fact, as we've already seen, the Babylonians found a fractional approximation to the square
root of two which they expressed in their own favorite base sixty.
So we've already seen evidence of expansions that are beyond the base ten.
Now visually on the number line, the base determines how many equal pieces were cutting
up each successive interval.
With base ten, we saw that we cut each interval up into ten equal pieces and then repeat because
it was base ten.
Well, the simplest base is base two, giving us what's known as binary expansions.
Now in this case, we have two digits.
We have a zero and a one, and that's all we're allowed to use.
And the places that we see the positional units are going to be powers of two.
Now in order to see how to interpret the meaning of binary expansions, let's look at a couple
of examples, and for each binary expansion, we'll try to locate and pinpoint that value
on the number line.
So let's consider the real number 0.101, but in base two.
Remember that little tiny two at the end of that number as a subscript reminds us that
this is not a decimal number, but instead is a base two number.
So how would we locate that particular number?
Well, we see that that number is between zero and one because it starts with zero point
something.
So we go between the interval from zero to one, and since we're in base two, we'll constantly
divide things up into two equal pieces, two equal intervals.
We'll cut things in half and then half again.
So here we cut in half, and that halfway point is what we call 0.1 in base two.
Our number is something that starts with 0.1.
So we see we're in the right half of this piece.
So we take that right half interval, and what do we do?
We cut it in half again, and we call the first piece zero and the second piece one.
And we look at our next digit.
Our next digit is zero, which means we go to the left, to the zero interval, which is
an interval of length a quarter.
Now we cut that in half again, and we see that in fact we land on one, which is the
point right in between there.
And so what we see now is the exact location of that number, 0.101 in base two.
And by the way, let's look at that number line.
We see that to get to that point, we first had to travel halfway, so that's a half,
and then we had to travel an extra eighth, because we went a fourth, and then half of
that, which was an eighth.
So a half and an eighth actually equals five eighths, which is the value of this number,
0.101, because the first one, the leftmost one, is located in the halves spot, and then
that rightmost one is located in the eighth spot.
So you can really see how we can visualize these numbers on the actual number line.
Notice, by the way, that this binary markup of the number line is perhaps even more familiar
than our base 10 number line, since it actually resembles a ruler that's marked off in half
inches, quarter inches, eighth inches, sixteenth inches.
In fact, that's the unit, that's the kind of units we use when we actually look at measuring
things for real.
Let's now locate, let's look at another example.
Let's locate the binary expansion, 0.111 in base two on the number line.
Well, again, how do we proceed?
Well, I see this number is between 0 and 1, and so what do I do?
Well, I look between 0 and 1, and I cut the interval right in half, because it's base
two.
I call the first piece 0 and the second piece 1.
I look at our number and see that the next digit is a 1, so I'm in the right spot, so
I'm in the right interval.
I take that interval, cut it in half again, and then what do I see?
Well, I see that our next digit, I call 1, 0, and I call 1, 1.
I see that our next digit is a 1, which means again, I'm to the right.
Then finally, I cut that little interval in half, well, yet again, and what do I see?
Well, I see 0 and 1, and I see I'm exactly at 1, so I'm exactly at that hash mark that
we put in there right there.
And again, we could figure out what this number is, because the first one starting from the
left is in the half spot, so I have 1.5, then I add another one, which is located in the
fourth spot, and then I locate, I have another one, which is located in the eighth spot.
So I have 1.5 plus 1.25 plus 1.8, which if you add them up, we get 7.8, and sure enough,
if you look on this number line, that number is located in the position of 7.8.
So there's a way of taking base 2 expansions and seeing how they appear on the number line,
instead of cutting up into 10 pieces as in base 10, we cut into 2 pieces each time, cut
everything in half for base 2.
Now, as we've noted in the previous lecture, the important 17th century German mathematician
Gottfried Leibniz, who invented calculus independently and concurrently with Isaac Newton, believed
that binary expansions were extremely valuable and even held quasi-mystical and spiritual
properties.
So you could see that there was a great import to this, and indeed, this expansion is important.
The next most basic expansion is base 3, or a base 3 expansion, also known as ternary,
or ternary expansion.
Again, since it's base 3, we now only have 3 digits, and that would be 0, 1, and 2.
So here, we divide our intervals on the number line into 3 equal subintervals, and repeat
each time, calling the first interval 0, the second interval 1, and the third interval
2.
So let's solidify this idea by considering a couple of illustrative examples.
First let's consider the real number 0.121, written in base 3.
Okay, now how would we locate that point on the number line?
Well, what we do is we first see that that number, again, is between 0 and 1, because
we have a 0 point.
So we're going to look just between 0 and 1.
And then what do we do?
Well, the next thing we do is we divide that interval into 3 equal pieces, divide into
thirds.
The first piece we call 0, the next one 1, the next one 2.
And we ask, what digit do we see next?
Well, we see a 1, which means we're in the middle third of that big interval.
Well, we take that interval, and we cut it into 3 pieces, calling them 0, 1, and 2.
And we ask ourselves, what's the next digit we see?
We see 2, which means that we now move to the rightmost tiny third interval that we
see there.
And then finally, we cut that into 3 pieces, and that last digit of a 1 tells us that we're
at the very first new little hash mark that we made.
And so there we've located the number exactly.
Again, divide and conquer, but the question is, how many pieces do we divide each interval
into?
That depends upon the base.
Let's locate, last example, 0.022 in base 3 on the number line.
So what do we do?
Well, again, I see it's a number between 0 and 1, so I look between 0 and 1.
I cut my little interval into 3 equal pieces, called the first 1, 0, second 1, 1, the last
1, 2.
I look at the next digit, and I see another 0, so that tells me I'm in the first subinterval.
What do I do?
Cut that up into 3 equal pieces, and look at the next digit, which is a 2, which tells
me I'm in the far right of that tiny subinterval.
And lastly, I cut that into 3 little pieces, and that 2 tells me that I'm at that very
last, rightmost new hash mark, and there I've located the number yet again.
So again, it's a divide and conquer, which just takes a little bit of practice.
Now once you get used to them, it's not difficult to locate binary or ternary expansions on
the number line, although it does take practice.
It takes practice to get used to it.
In fact, the great 17th century French mathematician Blaise Pascal believed that there's nothing
innately special about our decimal, or base 10, representations.
In fact, any other base would work just as well, such as binary or ternary, and they're
just as natural.
In fact, he wrote the following.
The decimal system has been established somewhat foolishly, to be sure, according to man's
customs, not from a natural necessity as most people would think.
Well, man's customs, in this case, might be the fact that we do have 10 digits, and
we've been using these 10 digits to count for an awfully long time, and that might be
the custom.
If we had a creature that had a different number of fingers, the custom might be different.
For example, what number system, what base system might Donald Duck use?
Well, we see Donald Duck has actually four fingers on each hand, so that would be a total
of eight, and so perhaps he would use a base eight system.
Well, let's now return to our familiar decimal, base 10 system, and look at expansions of
real numbers and consider the expansions of rational numbers, the expansions of fractions.
Now we can find the decimal expansion for a rational number, or a fraction, using long
division.
For example, if we look at one-third, we can actually do the division.
Divide three into one, and when we do the long division, we see 0.33333 and so forth.
So we see this long division gives us the decimal expansion, which we're familiar.
Now decimal expansions for rational numbers must eventually become periodic.
In other words, eventually they must have an endless tail, if you will, of repeating
digits in its decimal expansion, and those repeating digits go on forever.
Now let's see why this assertion holds by looking at another example.
Let's look at 11 sevenths, and actually perform the long division.
Now the magic of the classroom, I'll actually perform this long division very quickly.
Look, you'll see it right there.
There we have it all.
All right, but the key thing I want us to look at are the remainders that we found as
we went down this long, long division.
The remainders we see are four, and then a five, and then a one.
Let me just stop for a second, don't look any further.
Let's think about what the remainders are.
We remember from learning long division a long time ago in our elementary school math
classes that the remainder is always going to be a number between zero, well in this
case we're dividing by seven, so between zero and six, since we're dividing by seven.
Well what does that mean?
It means that if I do this long enough, these numbers are going to be either zero, one,
two, three, four, five, or six.
Those are the only choices.
So if I do this long enough, at some point we have to either hit a zero, in which case
we have a long run of zeros forever, or we're actually going to have something that we've
seen before, because we'll have only six possibilities, and so if we keep taking numbers from six
choices at some point we have to repeat.
Now what happens in our particular example here, I see four, five, one, three, two, six,
and the next one's a four.
Once I hit that four, I know what the next remainder's going to be.
It's going to be a five, and then a one, and then a three, and then a two, and then a six,
and then I hit a four again.
So since these remainders repeat, that tells me that the quotient's going to repeat as
well, and so the decimal 1.571428, and that piece will repeat 571428 and so forth.
That shows us that since the remainders come from a finite list of numbers, that if we
keep repeating at some point we have to see a repeat of numbers forever, or a repeat of
just zeros forever.
That's perfectly fine.
Well, in fact, this reasoning actually holds for any such long division calculation that
we could do, and therefore we actually conclude that all rational numbers, all fractions,
have decimal expansions that are eventually periodic.
Really neat.
Now, how about the other way around?
Do all periodic decimal representations represent rational numbers?
Well, to answer this question, let's revisit the decimal number that we're familiar with,
0.33333 forever on ending.
Let's verify that that decimal number is the number of third.
Now, of course, we know it is, but let's see if we can systematically find a way to verify
that.
Well, let's call that mysterious number, which of course we know is the third.
Let's call 0.33333 forever, repeating forever, let's call that question mark.
Question mark equals 0.33333.
Here's a great trick that I want to share with you.
What we do is we multiply both sides of that equation by 10.
By doing so, I see that 10 times question mark equals, we just move the decimal point
one over to the right, and I see 3.3333333 forever, again, an endless list of threes to
the right of the decimal point.
We have these two equalities, and now let me subtract them.
Notice that the endless run of threes that follow that decimal point line up perfectly,
like little soldiers, and all cancel away, so we get zeros.
What do I see?
I have that 3 in front of the decimal, and I subtract 0, so I see 3 on the right, and
then on the left-hand side, I have 10 question marks.
I take away one question mark, I'm left with nine question marks, and so I see nine question
mark equals three.
I can solve this for question mark by just dividing both sides by nine, and then I see
that question mark equals three-ninths, which reduces to one-third.
We just proved that 0.33333 forever equals one-third through this really clever trick.
Let's try the clever trick one more time, and look at the number 0.999 repeated forever,
and we'll be in for a surprise, and I love this.
Let's follow the same method to see what the rational number is.
So we'll call it question mark.
So question mark is the number 0.99999 forever, unending.
Now what we do is we multiply both sides by 10, because that will move the decimal point
over one unit to the right.
So I see 10 times question mark equals 9.99999 endlessly.
And notice that the endless tail of nines to the right of the decimal point line up perfectly
like little soldiers.
So when I subtract these two equalities from each other, they all drop out and I get a
run of zeros forever.
Nine minus zero is nine, and if I have 10 question marks and take away one question mark, you
know I've got nine question marks.
So now I see nine question mark equals nine.
If I divide both sides by nine, I see that question mark equals nine over nine, which
is one.
So we just proved mathematically that 0.999 forever actually equals the number one.
And this is so annoying and disturbing to people when they first see it, because it
sounds as though the number 0.999 forever should be a number that's a little bit smaller
than one.
But in fact, since those nines go on forever, if we were to try to locate that point on
the number line, we keep going to the furthest most right interval.
So we start here from zero to one, and then we go to the biggest tenth, then we go to
the biggest one hundredth, and then we go to the biggest one one thousandth interval.
We keep moving closer and closer to one, and since we're doing this process forever,
it never ends in the limit we actually are at one, as we just proved.
Anyway, a very counterintuitive fact that 0.999 forever equals one.
Now in fact, this fact also holds in other bases.
So for example, let's consider base three, and look at the number 0.2222 forever in base
three.
Let's see what that number equals in base three.
Well, I'll call it question mark.
So question mark equals 0.2222 forever base three.
Now to move the decimal point over, remember this is base three.
So we don't multiply by ten, we now multiply by three.
So I multiply both sides by three, and I see three question mark equals, and now that point,
that rate x moves one unit to the right, and so I see 2.2222 forever in base three.
The tail of twos line up like little soldiers, I subtract, and what do we see?
We see on the right we just have the number two, followed by infinitely many zeros.
And then if I have three question marks and take away one question mark, I've got two
question marks, and so two question mark equals two, divide both sides by two, question mark
equals one.
So again, we see this is true in all bases, not just in base ten.
So this wonderful, wonderful identity that tells us that 0.999 forever equals one carries
over in other bases as well correspondingly.
Well, we're seeing a pattern emerge in these examples.
We can actually classify the rational numbers as those numbers whose decimal expansions
are eventually periodic.
There's a piece that repeats forever in a decimal expansion.
This result captures in spirit the fact that we know rational numbers precisely, that their
decimal expansions are finite in nature, in that we only need a finite list of digits,
which just gets repeated forever.
In some sense, the rationals are the simple and understandable inhabitants within the
real numbers, while the irrational numbers remain subtle and exotic.
These character traits only come into focus when we see how these numbers sit within the
real number line.
