And so there we've located the number exactly.
Again, divide and conquer, but the question is, how many pieces do we divide each interval
into?
That depends upon the base.
Let's locate, last example, 0.022 in base 3 on the number line.
So what do we do?
Well, again, I see it's a number between 0 and 1, so I look between 0 and 1.
I cut my little interval into 3 equal pieces, called the first 1, 0, second 1, 1, the last
1, 2.
I look at the next digit, and I see another 0, so that tells me I'm in the first subinterval.
What do I do?
Cut that up into 3 equal pieces, and look at the next digit, which is a 2, which tells
me I'm in the far right of that tiny subinterval.
And lastly, I cut that into 3 little pieces, and that 2 tells me that I'm at that very
last, rightmost new hash mark, and there I've located the number yet again.
So again, it's a divide and conquer, which just takes a little bit of practice.
Now once you get used to them, it's not difficult to locate binary or ternary expansions on
the number line, although it does take practice.
It takes practice to get used to it.
In fact, the great 17th century French mathematician Blaise Pascal believed that there's nothing
innately special about our decimal, or base 10, representations.
In fact, any other base would work just as well, such as binary or ternary, and they're
just as natural.
In fact, he wrote the following.
The decimal system has been established somewhat foolishly, to be sure, according to man's
customs, not from a natural necessity as most people would think.
Well, man's customs, in this case, might be the fact that we do have 10 digits, and
we've been using these 10 digits to count for an awfully long time, and that might be
the custom.
If we had a creature that had a different number of fingers, the custom might be different.
For example, what number system, what base system might Donald Duck use?
Well, we see Donald Duck has actually four fingers on each hand, so that would be a total
of eight, and so perhaps he would use a base eight system.
Well, let's now return to our familiar decimal, base 10 system, and look at expansions of
real numbers and consider the expansions of rational numbers, the expansions of fractions.
Now we can find the decimal expansion for a rational number, or a fraction, using long
division.
For example, if we look at one-third, we can actually do the division.
Divide three into one, and when we do the long division, we see 0.33333 and so forth.
So we see this long division gives us the decimal expansion, which we're familiar.
Now decimal expansions for rational numbers must eventually become periodic.
