I see that our next digit is a 1, which means again, I'm to the right.
Then finally, I cut that little interval in half, well, yet again, and what do I see?
Well, I see 0 and 1, and I see I'm exactly at 1, so I'm exactly at that hash mark that
we put in there right there.
And again, we could figure out what this number is, because the first one starting from the
left is in the half spot, so I have 1.5, then I add another one, which is located in the
fourth spot, and then I locate, I have another one, which is located in the eighth spot.
So I have 1.5 plus 1.25 plus 1.8, which if you add them up, we get 7.8, and sure enough,
if you look on this number line, that number is located in the position of 7.8.
So there's a way of taking base 2 expansions and seeing how they appear on the number line,
instead of cutting up into 10 pieces as in base 10, we cut into 2 pieces each time, cut
everything in half for base 2.
Now, as we've noted in the previous lecture, the important 17th century German mathematician
Gottfried Leibniz, who invented calculus independently and concurrently with Isaac Newton, believed
that binary expansions were extremely valuable and even held quasi-mystical and spiritual
properties.
So you could see that there was a great import to this, and indeed, this expansion is important.
The next most basic expansion is base 3, or a base 3 expansion, also known as ternary,
or ternary expansion.
Again, since it's base 3, we now only have 3 digits, and that would be 0, 1, and 2.
So here, we divide our intervals on the number line into 3 equal subintervals, and repeat
each time, calling the first interval 0, the second interval 1, and the third interval
2.
So let's solidify this idea by considering a couple of illustrative examples.
First let's consider the real number 0.121, written in base 3.
Okay, now how would we locate that point on the number line?
Well, what we do is we first see that that number, again, is between 0 and 1, because
we have a 0 point.
So we're going to look just between 0 and 1.
And then what do we do?
Well, the next thing we do is we divide that interval into 3 equal pieces, divide into
thirds.
The first piece we call 0, the next one 1, the next one 2.
And we ask, what digit do we see next?
Well, we see a 1, which means we're in the middle third of that big interval.
Well, we take that interval, and we cut it into 3 pieces, calling them 0, 1, and 2.
And we ask ourselves, what's the next digit we see?
We see 2, which means that we now move to the rightmost tiny third interval that we
see there.
And then finally, we cut that into 3 pieces, and that last digit of a 1 tells us that we're
at the very first new little hash mark that we made.
