And I look at the next digit in our number, which in this case is a one, and that tells
me that I'm going to be between the one and the two.
And so I look in that tiny interval there, and what do I do?
I repeat.
I take that small interval, cut it into ten equal pieces.
I label the intervals zero to nine, and then I put my point right on the seven.
So I see one point four one seven.
And I've located that point by whittling down, always dividing by into ten equal pieces.
Here again we see the importance of the positional number system as a way of honing in on the
number.
In fact, Stevan saw the practical value of the decimal system and argued that the monetary
system should be decimal based rather than as fractions which were used at the time.
In fact, he wrote the following.
In view of the great usefulness of the decimal division, it would be a praiseworthy thing
if the people would urge having this put into effect so that the state would declare the
decimal division of the large units legitimate to the end that he who wished might use them.
It would further this cause also if all new money should be based on this system of tenths,
hundredths, thousandths, etc.
Well, it took over 200 years before governments came to see the wisdom of Stevan's suggestion
and adopt a decimal system in their currency.
Of course, there's nothing particularly special about the decimal expansion, although desi
implies base ten.
Just as we saw in lecture four with the natural numbers, here we'll see that we can write
real numbers in bases other than ten and locate them on the number line.
In fact, as we've already seen, the Babylonians found a fractional approximation to the square
root of two which they expressed in their own favorite base sixty.
So we've already seen evidence of expansions that are beyond the base ten.
Now visually on the number line, the base determines how many equal pieces were cutting
up each successive interval.
With base ten, we saw that we cut each interval up into ten equal pieces and then repeat because
it was base ten.
Well, the simplest base is base two, giving us what's known as binary expansions.
Now in this case, we have two digits.
We have a zero and a one, and that's all we're allowed to use.
And the places that we see the positional units are going to be powers of two.
Now in order to see how to interpret the meaning of binary expansions, let's look at a couple
of examples, and for each binary expansion, we'll try to locate and pinpoint that value
on the number line.
So let's consider the real number 0.101, but in base two.
Remember that little tiny two at the end of that number as a subscript reminds us that
this is not a decimal number, but instead is a base two number.
