He discusses a number line in a text he authored in 1585 that introduced a systematic approach
to the arithmetic of decimal numbers.
In further historical context, I want to note that René Descartes in 1637 described the
famous Cartesian coordinate system from geometry that implicitly utilizes the number line,
in fact two number lines that meet at right angles.
As the number line became popular as a means of viewing numbers, we see an interesting
shift in our perspective.
Let's recall that to the Greeks, the number one unity was the generator or starting point
of all numbers, because from one, if you add to one, you get two, add another one, you
get three, and we could build all the numbers that were God given in the Pythagorean's eyes.
But now, with the number line, we see zero taking center stage.
Everything is surrounded by zero, everything is centered around zero.
Are you to the right of zero or to the left of zero?
Now we see that zero has replaced one in prominence, and this new perspective is a clear movement
away from the ancient Greek sense of number.
The notion of number had evolved yet again.
Well, with the number line, we have a continuum of numbers which Stévan described poetically
as a flowing like a river of magnitudes, which really is a beautiful way of seeing the line
without any breaks at all.
Now there's an important connection between a points on the line and the decimal expansion
of real numbers that I want us to now explore a little bit.
This connection will at last lead to a precise definition of the real numbers.
Stévan was the first to offer a thorough account of decimal expansions of real numbers.
For our purposes here, we'll define the real numbers as the collection of all objects that
can be written as an endless decimal expression.
So as long as you put down a dot and an endless list of digits to the right of that, we'll
call that a real number.
For example, three is a real number because I can express it as three point zero zero
zero zero zero forever, an endless run of zeros is three.
Or I'll consider it a real number because I can express it as an endless decimal expansion.
Seven and a half or seven point five is a real number because I can write it as seven
point five zero zero zero zero zero forever.
A third is a real number because I can write it as zero point three three three three forever.
The square root of two, which we studied earlier, is a real number because it has decimal expansion
that begins one point four one four two one three and so forth.
Even a random number like negative four point zero one two is a real number because I can
write it as negative four point zero one two zero zero zero and so forth forever.
And the famous number pi that we'll study in a future lecture is equal to three point
one four one five nine two six and so forth.
So it's a real number.
Anything that can be expressed with an infinitely long decimal expansion is a real number.
