These are all examples.
Well, as an aside, I want to say a word about the evolution of the notation that we use
today for writing decimal numbers.
Stevan's original notation foreshadowed our current decimal notation.
In particular, in Stevan's system, he would have expressed the number sixty one and eight
hundred thirty eight hundred eight hundred thirty seven one thousandths as the following.
He'd write it as a sixty one then a space and then an eight with a roman numeral one
and a superscript and then a space and then the number three, digit three, with a roman
numeral two as a superscript and then another little space with a seven and then a roman
numeral three.
So we see that he's trying to indicate the positional system of where the tenths, hundreds
and thousands go by these roman numerals.
By sixteen fifty three, the notation had evolved so that this same number would have been expressed
as sixty one with a colon eight three seven.
And as an aside, this notation is still used to denote Bible chapters and verses.
Today we use a radex and simply write sixty one point eight three seven, but you can see
how naturally and beautifully that notation evolved from the early early attempts to express
these decimal numbers.
Let's now use the decimal expansion of a real number to locate that number on the number
line.
For example, suppose we want to find the real number one point four one seven and locate
that point on the number line.
Well what do we do?
Well I see that the number is between one and two.
I look to the left of the decimal point and that tells me which two consecutive integers
this number is going to be in between, in this case one and two.
So we look between one and two.
And now since this is base ten or decimal, I take the interval from one to two and I
cut it into ten equally spaced intervals, each having length a tenth.
And then I label them zero one two three four five six seven eight nine.
And I ask myself which the next digit, where do I see that next digit coming in?
Well I see the next digit is four.
And so where do I go?
I go between a four and a five.
So now I know that the number is going to be somewhere in that interval.
Okay that's great.
So again it's a divide and conquer approach.
Now within that tiny interval that has length a tenth, I repeat the process.
So I take that interval and I cut it up into ten smaller intervals each of length one hundredth.
And I label them zero one two three four five six seven eight nine for the digits we have
in base ten.
