This lecture is an invitation into the world of so-called real numbers.
In order to build some intuition into this extended notion of number, we'll visualize
these values through the use of a relic from our own mathematical past, the number line.
While we find evidence of the number line dating back to the 16th century, its first
appearance may have come even earlier.
This geometric point of view offers us a very useful description of real numbers.
Each point on the line corresponds to a real number determined by its distance from a point
marked zero, and whether it's to the right of zero, in which case we say it's positive,
or to the left of zero, in which case we say it's negative.
The number line also provides a means of writing real numbers, namely as a decimal expansion.
Just as with the natural numbers, here we'll discover that we can express real numbers
in bases other than our familiar base ten, or decimal expansion.
As we'll see, these alternate expansions actually can be visualized on the number line
itself.
Decentral expansions of real numbers will lead us to several surprising and perhaps
counterintuitive discoveries.
For example, we'll prove that the decimal number, 0.99999 forever, is actually equal
to one.
This potentially disturbing reality will have a silver lining.
We'll use this observation to uncover a very attractive property that the decimal expansions
of rational numbers possess.
As we'll see, the rational numbers are precisely those numbers whose decimal expansions eventually
repeat forever.
Thus we'll find that the number line together with decimal expansions offers an elegant
and powerful means of expressing and better understanding the real numbers.
Well, the collection of real numbers is a very difficult collection to precisely define.
Although we can define it and describe the numbers in a more informal manner.
The name itself, real numbers, captures the idea that these numbers represent real lengths
of real objects together with their negative values, and was probably coined in response
to the discovery of the more abstract, so-called imaginary numbers that do not represent any
actual lengths.
We'll actually see imaginary numbers for ourselves in Lecture 16, and in Lecture 18 we'll actually
offer a historical overview of the 19th century formalization of the real numbers, but for
now we'll offer a geometric means of viewing these real numbers.
One view that Pythagoreans held for number was a flowing quantity, and even though they
were unable to accept irrational numbers as numbers, their intuition about a flowing
list of numbers was correct.
We now view this flow in the form of a line, and the collection of real numbers can be
viewed as the collection of points on the number line.
It appears that the 16th century Flemish mathematician Simon Stevan may have been the first to explicitly
describe the number line.
