And this is so annoying and disturbing to people when they first see it, because it
sounds as though the number 0.999 forever should be a number that's a little bit smaller
than one.
But in fact, since those nines go on forever, if we were to try to locate that point on
the number line, we keep going to the furthest most right interval.
So we start here from zero to one, and then we go to the biggest tenth, then we go to
the biggest one hundredth, and then we go to the biggest one one thousandth interval.
We keep moving closer and closer to one, and since we're doing this process forever,
it never ends in the limit we actually are at one, as we just proved.
Anyway, a very counterintuitive fact that 0.999 forever equals one.
Now in fact, this fact also holds in other bases.
So for example, let's consider base three, and look at the number 0.2222 forever in base
three.
Let's see what that number equals in base three.
Well, I'll call it question mark.
So question mark equals 0.2222 forever base three.
Now to move the decimal point over, remember this is base three.
So we don't multiply by ten, we now multiply by three.
So I multiply both sides by three, and I see three question mark equals, and now that point,
that rate x moves one unit to the right, and so I see 2.2222 forever in base three.
The tail of twos line up like little soldiers, I subtract, and what do we see?
We see on the right we just have the number two, followed by infinitely many zeros.
And then if I have three question marks and take away one question mark, I've got two
question marks, and so two question mark equals two, divide both sides by two, question mark
equals one.
So again, we see this is true in all bases, not just in base ten.
So this wonderful, wonderful identity that tells us that 0.999 forever equals one carries
over in other bases as well correspondingly.
Well, we're seeing a pattern emerge in these examples.
We can actually classify the rational numbers as those numbers whose decimal expansions
are eventually periodic.
There's a piece that repeats forever in a decimal expansion.
This result captures in spirit the fact that we know rational numbers precisely, that their
decimal expansions are finite in nature, in that we only need a finite list of digits,
which just gets repeated forever.
In some sense, the rationals are the simple and understandable inhabitants within the
real numbers, while the irrational numbers remain subtle and exotic.
These character traits only come into focus when we see how these numbers sit within the
real number line.
