In other words, eventually they must have an endless tail, if you will, of repeating
digits in its decimal expansion, and those repeating digits go on forever.
Now let's see why this assertion holds by looking at another example.
Let's look at 11 sevenths, and actually perform the long division.
Now the magic of the classroom, I'll actually perform this long division very quickly.
Look, you'll see it right there.
There we have it all.
All right, but the key thing I want us to look at are the remainders that we found as
we went down this long, long division.
The remainders we see are four, and then a five, and then a one.
Let me just stop for a second, don't look any further.
Let's think about what the remainders are.
We remember from learning long division a long time ago in our elementary school math
classes that the remainder is always going to be a number between zero, well in this
case we're dividing by seven, so between zero and six, since we're dividing by seven.
Well what does that mean?
It means that if I do this long enough, these numbers are going to be either zero, one,
two, three, four, five, or six.
Those are the only choices.
So if I do this long enough, at some point we have to either hit a zero, in which case
we have a long run of zeros forever, or we're actually going to have something that we've
seen before, because we'll have only six possibilities, and so if we keep taking numbers from six
choices at some point we have to repeat.
Now what happens in our particular example here, I see four, five, one, three, two, six,
and the next one's a four.
Once I hit that four, I know what the next remainder's going to be.
It's going to be a five, and then a one, and then a three, and then a two, and then a six,
and then I hit a four again.
So since these remainders repeat, that tells me that the quotient's going to repeat as
well, and so the decimal 1.571428, and that piece will repeat 571428 and so forth.
That shows us that since the remainders come from a finite list of numbers, that if we
keep repeating at some point we have to see a repeat of numbers forever, or a repeat of
just zeros forever.
That's perfectly fine.
Well, in fact, this reasoning actually holds for any such long division calculation that
we could do, and therefore we actually conclude that all rational numbers, all fractions,
have decimal expansions that are eventually periodic.
Really neat.
Now, how about the other way around?
Do all periodic decimal representations represent rational numbers?
Well, to answer this question, let's revisit the decimal number that we're familiar with,
