So how would we locate that particular number?
Well, we see that that number is between zero and one because it starts with zero point
something.
So we go between the interval from zero to one, and since we're in base two, we'll constantly
divide things up into two equal pieces, two equal intervals.
We'll cut things in half and then half again.
So here we cut in half, and that halfway point is what we call 0.1 in base two.
Our number is something that starts with 0.1.
So we see we're in the right half of this piece.
So we take that right half interval, and what do we do?
We cut it in half again, and we call the first piece zero and the second piece one.
And we look at our next digit.
Our next digit is zero, which means we go to the left, to the zero interval, which is
an interval of length a quarter.
Now we cut that in half again, and we see that in fact we land on one, which is the
point right in between there.
And so what we see now is the exact location of that number, 0.101 in base two.
And by the way, let's look at that number line.
We see that to get to that point, we first had to travel halfway, so that's a half,
and then we had to travel an extra eighth, because we went a fourth, and then half of
that, which was an eighth.
So a half and an eighth actually equals five eighths, which is the value of this number,
0.101, because the first one, the leftmost one, is located in the halves spot, and then
that rightmost one is located in the eighth spot.
So you can really see how we can visualize these numbers on the actual number line.
Notice, by the way, that this binary markup of the number line is perhaps even more familiar
than our base 10 number line, since it actually resembles a ruler that's marked off in half
inches, quarter inches, eighth inches, sixteenth inches.
In fact, that's the unit, that's the kind of units we use when we actually look at measuring
things for real.
Let's now locate, let's look at another example.
Let's locate the binary expansion, 0.111 in base two on the number line.
Well, again, how do we proceed?
Well, I see this number is between 0 and 1, and so what do I do?
Well, I look between 0 and 1, and I cut the interval right in half, because it's base
two.
I call the first piece 0 and the second piece 1.
I look at our number and see that the next digit is a 1, so I'm in the right spot, so
I'm in the right interval.
I take that interval, cut it in half again, and then what do I see?
Well, I see that our next digit, I call 1, 0, and I call 1, 1.
