0.33333 forever on ending.
Let's verify that that decimal number is the number of third.
Now, of course, we know it is, but let's see if we can systematically find a way to verify
that.
Well, let's call that mysterious number, which of course we know is the third.
Let's call 0.33333 forever, repeating forever, let's call that question mark.
Question mark equals 0.33333.
Here's a great trick that I want to share with you.
What we do is we multiply both sides of that equation by 10.
By doing so, I see that 10 times question mark equals, we just move the decimal point
one over to the right, and I see 3.3333333 forever, again, an endless list of threes to
the right of the decimal point.
We have these two equalities, and now let me subtract them.
Notice that the endless run of threes that follow that decimal point line up perfectly,
like little soldiers, and all cancel away, so we get zeros.
What do I see?
I have that 3 in front of the decimal, and I subtract 0, so I see 3 on the right, and
then on the left-hand side, I have 10 question marks.
I take away one question mark, I'm left with nine question marks, and so I see nine question
mark equals three.
I can solve this for question mark by just dividing both sides by nine, and then I see
that question mark equals three-ninths, which reduces to one-third.
We just proved that 0.33333 forever equals one-third through this really clever trick.
Let's try the clever trick one more time, and look at the number 0.999 repeated forever,
and we'll be in for a surprise, and I love this.
Let's follow the same method to see what the rational number is.
So we'll call it question mark.
So question mark is the number 0.99999 forever, unending.
Now what we do is we multiply both sides by 10, because that will move the decimal point
over one unit to the right.
So I see 10 times question mark equals 9.99999 endlessly.
And notice that the endless tail of nines to the right of the decimal point line up perfectly
like little soldiers.
So when I subtract these two equalities from each other, they all drop out and I get a
run of zeros forever.
Nine minus zero is nine, and if I have 10 question marks and take away one question mark, you
know I've got nine question marks.
So now I see nine question mark equals nine.
If I divide both sides by nine, I see that question mark equals nine over nine, which
is one.
So we just proved mathematically that 0.999 forever actually equals the number one.
