Now, in fact, just to mention the mathematics again, Borel considered an even more general
notion of random number, and this is astounding, but a little bit complicated, so let's see
if we can think about this together.
Remember, what we just talked about were called normal numbers in base ten.
Borel actually studied numbers that he called normal numbers, just normal numbers, and what
that means, a number is a normal number if the number is normal in every base.
So take the number, the decimal number you're thinking of, right in base ten, it's normal
in base ten.
Write that same exact number, express it in base two, and it will be normal in base two,
which means in base two we only have two digits, zero and one, and we'd see the zeros happening
half the time on average, and the ones appearing half the time, so it's fifty-fifty, we see
zeros and ones on average the same amount of time.
If we look at base three, so we have zero, one, and two, we see each one of those digits
appearing how often?
A third of the time, and then if we look at base four, base five, base six, and so forth,
if the number is normal in every single base, then we say it's a normal number.
Well actually proved an even more astounding result.
The likelihood that a random real number is a normal number, so normal in every single
base is one hundred percent.
So if you randomly pick a number, the digits are going to basically be every kind of hodge
podge collection of digits in any kind of order you can imagine, and those orders will
be all appearing the right proportion of the time as if the number were selected by rolling
a die.
So rolling a fair tensile a die, what we're seeing is an actual correct way of generating
a real number.
Now if the likelihood that a random real number possesses a particular property, and if that
likelihood is one hundred percent, then we say in mathematics that almost all, we always
put that in quotes by the way, almost all real numbers possess that property.
So applying this new phrase, we could say almost all numbers are irrational.
And furthermore, we could say that almost all numbers are normal.
And hence the name normal, because almost all numbers are normal.
Thus for any random real number we think of, we expect that the digits to be such that
any particular run of digits will occur that the true, fair share of the time.
Well, within the world of real numbers, our familiar rational numbers are truly the exception,
while the at first exotic irrational numbers are in fact the rule.
It's intriguing actually to wonder how the Pythagoreans would have reacted to this new
found reality, one in which they're God given natural numbers, and even their beloved
ratios are totally overrun and outnumbered by the overwhelming dominance of the disturbing
irrational numbers.
Again we see the notion of numbers as a constantly evolving object.
And in the next lecture, we'll take a look at a very exotic collection of numbers sitting
nicely and beautifully inside the real number line.
