So this is amazing because even though we don't know anything about the digits, we actually
can say facts that the digits must obey.
This is amazing.
This is the power of the decimal expansion.
Now most of the digits we don't know, of course, and we don't know the list and entirety,
but even if we knew the first billion digits, it tells us nothing because we don't know
what happens at the tail.
In terms of rationality and irrationality, all we care about is the end game.
Well this insight offers us a new means of describing irrational numbers.
Any number whose decimal expansion never repeats is an irrational number.
So for example, we could actually build an irrational number by giving the decimal expansion
for it.
Here's one, for example.
Let's say 0.101, 001, 0001, 0001, and so forth.
At every stage, I add an extra 0 to buffer between the two ones, and so I add more and
more zeros.
Thus we see this number must be irrational because its decimal expansion never repeats.
The zeros are getting more and more robust as we go down the list.
Well this irrational number seems very contrived, and indeed it was.
We had to make sure that we had a system of placing down the digits so that they never
became periodic.
So what happens if we pick a real number at random?
Well, we know that the real numbers come in two basic flavors.
They're either rational or irrational.
The rational numbers are the ones that are the most familiar to us because we use fractions
regularly in our everyday lives.
The irrational numbers are the far more exotic ones.
They're difficult for us to name, and it's even a challenging task today to verify their
irrationality.
It's tricky business.
Well, now, suppose that we pick a number at random.
Say for example, we place a pin on the number line while we're blindfolded to select a particular
point.
Well, the random real number we select will either be a rational or an irrational number.
What's the likelihood that the random number will be one of the more familiar rational
numbers?
Well, if you think about this for a second, a blindfold and a pin are not great tools
for producing a random real number.
For one thing, we'll almost certainly miss the number line because the number line, of
course, is very, very thin, and we'd be blindfolded, and even more dangerously, we might even prick
our finger, and that would be awful.
So let's put down the sharp objects and focus on the numbers.
