It means that a number is a normal number in base 10 if every digit appears on average
a tenth of the time, every pair of digits consecutively appears every one hundredth
of the time on average, every three digit number you could think of on average appears
one in a thousand times and so forth, every four digit number, every five digit number
and so forth.
That's what it means for a number to be a normal number in base 10.
Now let's return to our randomly generated real number.
What's the likelihood that it's a normal number in base 10?
So just rolling that 10-sided die forever, what's the likelihood that in fact it will
be normal no matter what the runs of digits we look at?
Well this question remained unanswered until the 20th century when the influential French
mathematician Emile Borel provided a complete answer in 1909.
He proved that the likelihood that a random real number is normal in base 10 is one hundred
percent.
That means that if you pick a number out at random by rolling a 10-sided die forever,
that every length of runs of digits you can think of will appear the appropriate amount
of the time.
Absolutely amazing.
Basically in some vague sense he's proving that every number, the probability that a
number is random is essentially a hundred percent.
So if you just look down and randomly grab a number, it's going to be normal in this
sense.
All the digits will be all messed up and appear in all the different orders that you could
imagine and appear the right amount of the time, the right proportion of the time.
By the way, Borel is perhaps the only 20th century mathematician who actually has a crater
on the moon named after him.
There's a little piece of trivia that's amusing.
Well, in view of our previous observations we see yet again that through this refined
notion the rational numbers such as a third and a half are indeed very strange.
Why is a third so strange?
Well, because the decimal expansion for a third is what?
It's zero point three three three three three forever.
Imagine rolling a fair ten-sided die forever and only seeing threes.
It's not likely.
One third is a rare number.
What about a half?
Well, a half is zero point five zero zero zero zero forever.
Imagine picking up a fair ten-sided die, rolling it forever and seeing first a five and then
zeros forever.
It's not going to happen.
These rational numbers are rare, so again we have a different intuitive sense of why
these familiar numbers really are the exception.
