Welcome to the commonplace chaos within the real numbers.
In the previous lecture, we discovered that the numbers having decimal expansions that
eventually repeat are precisely the rational numbers, that is, the fractions.
In view of this theorem, we now see the decimal representation of real numbers also offers
an alternative means of classifying the enigmatic irrational numbers.
This classification offers an alternative and attractive means of producing other irrational
numbers.
In view of the fact that real numbers are either rational or irrational, a natural question
emerges.
What proportion of the real numbers is rational and what proportion is irrational?
For example, do the rational numbers make up half of the reals?
Well, our classification of rational and irrational real numbers by their decimal expansions holds
the key to unlocking an intuitive answer to this very question.
It also leads to a surprising realization that we'll make mathematically precise.
But the realization is that essentially zero percent of the real numbers are rational and
essentially a hundred percent of the real numbers are irrational.
Well, this assertion is totally counterintuitive because the rational numbers are the ones
with which we're most familiar and the irrational numbers appear as the exotic and rare.
Thus, here we discover an important recurring theme.
Often the seemingly familiar is the exception and the exotic is the rule.
While we'll see that the rationals are a very sparse collection within the real numbers,
we'll also see that they're spread out throughout the number line and are said to be dense.
We'll close this lecture with a description of some incredible facts involving modern
related concepts known as normal numbers, first studied by the important French mathematician
Emile Borel in 1909.
Well, let's begin by studying the decimal digits of irrational numbers and see why we
can view these digits in some sense as chaotic.
Well, first let's recall one of the main observations that we made in the previous lecture.
The rational numbers are precisely those real numbers whose decimal expansions are eventually
periodic.
Thus, we conclude that the decimal expansion for the square root of 2 will never become
periodic because we proved, in fact, the Pythagoreans proved even before us, that the
square root of 2 is irrational.
So think about this.
This is absolutely stunning because you could compute the first few decimal digits for the
decimal expansion for the square root of 2 using a calculator or a computer, but we can't
say anything about the entire infinite list.
Amazingly, we can say something about this list of digits.
We can say that they will never repeat.
So even though we don't know what those digits are, we know a property they possess because
the digits can't repeat for if they were to eventually repeat forever, that would make
it a rational number, a ratio, and we know the square root of 2 is not.
