In fact, mathematically, the probability is 0.
This result also implies that the likelihood that a real number selected at random, like
we're doing here, is going to be an irrational number is 100%.
It's 100% likely that we'll produce an irrational number, meaning that as we roll that die,
the digits will never eventually repeat and repeat forever.
Well, this counterintuitive and perhaps disturbing discovery offers us a new insight and a wonderful
opportunity to retrain our intuition about numbers.
Remember, whenever we're surprised in life, that's a moment where learning takes place.
And here, this surprise allows us to re hone our intuition.
In some sense, there are more irrational numbers than rational numbers.
In fact, what we're saying is that there are way, way more irrational numbers.
Now how can we make this make sense?
In fact, this idea of zero probability of selecting a rational number is still a little
disturbing because, of course, we know the rational numbers do exist.
So couldn't I just by accident happen to pick one?
But let me try to give you an analogy to get a sense of why this is really essentially
impossible and mathematically is impossible.
Suppose that we take a piece of paper and just draw a bunch of tiny dots on it or imagine
taking a pin and punching holes in the paper just a few times with the pin to make little
teeny holes, very, very tiny dots or very, very tiny holes, very, very tiny, almost invisible.
Well if you were to mark that, then when you looked at the white piece of paper, suppose
you marked it, let's say, with black dots, you would see those black dots.
That's all you would see.
But why would you see those black dots?
It's interesting.
The reason why you see the black dots is because there are so few of them that they stand
out.
That's like the rationals in the real numbers.
There are so few of them that they stand out in our minds and therefore they're familiar
to us.
Now, what if we were to close our eyes and take a pin and just put it down randomly on
that piece of paper that contains just a couple of black dots?
What's the likelihood that that pin will land on exactly one of those dots?
Well, it's clear that it's extremely unlikely and really the probability is zero.
Even though the black dots exist, the probability of hitting one at random is zero.
And that's the same principle that's going on here.
Thus we see that what first appeared to be exotic are more the norm.
And what first appeared to be the norm are in actuality the exotic and quite rare.
So the familiar rationals really are the unusual and these seemingly mysterious irrationals
are more the commonplace.
It's an interesting realization that in our everyday experiences and encounters with numbers,
it doesn't actually provide us with an accurate sense of how the rationals and irrationals
