Let's actually see a method that in fact establishes this assertion that goes back to ideas that
were originally generated by the great mathematician Archimedes in the third century BCE.
So here's the idea.
Let's just take the interval between 0 and 1 and pick two points, A and B, and put them
down.
There they are.
Now my mission is to try to show that there has to exist a rational in between these two
points.
So what do we do?
Well let's just consider the reciprocals of the natural numbers, 1 over 2, 1 over 3,
1 over 4, 1 over 5, 1 over 6.
We notice that as those numbers in the denominators increase, the numbers themselves decrease
because I'm looking at the reciprocal.
So they're getting closer and closer to 0, they're getting smaller and smaller.
Well I have this fixed interval length from A to B, and I'll just wait.
I will just literally wait until the 1 over something is actually smaller than this length.
This length is not going anywhere, but those reciprocals are quickly going to 0.
1 over 1,000, 1 over 1,001, 1 over 1,002 and so forth.
So I wait until I have a reciprocal that is smaller than this length.
In this example it looks like maybe 1 13th will fit the bill.
And what do I do?
I start at 0 and start marking off by 13ths.
So 1 13th, 2 13th, 3 13th, 4 13th, 5 13th, 6 13th, 7 13th, and look 7 13ths gets right
in between that interval.
And this method actually will always work.
And put mathematically what we just established was that the fact that the rational numbers
are dense on the number line, or equivalently we could say that the rational numbers are
dense in the real numbers.
Thus paradoxically, even though the rational numbers are hard to find by a random game
of Heiden and Gossick, they are spread out all over the number line, thus further demonstrating
the depth and complexity of the real numbers.
Well, let's now consider a more refined notion of a random real number.
So we're going to try to now up the abstraction a little bit here and see what really a random
real number should be.
Now if we consider rolling one 10-sided die to generate the digits of a random real number
just as we did before to generate the beginning digits of our random number, well here's
a question.
How often would we expect to see the digit 3 appear in that random real number?
Let's think about that for a second.
So I'm going to roll this fair 10-sided die forever and the question is how often will
we see on average the digit 3?
How often will the die land with a 3 up?
