actually fit together.
So again, our intuition is off.
Now despite this new insight that on the number line, it is nearly impossible to accidentally
stumble upon a rational number, we're now going to see paradoxically that the rational
numbers are essentially everywhere on the number line.
Again we see these two counter contradictory ideas coming together.
What I'm saying is that the rationals are spread out all over the place.
You can't help but be near one.
And to see that, let's just look at the interval between zero and one and start running down
rationals.
First we'll put in a half.
Now we'll put in one third and two thirds.
See how slowly those rationals are filling up that interval.
If we put in the fourths, we see one fourth, a half, and three fourths.
We put in the fifths, we see one fifth, two fifths, three fifths, four fifths.
Put in the sixths, put in the sevenths, one seventh, two sevenths, three sevenths, four
sevenths, five sevenths, six sevenths, slowly and keep going.
Notice how it's slowly filling up the entire interval with these essentially invisible rational
numbers.
Well mathematically speaking, we say that the rational numbers are dense.
That's the word we use.
The rational numbers are dense on the real line.
Now let's be a little bit more precise to see exactly what this means.
For the rational numbers to be dense, what we're saying is that they essentially are
going to be everywhere on the line.
And to show that the rational numbers are dense, we must show the following.
That given any two different points on their number line, we can always find a rational
number in between.
Let's think about that.
Suppose I give you two different points on the number line.
I've got to find a rational in between.
If the two points were far apart, this is really not a very exciting result.
So from the mathematical point of view, we have to imagine these two points really close
together, really close.
And even though they're so close together, it turns out there's always a rational in
between.
Make them closer, we'll still find a rational.
As long as the two points differ, so there's a gap in between, then we can always find
a rational.
That's what it means to be dense.
Now I'm actually going to show you why this is a believable fact, even though we see how
the rationals fill up the interval from 0 to 1.
