a 9, and a 0, then a 4, a 9, and a 0, then a 4, and a 9, and a 0, 490, 490, forever?
Well, if I were to do that, then I would have generated a rational number, because it would
have a periodic tail, which means it's a fraction.
But let's think about that.
What is the likelihood that that's going to happen?
Well, if you think about it just qualitatively, it's clear that it's not very likely at all,
because if I keep rolling this die forever, could you imagine what an amazing coincidence
it would be to see a 4, a 9, a 0, a 4, 9, 0, 490, and never see a 1, or a 6, or a 5 again?
That seems remarkable.
In fact, the probability is, in fact, 0.
And let me try to explain to you how we could see that for ourselves.
If I roll this die one more time, what's the probability that I will see another 4?
Well, there's 10 equally likely possibilities, one of which is the 4.
So that's 1 tenth.
So now it's 1 tenth likely that I'm going to have a 4.
Once I have the 4, what's the probability that when I roll the next time, I'll see the
9?
Well, that's going to be 1 out of 10, but I multiply these probabilities together, so
that's 1 1 hundredth.
So 1 1 hundredth is the probability, very small, 1 in 100, that I'll roll a 4 followed
by a 9.
Now to roll a 0 after that, that's going to be now 1 in 1,000.
And to roll a 4 after the 0 is going to be 1 in 10,000, and so forth.
And this product is getting smaller and smaller, and in fact, you could see it's approaching
0.
In fact, if we look at this product for the complete infinite decimal expansion, mathematicians
say this product is 0.
Therefore, mathematicians declare that the likelihood that a decimal expansion is eventually
periodic equals 0%.
In other words, we have a sense that the likelihood that a random real number selected genuinely
at random is rational is 0.
Now just for fun, let me roll it one more time, and let's see if we get the beginning.
Let's see if we get that 4.
You ready?
And it's a 1.
So you see, it was not likely that we're going to repeat 4 9 0 forever.
There you have it.
Well, this result, which is really startling at first, but then when we think about it,
makes sense when you think of the actual physical die being rolled again and again and again,
seeing a finite list of digits repeating forever is highly unlikely.
It now becomes a little bit more intuitive that we should believe that finding a rational
number at random is extremely unlikely.
