Welcome to the commonplace chaos within the real numbers.
In the previous lecture, we discovered that the numbers having decimal expansions that
eventually repeat are precisely the rational numbers, that is, the fractions.
In view of this theorem, we now see the decimal representation of real numbers also offers
an alternative means of classifying the enigmatic irrational numbers.
This classification offers an alternative and attractive means of producing other irrational
numbers.
In view of the fact that real numbers are either rational or irrational, a natural question
emerges.
What proportion of the real numbers is rational and what proportion is irrational?
For example, do the rational numbers make up half of the reals?
Well, our classification of rational and irrational real numbers by their decimal expansions holds
the key to unlocking an intuitive answer to this very question.
It also leads to a surprising realization that we'll make mathematically precise.
But the realization is that essentially zero percent of the real numbers are rational and
essentially a hundred percent of the real numbers are irrational.
Well, this assertion is totally counterintuitive because the rational numbers are the ones
with which we're most familiar and the irrational numbers appear as the exotic and rare.
Thus, here we discover an important recurring theme.
Often the seemingly familiar is the exception and the exotic is the rule.
While we'll see that the rationals are a very sparse collection within the real numbers,
we'll also see that they're spread out throughout the number line and are said to be dense.
We'll close this lecture with a description of some incredible facts involving modern
related concepts known as normal numbers, first studied by the important French mathematician
Emile Borel in 1909.
Well, let's begin by studying the decimal digits of irrational numbers and see why we
can view these digits in some sense as chaotic.
Well, first let's recall one of the main observations that we made in the previous lecture.
The rational numbers are precisely those real numbers whose decimal expansions are eventually
periodic.
Thus, we conclude that the decimal expansion for the square root of 2 will never become
periodic because we proved, in fact, the Pythagoreans proved even before us, that the
square root of 2 is irrational.
So think about this.
This is absolutely stunning because you could compute the first few decimal digits for the
decimal expansion for the square root of 2 using a calculator or a computer, but we can't
say anything about the entire infinite list.
Amazingly, we can say something about this list of digits.
We can say that they will never repeat.
So even though we don't know what those digits are, we know a property they possess because
the digits can't repeat for if they were to eventually repeat forever, that would make
it a rational number, a ratio, and we know the square root of 2 is not.
So this is amazing because even though we don't know anything about the digits, we actually
can say facts that the digits must obey.
This is amazing.
This is the power of the decimal expansion.
Now most of the digits we don't know, of course, and we don't know the list and entirety,
but even if we knew the first billion digits, it tells us nothing because we don't know
what happens at the tail.
In terms of rationality and irrationality, all we care about is the end game.
Well this insight offers us a new means of describing irrational numbers.
Any number whose decimal expansion never repeats is an irrational number.
So for example, we could actually build an irrational number by giving the decimal expansion
for it.
Here's one, for example.
Let's say 0.101, 001, 0001, 0001, and so forth.
At every stage, I add an extra 0 to buffer between the two ones, and so I add more and
more zeros.
Thus we see this number must be irrational because its decimal expansion never repeats.
The zeros are getting more and more robust as we go down the list.
Well this irrational number seems very contrived, and indeed it was.
We had to make sure that we had a system of placing down the digits so that they never
became periodic.
So what happens if we pick a real number at random?
Well, we know that the real numbers come in two basic flavors.
They're either rational or irrational.
The rational numbers are the ones that are the most familiar to us because we use fractions
regularly in our everyday lives.
The irrational numbers are the far more exotic ones.
They're difficult for us to name, and it's even a challenging task today to verify their
irrationality.
It's tricky business.
Well, now, suppose that we pick a number at random.
Say for example, we place a pin on the number line while we're blindfolded to select a particular
point.
Well, the random real number we select will either be a rational or an irrational number.
What's the likelihood that the random number will be one of the more familiar rational
numbers?
Well, if you think about this for a second, a blindfold and a pin are not great tools
for producing a random real number.
For one thing, we'll almost certainly miss the number line because the number line, of
course, is very, very thin, and we'd be blindfolded, and even more dangerously, we might even prick
our finger, and that would be awful.
So let's put down the sharp objects and focus on the numbers.
Well, it turns out that we could actually produce a random number, a random real number,
by generating its digits by pure chance.
And what we could do, actually, is imagine rolling a 10-sided die, because if we were
to roll a 10-sided die, which would have all the digits from 0 all the way out to 9, then
in fact, if the die was just as equally likely to come up one side than the other, then in
fact, we would see we'd be generating random digits and putting it together, stringing
it together, we would have a random number.
Well, in fact, we can try this.
Now, in terms of rationality and irrationality, all that matters are the digits to the right
of the decimal point.
So for our example, let's just suppose we start with 0 point, and then we'll roll and
see what the random is.
Now, in fact, you can actually get these dice.
Here's a die, and you can actually see the digits.
Here we see 0, 8, 2, 6, 4, and if you turn it around, you actually see 1, 7, 3, 5, 6,
5, 9.
So all 10 digits are represented here, and we could now generate a genuine random real
number by rolling the die to determine the digits.
And I'll do this right now, and I'll record the results.
So let's see what number we get.
This is going to be an actual random number.
We start with an 8.
Roll again.
A 7.
Roll again.
A 0.
Roll again.
Oops.
Luckily, I have a spare.
Roll again.
A 3.
Roll again.
A 4.
Roll again.
A 9.
Roll again.
A 0.
And we can keep doing this, but let's stop, because let me ask a question now.
So we have, so far, in our random number, 0.8703490.
Now the question is, is it possible that this now will repeat?
For example, let's just take the last three digits, the 490, and ask, is it possible that
when I roll this again and again and again, this fair 10-sided die, that I'll see a 4,
a 9, and a 0, then a 4, a 9, and a 0, then a 4, and a 9, and a 0, 490, 490, forever?
Well, if I were to do that, then I would have generated a rational number, because it would
have a periodic tail, which means it's a fraction.
But let's think about that.
What is the likelihood that that's going to happen?
Well, if you think about it just qualitatively, it's clear that it's not very likely at all,
because if I keep rolling this die forever, could you imagine what an amazing coincidence
it would be to see a 4, a 9, a 0, a 4, 9, 0, 490, and never see a 1, or a 6, or a 5 again?
That seems remarkable.
In fact, the probability is, in fact, 0.
And let me try to explain to you how we could see that for ourselves.
If I roll this die one more time, what's the probability that I will see another 4?
Well, there's 10 equally likely possibilities, one of which is the 4.
So that's 1 tenth.
So now it's 1 tenth likely that I'm going to have a 4.
Once I have the 4, what's the probability that when I roll the next time, I'll see the
9?
Well, that's going to be 1 out of 10, but I multiply these probabilities together, so
that's 1 1 hundredth.
So 1 1 hundredth is the probability, very small, 1 in 100, that I'll roll a 4 followed
by a 9.
Now to roll a 0 after that, that's going to be now 1 in 1,000.
And to roll a 4 after the 0 is going to be 1 in 10,000, and so forth.
And this product is getting smaller and smaller, and in fact, you could see it's approaching
0.
In fact, if we look at this product for the complete infinite decimal expansion, mathematicians
say this product is 0.
Therefore, mathematicians declare that the likelihood that a decimal expansion is eventually
periodic equals 0%.
In other words, we have a sense that the likelihood that a random real number selected genuinely
at random is rational is 0.
Now just for fun, let me roll it one more time, and let's see if we get the beginning.
Let's see if we get that 4.
You ready?
And it's a 1.
So you see, it was not likely that we're going to repeat 4 9 0 forever.
There you have it.
Well, this result, which is really startling at first, but then when we think about it,
makes sense when you think of the actual physical die being rolled again and again and again,
seeing a finite list of digits repeating forever is highly unlikely.
It now becomes a little bit more intuitive that we should believe that finding a rational
number at random is extremely unlikely.
In fact, mathematically, the probability is 0.
This result also implies that the likelihood that a real number selected at random, like
we're doing here, is going to be an irrational number is 100%.
It's 100% likely that we'll produce an irrational number, meaning that as we roll that die,
the digits will never eventually repeat and repeat forever.
Well, this counterintuitive and perhaps disturbing discovery offers us a new insight and a wonderful
opportunity to retrain our intuition about numbers.
Remember, whenever we're surprised in life, that's a moment where learning takes place.
And here, this surprise allows us to re hone our intuition.
In some sense, there are more irrational numbers than rational numbers.
In fact, what we're saying is that there are way, way more irrational numbers.
Now how can we make this make sense?
In fact, this idea of zero probability of selecting a rational number is still a little
disturbing because, of course, we know the rational numbers do exist.
So couldn't I just by accident happen to pick one?
But let me try to give you an analogy to get a sense of why this is really essentially
impossible and mathematically is impossible.
Suppose that we take a piece of paper and just draw a bunch of tiny dots on it or imagine
taking a pin and punching holes in the paper just a few times with the pin to make little
teeny holes, very, very tiny dots or very, very tiny holes, very, very tiny, almost invisible.
Well if you were to mark that, then when you looked at the white piece of paper, suppose
you marked it, let's say, with black dots, you would see those black dots.
That's all you would see.
But why would you see those black dots?
It's interesting.
The reason why you see the black dots is because there are so few of them that they stand
out.
That's like the rationals in the real numbers.
There are so few of them that they stand out in our minds and therefore they're familiar
to us.
Now, what if we were to close our eyes and take a pin and just put it down randomly on
that piece of paper that contains just a couple of black dots?
What's the likelihood that that pin will land on exactly one of those dots?
Well, it's clear that it's extremely unlikely and really the probability is zero.
Even though the black dots exist, the probability of hitting one at random is zero.
And that's the same principle that's going on here.
Thus we see that what first appeared to be exotic are more the norm.
And what first appeared to be the norm are in actuality the exotic and quite rare.
So the familiar rationals really are the unusual and these seemingly mysterious irrationals
are more the commonplace.
It's an interesting realization that in our everyday experiences and encounters with numbers,
it doesn't actually provide us with an accurate sense of how the rationals and irrationals
actually fit together.
So again, our intuition is off.
Now despite this new insight that on the number line, it is nearly impossible to accidentally
stumble upon a rational number, we're now going to see paradoxically that the rational
numbers are essentially everywhere on the number line.
Again we see these two counter contradictory ideas coming together.
What I'm saying is that the rationals are spread out all over the place.
You can't help but be near one.
And to see that, let's just look at the interval between zero and one and start running down
rationals.
First we'll put in a half.
Now we'll put in one third and two thirds.
See how slowly those rationals are filling up that interval.
If we put in the fourths, we see one fourth, a half, and three fourths.
We put in the fifths, we see one fifth, two fifths, three fifths, four fifths.
Put in the sixths, put in the sevenths, one seventh, two sevenths, three sevenths, four
sevenths, five sevenths, six sevenths, slowly and keep going.
Notice how it's slowly filling up the entire interval with these essentially invisible rational
numbers.
Well mathematically speaking, we say that the rational numbers are dense.
That's the word we use.
The rational numbers are dense on the real line.
Now let's be a little bit more precise to see exactly what this means.
For the rational numbers to be dense, what we're saying is that they essentially are
going to be everywhere on the line.
And to show that the rational numbers are dense, we must show the following.
That given any two different points on their number line, we can always find a rational
number in between.
Let's think about that.
Suppose I give you two different points on the number line.
I've got to find a rational in between.
If the two points were far apart, this is really not a very exciting result.
So from the mathematical point of view, we have to imagine these two points really close
together, really close.
And even though they're so close together, it turns out there's always a rational in
between.
Make them closer, we'll still find a rational.
As long as the two points differ, so there's a gap in between, then we can always find
a rational.
That's what it means to be dense.
Now I'm actually going to show you why this is a believable fact, even though we see how
the rationals fill up the interval from 0 to 1.
Let's actually see a method that in fact establishes this assertion that goes back to ideas that
were originally generated by the great mathematician Archimedes in the third century BCE.
So here's the idea.
Let's just take the interval between 0 and 1 and pick two points, A and B, and put them
down.
There they are.
Now my mission is to try to show that there has to exist a rational in between these two
points.
So what do we do?
Well let's just consider the reciprocals of the natural numbers, 1 over 2, 1 over 3,
1 over 4, 1 over 5, 1 over 6.
We notice that as those numbers in the denominators increase, the numbers themselves decrease
because I'm looking at the reciprocal.
So they're getting closer and closer to 0, they're getting smaller and smaller.
Well I have this fixed interval length from A to B, and I'll just wait.
I will just literally wait until the 1 over something is actually smaller than this length.
This length is not going anywhere, but those reciprocals are quickly going to 0.
1 over 1,000, 1 over 1,001, 1 over 1,002 and so forth.
So I wait until I have a reciprocal that is smaller than this length.
In this example it looks like maybe 1 13th will fit the bill.
And what do I do?
I start at 0 and start marking off by 13ths.
So 1 13th, 2 13th, 3 13th, 4 13th, 5 13th, 6 13th, 7 13th, and look 7 13ths gets right
in between that interval.
And this method actually will always work.
And put mathematically what we just established was that the fact that the rational numbers
are dense on the number line, or equivalently we could say that the rational numbers are
dense in the real numbers.
Thus paradoxically, even though the rational numbers are hard to find by a random game
of Heiden and Gossick, they are spread out all over the number line, thus further demonstrating
the depth and complexity of the real numbers.
Well, let's now consider a more refined notion of a random real number.
So we're going to try to now up the abstraction a little bit here and see what really a random
real number should be.
Now if we consider rolling one 10-sided die to generate the digits of a random real number
just as we did before to generate the beginning digits of our random number, well here's
a question.
How often would we expect to see the digit 3 appear in that random real number?
Let's think about that for a second.
So I'm going to roll this fair 10-sided die forever and the question is how often will
we see on average the digit 3?
How often will the die land with a 3 up?
Well, we'd guess that every digit from 0 to 9 would appear on average an equal amount
of the time.
In other words, each digit would appear about one tenth of the time, so we'd guess one tenth.
In fact, if we select a real number at random, we expect that one tenth of the digits in
its decimal expansion will be 0, one tenth of the digits in the decimal expansion will
be a 1 and so forth down the line and one tenth of the digits will be a 9.
Well to extend this idea further, let's now consider strings of two digit numbers within
the decimal expansion.
So let's look at two digits at a time.
Well how many, I mean how likely would it be to see any particular run of two digits?
Now what does that mean to generate two digits at random?
Well we have to imagine rolling a 100-sided die.
There's something you don't see in Vegas, it would start with 0, 0, that's the smallest
two digit number and it would go all the way up to 99, the largest two digit number.
And the question is if I were to generate a number at random, what proportion in that
run of digits would I see a particular two digit number as I look across?
Well first of all let me show you that these dice actually exist, this is one, in fact
this one actually makes a little bit of noise, it's almost like a maraca and it's actually
a 100-sided die, it almost looks like a golf ball doesn't it because it has little dimples
on it.
And if you roll it, this would generate two digits at random.
For example if I roll it once, let's see, hard to read but that looks like a 10, so
that's a 10.
Roll it again and I see a 43 and so forth.
Okay, so when I look at a random number, what's the likelihood that I'll see 43 and
how often will I see 43?
Well we might guess that because there are 102 digit numbers from 0, 0 to 99, we would
see in an average real number in its decimal expansion that it would contain the 43 roughly
one in 100 times because there are 100 equally likely possibilities for two digit numbers
and this is just one of them at random, so one in 100.
So in general for any two digit number we'd expect to see that that two digit number appears
about one in 100 times throughout this run of the decimal expansion.
Now of course we could consider the exact same issue with runs of three digits.
I don't have a thousand sided die but it's the same principle at work.
We'd have a thousand possibilities, the smallest three digit number would be 0, 0, 0, the largest
would be 999.
So the question would be how often would we expect to see the run of 0, 0, 0 appearing
in the decimal expansion for an endless real number, well we would expect it to be on average
one in a thousand because they're all equally likely.
Well real numbers for which every length of digits appears the appropriate or the expected
amount of the time in their decimal expansions are called normal numbers in base 10.
What does this mean?
It means that a number is a normal number in base 10 if every digit appears on average
a tenth of the time, every pair of digits consecutively appears every one hundredth
of the time on average, every three digit number you could think of on average appears
one in a thousand times and so forth, every four digit number, every five digit number
and so forth.
That's what it means for a number to be a normal number in base 10.
Now let's return to our randomly generated real number.
What's the likelihood that it's a normal number in base 10?
So just rolling that 10-sided die forever, what's the likelihood that in fact it will
be normal no matter what the runs of digits we look at?
Well this question remained unanswered until the 20th century when the influential French
mathematician Emile Borel provided a complete answer in 1909.
He proved that the likelihood that a random real number is normal in base 10 is one hundred
percent.
That means that if you pick a number out at random by rolling a 10-sided die forever,
that every length of runs of digits you can think of will appear the appropriate amount
of the time.
Absolutely amazing.
Basically in some vague sense he's proving that every number, the probability that a
number is random is essentially a hundred percent.
So if you just look down and randomly grab a number, it's going to be normal in this
sense.
All the digits will be all messed up and appear in all the different orders that you could
imagine and appear the right amount of the time, the right proportion of the time.
By the way, Borel is perhaps the only 20th century mathematician who actually has a crater
on the moon named after him.
There's a little piece of trivia that's amusing.
Well, in view of our previous observations we see yet again that through this refined
notion the rational numbers such as a third and a half are indeed very strange.
Why is a third so strange?
Well, because the decimal expansion for a third is what?
It's zero point three three three three three forever.
Imagine rolling a fair ten-sided die forever and only seeing threes.
It's not likely.
One third is a rare number.
What about a half?
Well, a half is zero point five zero zero zero zero forever.
Imagine picking up a fair ten-sided die, rolling it forever and seeing first a five and then
zeros forever.
It's not going to happen.
These rational numbers are rare, so again we have a different intuitive sense of why
these familiar numbers really are the exception.
Now, in fact, just to mention the mathematics again, Borel considered an even more general
notion of random number, and this is astounding, but a little bit complicated, so let's see
if we can think about this together.
Remember, what we just talked about were called normal numbers in base ten.
Borel actually studied numbers that he called normal numbers, just normal numbers, and what
that means, a number is a normal number if the number is normal in every base.
So take the number, the decimal number you're thinking of, right in base ten, it's normal
in base ten.
Write that same exact number, express it in base two, and it will be normal in base two,
which means in base two we only have two digits, zero and one, and we'd see the zeros happening
half the time on average, and the ones appearing half the time, so it's fifty-fifty, we see
zeros and ones on average the same amount of time.
If we look at base three, so we have zero, one, and two, we see each one of those digits
appearing how often?
A third of the time, and then if we look at base four, base five, base six, and so forth,
if the number is normal in every single base, then we say it's a normal number.
Well actually proved an even more astounding result.
The likelihood that a random real number is a normal number, so normal in every single
base is one hundred percent.
So if you randomly pick a number, the digits are going to basically be every kind of hodge
podge collection of digits in any kind of order you can imagine, and those orders will
be all appearing the right proportion of the time as if the number were selected by rolling
a die.
So rolling a fair tensile a die, what we're seeing is an actual correct way of generating
a real number.
Now if the likelihood that a random real number possesses a particular property, and if that
likelihood is one hundred percent, then we say in mathematics that almost all, we always
put that in quotes by the way, almost all real numbers possess that property.
So applying this new phrase, we could say almost all numbers are irrational.
And furthermore, we could say that almost all numbers are normal.
And hence the name normal, because almost all numbers are normal.
Thus for any random real number we think of, we expect that the digits to be such that
any particular run of digits will occur that the true, fair share of the time.
Well, within the world of real numbers, our familiar rational numbers are truly the exception,
while the at first exotic irrational numbers are in fact the rule.
It's intriguing actually to wonder how the Pythagoreans would have reacted to this new
found reality, one in which they're God given natural numbers, and even their beloved
ratios are totally overrun and outnumbered by the overwhelming dominance of the disturbing
irrational numbers.
Again we see the notion of numbers as a constantly evolving object.
And in the next lecture, we'll take a look at a very exotic collection of numbers sitting
nicely and beautifully inside the real number line.
