It's a very sparse collection of numbers and this is why the collection is also referred
to as canter dust.
These numbers are in essence invisible on the line segment between zero and one.
Of course this realization is consistent with the geometrical image we saw because it seemed
like it was a little dusting of points here and there.
Well we're now about to face one of Cantor's discoveries that's both truly remarkable and
totally counterintuitive.
It's one of his results that deeply disturbed his colleagues in fact.
Even though almost no numbers are in the canter set Cantor discovered a one to one pairing
between the numbers in the canter set and all of the numbers on the real number line between
zero and one.
In other words Cantor proved that even though his set is sparse and essentially an invisible
collection of numbers inside the interval between zero and one that collection of numbers
can be placed in a one to one correspondence with all the numbers inside the interval from
zero to one.
So Cantor saying if we consider the entirety of all the numbers between zero and one and
the canter set that tiny collection of numbers from zero one that appears to be invisible
then those two collections of numbers are equally numerous.
Well this result is very perplexing and difficult to digest.
In fact one of Euclid's so-called common notions that everyone accepted without question was
that the whole is greater than the part and as we're now seeing Cantor over 2,000 years
later is actually challenging this Greek notion.
So we now follow Cantor's steps through the explanation demonstrating that this unbelievable
assertion is in fact a fact.
Now just as the Sumerian shepherd paired up his sheep with his pebbles in a one to one
fashion we must find a systematic way of pairing up each number in the canter set with each
number from the interval between zero and one in a one to one fashion.
In other words we must find a method of associating each number in the canter set with one and
only one number from the line segment between zero and one and conversely find a way of
associating each number from the line segment between zero and one with one and only one
number from the canter set.
Now this task sounds really challenging.
Well Cantor's one to one correspondence is devilishly clever.
It hinges on the fact that every real number can be expressed in a base two expansion using
just zero and one.
So zeros and ones are all you need to write any number in base two.
Well Cantor's ingenious idea as we're about to see is so simple.
His one to one correspondence involves just switching twos and ones and toggling between
base three and base two expansions.
Let me say this very very briefly informally first and then I'll explain to you a little
