of zeros and twos that never repeat and if they never repeat it's irrational.
And if the number does repeat if the digits do repeat the zeros and twos then we know
it's rational.
So canter dust contains both rational irrational numbers and appears to have no apparent structure
whatsoever.
Well let's now try to visualize the canter dust by finding and locating some of the
dust in the number line.
So first let's just plot the four easy points that we found zero one third two thirds and
one on the number line and we see that actually spread out quite evenly between zero and one.
Well now let's attempt to pinpoint that kind of random number that I generated and let's
just think through the process together and I'm going to be a little bit fast here but
we'll see that there's a groove that we're building here.
So the first digit I see in this number is a two that tells me when I break the interval
from zero to one up into three pieces zero one two the two tells me go to the far right
go to the far right one okay fine.
In the far right one I cut that into three pieces the next digit of two tells me to go
to the far right in there then I take that tiny tiny interval cut into three pieces and
the zero we see tells me to go to the far left of that tiny interval cut that into three
pieces the two tells me to jump now to the right.
And so when we do this of course we can't do the whole number because it's too many digits
it's hard to pinpoint that point in this image but we see a process here we're bouncing from
right to left so from the chaos of the digits and all this interval hopping we begin to
see an attractive pattern emerge.
The numbers in the canter set reside in either the first third of the segment or the last
third of the segment of the interval between zero and one so the canter set will either
live in the first third or the second third but it won't I'm sorry the first third or
the third third but not the second third and why?
Because the canter set contains no numbers that have the digit one and the digit one
is represented by that middle third.
Now within each one of these two thirds the first third and the last third the canter
set has to reside in either the first or the third third of that and similarly the first
or the third third of that.
Again why?
Well because we see that the numbers from the canter dust cannot have a second digit
of one which would put them in the middle spots and so therefore we see that we're either
going to be in the first or the last third and the middle third will not be used.
In fact those middle thirds are dust free and this continues so imagine repeating this
pruning process forever right that is we successively remove the middle third from each interval
that we currently have at each stage of this process thereby ensuring we never see the
digit one we'd only see zeros and twos so we keep pruning out the middle thirds the
