middle thirds the middle thirds and so forth thus if we do this forever this process continues
forever we have a geometric description of this collection of numbers.
The canter set consists of all the points or all the numbers that have not been removed
from this infinite middle thirds pruning process.
Given this geometric construction of successively removing the ones digit by removing the middle
thirds the canter set is sometimes referred to as the middle thirds canter set because
it's the middle thirds that we keep throwing away.
Well this description in fact geometric description shows that this collection of numbers has incredible
structure after all even though it sounds like a jumble of numbers to begin with.
In particular this collection has a wonderful self similarity property that makes it an
example of what's called a fractal collection of numbers.
Well fractals are images that exhibit a self similarity property which means that if we
zoom in and just focus on a small portion of it that little portion looks like the entire
original image.
So as you zoom in you see within the zoom itself again and if you zoom closer you see
more.
Notice that every time we zoom into one of those intervals we actually see another set
of itself.
Well if we start with a triangle now just for fun and at each stage we remove the middle
third triangle then we produce a beautiful two dimensional version of the canter set.
We can visualize the canter set even in two dimensions and this famous fractal is actually
called the Serpinski triangle and it's an example of a more generalized canter set.
Well I now want us to consider the numerical beauty of this collection rather than just
its geometrical beauty and to do this we're going to pull in some of the ideas from the
previous lecture.
Now we saw that normal numbers have base three expansions in which each of the digits zero,
one and two occur a third of the time.
Now since the numbers in the canter set do not contain the digit one when we express
it as a base three expansion we conclude that none of the numbers in the canter set are
normal.
The normal numbers have to see on average a third of the digits have to be zero, a third
of the digits have to be one, a third of the digits have to be two.
Here we never see ones.
Well that's not normal and so therefore none of the numbers in the canter set are normal.
Well in the last lecture we considered Borel's theorem that states that almost all real numbers
are normal but we just said that no numbers from the canter set are normal.
In other words if we were to randomly select a real number between zero and one by rolling
a die again the probability that we happen to pick a number from the canter set is zero
percent thus we say that almost no numbers are in the canter set.
In some very real sense the canter set is very sparse.
