of numbers can be much more convenient than another.
In this case, we'll look at the real numbers in base three, as Cantor did in 1883, rather
than the more typical base ten.
The collection we're about to explore will reveal itself in a much more natural way when
we think of it in base three.
Well, so let's first recall that every real number can be expressed in a base three expansion
using just three digits, zero, one, and two, with the positional locations representing
powers of three.
So for example, if we look at the number one, two, zero in base three, and notice that little
subscript of three tells us this is not the number 120, but it's one, two, zero in base
three.
Well, the unit spot, the one spot, has zero.
So we have zero ones, but we have a two in the threes spot, because now in base three
the next space over represents threes.
So we have two threes, and then lastly that one is in the three squared, or the nine spot,
and so we see that this number is one times nine plus two times three plus zero times
one, which equals 15.
So one, two, zero in base three equals 15 in base ten.
How about another example?
Let's look at one that has a decimal, a fractional part, zero point one, zero, two in base three.
Well that first one we see is in the one third spot.
The next zero to the right is in the one ninth spot.
Now everything is in terms of powers of three, and that two is located in the one twenty-seventh
spot.
And so what we see here is one times a third plus zero times a ninth, or a third squared,
plus two times one third cubed, or two times one twenty-seventh.
And so when you put those numbers together we see eleven twenty-sevenths, which in base
ten is zero point four zero seven four zero seven four zero seven, and of course it repeats
since the rational number.
Well in lecture nine we saw that we can visualize a base three expansions on the number line
by cutting up intervals into three equal pieces each time.
So as a quick illustration let's locate the number zero point one zero two in base three
on the number line.
What do I do?
The first thing I do is realize that this number is between zero and one.
So I look just in that interval and I cut it up into three equal pieces each one a third
and I label the first interval zero then one then two.
I look at the digit I see next which is a one so I know that I'm in the middle thirds
I'm in the one spot so I'm in that middle third and what do I do?
I take that middle third and cut it up into three equal pieces and I label them zero one
