In this lecture, we'll discover some beautiful and amazing structure within the real numbers
that only comes into focus when we think in base 3.
In particular, we'll explore the nuances of one of the most famous and vexing collections
of real numbers.
This collection of real numbers was first described by the tremendously brave, ingenious,
but troubled German mathematician Georg Cantor in 1883.
His work in general and his collection of numbers in particular have led to a better
and deeper understanding of many areas of mathematics, especially numbers known as the
Cantor Set or as Cantor Dust.
This collection of numbers is intriguing in its own right because as we'll see, the
numbers can be described in a very elegant fashion in terms of their base 3 expansions
or equivalently in terms of their location on the number line.
In fact, when viewed on the number line, we'll see this collection is an example of what
mathematicians call today a fractal, a geometric form that has an endless self-similarity property.
While applying our observations from the previous lecture, we'll discover that even
though there are infinitely many numbers in the Cantor Set, they form a very thinly spread
or sparse collection of numbers between 0 and 1.
As sparse as this collection is, we'll establish a truly remarkable and counterintuitive theorem.
We'll see that even though this Cantor Set is an invisible dust-like collection, it contains
just as many numbers as the entire solid line segment from 0 to 1.
This result and its clever argument that establishes its validity show that within the jungle
of numbers, many surprising phenomena can and do occur.
While we'll struggle with these vexing notions in this lecture, it might be comforting to
know that the mathematics community struggled with Cantor's revolutionary ideas before seeing
the light.
In fact, Cantor's Set and its remarkable properties were part of his highly controversial
but totally correct work in cracking the mysteries of infinity.
Thus, this lecture foreshadows the original imaginative and groundbreaking work of a great
mathematician who set the mathematics community on fire with the creative spark of his beautiful
ideas.
Well, before we consider these special numbers, I want to say a few words about the life and
mathematics of the man who discovered them, Georg Cantor.
Georg Cantor was born in 1845 in St. Petersburg, soon after which his family moved to Germany
where he spent the rest of his life.
As a youth, Cantor showed much interest and promise in art, music, and mathematics, but
decided to focus on his mathematical talents.
In 1866, at the age of 22, Cantor completed his studies in number theory at the University
of Berlin after studying under some of the greatest German mathematicians of the time,
Ernst Kummer, Leopold Kronecker, and Karl Weierstrauss.
And we'll say more about these important figures later in lecture 18.
