In this lecture, we'll discover some beautiful and amazing structure within the real numbers
that only comes into focus when we think in base 3.
In particular, we'll explore the nuances of one of the most famous and vexing collections
of real numbers.
This collection of real numbers was first described by the tremendously brave, ingenious,
but troubled German mathematician Georg Cantor in 1883.
His work in general and his collection of numbers in particular have led to a better
and deeper understanding of many areas of mathematics, especially numbers known as the
Cantor Set or as Cantor Dust.
This collection of numbers is intriguing in its own right because as we'll see, the
numbers can be described in a very elegant fashion in terms of their base 3 expansions
or equivalently in terms of their location on the number line.
In fact, when viewed on the number line, we'll see this collection is an example of what
mathematicians call today a fractal, a geometric form that has an endless self-similarity property.
While applying our observations from the previous lecture, we'll discover that even
though there are infinitely many numbers in the Cantor Set, they form a very thinly spread
or sparse collection of numbers between 0 and 1.
As sparse as this collection is, we'll establish a truly remarkable and counterintuitive theorem.
We'll see that even though this Cantor Set is an invisible dust-like collection, it contains
just as many numbers as the entire solid line segment from 0 to 1.
This result and its clever argument that establishes its validity show that within the jungle
of numbers, many surprising phenomena can and do occur.
While we'll struggle with these vexing notions in this lecture, it might be comforting to
know that the mathematics community struggled with Cantor's revolutionary ideas before seeing
the light.
In fact, Cantor's Set and its remarkable properties were part of his highly controversial
but totally correct work in cracking the mysteries of infinity.
Thus, this lecture foreshadows the original imaginative and groundbreaking work of a great
mathematician who set the mathematics community on fire with the creative spark of his beautiful
ideas.
Well, before we consider these special numbers, I want to say a few words about the life and
mathematics of the man who discovered them, Georg Cantor.
Georg Cantor was born in 1845 in St. Petersburg, soon after which his family moved to Germany
where he spent the rest of his life.
As a youth, Cantor showed much interest and promise in art, music, and mathematics, but
decided to focus on his mathematical talents.
In 1866, at the age of 22, Cantor completed his studies in number theory at the University
of Berlin after studying under some of the greatest German mathematicians of the time,
Ernst Kummer, Leopold Kronecker, and Karl Weierstrauss.
And we'll say more about these important figures later in lecture 18.
Well, now let's turn to his early mathematical interests, and I want to place his work in
context, and so I want to first paint for you the mathematical scene of that period.
In the mid-1800s, there was much interest in subtle questions involving numbers and
functions.
Now for our purposes here, let's just think of a function as a formula.
In fact, one of the individuals interested in this study was the very influential mathematician
Bernhard Riemann, who we mentioned in lecture 7.
The question of interest was how to express certain exotic functions as sums of more familiar
trigonometric functions, such as the sinusoidal sine and cosine function that we saw sometime
back in our school days.
So these functions that we were trying to look at were more complicated wavy functions.
You can imagine, for example, visualizing a sound wave, very wiggly functions, and we
want to write these wiggly functions in terms of sums of these nice sines and cosines.
This theory later became known as Fourier analysis, named after Joseph Fourier, the
great 19th century French physicist.
Well, by 1870, it was known that the functions that were of interest to mathematicians of
the day, those wiggly functions, could indeed be expressed as a sum, a potentially an endless
sum, of sine and cosine functions.
However, the big question was, is such an expression unique?
In other words, is there only one way to write these wiggly functions as sums of trigonometric
functions?
That was the question.
Well, in 1868, Cantor accepted a position at the University of Hull, outside of Berlin.
Two years later, one of his senior colleagues there, Edward Heiney, published a paper in
which he mentioned this question of uniqueness.
In particular, he actually noted that many great minds, including Riemann, have been unable
to answer this important question.
Well, this challenge captured the imagination of Cantor, and he set off to tackle the question
that the great minds of the day could not themselves answer.
And well, just within one year, one year later in 1871, Cantor published a solution to this
famous, famous uniqueness problem.
He actually proved that if the functions were reasonably nice and well-behaved, as most
functions of interest of the day were, then there's only one way to express them as a
sum of trigonometric functions.
Well, Cantor wondered if the results still held for functions that were strange and not
so well-behaved.
He soon proved that, in fact, functions could be, in some sense, bad, as long as they were
only bad at finitely many numbers.
Well, what do I mean for a function to be bad at a number?
I mean that if we were to put that number into the formula, it would be like dividing
by zero.
It's undefined.
That's what I mean by bad.
So, his result was extremely well-received and actually earned Cantor the respect of
his colleagues, and young Cantor was now considered to be a mathematician of the highest caliber.
But still Cantor wondered.
He began to consider functions that were bad at infinitely many numbers, and he extended
his uniqueness result to such functions as long as the infinitely many bad numbers were
spread out on the number line.
Well, this result actually turned some heads and raised some eyebrows.
People were saying, gee, looking at infinitely many bad points, that's a little peculiar.
Well, he then further wondered, what would happen if the functions were bad at infinitely
many numbers, or equivalently infinitely many points on the number line, that were not
spread far apart, but were clustered together?
And it was at this point that Cantor's work became groundbreaking and totally original.
Well, in order to study such delicate, infinite clusters of points on the number line, Cantor
needed a very precise and exacting definition of the real numbers, the work required that,
and a much more refined treatment of irrational numbers.
And we'll highlight this important movement in lecture 18.
Well, Cantor started studying very exotic collections of real numbers, and soon this
study captured his imagination, and he actually lost interest in his original goal of writing
functions uniquely as sums of sines and cosines functions.
He said, who cares about that?
These interesting exotic collections of real numbers were really neat.
Well, his totally original work was highly controversial at first, and he actually suffered
greatly.
However, his work, in the scope of just five years, moved the frontiers of mathematical
and numerical understanding out beyond anyone's wildest imagination.
This is perhaps the only moment in history in which one individual, in a very short
time span, moved mathematics a quantum leap forward, for through his work, Cantor realized
how to understand infinity.
Now if you remember my vision for moving the mathematics frontier forward in our understanding,
it was building these dimples upon dimples on this copper orb, and what Cantor basically
did in essence is take a sledgehammer and just put an enormous, enormous spike in this
orb, and it took mathematicians a while just to be able to venture out there, even though
the path was already led.
That's how innovative the work was.
Well, to describe Cantor's collection of numbers, we need to return to the base three
expansions of real numbers.
One of the mathematical morals of this lecture is that sometimes one particular representation
of numbers can be much more convenient than another.
In this case, we'll look at the real numbers in base three, as Cantor did in 1883, rather
than the more typical base ten.
The collection we're about to explore will reveal itself in a much more natural way when
we think of it in base three.
Well, so let's first recall that every real number can be expressed in a base three expansion
using just three digits, zero, one, and two, with the positional locations representing
powers of three.
So for example, if we look at the number one, two, zero in base three, and notice that little
subscript of three tells us this is not the number 120, but it's one, two, zero in base
three.
Well, the unit spot, the one spot, has zero.
So we have zero ones, but we have a two in the threes spot, because now in base three
the next space over represents threes.
So we have two threes, and then lastly that one is in the three squared, or the nine spot,
and so we see that this number is one times nine plus two times three plus zero times
one, which equals 15.
So one, two, zero in base three equals 15 in base ten.
How about another example?
Let's look at one that has a decimal, a fractional part, zero point one, zero, two in base three.
Well that first one we see is in the one third spot.
The next zero to the right is in the one ninth spot.
Now everything is in terms of powers of three, and that two is located in the one twenty-seventh
spot.
And so what we see here is one times a third plus zero times a ninth, or a third squared,
plus two times one third cubed, or two times one twenty-seventh.
And so when you put those numbers together we see eleven twenty-sevenths, which in base
ten is zero point four zero seven four zero seven four zero seven, and of course it repeats
since the rational number.
Well in lecture nine we saw that we can visualize a base three expansions on the number line
by cutting up intervals into three equal pieces each time.
So as a quick illustration let's locate the number zero point one zero two in base three
on the number line.
What do I do?
The first thing I do is realize that this number is between zero and one.
So I look just in that interval and I cut it up into three equal pieces each one a third
and I label the first interval zero then one then two.
I look at the digit I see next which is a one so I know that I'm in the middle thirds
I'm in the one spot so I'm in that middle third and what do I do?
I take that middle third and cut it up into three equal pieces and I label them zero one
and two.
The next digit we have is a zero that means we're in the left tiny interval and then I
cut that tiny interval into three pieces equal in length and I go right to the beginning
of the third one the two and that's our point.
So again it's a honing in process that we do but instead of honing in by tens we hone
in by threes each time.
Well we're now ready to face Cantor's exotic collection of numbers.
Well Cantor considered all the real numbers within the interval between zero and one that
can be expressed in a base three expansion using only the digits zero or two.
Okay let's think about this for a second.
So he's defining a collection of numbers between zero and one and the only condition
the only stipulation on this collection is that when you write the number in base three
you only see the digits zero or twos.
You never see one.
That's how he's defining this collection and this collection of numbers is now known as
the Cantor set or Cantor dust.
Let me just say a word about the word set.
In mathematics set refers to a collection of things.
So it's not as though you know ready set go it's not like that it's set as in a collection
so the Cantor collection Cantor set or also referred to as the Cantor dust.
Let's identify some specific numbers that are part of the Cantor dust.
We begin by noting that both zero and one are in the Cantor set.
And why?
Well because zero is 0.000 forever just contains zero.
Remember the only rule is all you can see are zeros and twos.
Now the number one is in there because remember that we actually established that one is equal
to zero point two two two two two forever in base three.
That's a way of expressing one and so in fact we see that one is in the set because it can
be written as zeros and twos and nothing else in base three.
Also a third by the similar reason a third is in this collection because a third equals
zero point one in base three which is the same thing as zero point zero two two two
two forever in base three.
And two thirds is in this set because two thirds means I have two thirds which actually
is zero point two zero zero zero forever because the two is in the one third spot.
But even unfamiliar numbers that we can just make up are in the set as long as we make
sure we never utter a one.
So for example the number zero point two two zero two two two zero zero zero two zero
two zero two zero two two two and so forth base three are also in this collection.
In fact if you think about it we can see that there will be both rational and irrational
numbers in the canter dust because all we have to do is write an infinitely long list
of zeros and twos that never repeat and if they never repeat it's irrational.
And if the number does repeat if the digits do repeat the zeros and twos then we know
it's rational.
So canter dust contains both rational irrational numbers and appears to have no apparent structure
whatsoever.
Well let's now try to visualize the canter dust by finding and locating some of the
dust in the number line.
So first let's just plot the four easy points that we found zero one third two thirds and
one on the number line and we see that actually spread out quite evenly between zero and one.
Well now let's attempt to pinpoint that kind of random number that I generated and let's
just think through the process together and I'm going to be a little bit fast here but
we'll see that there's a groove that we're building here.
So the first digit I see in this number is a two that tells me when I break the interval
from zero to one up into three pieces zero one two the two tells me go to the far right
go to the far right one okay fine.
In the far right one I cut that into three pieces the next digit of two tells me to go
to the far right in there then I take that tiny tiny interval cut into three pieces and
the zero we see tells me to go to the far left of that tiny interval cut that into three
pieces the two tells me to jump now to the right.
And so when we do this of course we can't do the whole number because it's too many digits
it's hard to pinpoint that point in this image but we see a process here we're bouncing from
right to left so from the chaos of the digits and all this interval hopping we begin to
see an attractive pattern emerge.
The numbers in the canter set reside in either the first third of the segment or the last
third of the segment of the interval between zero and one so the canter set will either
live in the first third or the second third but it won't I'm sorry the first third or
the third third but not the second third and why?
Because the canter set contains no numbers that have the digit one and the digit one
is represented by that middle third.
Now within each one of these two thirds the first third and the last third the canter
set has to reside in either the first or the third third of that and similarly the first
or the third third of that.
Again why?
Well because we see that the numbers from the canter dust cannot have a second digit
of one which would put them in the middle spots and so therefore we see that we're either
going to be in the first or the last third and the middle third will not be used.
In fact those middle thirds are dust free and this continues so imagine repeating this
pruning process forever right that is we successively remove the middle third from each interval
that we currently have at each stage of this process thereby ensuring we never see the
digit one we'd only see zeros and twos so we keep pruning out the middle thirds the
middle thirds the middle thirds and so forth thus if we do this forever this process continues
forever we have a geometric description of this collection of numbers.
The canter set consists of all the points or all the numbers that have not been removed
from this infinite middle thirds pruning process.
Given this geometric construction of successively removing the ones digit by removing the middle
thirds the canter set is sometimes referred to as the middle thirds canter set because
it's the middle thirds that we keep throwing away.
Well this description in fact geometric description shows that this collection of numbers has incredible
structure after all even though it sounds like a jumble of numbers to begin with.
In particular this collection has a wonderful self similarity property that makes it an
example of what's called a fractal collection of numbers.
Well fractals are images that exhibit a self similarity property which means that if we
zoom in and just focus on a small portion of it that little portion looks like the entire
original image.
So as you zoom in you see within the zoom itself again and if you zoom closer you see
more.
Notice that every time we zoom into one of those intervals we actually see another set
of itself.
Well if we start with a triangle now just for fun and at each stage we remove the middle
third triangle then we produce a beautiful two dimensional version of the canter set.
We can visualize the canter set even in two dimensions and this famous fractal is actually
called the Serpinski triangle and it's an example of a more generalized canter set.
Well I now want us to consider the numerical beauty of this collection rather than just
its geometrical beauty and to do this we're going to pull in some of the ideas from the
previous lecture.
Now we saw that normal numbers have base three expansions in which each of the digits zero,
one and two occur a third of the time.
Now since the numbers in the canter set do not contain the digit one when we express
it as a base three expansion we conclude that none of the numbers in the canter set are
normal.
The normal numbers have to see on average a third of the digits have to be zero, a third
of the digits have to be one, a third of the digits have to be two.
Here we never see ones.
Well that's not normal and so therefore none of the numbers in the canter set are normal.
Well in the last lecture we considered Borel's theorem that states that almost all real numbers
are normal but we just said that no numbers from the canter set are normal.
In other words if we were to randomly select a real number between zero and one by rolling
a die again the probability that we happen to pick a number from the canter set is zero
percent thus we say that almost no numbers are in the canter set.
In some very real sense the canter set is very sparse.
It's a very sparse collection of numbers and this is why the collection is also referred
to as canter dust.
These numbers are in essence invisible on the line segment between zero and one.
Of course this realization is consistent with the geometrical image we saw because it seemed
like it was a little dusting of points here and there.
Well we're now about to face one of Cantor's discoveries that's both truly remarkable and
totally counterintuitive.
It's one of his results that deeply disturbed his colleagues in fact.
Even though almost no numbers are in the canter set Cantor discovered a one to one pairing
between the numbers in the canter set and all of the numbers on the real number line between
zero and one.
In other words Cantor proved that even though his set is sparse and essentially an invisible
collection of numbers inside the interval between zero and one that collection of numbers
can be placed in a one to one correspondence with all the numbers inside the interval from
zero to one.
So Cantor saying if we consider the entirety of all the numbers between zero and one and
the canter set that tiny collection of numbers from zero one that appears to be invisible
then those two collections of numbers are equally numerous.
Well this result is very perplexing and difficult to digest.
In fact one of Euclid's so-called common notions that everyone accepted without question was
that the whole is greater than the part and as we're now seeing Cantor over 2,000 years
later is actually challenging this Greek notion.
So we now follow Cantor's steps through the explanation demonstrating that this unbelievable
assertion is in fact a fact.
Now just as the Sumerian shepherd paired up his sheep with his pebbles in a one to one
fashion we must find a systematic way of pairing up each number in the canter set with each
number from the interval between zero and one in a one to one fashion.
In other words we must find a method of associating each number in the canter set with one and
only one number from the line segment between zero and one and conversely find a way of
associating each number from the line segment between zero and one with one and only one
number from the canter set.
Now this task sounds really challenging.
Well Cantor's one to one correspondence is devilishly clever.
It hinges on the fact that every real number can be expressed in a base two expansion using
just zero and one.
So zeros and ones are all you need to write any number in base two.
Well Cantor's ingenious idea as we're about to see is so simple.
His one to one correspondence involves just switching twos and ones and toggling between
base three and base two expansions.
Let me say this very very briefly informally first and then I'll explain to you a little
bit more rigorously.
So I'm going to show a correspondence between all the points on the number line between zero
and one and this very invisible Cantor set and here we go.
First of all let's take a number from the Cantor set.
Now remember that means that all we see in its base three expansion, let's just stop
and think about this for a second, all we see in the base three expansion are going
to be zeros and twos.
Here's Cantor's idea.
Wherever you see a two replace it by a one and think of it as a base two number then
it's going to be some number down here between zero and one but written in base two.
So every Cantor point is associated with some number down here by just changing the two
to a one and thinking of it as base two.
Here's the amazing thing.
Firstly, if we take any number from zero to one and write it in base two all we see are
zeros and ones.
Let's replace every one by a two and view that long infinite list as a base three expansion
then in fact we've got a number in the Cantor set because it just consists of zeros and
twos.
This was its basic idea.
Now let's make this rigorous.
So first, let's pair up every number from the Cantor set with exactly one number from
the interval between zero and one.
So for example, let's consider the number from the Cantor set that begins zero point
two two zero zero zero two zero two two two and so forth, base three.
We're expressing this in base three.
All we do is simply change each two to a one and now view that number as a base two number.
So in this example, we would change it to zero point one one zero zero zero zero one
zero one zero one one one and so forth but now we're writing the number in base two.
This is some number between zero and one.
Now using this idea, we can now pair up each number in the Cantor set expressed as base
three with its corresponding number now expressed in base two between zero and one.
In other words, we simply just change all the twos to ones and view this new list of
digits as a base two expansion.
It's ingenious.
Well this establishes a way of pairing up each number from the Cantor set with exactly
one number from the interval between zero and one.
Now here's the big question.
With this pairing, are there any numbers between zero and one that are not paired up with any
number from the Cantor set?
The amazing answer is no.
We've paired up every number from zero to one.
Why?
Suppose we consider a number between zero and one.
We first just write it in its base two expansion.
For example, let's say zero point zero one zero one one zero one zero zero zero one
zero and so forth, base two.
To find its partner in this pairing scheme, all we just do is take every appearance of
a one and just replace it by a two and take this new list of digits and view it as a base
three number.
In this case, we'd see the number zero point zero two zero two two zero two zero zero
zero and so forth, two zero and so on.
Base three.
Well since this new number consists of only zeros and two in its base three expansion,
it's in the Cantor set.
So every number has one and only one partner.
Amazing.
Well, this matchmaking method is the one to one correspondence between the Cantor set
and the entire collection of numbers between zero and one that Cantor claimed existed.
Absolutely tremendous.
Well the Cantor set is a very counterintuitive collection of numbers.
In fact, it's quite often used as a counter example to very seemingly reasonable conjectures.
This collection of numbers isn't once sparse and thin and yet full and as we'll see at
the end of the course, fat.
Cantor was an extraordinarily original and creative thinker who allowed his mind to wander
and through that journey made discoveries that at first appeared unbelievable.
Unfortunately, as we'll see in the last part of this course, Cantor also had to contend
with personal demons that haunted him most of his life.
Today, he would most likely have been diagnosed as bipolar, manic depressive and sadly he
spent a good portion of the later years in in asylums.
In the last part of our course, we'll explore this tragic drama, his struggle with relationships
including some ugly mathematical feuds and of course his imaginative and profound insights
into infinity which continue to be the foundations for how we view the infinite.
