bit more rigorously.
So I'm going to show a correspondence between all the points on the number line between zero
and one and this very invisible Cantor set and here we go.
First of all let's take a number from the Cantor set.
Now remember that means that all we see in its base three expansion, let's just stop
and think about this for a second, all we see in the base three expansion are going
to be zeros and twos.
Here's Cantor's idea.
Wherever you see a two replace it by a one and think of it as a base two number then
it's going to be some number down here between zero and one but written in base two.
So every Cantor point is associated with some number down here by just changing the two
to a one and thinking of it as base two.
Here's the amazing thing.
Firstly, if we take any number from zero to one and write it in base two all we see are
zeros and ones.
Let's replace every one by a two and view that long infinite list as a base three expansion
then in fact we've got a number in the Cantor set because it just consists of zeros and
twos.
This was its basic idea.
Now let's make this rigorous.
So first, let's pair up every number from the Cantor set with exactly one number from
the interval between zero and one.
So for example, let's consider the number from the Cantor set that begins zero point
two two zero zero zero two zero two two two and so forth, base three.
We're expressing this in base three.
All we do is simply change each two to a one and now view that number as a base two number.
So in this example, we would change it to zero point one one zero zero zero zero one
zero one zero one one one and so forth but now we're writing the number in base two.
This is some number between zero and one.
Now using this idea, we can now pair up each number in the Cantor set expressed as base
three with its corresponding number now expressed in base two between zero and one.
In other words, we simply just change all the twos to ones and view this new list of
digits as a base two expansion.
It's ingenious.
Well this establishes a way of pairing up each number from the Cantor set with exactly
one number from the interval between zero and one.
Now here's the big question.
With this pairing, are there any numbers between zero and one that are not paired up with any
number from the Cantor set?
The amazing answer is no.
