and two.
The next digit we have is a zero that means we're in the left tiny interval and then I
cut that tiny interval into three pieces equal in length and I go right to the beginning
of the third one the two and that's our point.
So again it's a honing in process that we do but instead of honing in by tens we hone
in by threes each time.
Well we're now ready to face Cantor's exotic collection of numbers.
Well Cantor considered all the real numbers within the interval between zero and one that
can be expressed in a base three expansion using only the digits zero or two.
Okay let's think about this for a second.
So he's defining a collection of numbers between zero and one and the only condition
the only stipulation on this collection is that when you write the number in base three
you only see the digits zero or twos.
You never see one.
That's how he's defining this collection and this collection of numbers is now known as
the Cantor set or Cantor dust.
Let me just say a word about the word set.
In mathematics set refers to a collection of things.
So it's not as though you know ready set go it's not like that it's set as in a collection
so the Cantor collection Cantor set or also referred to as the Cantor dust.
Let's identify some specific numbers that are part of the Cantor dust.
We begin by noting that both zero and one are in the Cantor set.
And why?
Well because zero is 0.000 forever just contains zero.
Remember the only rule is all you can see are zeros and twos.
Now the number one is in there because remember that we actually established that one is equal
to zero point two two two two two forever in base three.
That's a way of expressing one and so in fact we see that one is in the set because it can
be written as zeros and twos and nothing else in base three.
Also a third by the similar reason a third is in this collection because a third equals
zero point one in base three which is the same thing as zero point zero two two two
two forever in base three.
And two thirds is in this set because two thirds means I have two thirds which actually
is zero point two zero zero zero forever because the two is in the one third spot.
But even unfamiliar numbers that we can just make up are in the set as long as we make
sure we never utter a one.
So for example the number zero point two two zero two two two zero zero zero two zero
two zero two zero two two two and so forth base three are also in this collection.
In fact if you think about it we can see that there will be both rational and irrational
numbers in the canter dust because all we have to do is write an infinitely long list
