by zero.
It's undefined.
That's what I mean by bad.
So, his result was extremely well-received and actually earned Cantor the respect of
his colleagues, and young Cantor was now considered to be a mathematician of the highest caliber.
But still Cantor wondered.
He began to consider functions that were bad at infinitely many numbers, and he extended
his uniqueness result to such functions as long as the infinitely many bad numbers were
spread out on the number line.
Well, this result actually turned some heads and raised some eyebrows.
People were saying, gee, looking at infinitely many bad points, that's a little peculiar.
Well, he then further wondered, what would happen if the functions were bad at infinitely
many numbers, or equivalently infinitely many points on the number line, that were not
spread far apart, but were clustered together?
And it was at this point that Cantor's work became groundbreaking and totally original.
Well, in order to study such delicate, infinite clusters of points on the number line, Cantor
needed a very precise and exacting definition of the real numbers, the work required that,
and a much more refined treatment of irrational numbers.
And we'll highlight this important movement in lecture 18.
Well, Cantor started studying very exotic collections of real numbers, and soon this
study captured his imagination, and he actually lost interest in his original goal of writing
functions uniquely as sums of sines and cosines functions.
He said, who cares about that?
These interesting exotic collections of real numbers were really neat.
Well, his totally original work was highly controversial at first, and he actually suffered
greatly.
However, his work, in the scope of just five years, moved the frontiers of mathematical
and numerical understanding out beyond anyone's wildest imagination.
This is perhaps the only moment in history in which one individual, in a very short
time span, moved mathematics a quantum leap forward, for through his work, Cantor realized
how to understand infinity.
Now if you remember my vision for moving the mathematics frontier forward in our understanding,
it was building these dimples upon dimples on this copper orb, and what Cantor basically
did in essence is take a sledgehammer and just put an enormous, enormous spike in this
orb, and it took mathematicians a while just to be able to venture out there, even though
the path was already led.
That's how innovative the work was.
Well, to describe Cantor's collection of numbers, we need to return to the base three
expansions of real numbers.
One of the mathematical morals of this lecture is that sometimes one particular representation
