use today. The Latin cross was also used, but it was printed horizontally. Sometimes the Maltese
cross, the very ornate cross, was used for very formal writings. By the way, the minus sign that we
use today, a dash, makes its first appearance in the literature in 1481. Well, using the x-like symbol
as we do today for multiplication, came about in an interesting way. Our multiplication sign first
appears in Leonardo de Pisa, also known as Fibonacci's, important book, Lieberabekai, from 1202. And we
mentioned the book earlier. He employed the notation to indicate what we might consider today as cross
products of pairs of numbers. So for example, he'd make a two by two grid of numbers. For example, here
you see two, three, four, six. And then he'd use the cross to indicate which two opposite numbers to
multiply. So he would take the two times six and get 12, and then the three times four and get 12. He
recorded them both, 12 equals 12, and then he'd move on with his calculation. So this cross that you see
to indicate which two were to be multiplied slowly evolved into the product of just two numbers as we use
them today. What about our division sign? Well, in 1751, we see an inverted D, so a D written backwards, used
for division. In other words, we'd write 15 and then that inverted D five would equal three, because 15 divided
by five would be three. Just two years later, in 1753, we find the symbol that we use today with the horizontal
bar and the two dots. Although originally, there were actually two dots on the top and two dots on the bottom,
interestingly enough, and somewhere along the line, we canceled one of those dots away. In terms of writing
fractions, as we noted in lecture eight, Ames in the Rhine papyrus used a dot over a number to indicate a unit
fraction. So although he didn't have our symbol five, a dot over a five in his notation would mean one over five
or one fifth. Now the dot actually derived from the hieroglyph for an open mouth, indicating how fractions were used
to divide up rations of food and drink. And as we noted before, many of the questions from the Rhine papyrus
concerned dividing up red and ale. So it was quite a lively bunch of people, at least in the stories of the Rhine
papyrus. Writing fractions stacked using three terraces of type with a horizontal line between the numbers goes back to Arabic
writings. And even Fibonacci and Libre Abacay used stacked fractions. The writing of a slash for a fraction all in one line,
