But the question is, what power of 9 will equal the square root of 9? Well, I don't know what that power is, so let's give it a name. It's an unknown. Let's call it p for power.
So suppose that 9 to the p equals the square root of 9. Well, then if we just squared both sides or multiplied the left hand side by 9 to the p and the right hand side by
square root of 9, then we see 9 to the p times 9 to the p equals the square root of 9 times the square root of 9. Well, the square root of 9 times the square root of 9 is just 9.
And by the law of exponents, we know that 9 to the p times 9 to the p is 9 to the p plus p or 9 to the 2 times p. So we see that 9 to the 2p equals 9.
9 to the 2p power equals 9. So on the right hand side, we see 1, 9, and on the left hand side, we see 2p multiples of 9. Well, there has to be the same number of 9s on both sides, so 2p has to equal 1.
We have 1, 9 on one side, we have to have 1, 9 on the other, and so 2p equals 1, and so we see, if we divide both sides by 2, that p equals a half.
Therefore, we just discovered an amazing fact that 9 to the 1 half power means square root of 9. That is, 9 to the 1 half power equals the number 3. Similarly, 2 to the 1 half power means the square root of 2.
These examples, in fact, can be generalized. If we have a fractional number as an exponent, a fraction exponent, then its denominator, the number below, signifies a root.
So for example, 8 to the 1 third power equals the cube root of 8, which is in turn equal to 2, since 2 cubed 2 times 2 times 2 equals 8.
In general, we can say that a raised to the 1 over b power is the b th root of a.
Well, what if our fraction in the exponent has a numerator other than just 1? Well, no problem at all. For example, let's consider 8 raised to the 2 thirds power.
Well, in that case, I first take the cube root of 8, and then I square the quantity, which in this case, the cube root of 8 is 2, so I see 2 squared, which equals 2 times 2 or 4. So 8 to the 2 thirds power is equal to 4.
And more generally, we say that a raised to the c over b power is equal to the b th root of a all raised to the c power.
Well, Nicholas Orzmi, one of the most influential philosophers and mathematicians of the 14th century, was the first to write and make sense of fractional exponents.
And this really was an individual who was a great thinker. In fact, he once noted, and I love this little quote,
Therefore, I indeed know nothing except that I know that I know nothing. I think a very brilliant quote, because it really identifies the fact that every time we think we understand something, so much more is left to be understood.
As an aside, sometime later, the notion of fractional exponents was rediscovered by our friend, Simone Stevin.
While the symbols for fractional and other exponents were suggested by Orzmi and Stevin, the convention is really due to John Wallace, a 17th century English mathematician, and also to Sir Isaac Newton.
And the notation of putting a fraction in the exponent became popular around 1676.
Now, all notation aside, the important fact is that we can now make sense of taking a number like 2 and raising it to a fractional power like 7 fifths.
It means that we must first take the fifth root of 2, which we can do on a calculator, and then multiply that number by itself seven times.
By the way, in case you're wondering, that works out to be 2.63915 and so forth.
The point is, it's a real number.
