is going to be a real mathematical proof. So stay with me, but we need to see this finally
resolved. Let's first remember what negative one means. That's the first thing we have to do. Well,
negative one is the additive inverse of one. In other words, one plus negative one equals zero. That's
where we'll start. Now, if we multiply each side of this equation by negative one, then we see negative
one times the quantity one plus negative one equals negative one times zero. We now use the
distributive property and write this as negative one times one plus negative one times negative one
equals negative one times zero. Well, we just proved that any number multiplied by zero is zero. So
the right hand side is zero. And remember that one is the multiplicative identity. So negative one
times one is just negative one. And so we see our equation becomes negative one plus negative one
times negative one equals zero. And we're there. All we have to do is add one to both sides. And that
first negative one becomes a zero. And we see negative one times negative one equals one. Amazing. By
the way, it was Brahma Gupta, the seventh century astronomer who we mentioned back in lecture three,
who was the first to offer a systematic treatment of negative numbers and zero, including the
multiplication of sign numbers. So a negative times a negative equaling a positive is by no means a new
idea, but certainly a wonderful one. Well, now, have you ever wondered where all those cryptic
symbols of arithmetic that we know and love come from? Well, if so, this is your lucky day because
I want to share with you some of the interesting history and evolution of our arithmetical notation.
Well, let's begin with addition and our plus sign. In ancient Latin manuscripts, the word et et, which
is Latin for and, was used to indicate addition, which makes sense, right? Two and three equals five. So
they'd use e and then a t and they'd be writing this cursively. And then after a while, they would
just write the t. And then that t, as you could see, slowly evolved into the plus sign that we use,
are used to. So the plus sign that we use actually came from the t in et Latin for and. Really neat,
I think. In a manuscript from 1489, we find the Greek cross used for addition, which is what we
