we've already celebrated and that have certainly earned a rightful place of honor in the pantheon
of numbers. The first number is zero known in this kind of mathematical context as the
additive identity. Because if zero is added to any number, the sum of the given number
and zero is in fact the given number. For example, zero plus five equals five. So when
we add zero to five, we preserve the identity of five. That's why it's called the additive
identity. The second number is the Pythagorean number of reason, unity, the number one. Here
in this context, we refer to the number one as the multiplicative identity. Because if
one is multiplied by any given number, the product of that given, the product of those
two numbers is the given number. For example, one times five equals five. So again, we preserve
the identity of five. Well, since we're here with zero and one, I wanted to briefly mention
inverse numbers. These are very valuable when we're solving equations. Given any number,
say five, there exists another number, in this case we call it negative five, such that
the sum with five equals zero. More generally, given a number n, the number negative n is
called the additive inverse of n. In an informal sense, the additive inverse undoes the addition
of a number. In terms of undoing multiplication, given any non-zero number, say two, for example,
there exists a number whose product with two equals one, in this case, namely half. More
generally, every non-zero number n has a reciprocal, one over n, so that their product equals one.
The number one over n is called the multiplicative inverse of n. Arithmeticly speaking, addition
and subtraction are opposite operations, just as multiplication and division are. This observation
was first made by ancient Egyptians, who viewed each pair of operations as mirror images of one
another. Today we say they're inverse operations, less romantic phraseology, but just as descriptive.
Zero is the only number that does not have a multiplicative inverse. And why is that? Well,
because any number n, when multiplied by zero, yields zero. Now, this statement is not an axiom.
