Welcome to the World of Arithmetic. In this lecture, we'll open with a brief historical
overview of the familiar arithmetical functions of addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, and exponentiation, and the axioms that accompany them.
Many of the basic rules of arithmetic are so obvious and sensible that we accept them
without even a second thought. One such rule that we learned in our youth actually does
not fit this particular mold, and that's the declaration that a negative number multiplied
by another negative number produces a positive number. Here we'll discover that this rule
is, in fact, a theorem that can be deduced in an elegant manner from the basic axioms
arithmetic. Thus, we'll finally resolve a conundrum that has mystified many individuals
since their early childhood. Before moving on, we'll also take a momentary detour to
explore the origins and evolutions of the symbols of arithmetic that have become the
mathematical icons of our early school days. Combining numbers using the basic operations
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division quickly leads us to some interesting
and important numerical questions. For example, what does 2 raised to the power square root
of 2 mean, and is that a number? Here we'll take and pull ideas of Nicholas Ormsme, the
great 14th century mathematician and philosopher and others, to make sense of 2 raised to the
power square root of 2, and moreover to realize that such a thing is indeed a number. Well,
up to this point in our course, for the most part, we've been focusing on numbers themselves
and discovering how a more sophisticated understanding of nature and of our world leads to a more
sophisticated understanding of number. Here we'll consider various ways of combining numbers
in order to widen our view of number further still. So let's begin with some basic arithmetical
rules of the road that we've all seen in grade school and now discover their origin. In fact,
a good bit of our basic intuition about arithmetic was foreshadowed by Euclid himself. Euclid,
