in the third century BCE, offered five what we call today common notions, basic self-evident
truths that did not require proof. Now, in modern mathematics, we call such statements
axioms. The axioms are the statements we just state without proof and upon which we
build the edifice of mathematics through theorems and proofs. So what were his common notions?
The first one was things that are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
So for example, suppose that Deb has the same amount of money as I do and Mike has the same
amount of money as I do, well then Deb and Mike must have the same amount of money and
we call this transitivity today. His second notion was, if equals be added to equals,
the holes are equal. So in this context, suppose now that I give both Deb and Mike ten dollars
each, well then they still have the same amount of money even though they each have ten more
dollars than they had before. Number three is, if equals be subtracted from equals, the
remainders are equal. Well, if I now take back ten dollars from Deb and Mike, then they
still have the same amount of money but might not be too happy with me. Anyway, number four
is things that coincide with one another are equal to one another. Now today in geometry,
we call this notion congruent and it basically means that two geometric objects are congruent
if I could take one and physically slide it on top of the other and they match up perfectly.
This would be the notion of congruent. And finally, his last common notion was that the
hole is greater than the part. So for example, a whole chocolate cake is greater than any
piece of it. And of course, chocolate cake is greater than anything whatsoever. Now by
the way, we notice that in the previous lecture, Cantor showed us that this notion is not always
true with infinite collections. For he found a collection and a part where they actually
had the same number of elements. They were equally numerous because we had a one to one
correspondence. Well, in the eyes of arithmetic, there are two special numbers, each of which
