such as two thirds, first appears in a text published in Mexico in 1784. You could see it's a multicultural
contribution from all walks of the world, all points of the globe. In fact, we first see that this is actually almost like a tilted
flourish. So it's very elegant, and then slowly it evolved, or should I say devolved, into the less ornate slash that we use today.
Well, let's now turn to the important arithmetical objects known as powers and exponents and leave the notation behind. And to start
with, let's just consider powers that are natural numbers. They're the easiest ones. The great 17th century mathematician and philosopher
Renee Descartes developed a shorthand way of writing powers. He'd write five squared to mean five times five, and five cubed, which would
mean five times five times five. Now this notation allows us to write very large values in a very compact fashion. For example, instead
of writing one billion as one followed by nine zeros, we could just write 10 to the ninth power and be done with it. So it's a very
powerful way of notitating numbers. In view of Descartes notation, let's see that n cubed times n squared equals something that just in terms
of n. And what would it be? Well, I would take n cubed and write out n times n times n, and then I'd multiply that by n times n. So how
many n's am I multiplying? Five. And so I see n to the fifth. And so the rule here is that if we have the same base and different
exponents, we just add the exponents together. And this is always a tricky rule. And in fact, when I teach my college students this, I actually sing
for them a little jingle that I wrote to remind them of the method to do this. And it goes like this, and I'm tone death. But it goes, when in doubt,
write it out. Because just by writing out what n cubed mean, n times n times n, and n squared, n times n, we see n to the fifth, we add the
exponents. Now, this song is really an example of a much more general principle known as the law of exponents, which says that if I take n to the
power a and multiply it by n raised to the power b, then in fact we have n raised to the power a plus b. Now, in algebra, we often combine products,
sums, differences, and natural powers to create what are called polynomials. And we'll see this throughout our course. This is our first introduction to this idea.
Now, that is expressions such as 3n squared minus 2n plus 10. We're just adding multiplying numbers, and we're raising, in this case, n to natural number
powers. Or even more elaborate, 120n to the 95th power plus 12.3 times n to the 35th power minus 11n to the seventh power minus 5n plus 27.
Anything like that are known as polynomials. And as we'll see in lecture 15, polynomials can be used to refine our understanding of numbers and thus plays a significant role in the evolution of
numbers. Well, now it's time to move beyond natural number powers and consider fractions in the exponent. That is, what does it mean to raise a number to a fractional
power? Let's answer this riddle by using what we already know and considering a specific example. What power of 9 equals the square root of 9?
Now, recall that the square root of 9 is 3 because 3 squared, 3 times 3 equals 9, and the square root undoes the square. So the square root of 9 equals 3. So we know that.
