It's a provable theorem, and as we'll see in a moment, in fact, the proof only requires one thing.
We need to recall that numbers also satisfy what's called the distributive property. If I add or
subtract two numbers, so take b and add it or subtract it from c, so b plus or minus c. And I
multiply that entire quantity by a, that's the same exact number as distributing the a to first the
b and then to the c and look at bc plus or minus ab plus or minus ac. So that's the distributive
property. So for any number, let's take a look at seven and consider seven times zero. Well, I can
write zero as one minus one. So I see seven times one minus one. If I now use the distributive
property, we just said, I could see that we have seven times one minus seven times one. But one is
the the multiplicative identity. So seven times one is just seven. So we see seven minus seven,
which equals zero. So I just proved that seven times zero equals zero because of the distributive
property. Of course, we can apply this idea with any number, not just seven. And thus we've just
proven that any number multiplied by zero equals zero. Which is really quite wonderful, really. We
actually give a proof of that. Well, now that we're in the mood, let's have a little bit more fun with
multiplication and finally figure out why a negative times a negative always equals a positive. Now, of
course, we know that a positive number multiplied by a positive number is positive. Because, for
example, two times three means that I have three copies of two. So two plus two plus two and it's
six. Similarly, it makes sense that a negative number multiplied by a positive number is going to
equal a negative number. For example, negative five times two means I have two copies of five of
negative five. That is negative five plus negative five, which equals negative 10. However, the famous
rule that a negative number multiplied by a negative number is a positive number is by no means
obvious or even clear. So let's now see why this rule actually holds. Now, we'll just consider a
specific number to illustrate the idea of the argument. But the argument actually works for all
negative numbers. So now let's prove that negative one multiplied by negative one equals one. And this
