that gave the area of a circle once you multiplied it by the radius squared,
although he didn't actually explicitly give the value of pi.
In fact, what Euclid actually did was gave the earliest proof that the ratio of a circle's area to its diameter squared is always constant.
And if you want, you could actually work through what that constant ratio would be,
which in this case would be pi over 4, because remember, the diameter is twice the radius.
So you have 2r squared, and when you square the 2, that's where you get the 4.
So pi over 4 is what his constant was, which is equivalent to the formula that we have.
He actually stated his result in book 12 of his series, The Elements,
and he stated as circles are to one another as the squares on the diameters.
And so that's how he phrased it, but that's equivalent to what we just proved.
Well, we've seen the importance of pi as a number in our natural universe,
but what about the numerical personality of pi itself?
Well, in 1761, the German mathematician Johann Lambert showed that pi is an irrational number.
It's not a ratio.
This important result tells us that the decimal expansion for pi will never become periodic.
Even though the decimal expansion will never repeat from some point onward forever,
the digits do contain some interesting patterns.
But it's interesting to think about the fact that even though we don't know all the infinitely long
list of digits, we know by this abstract theorem of Lambert that, in fact,
the digits will never repeat forever.
But there are interesting patterns in that screed of digits.
For example, starting at the 760 second decimal place,
we see a run of six nines in a row.
So we see 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, all in a row.
But then, of course, it gets jumbled up again.
This place in the decimal expansion for pi is sometimes referred to as the Feynman point,
named after the Nobel Prize-winning 20th century physicist Richard Feynman.
And why is this run of six nines starting at the 760 second decimal spot of pi named after him?
Well, as the story goes, Feynman once said that if he could memorize all the digits of pi
up to this point, then he could end his long digit soliloquy with 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, and so on.
And now we can appreciate Feynman's joke.
He'd be implying that pi ended with an endless run of nines,
which is impossible since Lambert proved that pi is irrational.
So it's a cute little story, I thought.
Now, getting a little bit technical, but only for a moment, I promise,
since pi is not a fraction, that's what Lambert proved,
then it's not equal to a number of the form m divided by n for any integers m and n,
because it's not a fraction, so pi doesn't equal, it's not equal to m over n.
In other words, I could say that pi minus m over n could never equal zero,
