In this lecture, I want to share with you the story of one of the most famous numbers
in human history, and one of the most important numbers in our universe, the number pi.
While the origins of pi are not known for certain, we know that the Babylonians approximated
pi in base 60 around 1800 BCE.
The definition of pi centers around circles.
In fact, it's the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter.
Now, using this definition, we'll see for ourselves that pi is a number just a little
bit bigger than 3.
Here we'll explore humankind's odyssey to compute, approximate, and understand this
enigmatic number pi.
These attempts throughout the ages truly transcend cultures.
The constant pi helps us understand our universe with greater clarity.
In fact, the definition of pi inspired a new notion of measurement of angles, a new unit
of measurement.
This important angle measure is known as radian measure, and gave rise to many important insights
in our physical world.
As for pi itself, Johann Lambert showed in 1761 that pi is an irrational number.
And later, in 1882, Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that pi is not a solution to any polynomial
equation with integers.
However, we'll also see that many questions about pi remain unanswered.
Finally, we'll close this lecture with a number of entertaining stories involving pi.
These stories include the attempt of the Indiana General Assembly in 1897 to pass a bill declaring
that pi equals 3.2, the world record of a number of digits of pi memorized and recited
by an individual, and even a sneaky method to remember the first 15 of pi's decimal digits.
Well, any discussion of the origins of pi must begin with an interesting experiment involving
circles that we can all try.
So let's take any circle at all, and here I actually have one here.
What I want us to do is I want us to compare the length of the circumference, which is the
length around, and I want to measure it in terms of the diameter, which is the length
across.
So I actually want to try this right now.
We can actually try this if you have a cocktail party or something, and there's a coaster.
You could actually do this live.
Let's go over here and actually try this.
So I'm going to measure, and actually I have a measuring tool here, this ruler, is constructed
so it measures the diameter of this particular circle.
Now this experiment will work with any circle at all, so the size of the circle doesn't matter.
And you could see, for example, that these units are the diameter.
There's one diameter, there's two diameter, there's three diameters, and so forth.
