because they're never the same number, no matter what integers m and n are.
If I were to multiply through that not equal by n,
I would see n pi minus m will never equal zero.
Now, I know this sounds a little bit weird, but basically what it's saying is,
no integer times pi minus another integer will ever equal zero.
I'm assuming the integers are not zero, by the way.
Therefore, an equivalent, but more complicated way of describing what Lambert
proved is to say that pi will never be a solution to any polynomial equation
that looks like some integer x minus an integer equals zero, or nx minus m equals zero.
This kind of polynomial equation is called a linear equation.
And by a solution, I mean we find a value for x that will actually satisfy that equation.
Let's look at an example.
How about 5x minus 3 equals zero?
The solution there would be three-fifths, because if we replace the x by three-fifths,
then we see that five times three-fifths is just three, and three minus three is zero.
So that would be a solution.
Notice that in this solution, three-fifths is a fraction.
So what we're seeing is that pi is never a solution, this kind of thing.
So informally, let's just say that Lambert proved that pi is not the solution
to any very simple and special type of polynomial equation involving integers.
Well, over 120 years after Lambert's result in 1882,
the German mathematician Ferdinand von Lindemann proved a very important generalization.
He proved that pi is not a solution to any polynomial equation involving integers.
That means you can include x-squares and x-cubes and all sorts of things,
and pi will never be the solution to any kind of complicated polynomial of that sort
that you can ever think of.
Well, I just wanted to foreshadow this fact here.
We'll think about what it means to not be a solution in greater detail in lecture 15
and discover that this result allows us to actually better understand the mysterious numbers such as pi.
Although we're concerned with the number of important features about pi
and facts and formulas involving pi, there are many, many, many questions
that remain unanswered that involve pi.
And I thought that I wanted to share a few of my favorite open questions,
a few of the questions that no one knows the answers to that involve pi.
First of all, are the digits of pi random?
In other words, is pi an example of a normal number, which we saw in a previous lecture?
That is, in some sense, is every digit appearing the right amount of times for the number to be random,
like the digit 1 appears a tenth of the time, the digit 2 appears a tenth of the time, and so forth.
No one knows.
