Now, we want to figure out the area of this circle.
Now, of course, we can't use this famous formula because we're trying to derive it.
So what we'll do here is we'll try to convert this very subtle, complicated shape into a more familiar shape.
And so, again, we take something complicated and try to convert it to something easy,
something that we should do in every aspect of our lives.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to actually cut the circle up.
Now, notice that if I were just to cut it up into pieces, it won't change the area at all.
So let's actually try to do this right now live.
So here I go.
So I just cut it in half.
Notice the area won't change at all.
And I'm going to cut it in half again.
I'm going to do this a few times.
Now, of course, you really want to do this as much as possible.
Again, this is a great, fun little parlor experiment that you could actually perform at cocktail parties with a coaster.
And it really is neat.
I really do love this.
I'll just cut it up into this size pieces.
But of course, the more you do this, the easier it will be to see what we're about to see.
Let me just first of all show you that there was no sleight of hand here, that in fact these can all be reassembled.
And we'd form the complete circle again.
It looks like a pizza now, doesn't it?
Makes me hungry.
Well, there you can see that the circle is intact.
No pieces are missing.
And we want to find the area of that.
And the way I'm going to find the area of that is by moving the pieces around just a little bit.
By moving the pieces around, we're not going to actually change the amount of material required.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to interleaf these pieces.
And I'm going to, oh, before I do that, let's just make one comment about this before I mess this up.
The length around this curved circle is what?
Well, since the radius is R, the diameter is 2R.
And so the circumference is pi times the diameter, which in this case would be 2 pi R.
I want us to remember that this length from here all the way around to here, that total length is 2 pi R.
OK?
All right, now let's make ourselves a new figure.
And the new figure I want us to consider has these teeth coming together.
And so I'm going to do this for you right now live.
Not as easy as you may think.
