This is live mathematics unfolding here, very dramatic.
And you can see that the pieces fit together quite nicely.
Notice that they're inverted up, down, up, down now.
But they do fit together quite nicely.
And if we had smaller pizza pieces, then in fact, the bottom would be less wavy, in fact, is what we'd see.
And so what I see is something like this.
And we have to find the area of that.
That's what we're trying to figure out.
But notice that that now resembles a rectangle.
In fact, the smaller you cut the pieces, the finer we have these pizza slices.
Then in fact, the more rectangle-like it looks.
Just to illustrate that, let me just take this last one here, and let me just cut this one in half.
Just to illustrate that.
Now, of course, you'd have to cut them all in half to make this look even better.
But just here, you'll see how good it looks just by cutting this one and putting this here.
So I'll put this right here, and I'll put this one right here.
And look at that.
Doesn't that look almost like a rectangle?
If you squint your eyes, that looks like a rectangle.
Well, the area of a rectangle we actually know.
It's the length of the base multiplied by the length of the height.
Well, let's figure out what roughly speaking this would be.
Well, the height we know, that's just from the center of the circle.
It's a pizza slice, so that's just the radius.
So this height is just r.
And what about the base?
Well, these are wiggly parts that forms part of the circle.
But what part of the circle?
Well, we see that we have half of them down here and half of them up here.
So in fact, what we see here is that this is half of the entire travel around, or half the circumference.
Remember, we figured out the circumference was 2 pi r.
Therefore, half of it is just pi r.
So the length of the base is half the circumference, or pi r.
So we have pi r multiplied by the height, which is r.
And what do we see?
We see pi r squared.
We just gave an excellent heuristic for how we can prove that the area of a circle is indeed pi r squared.
Now, this formula was established by Archimedes in the third century BCE.
However, even before Archimedes, Euclid knew there was a special number
