In this lecture, I want to share with you the story of one of the most famous numbers
in human history, and one of the most important numbers in our universe, the number pi.
While the origins of pi are not known for certain, we know that the Babylonians approximated
pi in base 60 around 1800 BCE.
The definition of pi centers around circles.
In fact, it's the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter.
Now, using this definition, we'll see for ourselves that pi is a number just a little
bit bigger than 3.
Here we'll explore humankind's odyssey to compute, approximate, and understand this
enigmatic number pi.
These attempts throughout the ages truly transcend cultures.
The constant pi helps us understand our universe with greater clarity.
In fact, the definition of pi inspired a new notion of measurement of angles, a new unit
of measurement.
This important angle measure is known as radian measure, and gave rise to many important insights
in our physical world.
As for pi itself, Johann Lambert showed in 1761 that pi is an irrational number.
And later, in 1882, Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that pi is not a solution to any polynomial
equation with integers.
However, we'll also see that many questions about pi remain unanswered.
Finally, we'll close this lecture with a number of entertaining stories involving pi.
These stories include the attempt of the Indiana General Assembly in 1897 to pass a bill declaring
that pi equals 3.2, the world record of a number of digits of pi memorized and recited
by an individual, and even a sneaky method to remember the first 15 of pi's decimal digits.
Well, any discussion of the origins of pi must begin with an interesting experiment involving
circles that we can all try.
So let's take any circle at all, and here I actually have one here.
What I want us to do is I want us to compare the length of the circumference, which is the
length around, and I want to measure it in terms of the diameter, which is the length
across.
So I actually want to try this right now.
We can actually try this if you have a cocktail party or something, and there's a coaster.
You could actually do this live.
Let's go over here and actually try this.
So I'm going to measure, and actually I have a measuring tool here, this ruler, is constructed
so it measures the diameter of this particular circle.
Now this experiment will work with any circle at all, so the size of the circle doesn't matter.
And you could see, for example, that these units are the diameter.
There's one diameter, there's two diameter, there's three diameters, and so forth.
You could see the markings correspond perfectly.
Okay, well now let's measure and see how we do.
So I'm going to measure the circumference, which is a fancy way of saying the perimeter
around.
So I'll start over here, well in fact I'll start over here, and I go around, and you
can see, I'm doing this very carefully, trying to be as accurate as possible.
I'm coming to the beginning, and I see exactly here.
So this is the length, this is the length, which I'll move to this side right here, but
no sleight of hand, watch me, no sleight of hand, that's the length once around, once
around.
Now let's measure it and see what we get.
Well when I put this end here, and this end here, what do we see?
Well how many marks do we pass?
One, two, three.
So we pass three bits, and just a little bit more.
And if you look really closely we can see it's actually a little bit more than a tenth
of the way extra.
So what I see here is three, and a little bit more than a tenth.
So just this little experiment here live shows us that that ratio of the circumference to
the diameter is going to be a number that's around, or a little bit bigger, than 3.1.
Well in fact this works no matter what size of circle we actually start with.
So no matter what the size of the circle is, the circumference is slightly greater than
three times the diameter.
And we give this fixed constant value a name, and we call it pi.
So let's say this more precisely.
The number pi is defined to equal the ratio of the circumference of any circle to its
diameter across.
And as we've just noted, this ratio is constant.
No matter what size circle we try this with, that number will be always the same.
Now you can actually list many digits of this number.
It begins 3.141592653589, and it keeps going and so forth.
Well we'll take a look, let's first take a look at the early history of pi, and the
ancient struggle to pin down its exact value.
First a word about the symbol pi.
We use the Greek letter pi for this number, because the Greek word for periphery begins
with the Greek letter pi.
Now periphery of a circle was the precursor to the perimeter of the circle, which today
we call circumference.
The symbol pi first appears in William Jones's 1709 text, New Introduction to Mathematics.
The symbol was later made popular by the great 18th century Swiss mathematician, Leonhard
Euler, around 1737.
From its name to its value, we have evidence that the Babylonians approximated pi in base
60 around 1800 BCE.
In fact, they believe that pi equaled 25 over 8, or 3.125, an amazing approximation for
so early in human history.
The ancient Egyptian scribe Ames, who is associated with the famous Ryan Papyrus, offered the
approximation 256 divided by 81, which works out to be 3.16049 and so forth.
Again we see a very impressive approximation to this constant.
There's even an implicit value of pi given in the Bible.
In 1 Kings 723, a round basin is said to have 30 cubic circumference and 10 cubic diameter,
and thus in the Bible implicitly it states that pi equals 3, 30 divided by 10.
Not surprisingly, as humankind's understanding of number evolved, so did its ability to better
understand and thus estimate pi itself.
In the year 263, the Chinese mathematician Laihu believed that pi equaled 3.141014.
Approximately 200 years later, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Arabata approximated pi with
the fraction 62,832 divided by 20,000, which is 3.1416, amazing.
And in 1400, the Persian astronomer, Kasheni, computed pi correctly to 16 digits.
Amazing.
Well, let's break away from this historical hunt for the digits of pi for a moment and
consider pi as an important number in our universe.
Given pi's connection with measuring circumferences of circles, scholars were inspired to use
it as a measure of angle distance.
Now, let's consider a circle having radius 1, remember radius is just the measure from
the center out to the side, it's half the diameter.
The traditional units for measures of angles are of course degrees, and with degrees, one
complete rotation around the circle has a measure of 360 degrees, which by the way happens
to approximately equal the number of days in one complete year, which might explain
why we think of once around as 360.
Well, instead of the arbitrary measure 360 to mean once around the circle, let's figure
out the actual length of traveling around this particular circle, a circle of radius
1, once around.
So what's the length, what's the circumference of that?
Well, let's see, if we have a radius of 1, then our diameter is twice that, 2.
And so we know that the once around will be 2 times pi, because the circumference is
a pi times the diameter.
And so what I see here is once around will be 2 pi.
So one full rotation around, which is an angle of 360 degrees, would be swept out with a
circumference length of 2 pi in this particular circle.
In fact, well, what half way be around, well, that would be 180 degrees, and we would sweep
out half the circumference, which in this case would be pi.
90 degrees would sweep out a quarter of the circle, and for this particular circle that
would have length pi over 2, or one half pi.
But we're beginning to see that every angle corresponds to a distance measured part way,
or all the way around, this particular circle of radius 1.
In other words, for any angle, we can measure the length of the arc of this circle swept
out by that angle.
This arc length provides a new way of representing the measure of an angle.
And we call this measure of angles radian measure.
So for example, 360 degrees equals 2 pi radians, those are the units, 180 degrees equals pi
radians.
And 90 degrees would equal pi over 2 radians.
And remember, all these measures are always based on a special circle which has radius
1.
Now, it turns out that this radian measure is much more useful in measuring angles for
mathematics and physics than the more familiar degree measure.
Now, if you think about it, this fact is not too surprising, since radian measure is naturally
connected through the circumference length with the angle, rather than the more arbitrary
degree measure that has no mathematical underpinnings, but just represents an approximation to a
complete year.
Now, the term radian first appeared in print in the 1870s.
But by that time, great mathematicians, including the great mathematician, Leonhard Euler, had
been using angles measured in radians for over 100 years.
Well, beyond angle measures, pi is a central in our understanding of our universe.
In fact, the number pi appears in countless important formulas and theories, including
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and Einstein's field equation from general relativity.
So a very, very important formula, a very important number indeed.
There is one famous ancient formula that involves pi that I want us to see together.
It's the beautiful formula for the area of a circle.
The area of a circle is equal to pi, this constant, multiplied by the length of the radius squared,
the famous formula pi r squared.
Now, let's see why this formula actually makes sense.
So, we're going to consider a circle that has radius r.
Let me move this aside for a second.
We're going to actually perform an experiment here live.
So let's consider a circle that has radius r.
So the distance from the center of the circle out to the radius is r.
That means that the diameter across would be r plus r or 2r.
Now, we want to figure out the area of this circle.
Now, of course, we can't use this famous formula because we're trying to derive it.
So what we'll do here is we'll try to convert this very subtle, complicated shape into a more familiar shape.
And so, again, we take something complicated and try to convert it to something easy,
something that we should do in every aspect of our lives.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to actually cut the circle up.
Now, notice that if I were just to cut it up into pieces, it won't change the area at all.
So let's actually try to do this right now live.
So here I go.
So I just cut it in half.
Notice the area won't change at all.
And I'm going to cut it in half again.
I'm going to do this a few times.
Now, of course, you really want to do this as much as possible.
Again, this is a great, fun little parlor experiment that you could actually perform at cocktail parties with a coaster.
And it really is neat.
I really do love this.
I'll just cut it up into this size pieces.
But of course, the more you do this, the easier it will be to see what we're about to see.
Let me just first of all show you that there was no sleight of hand here, that in fact these can all be reassembled.
And we'd form the complete circle again.
It looks like a pizza now, doesn't it?
Makes me hungry.
Well, there you can see that the circle is intact.
No pieces are missing.
And we want to find the area of that.
And the way I'm going to find the area of that is by moving the pieces around just a little bit.
By moving the pieces around, we're not going to actually change the amount of material required.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to interleaf these pieces.
And I'm going to, oh, before I do that, let's just make one comment about this before I mess this up.
The length around this curved circle is what?
Well, since the radius is R, the diameter is 2R.
And so the circumference is pi times the diameter, which in this case would be 2 pi R.
I want us to remember that this length from here all the way around to here, that total length is 2 pi R.
OK?
All right, now let's make ourselves a new figure.
And the new figure I want us to consider has these teeth coming together.
And so I'm going to do this for you right now live.
Not as easy as you may think.
This is live mathematics unfolding here, very dramatic.
And you can see that the pieces fit together quite nicely.
Notice that they're inverted up, down, up, down now.
But they do fit together quite nicely.
And if we had smaller pizza pieces, then in fact, the bottom would be less wavy, in fact, is what we'd see.
And so what I see is something like this.
And we have to find the area of that.
That's what we're trying to figure out.
But notice that that now resembles a rectangle.
In fact, the smaller you cut the pieces, the finer we have these pizza slices.
Then in fact, the more rectangle-like it looks.
Just to illustrate that, let me just take this last one here, and let me just cut this one in half.
Just to illustrate that.
Now, of course, you'd have to cut them all in half to make this look even better.
But just here, you'll see how good it looks just by cutting this one and putting this here.
So I'll put this right here, and I'll put this one right here.
And look at that.
Doesn't that look almost like a rectangle?
If you squint your eyes, that looks like a rectangle.
Well, the area of a rectangle we actually know.
It's the length of the base multiplied by the length of the height.
Well, let's figure out what roughly speaking this would be.
Well, the height we know, that's just from the center of the circle.
It's a pizza slice, so that's just the radius.
So this height is just r.
And what about the base?
Well, these are wiggly parts that forms part of the circle.
But what part of the circle?
Well, we see that we have half of them down here and half of them up here.
So in fact, what we see here is that this is half of the entire travel around, or half the circumference.
Remember, we figured out the circumference was 2 pi r.
Therefore, half of it is just pi r.
So the length of the base is half the circumference, or pi r.
So we have pi r multiplied by the height, which is r.
And what do we see?
We see pi r squared.
We just gave an excellent heuristic for how we can prove that the area of a circle is indeed pi r squared.
Now, this formula was established by Archimedes in the third century BCE.
However, even before Archimedes, Euclid knew there was a special number
that gave the area of a circle once you multiplied it by the radius squared,
although he didn't actually explicitly give the value of pi.
In fact, what Euclid actually did was gave the earliest proof that the ratio of a circle's area to its diameter squared is always constant.
And if you want, you could actually work through what that constant ratio would be,
which in this case would be pi over 4, because remember, the diameter is twice the radius.
So you have 2r squared, and when you square the 2, that's where you get the 4.
So pi over 4 is what his constant was, which is equivalent to the formula that we have.
He actually stated his result in book 12 of his series, The Elements,
and he stated as circles are to one another as the squares on the diameters.
And so that's how he phrased it, but that's equivalent to what we just proved.
Well, we've seen the importance of pi as a number in our natural universe,
but what about the numerical personality of pi itself?
Well, in 1761, the German mathematician Johann Lambert showed that pi is an irrational number.
It's not a ratio.
This important result tells us that the decimal expansion for pi will never become periodic.
Even though the decimal expansion will never repeat from some point onward forever,
the digits do contain some interesting patterns.
But it's interesting to think about the fact that even though we don't know all the infinitely long
list of digits, we know by this abstract theorem of Lambert that, in fact,
the digits will never repeat forever.
But there are interesting patterns in that screed of digits.
For example, starting at the 760 second decimal place,
we see a run of six nines in a row.
So we see 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, all in a row.
But then, of course, it gets jumbled up again.
This place in the decimal expansion for pi is sometimes referred to as the Feynman point,
named after the Nobel Prize-winning 20th century physicist Richard Feynman.
And why is this run of six nines starting at the 760 second decimal spot of pi named after him?
Well, as the story goes, Feynman once said that if he could memorize all the digits of pi
up to this point, then he could end his long digit soliloquy with 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, and so on.
And now we can appreciate Feynman's joke.
He'd be implying that pi ended with an endless run of nines,
which is impossible since Lambert proved that pi is irrational.
So it's a cute little story, I thought.
Now, getting a little bit technical, but only for a moment, I promise,
since pi is not a fraction, that's what Lambert proved,
then it's not equal to a number of the form m divided by n for any integers m and n,
because it's not a fraction, so pi doesn't equal, it's not equal to m over n.
In other words, I could say that pi minus m over n could never equal zero,
because they're never the same number, no matter what integers m and n are.
If I were to multiply through that not equal by n,
I would see n pi minus m will never equal zero.
Now, I know this sounds a little bit weird, but basically what it's saying is,
no integer times pi minus another integer will ever equal zero.
I'm assuming the integers are not zero, by the way.
Therefore, an equivalent, but more complicated way of describing what Lambert
proved is to say that pi will never be a solution to any polynomial equation
that looks like some integer x minus an integer equals zero, or nx minus m equals zero.
This kind of polynomial equation is called a linear equation.
And by a solution, I mean we find a value for x that will actually satisfy that equation.
Let's look at an example.
How about 5x minus 3 equals zero?
The solution there would be three-fifths, because if we replace the x by three-fifths,
then we see that five times three-fifths is just three, and three minus three is zero.
So that would be a solution.
Notice that in this solution, three-fifths is a fraction.
So what we're seeing is that pi is never a solution, this kind of thing.
So informally, let's just say that Lambert proved that pi is not the solution
to any very simple and special type of polynomial equation involving integers.
Well, over 120 years after Lambert's result in 1882,
the German mathematician Ferdinand von Lindemann proved a very important generalization.
He proved that pi is not a solution to any polynomial equation involving integers.
That means you can include x-squares and x-cubes and all sorts of things,
and pi will never be the solution to any kind of complicated polynomial of that sort
that you can ever think of.
Well, I just wanted to foreshadow this fact here.
We'll think about what it means to not be a solution in greater detail in lecture 15
and discover that this result allows us to actually better understand the mysterious numbers such as pi.
Although we're concerned with the number of important features about pi
and facts and formulas involving pi, there are many, many, many questions
that remain unanswered that involve pi.
And I thought that I wanted to share a few of my favorite open questions,
a few of the questions that no one knows the answers to that involve pi.
First of all, are the digits of pi random?
In other words, is pi an example of a normal number, which we saw in a previous lecture?
That is, in some sense, is every digit appearing the right amount of times for the number to be random,
like the digit 1 appears a tenth of the time, the digit 2 appears a tenth of the time, and so forth.
No one knows.
In fact, is there a pattern to the digits of pi?
Is there a formula that will generate the digits of pi?
No one knows.
We know that the number is irrational, so we know it will never repeat,
but maybe there's some kind of pattern that's more elaborate than just a repetitive pattern.
Well, what about a number like 2 raised to the pi power?
We looked at 2 raised to the square root of 2 power, but what about 2 to the pi power?
Is that an irrational number?
No one knows.
Well, if you could answer any of these questions, you'd become even more rich and famous than you already are,
and would certainly gain the respect of generations of mathematicians and number fans all over the world,
because these are notoriously challenging questions.
Well, I want to close this lecture on a light note and offer a slice of life through a slice of pi.
So, I thought it would be amusing to conclude with some wonderful antics and trivia involving this very famous number.
Around 1600, German mathematician Ludof van Kulen used a method that actually goes back to Archimedes
to compute the first 35 digits of pi.
He was so proud of his calculation that he wanted those 35 digits to be carved into his gravestone,
and his request was honored at the time of his death in 1610.
So, there's a gravestone out there where you actually see the first 35 digits of pi.
In 1873, a British math enthusiast, William Shanks, computed the first 707 digits of pi.
This is an 1873. It's amazing.
First 707 digits of pi.
It took Shanks over 20 years to perform the necessary computation.
He took 20 years of his life to get the 707 digits of pi.
But sadly, in 1944, D.F. Ferguson found that Shanks made a mistake in the 528th decimal spot.
Whoops! I mean, just amazing.
Here, he dedicated 20 years of your life and you make a mistake. Oh well.
In 1897, the Indiana General Assembly passed a bill declaring that pi was equal to 3.2.
However, the Indiana Senate postponed the bill indefinitely and thus, thankfully,
it's not against the law in Indiana to say that pi equals 3.1415, etc.
Can you imagine if this were actually a law?
That would mean that every mathematician and every math person that would use pi correctly
would be breaking the law and would be arrested.
Can you imagine that? That would be something.
By the way, why would Indiana make a law or even propose a law that sounds so silly?
Well, there's some sense to it.
If you think about it, when you're actually measuring land and sometimes farm areas are circular in nature,
to find the area of that, that involves the number pi.
And for taxation purposes and for deeds and ownership, it's important to know the exact amount of the area.
So computing areas is important, especially of circles.
And so, well, if you use a different approximation, the tax on the land might be different.
And so they were trying to standardize it.
So they weren't totally kooky, but it wasn't great.
Today, the first trillion digits of pi are known and billions of digits can be generated on a laptop computer with the appropriate software.
In fact, pi fans celebrate what's called pi day on March 14th at 1.59 pm.
Why? Well, because March 14th is 3.14 and 1.59 pm gives us 3.14159.
Now, if you're a real pi fishinato, then you should be doing this, of course, at 1.59 am, because really 1.59 pm is 13.59.
So really, you need to wake up at 1.59 in the morning on March 14th and start partying then.
Well, how many digits of pi do we need for precision in our calculations?
Well, suppose we want to use just the first 10 digits of pi to compute the circumference of Earth's equator, assuming, of course, that we know the exact diameter.
Well, if you do that calculation, we'd actually be off less than 2 tenths of a millimeter.
By the way, the circumference of the equator is about 24,901.5 miles.
So 1 fifth of a millimeter is not bad to be off.
So really, going out very far into the thousands and billions digits of pi is not necessary for computation in practical sense.
Well, how many digits of pi can you rattle off?
The current record holder is Akira Haraguchi, who, on October 3rd, 2006, correctly recited the first 100,000 digits of pi.
By the way, we all know what he recited starting at the 762nd spot.
He said 999999.
But he didn't say and so on.
He just kept going and going and going like the little bunny.
Well, do you want to remember the first 15 digits of pi?
No problem.
Just remember the following sentence, and you have to count the letters of each word.
There's actually a famous sentence that's out there, but I changed it.
So this is actually a brand new sentence just for you to help you remember this famous constant pi and its beginning decimal expansion.
And the sentence you have to remember is, how I need a drink, alcoholic, of course, after the heavy lectures involving ancient constants.
If you do a letter count, how I need, that's 314, and then if you go through how I need a drink, alcoholic, of course, after the heavy lectures involving ancient constants, you get 314159265358969.
And you could be quite the aficionado for yourselves.
Pi has been around forever, and it forms a fundamental constant in our universe and has been a source of inspiration and intrigue for thousands and thousands of years up to today.
