In fact, well, what half way be around, well, that would be 180 degrees, and we would sweep
out half the circumference, which in this case would be pi.
90 degrees would sweep out a quarter of the circle, and for this particular circle that
would have length pi over 2, or one half pi.
But we're beginning to see that every angle corresponds to a distance measured part way,
or all the way around, this particular circle of radius 1.
In other words, for any angle, we can measure the length of the arc of this circle swept
out by that angle.
This arc length provides a new way of representing the measure of an angle.
And we call this measure of angles radian measure.
So for example, 360 degrees equals 2 pi radians, those are the units, 180 degrees equals pi
radians.
And 90 degrees would equal pi over 2 radians.
And remember, all these measures are always based on a special circle which has radius
1.
Now, it turns out that this radian measure is much more useful in measuring angles for
mathematics and physics than the more familiar degree measure.
Now, if you think about it, this fact is not too surprising, since radian measure is naturally
connected through the circumference length with the angle, rather than the more arbitrary
degree measure that has no mathematical underpinnings, but just represents an approximation to a
complete year.
Now, the term radian first appeared in print in the 1870s.
But by that time, great mathematicians, including the great mathematician, Leonhard Euler, had
been using angles measured in radians for over 100 years.
Well, beyond angle measures, pi is a central in our understanding of our universe.
In fact, the number pi appears in countless important formulas and theories, including
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and Einstein's field equation from general relativity.
So a very, very important formula, a very important number indeed.
There is one famous ancient formula that involves pi that I want us to see together.
It's the beautiful formula for the area of a circle.
The area of a circle is equal to pi, this constant, multiplied by the length of the radius squared,
the famous formula pi r squared.
Now, let's see why this formula actually makes sense.
So, we're going to consider a circle that has radius r.
Let me move this aside for a second.
We're going to actually perform an experiment here live.
So let's consider a circle that has radius r.
So the distance from the center of the circle out to the radius is r.
That means that the diameter across would be r plus r or 2r.
