You could see the markings correspond perfectly.
Okay, well now let's measure and see how we do.
So I'm going to measure the circumference, which is a fancy way of saying the perimeter
around.
So I'll start over here, well in fact I'll start over here, and I go around, and you
can see, I'm doing this very carefully, trying to be as accurate as possible.
I'm coming to the beginning, and I see exactly here.
So this is the length, this is the length, which I'll move to this side right here, but
no sleight of hand, watch me, no sleight of hand, that's the length once around, once
around.
Now let's measure it and see what we get.
Well when I put this end here, and this end here, what do we see?
Well how many marks do we pass?
One, two, three.
So we pass three bits, and just a little bit more.
And if you look really closely we can see it's actually a little bit more than a tenth
of the way extra.
So what I see here is three, and a little bit more than a tenth.
So just this little experiment here live shows us that that ratio of the circumference to
the diameter is going to be a number that's around, or a little bit bigger, than 3.1.
Well in fact this works no matter what size of circle we actually start with.
So no matter what the size of the circle is, the circumference is slightly greater than
three times the diameter.
And we give this fixed constant value a name, and we call it pi.
So let's say this more precisely.
The number pi is defined to equal the ratio of the circumference of any circle to its
diameter across.
And as we've just noted, this ratio is constant.
No matter what size circle we try this with, that number will be always the same.
Now you can actually list many digits of this number.
It begins 3.141592653589, and it keeps going and so forth.
Well we'll take a look, let's first take a look at the early history of pi, and the
ancient struggle to pin down its exact value.
First a word about the symbol pi.
We use the Greek letter pi for this number, because the Greek word for periphery begins
with the Greek letter pi.
Now periphery of a circle was the precursor to the perimeter of the circle, which today
we call circumference.
The symbol pi first appears in William Jones's 1709 text, New Introduction to Mathematics.
