In fact, is there a pattern to the digits of pi?
Is there a formula that will generate the digits of pi?
No one knows.
We know that the number is irrational, so we know it will never repeat,
but maybe there's some kind of pattern that's more elaborate than just a repetitive pattern.
Well, what about a number like 2 raised to the pi power?
We looked at 2 raised to the square root of 2 power, but what about 2 to the pi power?
Is that an irrational number?
No one knows.
Well, if you could answer any of these questions, you'd become even more rich and famous than you already are,
and would certainly gain the respect of generations of mathematicians and number fans all over the world,
because these are notoriously challenging questions.
Well, I want to close this lecture on a light note and offer a slice of life through a slice of pi.
So, I thought it would be amusing to conclude with some wonderful antics and trivia involving this very famous number.
Around 1600, German mathematician Ludof van Kulen used a method that actually goes back to Archimedes
to compute the first 35 digits of pi.
He was so proud of his calculation that he wanted those 35 digits to be carved into his gravestone,
and his request was honored at the time of his death in 1610.
So, there's a gravestone out there where you actually see the first 35 digits of pi.
In 1873, a British math enthusiast, William Shanks, computed the first 707 digits of pi.
This is an 1873. It's amazing.
First 707 digits of pi.
It took Shanks over 20 years to perform the necessary computation.
He took 20 years of his life to get the 707 digits of pi.
But sadly, in 1944, D.F. Ferguson found that Shanks made a mistake in the 528th decimal spot.
Whoops! I mean, just amazing.
Here, he dedicated 20 years of your life and you make a mistake. Oh well.
In 1897, the Indiana General Assembly passed a bill declaring that pi was equal to 3.2.
However, the Indiana Senate postponed the bill indefinitely and thus, thankfully,
it's not against the law in Indiana to say that pi equals 3.1415, etc.
Can you imagine if this were actually a law?
That would mean that every mathematician and every math person that would use pi correctly
would be breaking the law and would be arrested.
Can you imagine that? That would be something.
By the way, why would Indiana make a law or even propose a law that sounds so silly?
Well, there's some sense to it.
If you think about it, when you're actually measuring land and sometimes farm areas are circular in nature,
to find the area of that, that involves the number pi.
And for taxation purposes and for deeds and ownership, it's important to know the exact amount of the area.
