So computing areas is important, especially of circles.
And so, well, if you use a different approximation, the tax on the land might be different.
And so they were trying to standardize it.
So they weren't totally kooky, but it wasn't great.
Today, the first trillion digits of pi are known and billions of digits can be generated on a laptop computer with the appropriate software.
In fact, pi fans celebrate what's called pi day on March 14th at 1.59 pm.
Why? Well, because March 14th is 3.14 and 1.59 pm gives us 3.14159.
Now, if you're a real pi fishinato, then you should be doing this, of course, at 1.59 am, because really 1.59 pm is 13.59.
So really, you need to wake up at 1.59 in the morning on March 14th and start partying then.
Well, how many digits of pi do we need for precision in our calculations?
Well, suppose we want to use just the first 10 digits of pi to compute the circumference of Earth's equator, assuming, of course, that we know the exact diameter.
Well, if you do that calculation, we'd actually be off less than 2 tenths of a millimeter.
By the way, the circumference of the equator is about 24,901.5 miles.
So 1 fifth of a millimeter is not bad to be off.
So really, going out very far into the thousands and billions digits of pi is not necessary for computation in practical sense.
Well, how many digits of pi can you rattle off?
The current record holder is Akira Haraguchi, who, on October 3rd, 2006, correctly recited the first 100,000 digits of pi.
By the way, we all know what he recited starting at the 762nd spot.
He said 999999.
But he didn't say and so on.
He just kept going and going and going like the little bunny.
Well, do you want to remember the first 15 digits of pi?
No problem.
Just remember the following sentence, and you have to count the letters of each word.
There's actually a famous sentence that's out there, but I changed it.
So this is actually a brand new sentence just for you to help you remember this famous constant pi and its beginning decimal expansion.
And the sentence you have to remember is, how I need a drink, alcoholic, of course, after the heavy lectures involving ancient constants.
If you do a letter count, how I need, that's 314, and then if you go through how I need a drink, alcoholic, of course, after the heavy lectures involving ancient constants, you get 314159265358969.
And you could be quite the aficionado for yourselves.
Pi has been around forever, and it forms a fundamental constant in our universe and has been a source of inspiration and intrigue for thousands and thousands of years up to today.
