Compared with the number pi, the constant today known as e is new to the number theory
scene, but its popularity can only be described as exponential.
First referenced by John Napier in 1618 and first approximated by Jacob Bernoulli, this
number quickly became one of the most important numbers in mathematics.
Leonhard Euler in 1727 was the first to name the number e, and although it most likely wasn't
named after Euler himself, today the numbers refer to as Euler's number.
With a value approximately 2.7182818 and so forth, this special number is fundamental
in our understanding of growth, thus in order to help us define this number, in this lecture
we'll consider an excellent $1 investment opportunity that offers 100% interest per
year.
This financial fantasy will inspire the precise definition of e as a limiting value of an
infinite list of numbers.
And with the official definition of e, we'll next consider several of its famous features.
These properties include a very surprising way of writing e as an infinitely long sum
of fractions that will actually be punctuated by actual exclamation points.
This important representation allowed Joseph Fourier in 1815 to devise a very clever proof
that e is irrational.
As we'll see, this punctuated sum can be generalized so as to represent any power of e.
While the complete decimal expansion for e remains unattainable, we'll celebrate a very
attractive way of writing e as an infinitely nested fraction.
Charles Hermit in 1873 extended Fourier's work and showed that e, just like pi, is not
the solution to any polynomial equation with integers.
The number e is very important in calculus and has thus captured the admiration of science
fans and groupies all over the world.
We'll even see a frivolous reflection of this e-esteem within the IPO for Google made in
2004.
Well, at the very end of the 17th century, Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli was working
through a computation involving compound interest and he came upon a very interesting
number.
Now in order to inspire this real number, I'm going to make you an offer you can't
afford to refuse.
So here's the very simple and attractive investment question I want us to consider.
Suppose that we invest $1 in a savings account paying 100% interest per year.
How much money would we have at the end of the year?
Well, actually, we can't answer this question quite yet since the answer depends upon how
often the interest is compounded.
That's why we so often read about APR, annual percentage rate.
That's the important number to us as investors.
So let's consider various scenarios in this story.
First, if the interest were paid once a year, then at the end of the year we would have
$2 because we'd have 100% more at the end of the year.
We started with $1, so that would be 1 plus 1, which is $2.
If the interest were to be awarded twice a year, then after the first six months, half
the year, we would be paid an interest of 50 cents, which is half of the 100% of the
dollar.
Thus, at the halfway point, we'd have $1.50.
And after the second six months, we would earn half of 100% on $1.50, which equals $0.75.
So the total amount that we'd have at the end of the year would be $2.25.
Now notice that that $0.25 came from the fact that we had a little more money in our account
at the midway point, and that money generated some interest.
That's the power of compounding.
If the interest were compounded quarterly, then the amount at the end of the year would
be $2.44.
Now let me give you the entire decimal because we'll think of these as numbers, not just
dollars and cents.
So the amount we'd actually have precisely would be $2.4414.
If the interest were compounded monthly, then we'd have 12 payments, one each month.
Then we'd end the year with $2.613.
Notice the amounts are going up because we're having more money placed into our account,
which in turn generates interest.
If the interest were to be compounded weekly, then at the end of the year, we'd see $2.6925.
If the interest were actually compounded daily, so 365 times we get an injection of a little
bit of interest, that will accrue even more, and we'd end the year with $2.71456 and so
forth.
So we see about $2.71, not bad.
Finally, what if the interest were compounded continuously?
That means every instant, every moment, so forth, the stream of interest being paid.
Well, we could figure this out numerically, and it works out to be $2.718281 and so forth.
Now by the way, at this point, it's not obvious how to compute this amount, but we'll actually
come back to that.
Thus, we've discovered that there's a limiting amount to our investment as the compounding
becomes more and more frequent.
We hit a ceiling in some sense at around $2.71 something.
Bernoulli was the first to realize that this process of compounding more and more frequently
has this limiting value, and he was actually the first person to compute this special number.
In fact, this special number that Bernoulli computed begins $2.718281828 and it goes on,
so forth.
This special number was first referenced in 1614 in a book by the remarkable Scottish
mathematician John Napier.
Napier was a true Renaissance man, his interests were political and religious in nature, and
his recreation was mathematics.
Among his long list of credits, he's believed to be the individual who actually popularized
the use of the decimal point that we use today.
Napier was an extraordinarily brilliant individual, and I want to share with you one of my favorite
stories of how clever he actually was.
On one occasion, he believed that one of his servants was stealing from him, but he didn't
know which one.
So Napier obtained a black rooster and informed his servants that his rooster would be able
to tell who the thief was.
One by one, he told them, they would be put into a room alone with the rooster, and at
which time they were to pet the animal.
Well, without the servants knowing it, Napier covered the black rooster with charcoal dust.
The innocent servants, of course, would have no qualms about petting the rooster as they
were instructed.
However, the guilty parties, being afraid that they might be caught, wouldn't dare touch
the rooster, and would simply just lie and say they petted the animal.
Napier would then just look at the servants' hands as they came out of the room, and the
servants with the clean hands were the guilty parties that he was looking for.
They're really ingenious, don't you think?
Well, on a more serious note, perhaps his most important mathematical work was his text
entitled, Miraculous Canon of Logrithms, in which he describes the theory of logarithms,
an idea that he himself invented.
So if you ever hated logarithms in school, you now know who you can thank for all that
pain and suffering that you may have endured.
In fact, a logarithm is really just a means of studying exponents, and that's all I'll
say about that.
What's relevant here for us now is that in this important book, the calculations of which
took him over 20 years to finish, he introduces this special number, 2.71828 and so forth,
for the very first time.
Today we denote this special number by a lowercase e.
The name e was first given to this number by Leonhard Euler in 1727, and often e is
referred to as Euler's number.
However, given that Euler was known for being very modest, and quite a modest mathematician,
it's likely that he didn't actually name the number after himself.
Well moving beyond its name, Euler's constant is extremely important, and a fundamental
number in nature.
It appears in essentially all questions of growth and decay.
These are commonly referred to as exponential growth and exponential decay.
Perhaps e comes from exponential.
Often populations grow at a rate proportional to the size of the population.
So in other words, if we have a very large population, then the rate of growth of that
population, the people would be reproducing at a much larger rate.
Whereas if we had a relatively smaller population, then that reproduction would be a little bit
smaller and the rate of growth would be smaller.
So this is a standard model that the population growth is proportional to the actual size
of the population.
Now the population could be anything, it could be people, it could be bacteria, or it could
be money.
It doesn't matter.
Now modeling the growth of this type actually involves the number e.
Now all serious financial advisors employ this number, whether they're even aware of
it or not.
Computations of the decay of radioactive substances, which is sometimes known as half-lives, often
involve the number e, and it's called half-life because quite often what we have here, a radioactive
substance decays at a rate that half of what's there decays at a certain point.
And if you wait that same length of time, half of what's there decays and so forth,
it's called a half-life, very slow way, very gradual way to dissipate quantity.
And that is also modeled by this number e.
In fact, the number e is one of the most important numbers in the study of calculus, which really
is the study of how things change.
So not surprisingly, if we're talking about things moving and growing or shrinking, e plays
a central role.
Well, let's now look at the number e itself and study it in a little bit more depth.
Well, there are many ways to explicitly and precisely define e.
Bernoulli's observation about the limiting value found by compound interest rates that
we just saw at the opening of this lecture can be expressed as a formula.
Let's now let the number n stand for the number of times we have compounding in one year.
And after one year with our $1 investment at 100% interest compounded n times, we would
end up with the quantity 1 plus 1 over n all raised to the n power.
That's how much dollars we would have, that's how many dollars we would have at the end
of the year.
So once we know how many times we compound, we could actually plug into this formula and
it would tell us how much money we'd have at the end of the year.
For example, let's take a look at some examples to illustrate the point.
If n equals 1, so there's compounding just once, which is at the end of the year, then
this formula gives 1 plus 1 over 1 to the first power.
Now raising a number to the first power is just the same thing as having the number itself,
so we don't have to do anything with that exponent of 1.
And we just see 1 plus 1 over 1, 1 over 1 is 1, so 1 plus 1, 2.
And of course, that was the answer we arrived at earlier.
If n were 2, which means that we actually have compounding twice, one at six months
and then one at the end of the year, then we'd actually see we'd have the formula gives
1 over 1 plus 1 half all squared, which equals 3 halves squared, which equals 9 fourths.
And 9 fourths is 2.25, which again we saw for ourselves earlier.
If n equals 4, so we have compounding quarterly, then we look at 1 plus 1 quarter raised to
the fourth power, which works out to be 2.4414 and so forth.
And if we have compounding daily, then n would equal 365, and we'd see the formula giving
1 plus 1 over 365 all raised to the 365th power, which works out to 2.71456 and so forth,
and that's how we actually computed those values.
Now if we compound every second of the year, every second, then n would equal 31,536,000.
And we'd have, for the amount of money that we'd have at the end of the year, 1 plus 1
over 31,536,000 all raised to the 31,536,000 power, which equals 2.7182817 and so forth.
You could see that we're actually heading toward our number.
So we now see that Bernoulli's, as Bernoulli saw, namely that as n gets larger and larger
and actually approaching infinity, the corresponding value of 1 plus 1 over n, all raised to the
n power, is approaching this number E. Well, another important definition of E arises out
of the ideas of calculus.
The number E can be expressed as an infinitely long sum of ever shrinking fractions.
So we can actually write E as 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 2 times 1 plus 1 over 3 times
2 times 1 plus 1 over 4 times 3 times 2 times 1, and this pattern continues.
Now the product of all the natural numbers from 1 up to any natural number n is called
n factorial, and it's denoted by the letter n followed by an exclamation mark.
So for example, 5 factorial would be the number 5 times 4 times 3 times 2 times 1, which in
that case would equal 120.
So given this shorthand, we could actually write the previous sum or speak the previous
sum for E in a more compactified way.
We could see that the formula tells us that E equals 1 plus 1 over 1 factorial plus 1
over 2 factorial plus 1 over 3 factorial plus 1 over 4 factorial plus 1 over 5 factorial,
and so forth, the pattern continues.
Isn't that some really quite something?
Now of course, 1 factorial is just 1, and 2 factorial is still 2 because it's 1 times
2, but we keep that factorial there so we can see the attractive pattern throughout.
In fact, this infinite sum can be extended to hold for not just E, but any power of E.
For example, E squared or E cubed, or in general, E to the power, let's call it x.
That generalized formula would be E to the x, or E to whatever the power is, so E to
the x equals 1 plus x to the first power over 1 factorial plus x squared over 2 factorial
plus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 4 factorial.
Do you see the pattern?
We keep having x to the, for example, the next one is x to the fifth over 5 factorial,
and so forth.
For example, E squared would be written as 1 plus 2 over 1 factorial plus 2 squared over
2 factorial plus 2 cubed over 3 factorial, and so on.
We could write as 1 plus 2 over 1 factorial plus 4 over 2 factorial plus 8 over 3 factorial
plus 16 over 4 factorial plus 32 over 5 factorial, and so forth.
This is an extremely famous and important formula, and we'll actually apply it for ourselves
in lecture 17 to make one of the most amazing discoveries in all of mathematics.
Now, that's a pretty big buildup, don't you think?
But I promise I'm going to deliver on this.
The important thing here is that this formula is highly non-trivial, not at all obvious,
and really to derive it, we require the deep ideas of calculus.
As an aside though, I want to say just a word about the evolution of that factorial symbol,
the factorial mark, the exclamation mark, and how it came about.
In 1774, we find the notation n with an asterisk or n star for this quantity of multiplying
all the numbers from 1 up to n together, and in 1841, Carl Weierstrauss used n with a single
quote, which in mathematics is read n prime.
But by 1816, the notation n with an exclamation mark for n factorial was really catching on.
The 19th century French mathematician J.B.
Durand once wrote,
There is ground for surprise that a notation so simple and consequently so useful has not
yet been universally adopted.
And again, we see an example by just finding the right notation for some mathematical idea.
It actually allows us to understand it better and to make new and further discoveries.
The exclamation point was sometimes actually read as n admiration instead of n factorial.
And if you were Victor Borga, you'd probably say n, so lots of ways of saying it.
Today, in certain computer science circles and in the United Kingdom, sometimes one reads
n factorial as n bang.
Bang is shorter and easier to say than factorial, so the formula we saw for e would be read
as e equals 1 plus 1 over 1 bang plus 1 over 2 bang plus 1 over 3 bang.
It certainly sounds more hip, doesn't it?
Well, there are many other amazing formulas involving e.
One such beautiful formula is known as a continued fraction.
It's not a fraction in the truest sense, but it's a nested collection of fractions.
And in fact, this is actually the area of number theory that houses some of my own research,
and so I'm very fond of these expressions.
I thought I would share with you the beautiful pattern that occurs when we try to write the
continued fraction expansion for e.
It looks like this.
e can be written as 2 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 2 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1
over 4 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 6.
And as you look at this, just focus on those first numbers that you see.
You see 2, 1, 2, and then 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, 6, 1, 1, 8, 1, 1, 10, and so forth.
We see 1, 1, and then the even numbers.
Absolutely amazing pattern, which is highly unusual, but it shows the deep and rich structure
in e and how fundamental of a number this number actually is.
Well, I want to close this lecture with a chance for us to celebrate and enjoy the wonders
of this magical and all-important number, e.
Now even though this number has been known to humanity for only 400 years, it's generated
a tremendous amount of interest and has had an enormous impact on our understanding of
mathematics, science, nature, and our universe.
In 1815, Joseph Fourier used the description of e as that infinitely long sum of fractions
with the factorials to actually establish and prove that e is an irrational number.
Thus, we can conclude from our earlier discoveries that the decimal expansion for e is never ending
and will never eventually become periodic.
Again, a wonderful moment where we can say something about this infinitely long list
of digits even though we don't know what those numbers are.
We can say something about a property that they possess.
Just as we saw with pi, because e is not a fraction, then in fact we can say that in
a cryptic way.
We could say that e is never equal to a number of the form m over n, where m and n are integers.
Again, just like we did for pi, let's take a moment to reflect on this with e.
e doesn't equal an m over n, which is identical to saying that e minus m over n can never
equal 0, because if they were equal 0, then they'd be the same and we know that e is not
a fraction.
Well, if we take this unequality and multiply both sides by n, then we actually see that
n times the number e minus m can never equal 0.
Just to say that in words, what that means is that any integer times e minus any other
integer cannot equal 0.
Again, I'm going to assume that these integers aren't 0 themselves.
This is a cryptic way of describing the irrationality that Fourier just showed us.
Thus, we can see that e can never be a solution to a linear polynomial equation of the form
integer x minus integer equals 0, or more formally, n times x minus m equals 0, where
the m and m are integers.
For example, let's consider 7x minus 5 equals 0.
The solution to that would be x equals 5 7ths, because if I replace the x by 5 7ths, then
I see that I can simplify this.
The 7ths cancel.
I'm just left with the 5.
5 minus 5 is 0.
So I see x equals 5 7ths is a solution to that.
But notice 5 7ths is a fraction.
It's a ratio.
It's a rational number.
We know that e is irrational, which means that e will never satisfy an equation of that
form.
Well, in 1873, Charles Hermit generalized this result and showed that e, just like with
pi, is not a solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
In other words, you can throw on not just x's, but you could have x squareds and x cubes
and put really big integers in front of those numbers, multiply by big integers, subtract
them, add them, combine them in any way you want.
There's no way to have e be a solution to any such equation, no matter how complicated
you try to make it.
It's really a stunning result.
And these remarks, in fact, about both pi and e, will be the inspiration for our next
lecture, where we study numbers that much deeper.
Well, just as with pi, many mysteries remain with e.
First off, we could ask, is e a normal number?
Well, that means do the digits of e in the decimal expansion appear the right amount
of time if the number were to be selected at random, namely that the digit 0, for example,
appears a tenth of the time.
The digit 1 appears a tenth of the time, all the way out to the digit 9 appearing a tenth
of the time.
Well, no one knows for certain.
In fact, here's a question.
Does the digit 7 appear infinitely often in the decimal expansion for e?
No one even knows that.
So we know we have this endless decimal expansion that's never repeating for e, but we don't
even know if the digit 7 even appears infinitely often, or if there's a last 7 in this long
list of digits.
No one knows.
Well, there are many basic questions involving both the numbers pi and e together that no
one knows the answer to.
For example, no one knows if e plus pi, so take the number e and add it to pi.
No one knows if that number is irrational.
What does that mean?
Well, remember that we proved that e is, we didn't prove it, but we saw that e is an
irrational number, and we remarked that pi also is an irrational number, but what about
their sum?
Well, there's no obvious reason by just knowing I have two irrational numbers that their sum
is in fact irrational.
Possibly the sum, there might be tremendous conspiracy in all those digits, and when you
actually add that infinitely long list of digits for pi to the infinitely long list
of digits for e, potentially all of a sudden there's an amazing conspiracy, and the decimal
digits of the sum begins to repeat from some point onward.
That could in theory happen.
We don't know otherwise.
That's an open question.
In fact, even e multiplied by pi, that number no one knows if in fact is irrational or not.
And for example, take pi and raise it to the e power.
No one knows if that number is irrational, although just intuitively it seems obvious
to mathematicians and maybe even just to general people thinking about these complicated numbers
that they're so complicated that in fact it would make sense that all of these quantities,
e plus pi, e times pi, pi to the e power, they would all be irrational numbers.
So while we believe they're all irrational, remember in mathematics we need a complete
proof, and complete proofs of these facts allude us, if they're facts, allude us to
this day.
So many, many open questions.
The importance and beauty of e has made it a favorite number in many mathematical circles
and amongst mathematical fans and groupies all over the world.
As a result, we see the digits of e actually appearing in the strangest places.
And so I thought I'd share one with you.
For example, in 2004, Google honored this extremely important constant in an unusual
way in its initial public offering, which was 2,718,281,828, precisely the first 10 digits
of e.
So even Google is gaga over e.
Well, oh, by the way, suppose that you actually want to rattle off the first 11 digits of
e.
It's always fun to be able to have a little trivia fact like that to rattle off at parties
and in meetings.
If you want to actually remember the first 11 digits of e, you just have to remember
the sentence that I'm about to give you.
And again, their famous sentence is like this, and I modified this just for us.
So this is the first time this sentence has ever been uttered.
But if you remember it, you'll always remember the digits of e, at least the first 11.
So here's the sentence to remember.
To express e, remember to memorize a sentence in embedded code.
And notice that if you take the letter count of each word in the sentence to express e,
remember to memorize a sentence in embedded code.
Notice that in the first three words, if you were to count the letters, we'd see two,
a seven, and then a one.
And if you continue, you would see two, seven, one, eight, two, eight, one, eight, two, eight,
four, the first 11 digits of e.
Well, e is indeed a natural constant that's extremely important in our universe.
It's intrinsic in nature and in growth.
Now it's a new number to humanity in terms of our discovery of this amazing constant,
but it's been with us since the very, very beginning of time.
