referred to as Euler's number.
However, given that Euler was known for being very modest, and quite a modest mathematician,
it's likely that he didn't actually name the number after himself.
Well moving beyond its name, Euler's constant is extremely important, and a fundamental
number in nature.
It appears in essentially all questions of growth and decay.
These are commonly referred to as exponential growth and exponential decay.
Perhaps e comes from exponential.
Often populations grow at a rate proportional to the size of the population.
So in other words, if we have a very large population, then the rate of growth of that
population, the people would be reproducing at a much larger rate.
Whereas if we had a relatively smaller population, then that reproduction would be a little bit
smaller and the rate of growth would be smaller.
So this is a standard model that the population growth is proportional to the actual size
of the population.
Now the population could be anything, it could be people, it could be bacteria, or it could
be money.
It doesn't matter.
Now modeling the growth of this type actually involves the number e.
Now all serious financial advisors employ this number, whether they're even aware of
it or not.
Computations of the decay of radioactive substances, which is sometimes known as half-lives, often
involve the number e, and it's called half-life because quite often what we have here, a radioactive
substance decays at a rate that half of what's there decays at a certain point.
And if you wait that same length of time, half of what's there decays and so forth,
it's called a half-life, very slow way, very gradual way to dissipate quantity.
And that is also modeled by this number e.
In fact, the number e is one of the most important numbers in the study of calculus, which really
is the study of how things change.
So not surprisingly, if we're talking about things moving and growing or shrinking, e plays
a central role.
Well, let's now look at the number e itself and study it in a little bit more depth.
Well, there are many ways to explicitly and precisely define e.
Bernoulli's observation about the limiting value found by compound interest rates that
we just saw at the opening of this lecture can be expressed as a formula.
Let's now let the number n stand for the number of times we have compounding in one year.
And after one year with our $1 investment at 100% interest compounded n times, we would
