That's the important number to us as investors.
So let's consider various scenarios in this story.
First, if the interest were paid once a year, then at the end of the year we would have
$2 because we'd have 100% more at the end of the year.
We started with $1, so that would be 1 plus 1, which is $2.
If the interest were to be awarded twice a year, then after the first six months, half
the year, we would be paid an interest of 50 cents, which is half of the 100% of the
dollar.
Thus, at the halfway point, we'd have $1.50.
And after the second six months, we would earn half of 100% on $1.50, which equals $0.75.
So the total amount that we'd have at the end of the year would be $2.25.
Now notice that that $0.25 came from the fact that we had a little more money in our account
at the midway point, and that money generated some interest.
That's the power of compounding.
If the interest were compounded quarterly, then the amount at the end of the year would
be $2.44.
Now let me give you the entire decimal because we'll think of these as numbers, not just
dollars and cents.
So the amount we'd actually have precisely would be $2.4414.
If the interest were compounded monthly, then we'd have 12 payments, one each month.
Then we'd end the year with $2.613.
Notice the amounts are going up because we're having more money placed into our account,
which in turn generates interest.
If the interest were to be compounded weekly, then at the end of the year, we'd see $2.6925.
If the interest were actually compounded daily, so 365 times we get an injection of a little
bit of interest, that will accrue even more, and we'd end the year with $2.71456 and so
forth.
So we see about $2.71, not bad.
Finally, what if the interest were compounded continuously?
That means every instant, every moment, so forth, the stream of interest being paid.
Well, we could figure this out numerically, and it works out to be $2.718281 and so forth.
Now by the way, at this point, it's not obvious how to compute this amount, but we'll actually
come back to that.
Thus, we've discovered that there's a limiting amount to our investment as the compounding
becomes more and more frequent.
We hit a ceiling in some sense at around $2.71 something.
Bernoulli was the first to realize that this process of compounding more and more frequently
