has this limiting value, and he was actually the first person to compute this special number.
In fact, this special number that Bernoulli computed begins $2.718281828 and it goes on,
so forth.
This special number was first referenced in 1614 in a book by the remarkable Scottish
mathematician John Napier.
Napier was a true Renaissance man, his interests were political and religious in nature, and
his recreation was mathematics.
Among his long list of credits, he's believed to be the individual who actually popularized
the use of the decimal point that we use today.
Napier was an extraordinarily brilliant individual, and I want to share with you one of my favorite
stories of how clever he actually was.
On one occasion, he believed that one of his servants was stealing from him, but he didn't
know which one.
So Napier obtained a black rooster and informed his servants that his rooster would be able
to tell who the thief was.
One by one, he told them, they would be put into a room alone with the rooster, and at
which time they were to pet the animal.
Well, without the servants knowing it, Napier covered the black rooster with charcoal dust.
The innocent servants, of course, would have no qualms about petting the rooster as they
were instructed.
However, the guilty parties, being afraid that they might be caught, wouldn't dare touch
the rooster, and would simply just lie and say they petted the animal.
Napier would then just look at the servants' hands as they came out of the room, and the
servants with the clean hands were the guilty parties that he was looking for.
They're really ingenious, don't you think?
Well, on a more serious note, perhaps his most important mathematical work was his text
entitled, Miraculous Canon of Logrithms, in which he describes the theory of logarithms,
an idea that he himself invented.
So if you ever hated logarithms in school, you now know who you can thank for all that
pain and suffering that you may have endured.
In fact, a logarithm is really just a means of studying exponents, and that's all I'll
say about that.
What's relevant here for us now is that in this important book, the calculations of which
took him over 20 years to finish, he introduces this special number, 2.71828 and so forth,
for the very first time.
Today we denote this special number by a lowercase e.
The name e was first given to this number by Leonhard Euler in 1727, and often e is
