Again, just like we did for pi, let's take a moment to reflect on this with e.
e doesn't equal an m over n, which is identical to saying that e minus m over n can never
equal 0, because if they were equal 0, then they'd be the same and we know that e is not
a fraction.
Well, if we take this unequality and multiply both sides by n, then we actually see that
n times the number e minus m can never equal 0.
Just to say that in words, what that means is that any integer times e minus any other
integer cannot equal 0.
Again, I'm going to assume that these integers aren't 0 themselves.
This is a cryptic way of describing the irrationality that Fourier just showed us.
Thus, we can see that e can never be a solution to a linear polynomial equation of the form
integer x minus integer equals 0, or more formally, n times x minus m equals 0, where
the m and m are integers.
For example, let's consider 7x minus 5 equals 0.
The solution to that would be x equals 5 7ths, because if I replace the x by 5 7ths, then
I see that I can simplify this.
The 7ths cancel.
I'm just left with the 5.
5 minus 5 is 0.
So I see x equals 5 7ths is a solution to that.
But notice 5 7ths is a fraction.
It's a ratio.
It's a rational number.
We know that e is irrational, which means that e will never satisfy an equation of that
form.
Well, in 1873, Charles Hermit generalized this result and showed that e, just like with
pi, is not a solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
In other words, you can throw on not just x's, but you could have x squareds and x cubes
and put really big integers in front of those numbers, multiply by big integers, subtract
them, add them, combine them in any way you want.
There's no way to have e be a solution to any such equation, no matter how complicated
you try to make it.
It's really a stunning result.
And these remarks, in fact, about both pi and e, will be the inspiration for our next
lecture, where we study numbers that much deeper.
Well, just as with pi, many mysteries remain with e.
First off, we could ask, is e a normal number?
