sum for E in a more compactified way.
We could see that the formula tells us that E equals 1 plus 1 over 1 factorial plus 1
over 2 factorial plus 1 over 3 factorial plus 1 over 4 factorial plus 1 over 5 factorial,
and so forth, the pattern continues.
Isn't that some really quite something?
Now of course, 1 factorial is just 1, and 2 factorial is still 2 because it's 1 times
2, but we keep that factorial there so we can see the attractive pattern throughout.
In fact, this infinite sum can be extended to hold for not just E, but any power of E.
For example, E squared or E cubed, or in general, E to the power, let's call it x.
That generalized formula would be E to the x, or E to whatever the power is, so E to
the x equals 1 plus x to the first power over 1 factorial plus x squared over 2 factorial
plus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 4 factorial.
Do you see the pattern?
We keep having x to the, for example, the next one is x to the fifth over 5 factorial,
and so forth.
For example, E squared would be written as 1 plus 2 over 1 factorial plus 2 squared over
2 factorial plus 2 cubed over 3 factorial, and so on.
We could write as 1 plus 2 over 1 factorial plus 4 over 2 factorial plus 8 over 3 factorial
plus 16 over 4 factorial plus 32 over 5 factorial, and so forth.
This is an extremely famous and important formula, and we'll actually apply it for ourselves
in lecture 17 to make one of the most amazing discoveries in all of mathematics.
Now, that's a pretty big buildup, don't you think?
But I promise I'm going to deliver on this.
The important thing here is that this formula is highly non-trivial, not at all obvious,
and really to derive it, we require the deep ideas of calculus.
As an aside though, I want to say just a word about the evolution of that factorial symbol,
the factorial mark, the exclamation mark, and how it came about.
In 1774, we find the notation n with an asterisk or n star for this quantity of multiplying
all the numbers from 1 up to n together, and in 1841, Carl Weierstrauss used n with a single
quote, which in mathematics is read n prime.
But by 1816, the notation n with an exclamation mark for n factorial was really catching on.
The 19th century French mathematician J.B.
Durand once wrote,
There is ground for surprise that a notation so simple and consequently so useful has not
yet been universally adopted.
And again, we see an example by just finding the right notation for some mathematical idea.
It actually allows us to understand it better and to make new and further discoveries.
