Compared with the number pi, the constant today known as e is new to the number theory
scene, but its popularity can only be described as exponential.
First referenced by John Napier in 1618 and first approximated by Jacob Bernoulli, this
number quickly became one of the most important numbers in mathematics.
Leonhard Euler in 1727 was the first to name the number e, and although it most likely wasn't
named after Euler himself, today the numbers refer to as Euler's number.
With a value approximately 2.7182818 and so forth, this special number is fundamental
in our understanding of growth, thus in order to help us define this number, in this lecture
we'll consider an excellent $1 investment opportunity that offers 100% interest per
year.
This financial fantasy will inspire the precise definition of e as a limiting value of an
infinite list of numbers.
And with the official definition of e, we'll next consider several of its famous features.
These properties include a very surprising way of writing e as an infinitely long sum
of fractions that will actually be punctuated by actual exclamation points.
This important representation allowed Joseph Fourier in 1815 to devise a very clever proof
that e is irrational.
As we'll see, this punctuated sum can be generalized so as to represent any power of e.
While the complete decimal expansion for e remains unattainable, we'll celebrate a very
attractive way of writing e as an infinitely nested fraction.
Charles Hermit in 1873 extended Fourier's work and showed that e, just like pi, is not
the solution to any polynomial equation with integers.
The number e is very important in calculus and has thus captured the admiration of science
fans and groupies all over the world.
We'll even see a frivolous reflection of this e-esteem within the IPO for Google made in
2004.
Well, at the very end of the 17th century, Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli was working
through a computation involving compound interest and he came upon a very interesting
number.
Now in order to inspire this real number, I'm going to make you an offer you can't
afford to refuse.
So here's the very simple and attractive investment question I want us to consider.
Suppose that we invest $1 in a savings account paying 100% interest per year.
How much money would we have at the end of the year?
Well, actually, we can't answer this question quite yet since the answer depends upon how
often the interest is compounded.
That's why we so often read about APR, annual percentage rate.
