Well, that means do the digits of e in the decimal expansion appear the right amount
of time if the number were to be selected at random, namely that the digit 0, for example,
appears a tenth of the time.
The digit 1 appears a tenth of the time, all the way out to the digit 9 appearing a tenth
of the time.
Well, no one knows for certain.
In fact, here's a question.
Does the digit 7 appear infinitely often in the decimal expansion for e?
No one even knows that.
So we know we have this endless decimal expansion that's never repeating for e, but we don't
even know if the digit 7 even appears infinitely often, or if there's a last 7 in this long
list of digits.
No one knows.
Well, there are many basic questions involving both the numbers pi and e together that no
one knows the answer to.
For example, no one knows if e plus pi, so take the number e and add it to pi.
No one knows if that number is irrational.
What does that mean?
Well, remember that we proved that e is, we didn't prove it, but we saw that e is an
irrational number, and we remarked that pi also is an irrational number, but what about
their sum?
Well, there's no obvious reason by just knowing I have two irrational numbers that their sum
is in fact irrational.
Possibly the sum, there might be tremendous conspiracy in all those digits, and when you
actually add that infinitely long list of digits for pi to the infinitely long list
of digits for e, potentially all of a sudden there's an amazing conspiracy, and the decimal
digits of the sum begins to repeat from some point onward.
That could in theory happen.
We don't know otherwise.
That's an open question.
In fact, even e multiplied by pi, that number no one knows if in fact is irrational or not.
And for example, take pi and raise it to the e power.
No one knows if that number is irrational, although just intuitively it seems obvious
to mathematicians and maybe even just to general people thinking about these complicated numbers
that they're so complicated that in fact it would make sense that all of these quantities,
e plus pi, e times pi, pi to the e power, they would all be irrational numbers.
So while we believe they're all irrational, remember in mathematics we need a complete
