The exclamation point was sometimes actually read as n admiration instead of n factorial.
And if you were Victor Borga, you'd probably say n, so lots of ways of saying it.
Today, in certain computer science circles and in the United Kingdom, sometimes one reads
n factorial as n bang.
Bang is shorter and easier to say than factorial, so the formula we saw for e would be read
as e equals 1 plus 1 over 1 bang plus 1 over 2 bang plus 1 over 3 bang.
It certainly sounds more hip, doesn't it?
Well, there are many other amazing formulas involving e.
One such beautiful formula is known as a continued fraction.
It's not a fraction in the truest sense, but it's a nested collection of fractions.
And in fact, this is actually the area of number theory that houses some of my own research,
and so I'm very fond of these expressions.
I thought I would share with you the beautiful pattern that occurs when we try to write the
continued fraction expansion for e.
It looks like this.
e can be written as 2 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 2 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1
over 4 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 6.
And as you look at this, just focus on those first numbers that you see.
You see 2, 1, 2, and then 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, 6, 1, 1, 8, 1, 1, 10, and so forth.
We see 1, 1, and then the even numbers.
Absolutely amazing pattern, which is highly unusual, but it shows the deep and rich structure
in e and how fundamental of a number this number actually is.
Well, I want to close this lecture with a chance for us to celebrate and enjoy the wonders
of this magical and all-important number, e.
Now even though this number has been known to humanity for only 400 years, it's generated
a tremendous amount of interest and has had an enormous impact on our understanding of
mathematics, science, nature, and our universe.
In 1815, Joseph Fourier used the description of e as that infinitely long sum of fractions
with the factorials to actually establish and prove that e is an irrational number.
Thus, we can conclude from our earlier discoveries that the decimal expansion for e is never ending
and will never eventually become periodic.
Again, a wonderful moment where we can say something about this infinitely long list
of digits even though we don't know what those numbers are.
We can say something about a property that they possess.
Just as we saw with pi, because e is not a fraction, then in fact we can say that in
a cryptic way.
We could say that e is never equal to a number of the form m over n, where m and n are integers.
