If you look up into the dark sky, you see stars.
Of course, we see them because they're the exception.
But if you were to just somehow pick one point out in space, the likelihood of selecting
one of those stars would be zero.
More likely you would hit the black background, and that dense black background is the firmament
where the transcendentals live.
Once again, we see in our course this wonderful theme that the familiar numbers, in this case
the algebraic numbers, like square root of two, are, in fact, the rare numbers, while
the more mysterious transcendental numbers are more the commonplace and more the ordinary.
Again, we see this wonderful dichotomy between our understanding and intuition versus reality.
Thus, we're presented with another opportunity to retrain our thinking and intuition, although
this is by no means easy to do.
It's difficult to even grasp the idea of a transcendental number, let alone imagine
that, in fact, the real line is teeming with them, and the square roots of two and cube
roots of five that we're familiar with are the exception.
Well, I now want to share the story of a very famous question about transcendental numbers
that was posed by the early 20th century German mathematician David Hilbert.
One of the most famous international mathematics conferences is the Congress of Mathematics
held every four years.
In 1900, at the dawn of the 20th century, the Congress of Mathematics held in Paris
invited David Hilbert, one of the greatest mathematicians of the modern age, to deliver
an address on August 8.
Hilbert took this opportunity to reflect on the then current state of mathematics and
consider where it has been and the next direction in which it should move.
So, in his address, he posed open questions that he believed would shape the future of
mathematics.
He actually posed 23 questions, although only 10 were presented in the conference, but in
the conference proceedings, which he contributed, he listed all 23.
Of the 23 offered in 1900, 10 of those questions have been solved completely today, and the
rest still remain open.
In this famous list of questions, I want us to focus on his seventh question that he
describes.
The question actually involves a number that we ourselves studied earlier, the number two
raised to the square root of two power.
We figured out what that meant in a previous lecture, but he asks here if that number was
in fact transcendental.
Now, more generally, Hilbert asked the following question, so I'm going to state this question
in mathematical language, but we'll see that it's similar in structure to two raised to
the square root of two power.
