The simplest equations in my mind are the equations that look like, for example, x minus
two equals zero, for which I can see that the solution would be x equals two.
What does it mean to find a solution?
It means we have to find a value for x so that when we plug that value in for x in the
equation, the equation is valid.
Another example would be two x minus ten equals zero.
Again, fairly simple.
And if we work through and solve that, we'd see the solution is x equals five, because
if I replace the x by five, I would see two times five minus ten.
By the way, when we write two x, that always means that we're multiplying.
So if there's no symbol in between two and an x like that, that means two times x.
So we see two times five minus ten, which does indeed equal zero.
That's a solution.
Well, in fact, these are two examples of what are called linear equations of the general
form something times x minus something equals zero.
Now if m and n are integers in the expression nx minus m equals zero, then the solution
to that, which is x equals m divided by n, is a rational number.
In other words, it's a fraction.
We have a ratio of two integers.
So for example, three x minus two, if we were to find the solution of that, we'd see the
answer is that x equals two thirds.
And notice two thirds is indeed a ratio of integers.
It's a rational number.
So these three equations are in fact a special case of the simplest class of equations that
we have known as polynomial equations.
These are sums and differences of numbers multiplied by x's that are being raised to
various natural number powers and then all set equal to zero.
So let's now see some examples of polynomial equations that are not linear just to get
into the groove.
Now these are going to make some up and these are going to be just random and ugly looking
things but I assure you that we're not going to solve them but I want you to get a sense
of what they look like, their general form.
For example, x squared minus two equals zero.
That's an example of a polynomial equation.
Five x cubed plus nine x squared minus thirty five x minus seven equals zero is even a more
elaborate one and you can make even really complicated looking ones.
For example, negative x to the twenty-fifth power plus forty nine x to the seventeenth
power plus x to the ten minus twelve x equals zero.
Wow, that looks really impressive.
