He asked the following, he said, let's let A be an algebraic number that's not equal
to zero or one.
So, throw away zero or one, but take any other algebraic number you can think of, and let's
let B be an irrational algebraic number, like, for example, square root of two or the cube
root of five.
Then, the question is, if I take A and raise it to the B power, is that number a transcendental
number?
That was his seventh question.
Now, most mathematicians believe that this question would remain unanswered for a long,
long time, because it appeared totally out of reach using the current techniques and
theorems from number theory of the day.
However, in a surprisingly fast turn of events, an answer was provided by Alexander Gelfand
in 1934, and then again by Theodore Schneider in 1935.
And amazingly, Schneider wasn't even aware of Gelfand's work.
Once again, we see where our knowledge of mathematics is at a point where a question
was about to fall, and two great minds independently on their own, but simultaneously, saw that
avenue and cracked the question open, provided the answer.
They proved that the answer is yes.
All those numbers that Hilbert described are indeed transcendental numbers.
The result today is now known as the Gelfand-Schneider theorem to celebrate and honor both men who
created the proof.
Now, we can actually apply their theorem, and this powerful result, to establish that
two raised to the square root of two power is indeed transcendental.
Let's just do it really quickly to see that the number is transcendental.
So first of all, the number two is neither zero nor one, which is one of the stipulations,
and notice that it is algebraic because it's the solution to x minus two equals zero.
So therefore, it is an algebraic number that's neither zero or one, and so it's a allowable
candidate for the base.
And what about the exponent squared of two?
Well, it's an algebraic number because it's a solution, as we've seen earlier, to x squared
minus two equals zero, that's a polynomial.
And the Pythagoreans and we ourselves proved that that number is irrational, so we have
an irrational algebraic number.
We can use that in the theorem as the exponent.
So the hypotheses are fulfilled, we've satisfied the conditions required in order for us to
conclude through the Gelfand-Schneider theorem that two raised to the square root of two
power is indeed a transcendental number.
Well, many open questions remain, and I want to share some of them with you.
In fact, our understanding of transcendental numbers is very, very narrow, very, very limited.
