In this lecture, using pi and e as two famous exemplars, we'll introduce the mysterious
world of transcendental numbers.
We'll see how numbers fall into one of two different classes.
Whether they are a solution to some special type of equation or they're not the solution
to any such equation.
If a number is a solution, we call it an algebraic number and otherwise we call it transcendental
or a transcendental number.
The existence of algebraic numbers goes back to at least as far as the Babylonians who
were solving quadratic equations as early as 2000 BCE.
However, humankind had awaited several millennia before we were able to demonstrate the existence
of even one transcendental number.
Joseph Leaville in 1844 made this wonderful discovery about nature and number by actually
constructing one.
As we've seen throughout these lectures, what at first appears exotic and rare are
in fact commonplace and ordinary.
While it took thousands of years to show that transcendental numbers even existed, it took
Georg Cantor only 50 years after Leaville's seminal work to prove that almost all numbers
are transcendental.
Even though we know that real numbers are teeming with transcendentals, it remains a
very difficult task to produce specific ones even today.
In fact, David Hilbert in his famous address at the 1900 Congress of Mathematics in which
he listed 10 fundamental open questions of mathematics challenged the mathematical community
to prove the transcendence of two raised to the square root of two power.
While many mathematicians including Hilbert himself considered this question out of reach,
Alexander Gelfand and Theodore Schneider independently gave an affirmative answer to this question
in the mid 1930s.
We'll close our discussion of transcendental numbers by describing some questions that
remain unanswered to this very day.
Well, the main object of interest in this lecture is the notion of a transcendental number.
Unfortunately, transcendental numbers are defined indirectly.
They're defined by what we say they're not.
They're not the solutions to certain equations.
And so I want to open this lecture here with a few minutes about those equations themselves.
Now, because these ideas are challenging for all who encountered them for the first
time, including the mathematicians themselves, here we have an opportunity to celebrate one
of my favorite lessons for understanding difficult notions.
First try to understand simple things deeply.
So let's start at the beginning and see our story slowly unfold.
Well, one of the most common practices in mathematics is the solving of equations.
