the polynomial equation x cubed minus 5 equals 0.
Now to see that, let's actually substitute the cube root of 5 in for the unknown x and
see that indeed it's a solution.
If we take the cube root of 5 and cube it, well, just like with the square root being
squared, a cube root being cubed, those two operations cancel out so we just see 5.
5 minus 5 is 0.
So indeed it's a solution to that and therefore the cube root of 5 is awarded, the title,
an algebraic number.
Well, while algebraic numbers have no specific look to them, they often involve roots.
For example, the square root of 2 is an algebraic number.
The cube root of 2 is an algebraic number.
The square root of 5 minus 7, and you can even make more elaborate ones.
For example, the square root of 6 plus the fourth root of 22 all over 9.
Well, these are all examples of algebraic numbers and you can see that these can get
a very complicated looking very quickly.
In fact, this reminds me that Sir Winston Churchill carried the memory of these square
roots and cube roots throughout his life.
In his autobiography entitled My Early Life, A Roving Commission, he reflects on his bout
with mathematics as part of his entrance exam to be admitted into the military academy and
I thought I would read a little excerpt from his book in his own words.
All my life from time to time I have had to get up disagreeable subjects at short notice.
What I consider my triumph moral and technical was in learning mathematics in six months.
Of course, what I call mathematics is only what the civil service commissioners expected
you to know to pass a very rudimentary exam.
I suppose that to those who enjoy this peculiar gift, senior wranglers and the like, the waters
in which I swam must seem only a duck puddle compared to the Atlantic Ocean.
Nevertheless, when I plunged in, I was soon out of my depth.
He goes on to say, When I look back upon those care-laden months,
their prominent features rise from the abyss of memory.
Of course, I had progressed far beyond vulgar fractions and the decimal system.
We were arrived in an Alice in Wonderland world at the portals of which stood a quadratic equation.
We turned aside not indeed to the uplands of the delectable mountains, but into a strange
corridor of things like anagrams and acrostics called signs, cosines and tangents.
Apparently, they were very important, especially when multiplied by each other or by themselves.
There was a question on my third and last examination about these cosines and tangents
in a highly square-rooted condition, which must have been decisive upon the whole of
my afterlife.
It was a problem.
Luckily, I had seen its ugly face only a few days before, and I recognized it at first
