But they all have the same form and that's what I just want us to see here now.
They all have this similar look.
Now even with these more intimidating polynomial equations, a value of x that makes the equation
valid is called a solution to that equation.
That is, if we plug in that value that for the unknown x, we see that the equality holds.
Even though it looks complicated and so forth, if we had a value we could plug in and see
if it satisfies the equation or not.
So for example, let's see that x equals three is in fact a solution to the polynomial equation
x squared minus nine equals zero.
Well, let's check and see.
If we replace the x, the unknown x by a three, what we see here is three squared minus nine.
Well, three squared is three times three, which is nine.
So we see nine minus nine, which indeed equals zero.
So yes, it's a solution.
Let's check to see another example that the square root of two is a solution to x squared
minus two equals zero.
So if we look at the polynomial x squared minus two equals zero and now we substitute
for the unknown x, the square root of two, then what do we see?
Well, we see the square root of two squared.
Well, remember that when we square a square root, those two functions counteract each other
and we're just left with in this case just the two.
Square root of two squared equals two.
But then we subtract two, which means we yield zero.
So in fact, we see that the square root of two is a solution to that polynomial.
So we see solutions.
Now, for this lecture, we'll only consider polynomials having integer coefficients.
In other words, the only numbers we'll see multiplying all those x's are going to be
natural numbers or their negatives, which has been the case in all the examples that
we've seen so far.
Solving polynomial equations is very, very difficult in general.
For quadratic polynomial equations, and by the way, an equation, a polynomial equation
is a quadratic equation if the highest power of x is a two.
So we see x squared and no x cubes are higher.
Well, for quadratic polynomial equations, we can actually employ the so-called quadratic
formula to solve them and we actually studied the quadratic formula long ago in our math
classes in school.
However, in general, it's been proven that it's impossible to have a formula that can
find the solutions to an arbitrary polynomial equation.
That is, we know for certain that no such big formula exists.
