sight.
Well, there you see this vision of mathematics and how these numbers with the roots can be
extremely intimidating.
In fact, he reflects on mathematics just a page or so later, and I wanted to share with
you his reflections on his own discovery of mathematics.
He writes, I had a feeling once about mathematics, that I saw it all, depth beyond depth was
revealed to me, the bis and the abyss.
I saw, as one might see, the transit of Venus, a quantity passing through infinity and changing
its sign from plus to minus.
I saw exactly how it happened and why the trigiversation was inevitable, and how the
one step involved all the others.
It was like politics, but it was after dinner, and I let it go.
So there you have a great, great memory from Churchill.
Well, getting back to our transcendental numbers, once mathematicians found these algebraic
numbers, it actually led to a very natural question.
In fact, it led to one of the most important questions in mathematics that remained unanswered
all the way through to the 19th century.
Are there any real numbers that are not algebraic?
In other words, are all real numbers these algebraic numbers?
So is every real number a solution to some polynomial equation having integer coefficients?
Well, a number that is not algebraic is called a transcendental number.
So the big question was, do transcendental numbers exist?
Well, Gottfried Leibniz in 1682 was probably the first to use the term transcendental,
but the modern definition of a transcendental number probably didn't arise until the next
century in the work of Euler.
The question of the existence of transcendental numbers remained unanswered until 1844, when
Joseph Leeville actually produced a particular real number and proved that it could not be
an algebraic number.
In other words, it could not be the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
His number, known as Leeville's number, is the first number actually to be known to be
transcendental.
And its decimal value is 1.110001, and then a run of 17 zeros, then a 1, then an even
longer run of zeros, then a 1, and then an even longer run of zeros followed by 1, and
so forth.
That is, his number has a decimal expansion just consisting of zeros and ones, and with
the number of zeros between the ones growing at a very dramatic rate, almost at a rate
of n factorial, if you remember the factorial from the previous lecture, which is the product
of all the natural numbers up to a certain point.
By the way, we can see for ourselves that this number is irrational, namely it's not
