This important discovery was made by Everest Gawa, a brilliant young 19th century French
mathematician who tragically, at the age of 20, was killed in a duel on May 30th, 1832.
Really a sad story.
Now, we're not exactly sure today why this duel took place.
One romantic theory is that Gawa was defending the honor of a young lady.
A less romantic but more likely explanation is that he was defending his radical political
beliefs.
What we do know for sure is that the evening before this fateful duel, Gawa stayed up all
night writing down his mathematical ideas.
He was 20 years old and he was writing and writing because he realized things might not
go so well the next day.
And in fact, the ideas that he wrote were the ideas that resolved this question showing
that there is no big solution to all polynomial equations.
There's no formula that will work.
He proved that that night.
In fact, in his last letter to his brother Alfred, he actually wrote, Don't cry, Alfred.
I need all my courage to die at 20.
A very tragic story and an untimely death of an incredible mind.
Well, the desire to solve these polynomial equations goes back at least to the Babylonians
in 2000 BCE.
For example, they studied the solutions to x squared minus 2 equals 0.
One solution to this equation, as we just saw, is x equals the square root of 2.
And as we've noted several times in the course, the Babylonians approximated this value in
base 60.
The numbers that are solutions to such polynomial equations with integers are known as algebraic
numbers because they're numbers that arise from using algebra to solve the equations.
The integers, of course, are all algebraic numbers because if you think about it for
a moment, take, for example, the integer 7.
If we consider the polynomial x minus 7 equals 0, 7's a solution.
Well, if you're a solution to such an equation, then we see that you're an algebraic number.
So all the integers are algebraic numbers.
Similarly, all the rational numbers, all the fractions are algebraic numbers, as we saw
with the examples we looked at at the opening of this course.
So those are two collections of well-known algebraic numbers in our minds, the integers,
the counting numbers, the rational numbers.
But of course, we've also seen some irrational numbers that are algebraic.
The square root of 2 is the most famous that we actually proved following the ancient Greeks'
proof.
For example, the cube root of 5 is an algebraic number because it's actually a solution to
