So for example, pi plus e, we don't know if that number is transcendental, as far as
you might remember we discussed earlier that we don't even know if that number is even
irrational.
So we certainly don't know if it's transcendental.
Pi times e, nobody knows.
Pi to the e power, nobody knows.
Pi raised to the square root of two power, no one knows.
Notice we can't use the Gelfand-Schneider with pi raised to the square root of two power,
even though the square root of two is indeed an irrational algebraic number.
Pi is not an algebraic number, because we've already discussed that pi is an example of
a transcendental number, and the Gelfand-Schneider theorem says nothing about a transcendental
raised to an algebraic power, only algebraic to an algebraic power.
E to the e is another example where we know nothing about pi to the pi, two to the pi,
and two to the e.
You can make up lots of numbers of this sort, and we really don't know anything about them.
It's amazing how limited our understanding of numbers genuinely is at the forefronts.
Now we conjecture that all of these numbers are transcendental, because they look so complicated
and so forth, but that says nothing, that proves nothing.
We have to be able to prove it, and in fact we don't even know if any of those numbers
are in fact even irrational.
So there's much work to be done if we really want to understand the transcendental numbers
in greater depth.
Well, the point in this lecture is to discover that there's different ways of actually approaching
and viewing number, and we can classify numbers depending upon whether they're sympathetic
to algebraic expressions or not.
If they are, then we call them algebraic numbers, and if they're not, we call them transcendentals.
We've seen lots and lots of examples of algebraic numbers in our own mathematical histories,
and certainly in our course, for example the square root of two, and the natural numbers,
and the ratios of natural numbers, the fractions, but the transcendental numbers remain enigmatic
in our minds.
However, in reality what we're seeing is that the number line is teeming with these transcendental
numbers, and they are more the norm than the exception.
And quite often we see this again and again in our course where that which is the most
familiar turns out to be the most exotic.
So I hope you will consider thinking about transcendental numbers, an extremely deep
idea that continues to intrigue the world of mathematicians and mathematics to this day.
