a fraction, since its decimal expansion does not eventually become periodic because the
runs of zeros are ever increasing, so we can't have a repeating piece.
So we know it's irrational, but he proved much more.
He proved that it's transcendental.
It's not the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Well, this result was one of the greatest triumphs in our understanding of number and
continues to inspire beautiful, important mathematical research.
This area is known as transcendence, or transcendental number theory, and I must confess that Leeuvel's
result is my personal favorite result in all of mathematics, so this is a wonderful theorem
and certainly means a lot to me.
As we've already noted in 1873, Charles Irmeet proved that E is a transcendental number.
I'm just using that language, and nine years later, Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that
pi is a transcendental number, just converting what we said before about not being a solution
to polynomial equations with integer coefficients using the phrase transcendental number, which
means the same.
Now, the transcendentals form a vast world of mysterious numbers, and our understanding
of them is relatively limited even today.
It remains a great challenge and an amazing undertaking to establish the transcendence
of a particular number.
And why?
Well, because in theory, if you want to show that a particular number is transcendental,
in some sense, you'd have to go through all the infinitely many different polynomial equations
with integer coefficients and check each one and make sure that this number is not a solution
to any of them.
Well, that, of course, is impossible in finitely many steps, and so people have to use ingenious
ideas in order to get around that and prove transcendence indirectly, indirectly.
Well, given this reality, Georg Cantor in the late 1880s surprised the mathematics community
when he showed that almost all numbers are in fact transcendental.
In other words, the percentage of algebraic numbers is so small that it's effectively
zero, and in fact, mathematically, it is zero.
So the probability of picking one is, in fact, zero.
And this extends our previous observation that almost all numbers are irrational.
Remember, if you pick a number, a real number, out at random, it's with certainty that that
number will be irrational.
In fact, the famous mathematical historian, E.T. Bell, in 1937, described this vision in
a very romantic manner.
He wrote, the algebraic numbers are spotted over the plane like stars against a black
sky, the dense blackness in the firmament of the transcendentals.
A wonderful image.
