Descartes favored X since it was the least most common letter in the French language,
and so it would be the least confusing.
It was the least used letter to start French words.
Beyond the unknown, the always present object in equations, of course, is the equal sign,
which we denote as two short little parallel horizontal lines.
Ames, in the Rhine Papyrus, used a symbol that meant it gives for the equation sign,
which again is wonderful because certainly 1 plus 2, well, it gives 3, and so that makes
sense.
In texts before 1557, Latin words such as equales, abbreviated as A, E, Q, were actually
used, the letters were actually used to denote the equals.
Some actually used a long hyphen for an equal sign.
But it was Robert Record who published an algebra text in 1557, which he introduced
the symbol to horizontal parallel lines, although his were actually very, very long
at first.
And this symbol was later shrunken down to the more modest equal sign that is familiar.
Record's book was also the first English text to introduce our current symbols for addition
and subtraction.
Well, algebra remains an important tool to help answer important questions.
However, believe it or not, it can also be viewed as a past time.
The great 12th century mathematician Bascara authored a text entitled The Gem of Mathematics.
It contains entertaining challenges to keep the interest of the reader, and he wrote these
puzzles in verse, and I wanted to offer you an example of one.
Oh, tender girl, out of the swans in a certain lake, ten times the square root of their number
flew away to Manessa, Saorvar, when the rains came at the monsoon.
One eighth went away to the forest called Sala Padmini.
Three swans remained in the lake engaged in amorous play.
How many swans were there in all?
The kind of question that we saw when we were kids and we dreaded, you know, square root
of the number of swans, it's very silly in a way, and the legend has it that Bascara
wrote this book, in fact, for his daughter.
And if you notice, it opens with oh, tender girl, perhaps referring to his daughter.
And the story goes that he actually wrote this book to try to distract his daughter from
seeing a certain suitor which Bascara didn't particularly like and was trying to, although
having a question that involves swans engaged in amorous play, I don't know how successful
this distraction really was.
Well, let's now witness the growth of numbers within an algebraic garden.
In other words, let's exploit our desire to find solutions to simple equations and see
