how the notion of number evolves and where it takes us.
We begin with the numbers that we can really count on, namely the natural numbers.
That is, we'll now momentarily pretend that our entire world of number consists solely
of the collection of natural numbers.
If we consider simple linear equations such as x plus 2 equals 5, we see that these equations
do have solutions.
In this case, x would be 3, which is a counting number.
It's a natural number.
However, we run into trouble if we consider the equation x plus 7 equals 5.
For there's no number in our pretend universe that actually satisfies this equation because
we have no number negative 2, only the natural numbers.
Well, as we saw in an earlier lecture, the father of algebra himself, the Greek mathematician
Delfantis, around the year 250, wrote about such nonsensical equations.
If an equation had a negative number solution, he called the entire equation absurd.
Again, note the bias and the prejudice.
It's hard for minds, even great minds, to become open to notions and ideas that seem
so unnatural and counterintuitive at first, but still we try to overcome it.
Well, returning back to algebra in our evolving number sense, it seems sensible that simple
equations such as x plus 7 equals 5 should have solutions.
Thus, the algebra now forces us to expand our notion of numbers so that these equations
have solutions.
Therefore, we now allow negative natural numbers to be viewed as numbers.
We recall from lecture 3 that the great 7th century Indian astronomer Brahma Gupta was
the first to offer a systematic treatment of negative numbers.
This expanded view leads us to the integers.
That is, let's now build the world of the rational numbers.
We have the integers, which are the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, with 0 and with negative
1, negative 2, negative 3, but let's see how algebra demands more from us.
If we consider the entire world of numbers to be comprised solely of this collection
of integers, then we face further trouble when we consider simple equations such as
3x equals 5, so 3 times x equals 5.
The solution there would be 5 thirds, x equals 5 thirds, and there's no integer that satisfies
this equation because 5 thirds is in fact not an integer, it's a ratio of 2 integers
with a denominator of 3.
And yet, it seems sensible that simple equations such as 3x equals 5 should have solutions.
Thus, we now expand our notion of number so that these equations do have solutions.
In other words, we now introduce fractional numbers into our ever-evolving world of number.
