as abstract and just as real as the other numbers, although they're not real numbers
as we define them in a mathematical sense.
Incredibly, with just the inclusion of this one new number, the imaginary number i, we
were able to build all the complex numbers just using the real numbers.
And as we've seen, we need these complex numbers because they are the solutions to certain
equations.
However, do we need more numbers?
Do we need to expand even more?
In other words, do we need to expand our notion of number further to ensure that all polynomial
equations of this form have solutions?
In a surprising turn of events, it can be proven that just by including i and all the
complex numbers x plus yi, we've captured all the algebraic numbers.
In fact, every polynomial equation has solutions of the form x plus yi in which x and y are
real numbers.
That's it, we have all the algebraics.
This incredible result was established in 1799 by the great child mathematics prodigy,
Carl Friedrich Gauss, in his PhD thesis.
Gauss today is known as the prince of mathematics because he's so great and made so many important
contributions.
Gauss's amazing and surprising insight shows us that there's no need to create any additional
numbers after we include the imaginary number i to ensure that all polynomials have solutions.
We might note, however, that Gauss still found the number i to be very mysterious.
In fact, in 1825, he wrote, the true metaphysics of the square root of negative one remains
elusive.
So, even though he was performing work using these numbers, it still wasn't exactly clear
what these numbers represented.
The incredible fact that once we include i, we need nothing more in order to describe
solutions to polynomial equations can be expressed mathematically by saying that the complex
numbers are algebraically closed, meaning that all algebra questions that we could think
of with polynomials can be solved in the world of the complex numbers.
There's no further expansion, so with i in hand, we've come to the end of the number
line, or maybe I should say the number plane.
When we view the world of numbers with this algebraic lens, of course, the reality is,
as we'll soon see, there are other lenses with which we can look at the world of number,
and within those lenses, our view and vision of number can grow further still.
Enjoy i.
