We'll open this lecture with a historical look back at algebra.
What it means, its symbols, and how it can even distract from star-crossed lovers.
Inspired by the study of algebra, in particular solving polynomial equations, we'll then
offer a mathematical story that opens with the natural numbers and naturally leads to
the discovery of the integers, the rational numbers, and then the algebraic irrational
numbers such as the square root of 2.
This story brings us to a seemingly innocuous or perhaps even ridiculous question.
Are all algebraic numbers, in fact, numbers as we know them to this point?
In other words, is every algebraic number a real number on the number line?
Well, this will bring us to Gialamo Cardano, a 16th century Italian mathematician with
an interesting story.
We'll soon discover that the answer is no.
There are equations that have no solutions among the real numbers.
Cardano was the first to consider square roots of negative numbers.
He called them fictitious and meaningless numbers.
This discovery led to the need to expand our notion of number yet again and thus in turn
to develop the so-called complex numbers or imaginary numbers.
However, in view of our story, these new numbers will not appear to be that imaginary.
Given this new expanded view of number, that is the collection of all complex numbers,
no wonder if we've captured every algebraic number in this expanded net of numbers.
Carl Friedrich Gauss in his PhD thesis of 1799 showed that the answer is yes, and surprisingly
much, much more is true.
In fact, we'll see that in the eyes of this algebraic approach to numbers, when we ascend
to the complex numbers, we have arrived at the end of the number line, the ultimate notion
of number.
While this observation is true using this algebraic lens, we'll soon discover that there
are other mathematical lenses through which we can gaze into the world of number, and
through those visions, we actually see and discover different conclusions.
Well, to get started, I want us to return to our heady days of algebra.
In fact, what exactly is algebra?
Well, at the heart of algebra, we find two numerical expressions that are equal to one
another.
However, algebra holds a mystery.
Some number or numbers in one of the expressions are unknown.
Thus, the main mission in algebra is to figure out the number that represents that unknown
quantity.
For example, if we consider 2 times 5 equals 10, well, this is a true equation, but nothing
