fact in the next lecture to discover something truly amazing.
Well, how can we visualize these complex numbers?
We recall that the real numbers can be viewed as the points on the number line.
Well, it turns out that we can generalize this idea and visualize complex numbers by
replacing the number line by a flat plane of numbers.
So here we actually see two number lines that meet up at right angles.
The horizontal number line is referred to as the real number line, the one that we're
used to, and this new vertical number line is referred to as the imaginary axis.
And this figure is called the complex plane, and we can actually visualize complex numbers
by plotting their location in the plane.
For example, let's consider the complex number 3 plus 2i.
How do I find out where that point is in this plane?
Well the 3, the first number, tells me how far to go over in the horizontal direction
on the real axis.
So I move three units to the right, and then the 2i tells me how far up or down I should
go.
In this case I go up two units, and that point that we see represents the number 3 plus 2i.
So there's that point represented in the plane.
More generally, we can plot the complex number x plus iy by moving to the real axis, the
number x, that's the horizontal, go over to the value x, and then go vertically up or
down the y, and then that dot we see is x plus iy.
Well, the complex plane really is a generalization of the number line, but we notice that we
need to include that extra direction, that up-down direction, for the new number i that
we introduced.
In fact, this vertical axis, as I said before, is sometimes referred to as the imaginary
axis.
Bringing these ideas back full circle to the beginning of this lecture, we recall that our
algebraic development of number evolved through our desire to find solutions to polynomial
equations with integers.
It was the 11th century Persian mathematician Omar Kayam who first formalized the notion
of algebra by explicitly considering solutions to polynomial equations.
He, unlike the ancient Greeks, viewed the irrational numbers as numbers themselves.
Well, we've seen that we can even solve equations such as x squared plus 1 equals 0, even though
our solutions are no longer real numbers and no longer reside on the number line, and these
new imaginary numbers are certainly no more imaginary than the square root of 2.
Remember, that was a number that was imaginary to the Pythagorean.
So the phrase imaginary really is just one within our minds, but these numbers are just
