equation x squared plus 1 equals 0, let's check that.
If we let x equal i, remember i is the square root of negative 1, if I take the square root
of negative 1 and square it, remember that the square root and square counteract each
other and so what we see here is just negative 1, negative 1 plus 1, indeed equals 0.
So it is a solution, therefore i is an algebraic number.
Well, now armed with the special number i, which is the square root of negative 1, we
can now define all the complex numbers so we can extend this notion yet further.
So the complex numbers are numbers that we can write as a real number plus a real number
times i, or put more mathematically, x plus yi, where x and y are real numbers from the
number line.
So for example, 2 plus 3i is an example of a complex number, as is negative 3i.
These are just two examples, there are of course many, many examples of complex numbers,
but this is the general form that they take.
Now just as with real numbers, we can add, subtract, multiply and divide complex numbers
so we can perform arithmetic with this new collection of numbers.
For example, let's compute i squared.
Well we know by its definition that i squared actually equals negative 1.
But what about higher powers of i?
What about i cubed?
Well i cubed would just be i times i times i.
So i times i is negative 1, and negative 1 times i is negative i.
So i cubed is negative i.
What is i to the fourth power?
Well i squared is negative 1, and if we square again to get the fourth power, we see 1.
Or in other words, i times i is negative 1, i times i is negative 1, and negative 1 times
negative 1, we actually proved ourselves, is 1.
What about i to the fifth?
Well that would be 1 times i, which is i.
i to the sixth would be i times i yet again, which would be negative 1.
And in other words, what we're seeing here is that we return to the number i, and then
we start to repeat.
So it's a repeating pattern when we take higher and higher powers of i.
We see i, and then when we square it, we see negative 1, then negative i, then 1, then i,
then negative 1, then negative i, then 1, then i, then negative 1, and so forth.
And this keeps repeating as we take higher and higher powers of i.
We cycle through these four numbers.
Well this repeating pattern actually continues, and it will actually apply this really neat
