This expanded view leads us to rational numbers.
Now, as we've seen in previous lectures, fractions go back to the Egyptians and the
Greeks, but did the Greeks view rational numbers as numbers or as merely ratios of numbers?
Again, this remains open.
In our minds now, algebra dictates that in fact we view these rational numbers or ratios
as numbers.
Notice how algebra is beautifully growing our number sense for us, just by our desire
to find solutions to equations that seem simple and should have solutions within mathematics.
Well, let's now journey into the universe of algebraic numbers.
If we consider the entire world of number to be comprised solely of the rational numbers,
in other words, the fractions, then we face further headaches when we consider simple
equations like x squared equals 2.
Well, because we know that the solution, one solution to this, is in fact x equals the
square root of 2 because the square root of 2 squared equals 2.
And we've proven that the square root of 2 is in fact an irrational number.
That's not a ratio.
And so therefore as the ancient Greeks discovered thousands of years ago, and we discovered
in lecture 8, there's no solution to this because there's no rational number that will
satisfy this in our current number state.
And yet it seems sensible that simple equations such as x squared equals 2 should have solutions.
What are we forced to do?
Well, thus we expand our notion of numbers so that these equations do have solutions.
In this case, we have the new number square root of 2 and also negative square root of
2, which is the other solution.
Therefore we now allow these irrational numbers to be considered as numbers.
Now we call the collection consisting of all of these numbers, the irrational and the one
we saw earlier, we call that collection the algebraic numbers.
And so now we've arrived at the algebraic numbers.
Well, up to this point in our algebraic evolution of number, all the numbers that we've seen
are numbers that we've already discovered in previous lectures, even including these
algebraic numbers, which we saw in the previous lecture.
Well, that's about to change, and it's going to change with a character named Cardano.
Girolamo Cardano was a colorful 16th century Italian physician and mathematician.
He was the first to describe typhoid fever.
He invented the combination lock, but was always short of cash, and thus was also an
accomplished gambler and chess player, so quite a character.
One of his greatest works was a text he wrote in 1545 entitled The Great Art.
