is hidden from sight.
However, the equation 2x equals 10, well remember 2x means 2 times x, 2x equals 10 has a mysterious
quantity, namely that x.
Our mission now is to find the number x that makes that equation true.
In other words, we must find a number with the property that when it's multiplied by
2, the product equals 10.
Of course, we see that in this case, our mysterious number is simply x equals 5.
Now, when we think of algebra, we might think of those dreaded word problems or story problems.
These have challenged some and tortured others for thousands of years.
The book entitled Greek Anthology from the 4th century BCE contained many algebraic riddles.
In fact, here's one from that ancient book.
Six people are to divide a heap of apples.
The first person receives one third of the apples, the second person receives one eighth
of the apples, the third person receives one fourth of the apples, and the fourth person
receives one fifth.
The fifth person receives 10 apples, and the last person is given only one.
How many apples were there in the original heap?
Well, that's the kind of question that we've all faced from time to time.
Maybe I shouldn't tell you the answer, but just in case you're wondering, the answer
is 120, and you can go back and check that 120 satisfies all those conditions every person
gets the appropriate number of apples that they're allotted.
Today, we often refer to an unknown as X, but Ames in the Rhine Papyrus represented
unknown quantities with a symbol for heaps.
And if you remember, back in this period, numbers were defined by heaps or piles of things.
So using a symbol that means heaps seems very natural and consistent with that point of view.
The ancient Chinese indicated unknowns by their physical position in the equation, how
they were placed, while in the Hindu works, we actually see the unknown represented as
a dot.
Brahmagupta and later Bhaskara used names of colors to designate different unknown quantities,
while in Arabic works from 900 CE, different coins were used to represent unknowns and
refer to one unknown as thing, which is interesting that there was an unknown object, and so we
called it thing, even though it represented some number, we just didn't know what that
number was at this point.
It was Rene Descartes in 1637 who adopted the italic letters X, Y, Z, all lower case,
for unknowns.
And this is the notion and notation that is used today.
Now why the popularity of X?
