times positive, or negative times negative, and we saw that in both cases, the answer
is positive.
And thus, since we have a square equaling negative one, we see there is no real solution
that's going to actually satisfy that.
No real number will satisfy this equation.
And yet, it seems sensible that such a simple equation as x squared equals negative one
should have solutions.
Okay, now this is an interesting moment, because we find a need to expand our notion of numbers
yet again.
So let's do just that.
Let's now widen our notion of numbers, so that these equations do have solutions.
Therefore, for the first time in this course, we find the need to expand our notion of number
beyond the real numbers of our number line.
And we're finally going to take off from the line.
We call these new numbers complex numbers, and we denote the special number square root
of negative one as the lower case italics i.
This special number i is our first number that is not real.
It does not correspond to any point on the number line.
And as we noted, Cardano was the first to consider square roots of negative numbers.
Now he called these numbers fictitious and meaningless numbers, which is a wonderful way
of describing numbers that don't have any sort of physical measurement associated with
it or a negative.
Today we call the number i an imaginary number.
In fact, Cardano himself wrote about this and said, put aside the mental tortures involved,
no progresses arithmetic subtlety, the end of which, as is said, is as refined as it
is useless, implying that, well, the math is correct, we derive it this answer, but
in fact these numbers mean nothing and they're useless.
Well, it turns out that Cardano was in fact wrong about the utility of these numbers.
These imaginary numbers are used in physics to help us understand and model flows and
the dynamics of currents and fluid.
So in fact, even things that, again, first appear to be totally abstract and devoid of
application utility turn out to be descriptors of our everyday world.
The name i was given by Leonardo Euler two centuries after Cardano's original work.
We note that because i is not real, then it cannot be a fractional number because of course
all fractions live on the real line, hence i is another example of an irrational number
by it not, in fact, living on the line.
However, the number i is an algebraic number because it is the solution to the polynomial
