And it was an algebra text, and in it he included a systematic method for solving certain cubic
equations.
So these are equations which have an x cubed in it, but no x to the force or higher powers,
just x cubes.
But even his solution was not without controversy.
Niccolò Tartaglia derived this particular solution and shared it with Cardano.
Tartaglia claimed later that Cardano promised not to publish it, and thus this led to a
very long and bitter plagiarism battle between these two men.
Well, in a different direction, but perhaps even more controversial, Cardano posed the
following question in his book The Great Art, and the question read, divide ten into two
parts whose product is forty.
In other words, we're asked to find two numbers that sum to equal ten, and whose product
equals forty.
Sounds like a harmless question.
Well if one were to work it out, the answers turn out to be five plus the square root
of negative fifteen, and five minus the square root of negative fifteen.
Now, it's easy to see that if we take those two numbers and just add them together, that
the square root of negative fifteen minus the square root of negative fifteen, they
cancel out, and five plus five is ten.
So the sum being ten is easy to see.
And if one were to very carefully multiply those two numbers together correctly, we'd
actually see that the product is forty, as it was supposed to be.
But the question really is, what does the square root of negative fifteen mean?
To face this challenging question, we need to consider a simpler question.
The question that I want us to think about is, does x squared plus one equals zero have
a solution?
Well, let's think about x squared plus one equals zero.
Well, if there is a number x that is a solution to x squared plus one equals zero, then if
I were to subtract one from both sides, I would see that x squared equals negative
one.
Okay.
Well, we notice that in this case, x can't be zero, since zero squared is zero, and it's
not equal to negative one.
So x equals zero is out, it's not a solution.
Therefore, the number x must be a non-zero number.
However, let me remind you that in lecture twelve, we proved that the square of any non-zero
real number equals a positive number, because a number multiplied by itself is either positive
