Before leaving the complex numbers, I'd like us to return to their geometrical universe,
the complex plane.
Here we'll discover that we can describe complex numbers, x plus y times i, in an alternative
geometric manner, using just an angle and a length.
We can make this description precise by introducing a right triangle and resurrecting some trigonometry,
but I promise you that we'll experience no trig tribulation, since a brief review of
signs and cosines is all that we'll require.
Armed with this new way of writing complex numbers, we'll be ready to discover one of
the most beautiful equations within all of mathematics, an identity that in one equality
contains the five most important numbers, zero, one, pi, e, and i.
This incredible result is known as Euler's identity, named after the great 18th century
mathematician, Leonhard Euler.
Although Euler is credited for first stating this identity, it was actually given to him
and known to other people much earlier before.
This amazing identity together with the Gelfand-Schneider theorem that we discussed in lecture 15 will
enable us to prove for ourselves that e raised to the pi power is in fact a transcendental
number.
Thus we leave the complex plane and our algebraic excursion into number, holding in our minds
one of the most beautiful objects in nature, an equality that brings together the most
important constants of our universe.
We can all celebrate this formula while marveling at the beauty of both nature and number.
Well here we focus on the five most important numbers in human history and see how they
are in fact connected with one another.
We first celebrate the two most important integers.
We begin with unity, the Pythagorean number of reason, the number one.
Its mathematical importance comes from its unique role as the multiplicative identity.
In other words, any number multiplied by one equals the any number.
So multiplying one by any number a preserves the identity of the number a.
Next we turn to zero, the number that took humanity hundreds of years to embrace as
an actual number.
But its true importance is in the fact that it's actually the additive identity.
If we take any number and add it to zero we get the any number back again.
So adding zero to any number a preserves the identity of that number a.
Well we now honor two of the most important real numbers, pi and e.
