Beyond their transcendental qualities we've seen that both pi and e through their nature
have allowed us to understand our universe in a deeper and richer way.
Finally, we acknowledge the most famous number that is not real, the square root of negative
one also known as i.
In our previous lecture we discovered that the imaginary number i in fact has great importance
because we can use it to in fact generate all the complex numbers thus guaranteeing
that we have solutions to all polynomial equations we could ever imagine.
Yes, we've studied and enjoyed the five most important numbers in mathematics but now we
wonder if mathematics and nature are so supremely beautiful as to bring together these five
famous numbers into one profound equation.
The amazing answer is yes.
There is one equation that connects the numbers zero, one, pi, e and i.
In fact, that equation also captures the three fundamental arithmetical operations addition
multiplication and exponentiation.
This fantastic formula is the following, e raised to the power pi times i plus one equals
zero.
Well, let's just take a deep breath here and take in this vision of number all together
in a wonderful identity.
We see the five numbers, you can see zero, one, pi, e and i.
You also notice that we have an addition, we have a multiplication, the pi times the
e, a pi times the i and then the exponentiation, e to the power pi times i.
So we see it all in one equation.
So we can celebrate it until we realize that exactly what does it mean to raise e to an
imaginary power.
So of course we have to make sense of this.
What does it mean to raise e to a power that actually is imaginary?
Well we'll now dedicate ourselves to resolving this conundrum so that this amazing equation
makes sense to us and then we'll see why this incredible formula really does hold.
Along the way, we'll also discover many advances in our understanding of numbers.
So numbers will certainly play a prominent role in proving this beautiful relationship.
Well to begin, let's recall how to visualize complex numbers in the complex plane.
In the previous lecture, we saw how every complex number can be expressed in the form
x plus yi, where the x and y represent any real numbers at all.
We can visualize these numbers, not on the real number line, but as points in the complex
