plane.
Here remember we saw that we had two sets of axes, a horizontal one which is called the
real axis, the real number axis, and then a vertical one that meets it perpendicularly
called the imaginary.
And they meet at right angles and the entire entirety of the plane represents the plane
of complex numbers.
So for example, we could plot numbers by plotting their coordinates.
So the number four plus three times i, four plus three i, would be arrived at by starting
at the crosshairs, the origin, and then moving four units over in this horizontal direction
and then three units up in the vertical direction, and that point right there isolates the point
four plus three times i.
In general, we could look at x plus yi, but moving over the appropriate number of units
in the horizontal direction x, and then moving up and down the appropriate number of units
y, and that point is x plus yi.
Now we now look at this plane of complex numbers with a different i.
If we have a complex number, x plus yi, marked on the plane with a point, then we can locate
that point by measuring an angle and a length, and I want to describe how.
Well, suppose that we have a dotted red line that's lying on the positive real axis, so
the positive horizontal axis.
And that line is actually hinged right at the intersection of the two axes, sometimes
called the origin.
So it's like a spinner.
It could go up and down like this, but actually it's going to only go counterclockwise like
in this direction, so it's only going to go this way.
So in other words, this dotted red line is more like a second hand on a clock, but only
going counterclockwise.
Well now let's imagine pivoting that red line up counterclockwise until it passes through
the point that represents our complex number.
And let's note that the red line will determine a specific angle.
So I just bring this line up from the horizon until I hit the point, and then once I hit
that point, I can measure this angle.
Well then we could actually measure the length from the crosshairs where the two axes meet
out to the point along this red dotted line.
So I could measure any particular complex number or point in the plane by giving just
