Notice that in this right triangle the side of the horizontal equals the value x and the
length of the vertical side of the triangle in fact is the value y.
However I want us to express these two lengths, the x and the y length, in terms of just the
angle and in fact the length of the red side, which is now known as the hypotenuse of this
right triangle.
Well in order to express these lengths we'll apply some tools from trigonometry.
Now we won't have to worry about all the technical details, so don't worry if you're not all
up to speed on your trigonometry.
But I do want us to briefly outline the basic ideas from trigonometry involving right triangles
and their angles so we can appreciate the formula.
Well back in our math classes we were told that the ratio of various side lengths of right
triangles produce various trigonometric functions.
For example the sign of an angle of a right triangle is defined to equal the ratio of
the length of the opposite side to the length of the hypotenuse.
In other words the shorthand way is sign is opposite over hypotenuse.
The cosine of an angle on the other hand is defined to equal the ratio of the length
of the adjacent side to the length of the hypotenuse or sometimes read adjacent over
hypotenuse.
Well so now in our case to make things a little bit easier let's now suppose that we
have the complex number x plus yi and that the right triangle that it forms in the complex
plane has a hypotenuse length of 1 so when we plot that point the distance away from
the cross hairs is 1 and let's call the angle that it makes with the horizontal axis we'll
call that angle a radians.
So this length is just 1 and this is a.
Well we can now see that the cosine of a equals the adjacent over the hypotenuse the adjacent
is x and the hypotenuse is 1 so we have x over 1 so it just equals x.
The sine of a equals the opposite length which is the y divided by the hypotenuse which is
1.
So we see y divided by 1 and we see it equals y.
Well this is really neat because x equals the cosine of a and y equals the sine a in
this example and so we can now say this in a different way.
We can say the complex number x plus y times i is actually equal to cosine a plus i sine
a because of course cosine we just saw was x and sine a is y.
We usually write cosine a plus i times sine a we write the sine a second only to not get
