it confused the i and the a together but it means i times sine a.
In other words given any complex number x plus y times i whose distance from the axes
cross hairs is 1 there is an angle if we measure that angle and we call that angle a radians
then we see that x plus y times i equals cosine a plus i times sine a.
Now here's the really cool move.
Let's now swing this observation around to create a degenerate triangle.
Now if we rotate this point around a circle counterclockwise so just keep bringing it
up so here's the cross hairs and here's that point length 1 and just keep rotating it around
until it hits the horizontal axis where is it going to hit?
Well it has length 1 so it's going to hit exactly at this side of the line which is
negative 1 so it sweeps out and hits at negative 1.
Well in this case what's the angle that we swept out?
Well we went half way around and so that's going to be 180 degrees or in radians we see
it's pi radians.
Well now let me just note that our formula that we just derived still will hold even
in degenerate triangles even if the triangles kind of collapses on itself like it does here.
So in this case we see that we can say that the complex number which is just the point
negative 1 equals the cosine of the angle which is pi plus i times the sine of the angle
which is pi so we see that negative 1 equals cosine pi plus i multiplied by sine pi.
Well so notice that hidden in this equality already we see the numbers 1, pi and i.
Notice remember that we're trying to connect the numbers 0, 1, pi, e and i so into one equation
and so we're just missing the numbers 0 and e and now we have to try to get them into
the picture and as a little aside let me just say that this formula actually captures the
spirit of Geir Cantor's work in writing functions as sines and cosines, sums of them that we
mentioned in lecture 11.
Well to introduce the number e into our story I want to bring back a formula that we saw
for ourselves in lecture 14.
It was a formula that expressed e to any power at all, e to the x and it said that e to the
x was an endless sum which read 1 plus x to the 1 over 1 factorial plus x squared over
2 factorial plus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the 4th over 4 factorial and so
forth.
Again don't worry about the details of how it looks but notice the pattern that in fact
the exponent and the denominator look the same and that factorial means that I take
that number and multiply it by the previous natural number and the previous natural number
