Before leaving the complex numbers, I'd like us to return to their geometrical universe,
the complex plane.
Here we'll discover that we can describe complex numbers, x plus y times i, in an alternative
geometric manner, using just an angle and a length.
We can make this description precise by introducing a right triangle and resurrecting some trigonometry,
but I promise you that we'll experience no trig tribulation, since a brief review of
signs and cosines is all that we'll require.
Armed with this new way of writing complex numbers, we'll be ready to discover one of
the most beautiful equations within all of mathematics, an identity that in one equality
contains the five most important numbers, zero, one, pi, e, and i.
This incredible result is known as Euler's identity, named after the great 18th century
mathematician, Leonhard Euler.
Although Euler is credited for first stating this identity, it was actually given to him
and known to other people much earlier before.
This amazing identity together with the Gelfand-Schneider theorem that we discussed in lecture 15 will
enable us to prove for ourselves that e raised to the pi power is in fact a transcendental
number.
Thus we leave the complex plane and our algebraic excursion into number, holding in our minds
one of the most beautiful objects in nature, an equality that brings together the most
important constants of our universe.
We can all celebrate this formula while marveling at the beauty of both nature and number.
Well here we focus on the five most important numbers in human history and see how they
are in fact connected with one another.
We first celebrate the two most important integers.
We begin with unity, the Pythagorean number of reason, the number one.
Its mathematical importance comes from its unique role as the multiplicative identity.
In other words, any number multiplied by one equals the any number.
So multiplying one by any number a preserves the identity of the number a.
Next we turn to zero, the number that took humanity hundreds of years to embrace as
an actual number.
But its true importance is in the fact that it's actually the additive identity.
If we take any number and add it to zero we get the any number back again.
So adding zero to any number a preserves the identity of that number a.
Well we now honor two of the most important real numbers, pi and e.
Beyond their transcendental qualities we've seen that both pi and e through their nature
have allowed us to understand our universe in a deeper and richer way.
Finally, we acknowledge the most famous number that is not real, the square root of negative
one also known as i.
In our previous lecture we discovered that the imaginary number i in fact has great importance
because we can use it to in fact generate all the complex numbers thus guaranteeing
that we have solutions to all polynomial equations we could ever imagine.
Yes, we've studied and enjoyed the five most important numbers in mathematics but now we
wonder if mathematics and nature are so supremely beautiful as to bring together these five
famous numbers into one profound equation.
The amazing answer is yes.
There is one equation that connects the numbers zero, one, pi, e and i.
In fact, that equation also captures the three fundamental arithmetical operations addition
multiplication and exponentiation.
This fantastic formula is the following, e raised to the power pi times i plus one equals
zero.
Well, let's just take a deep breath here and take in this vision of number all together
in a wonderful identity.
We see the five numbers, you can see zero, one, pi, e and i.
You also notice that we have an addition, we have a multiplication, the pi times the
e, a pi times the i and then the exponentiation, e to the power pi times i.
So we see it all in one equation.
So we can celebrate it until we realize that exactly what does it mean to raise e to an
imaginary power.
So of course we have to make sense of this.
What does it mean to raise e to a power that actually is imaginary?
Well we'll now dedicate ourselves to resolving this conundrum so that this amazing equation
makes sense to us and then we'll see why this incredible formula really does hold.
Along the way, we'll also discover many advances in our understanding of numbers.
So numbers will certainly play a prominent role in proving this beautiful relationship.
Well to begin, let's recall how to visualize complex numbers in the complex plane.
In the previous lecture, we saw how every complex number can be expressed in the form
x plus yi, where the x and y represent any real numbers at all.
We can visualize these numbers, not on the real number line, but as points in the complex
plane.
Here remember we saw that we had two sets of axes, a horizontal one which is called the
real axis, the real number axis, and then a vertical one that meets it perpendicularly
called the imaginary.
And they meet at right angles and the entire entirety of the plane represents the plane
of complex numbers.
So for example, we could plot numbers by plotting their coordinates.
So the number four plus three times i, four plus three i, would be arrived at by starting
at the crosshairs, the origin, and then moving four units over in this horizontal direction
and then three units up in the vertical direction, and that point right there isolates the point
four plus three times i.
In general, we could look at x plus yi, but moving over the appropriate number of units
in the horizontal direction x, and then moving up and down the appropriate number of units
y, and that point is x plus yi.
Now we now look at this plane of complex numbers with a different i.
If we have a complex number, x plus yi, marked on the plane with a point, then we can locate
that point by measuring an angle and a length, and I want to describe how.
Well, suppose that we have a dotted red line that's lying on the positive real axis, so
the positive horizontal axis.
And that line is actually hinged right at the intersection of the two axes, sometimes
called the origin.
So it's like a spinner.
It could go up and down like this, but actually it's going to only go counterclockwise like
in this direction, so it's only going to go this way.
So in other words, this dotted red line is more like a second hand on a clock, but only
going counterclockwise.
Well now let's imagine pivoting that red line up counterclockwise until it passes through
the point that represents our complex number.
And let's note that the red line will determine a specific angle.
So I just bring this line up from the horizon until I hit the point, and then once I hit
that point, I can measure this angle.
Well then we could actually measure the length from the crosshairs where the two axes meet
out to the point along this red dotted line.
So I could measure any particular complex number or point in the plane by giving just
the angle I go up and then how far I go out.
And I can identify complex numbers in that fashion as an angle and a length.
For example, let's consider the complex number 1 plus 1 times i, or 1 plus 1i.
Well first of all, let's plot it.
So if you imagine the plane right here, I'd go one unit over and one unit up.
So there's the point right there.
Now how would I measure that?
Well of course I would start here at the horizontal, and I would tilt up until I get there and
measure that angle.
Well since I went one over and one up, that point is exactly halfway in between the two
axes which meet at 90 degrees, and so the angle must be half of 90 degrees, which is 45 degrees.
So I see the angle is in fact 45 degrees.
Now however, it's important here to remember that we are using the mathematical measure
of angle, not the familiar degree measure.
But as we saw in lecture 13, we're going to use the so-called radian measure of angle.
Radians contain the number pi in it, and in fact this is how we're going to get pi into
our famous formula.
Once around 360 degrees equals 2 pi, halfway around 180 equals pi, a quarter away which
is 90 degrees equals pi over 2, and so therefore half of that or 45 degrees would be a quarter
pi.
So that's how many radians, a quarter pi radians is that angle.
Therefore our angle is a quarter pi radians, and now the question is what's the length
from the center out to here where I went one over and one up.
Well that length we actually computed in lecture 8, because notice that we actually
have a square that's a one by one square.
And so a one by one square, this is in fact the diagonal, and we computed that to be the
square root of 2.
So we see in this case we can describe this point here as go up an angle of pi over 4 radians
and then go out square of 2 and you hit the point.
So any complex number x plus yi can be expressed, or at least its location can be expressed
in the complex plane as an angle and a length in this fashion.
In fact this angle and the red line segment can be used to form a right triangle in the
complex plane by simply drawing a perpendicular line from our point down to the horizontal
real axis, and all of a sudden we have a nice right triangle.
Notice that in this right triangle the side of the horizontal equals the value x and the
length of the vertical side of the triangle in fact is the value y.
However I want us to express these two lengths, the x and the y length, in terms of just the
angle and in fact the length of the red side, which is now known as the hypotenuse of this
right triangle.
Well in order to express these lengths we'll apply some tools from trigonometry.
Now we won't have to worry about all the technical details, so don't worry if you're not all
up to speed on your trigonometry.
But I do want us to briefly outline the basic ideas from trigonometry involving right triangles
and their angles so we can appreciate the formula.
Well back in our math classes we were told that the ratio of various side lengths of right
triangles produce various trigonometric functions.
For example the sign of an angle of a right triangle is defined to equal the ratio of
the length of the opposite side to the length of the hypotenuse.
In other words the shorthand way is sign is opposite over hypotenuse.
The cosine of an angle on the other hand is defined to equal the ratio of the length
of the adjacent side to the length of the hypotenuse or sometimes read adjacent over
hypotenuse.
Well so now in our case to make things a little bit easier let's now suppose that we
have the complex number x plus yi and that the right triangle that it forms in the complex
plane has a hypotenuse length of 1 so when we plot that point the distance away from
the cross hairs is 1 and let's call the angle that it makes with the horizontal axis we'll
call that angle a radians.
So this length is just 1 and this is a.
Well we can now see that the cosine of a equals the adjacent over the hypotenuse the adjacent
is x and the hypotenuse is 1 so we have x over 1 so it just equals x.
The sine of a equals the opposite length which is the y divided by the hypotenuse which is
1.
So we see y divided by 1 and we see it equals y.
Well this is really neat because x equals the cosine of a and y equals the sine a in
this example and so we can now say this in a different way.
We can say the complex number x plus y times i is actually equal to cosine a plus i sine
a because of course cosine we just saw was x and sine a is y.
We usually write cosine a plus i times sine a we write the sine a second only to not get
it confused the i and the a together but it means i times sine a.
In other words given any complex number x plus y times i whose distance from the axes
cross hairs is 1 there is an angle if we measure that angle and we call that angle a radians
then we see that x plus y times i equals cosine a plus i times sine a.
Now here's the really cool move.
Let's now swing this observation around to create a degenerate triangle.
Now if we rotate this point around a circle counterclockwise so just keep bringing it
up so here's the cross hairs and here's that point length 1 and just keep rotating it around
until it hits the horizontal axis where is it going to hit?
Well it has length 1 so it's going to hit exactly at this side of the line which is
negative 1 so it sweeps out and hits at negative 1.
Well in this case what's the angle that we swept out?
Well we went half way around and so that's going to be 180 degrees or in radians we see
it's pi radians.
Well now let me just note that our formula that we just derived still will hold even
in degenerate triangles even if the triangles kind of collapses on itself like it does here.
So in this case we see that we can say that the complex number which is just the point
negative 1 equals the cosine of the angle which is pi plus i times the sine of the angle
which is pi so we see that negative 1 equals cosine pi plus i multiplied by sine pi.
Well so notice that hidden in this equality already we see the numbers 1, pi and i.
Notice remember that we're trying to connect the numbers 0, 1, pi, e and i so into one equation
and so we're just missing the numbers 0 and e and now we have to try to get them into
the picture and as a little aside let me just say that this formula actually captures the
spirit of Geir Cantor's work in writing functions as sines and cosines, sums of them that we
mentioned in lecture 11.
Well to introduce the number e into our story I want to bring back a formula that we saw
for ourselves in lecture 14.
It was a formula that expressed e to any power at all, e to the x and it said that e to the
x was an endless sum which read 1 plus x to the 1 over 1 factorial plus x squared over
2 factorial plus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the 4th over 4 factorial and so
forth.
Again don't worry about the details of how it looks but notice the pattern that in fact
the exponent and the denominator look the same and that factorial means that I take
that number and multiply it by the previous natural number and the previous natural number
until I get to 1.
So for example 4 factorial means 4 multiplied by 3 times 2 times 1 which equals 24.
Well now here's the amazing moment but this is going to take just a teeny bit of algebra
and we're going to get technical for literally a moment.
Now feel free to either follow every detail or just sit back and enjoy the big picture
as you wish as the mathematical story unfolds but in either case the algebra details here
will only last for a minute I promise.
Okay well using some deep ideas from calculus we can find formulas for both the sine and
the cosine that are similar to the one we have for e raised to the x power and this
is the key connection that links the trigonometric functions to our famous number e.
Well first for sine of a we could write that as a to the 1st power over 1 factorial minus
a cubed over 3 factorial plus a to the 5th over 5 factorial minus a to the 7th over 7
factorial and so forth.
Similarly for the cosine of a we could write that as 1 minus a squared over 2 factorial
plus a to the 4th over 4 factorial minus a to the 6th over 6 factorial and so forth.
Notice there's a pattern here.
First of all in each case the sines alternate from plus minus and in the sine of a we see
odd numbers appearing and in the cosine of a we see the even numbers appearing.
Now these formulas are extremely important, profound and by no means obvious.
Notice that if we add those two formulas together we almost get e to the a but not quite since
the negative sines get in the way and snare things up a little bit so we're very close
but this is where the number i comes to our rescue.
Ok well let's make sense out of the number e raised to the power pi times i.
Well the way we'll do that is we'll plug pi times i in for x in our formula for e to
the power x and we see something that's going to look a little bit unwieldy but just watch
it and enjoy it and watch how things all of a sudden get very simple after they get complicated.
We'd see e to the pi times i power equals one plus pi times i to the first power over
one factorial plus pi i squared over two factorial plus pi i cubed over three factorial plus
pi i to the fourth over four factorial and the pattern continues forever.
Now we could actually simplify that a little teeny bit because when we have pi i for example
squared then we know that that actually equals pi squared times i squared.
We could actually square each of those and then multiply them together so we could rewrite
e to the pi i as one plus pi to the first i to the first over one factorial plus pi
squared i squared over two factorial plus pi cubed times i cubed over three factorial
plus pi to the fourth over times i to the fourth over four factorial and so forth all
I did there was take the pi i to a power and just split it up into pi to the power i to
the power which is completely legal in the in the world of arithmetic.
Now let's remember something fantastic that powers of i repeat so we have i and then i
squared is negative one i cubed is negative i and i to the fourth gets us to one and then
we repeat i to the fifth gets its i and so forth so we see i as we raise to higher and
higher powers in i we see i negative one negative i one i negative one negative i one and so
forth it repeats its cycles and if we use that fact and then replace all the i's to
powers by what they're equal to we see the following we see that our long expression
becomes e to the pi i equals one plus pi to the first times i all over one factorial minus
pi squared over two factorial because i squared is negative one minus pi cubed i over three
factorial plus pi to the fourth over four factorial and so on again looks pretty complicated
and threatening but watch what happens now notice that every other term in this sum has
an i in it so let's reorganize the sum and write the first terms with no i's at the beginning
so first write the terms with no i's and then write all the terms with one i at the end
and so now if we factor out the common factor of i from all the terms in the second sum
then we see something interesting by the way we could factor out that i just using the
good old distributive law in reverse so it can be done it's not a problem but now look
what we have in the top sum we see only even numbers and the signs alternate plus minus
in the bottom sum we see only odd numbers and again the signs alternate plus minus in
other words forget about all the derivation just look at these things visually and you'll
see that these are precisely the previous formulas that we saw for sine and cosine so the first
sum is the sine and the second sum being multiplied by the i is the cosine well in this case the
a in our formula is pi since we have pi's running around well pulling all these ideas
together we see that e raised to the pi times i power is equal to cosine pi plus i times
sine pi again just using the formula that we derived before well ok the algebra is over
you survived and now it's back to the fun let's now remember what we've learned from
those right triangles and trigonometry we saw for ourselves by swinging that point way
around that cosine pi plus i times sine pi equals negative one we saw that in the complex
plane well this is wonderful because if we pull all these discoveries together we realize
that e raised to the power pi times i equals negative one and maybe you can see it coming
all we have to do is add one to both sides and we come upon beauty e to the power pi
times i plus one equals zero we just arrived for ourselves the most beautiful formula in
all of mathematics and all of nature this is a moment to celebrate so feel free to celebrate
if you want you've earned it well thus we proved that the five most important numbers
come together in one identity involving the three most important arithmetic operations
this identity was first recorded in its modern form by leonard euler in the eighteenth century
although the english mathematician roger coats had proved the result about thirty years earlier
it was also the first to consider exponents with imaginary numbers as we did in this lecture
and this was in seventeen forty but as we remarked in an earlier lecture as late as eighteen
twenty five the great mathematician gauss wrote that the true metaphysics of the square root
of negative one remains elusive so we could see that again trying to wrap our minds around
the imaginary number i takes an awful lot of time today this formula is considered to
be the most beautiful equation in all of mathematics the great twentieth century nobel prize winning
physicist richard feinman once called it the most remarkable formula in mathematics nearly
a hundred years before that the harvard mathematician benjamin pierce after proving this formula
in a lecture just the way we did in fact he said the following after after he gave the
proof to the to the group gentleman that is surely true it is absolute absolutely paradoxical
we cannot understand it and we have not the slightest idea what the equation means but
we have proved it and therefore we know it must be the truth and we may be sure that
it means something very important it is beautiful beautiful quote here where it's certain it's
mathematically correctly proved it but we have no idea what it means who knows however given
that all these wonderful numbers are coming together it's got to mean something important
even though we don't know what it means yet well the truth is that not every formula must
have a profound application in order for us to appreciate it we can appreciate its beauty
just as we depreciate a piece of music or a work of art however in mathematics quite
often what first appears as abstract and devoid of any practical value is later discovered
to be central into or central piece I should say of some important mathematical puzzle so
I thought we would actually close this lecture to see that pierce's intuition was in fact
correct I'm gonna now describe a tremendous number theoretic theoretic consequence of this
beautiful formula that was discovered nearly a hundred years after pierce made his famous remarks
about I'm sure it's important but I don't know how we'll actually use Euler's formula to prove
that e to the pi is a transcendental number which means that not only is e to the pi an irrational
number but we'll actually be able to know that it's not the solution to any polynomial
equation involving integers now the two basic pieces to our argument first is the famous
identity we just proved e to the pi I plus one equals zero although the version we'll
look at is the one we did right before we we actually solved we had e to the pi I equals
negative one and the second important fact will be the Gelfand Schneider theorem so let's
take a moment to recall the Gelfand Schneider theorem from lecture 15 it states that if
we have an algebraic number that's not zero or one and we raise it to an irrational algebraic
number then the result of this number raised to that number will be a transcendental number
well let's now show that e to the pi is transcendental indirectly in other words we'll assume that
e to the pi is not transcendental which implies that it's an algebraic number well let's recall
that from lecture 16 we saw that I is in fact an algebraic irrational number remember I is
the solution to the polynomial is one of the solutions to the polynomial x squared plus
one equals zero so it's algebraic and since I is not real it must be irrational well given
our assumption that e to the pi power is algebraic I can take e to the pi power algebraic number
and raise it to the I which is an algebraic irrational number and then by the Gelfand
Schneider theorem I know that this quantity in fact must be a transcendental number well
but e to the pi all raised to the I is actually the same thing as e to the pi times I which
we just saw was negative one and negative one is an algebraic number it's the solution in
fact to x plus one equals zero so it's certainly not transcendental so we just contradicted
the Gelfand Schneider theorem and so what's the problem well our assumption that e to
the pi was an algebraic number must be false that was the only thing we assumed in other
words we just prove that e to the pi is not algebraic therefore it's transcendental now
remember that we've already seen that both pi and e are transcendental numbers however
there's so many simple combinations of involving involving pi and e as we noted in lecture 15
and for most of these combinations we don't know if any of these numbers are irrational
let alone transcendental but here we see a natural combination of pi and e e to the pi
power for which we know the whole story all because of our amazing identity so we see
that this amazingly beautiful formula e raised to the pi I plus pi I plus one equals zero
does have important applications after all in particular it allows us to discover that
the number e to the pi is a transcendental number well thus this this helps us see more
detail into the jungle of numbers but more importantly we can look upon this formula
with great delight and appreciate the beauty and the majesty that is the five most important
numbers the three most important operations all together singing in unison
