the angle I go up and then how far I go out.
And I can identify complex numbers in that fashion as an angle and a length.
For example, let's consider the complex number 1 plus 1 times i, or 1 plus 1i.
Well first of all, let's plot it.
So if you imagine the plane right here, I'd go one unit over and one unit up.
So there's the point right there.
Now how would I measure that?
Well of course I would start here at the horizontal, and I would tilt up until I get there and
measure that angle.
Well since I went one over and one up, that point is exactly halfway in between the two
axes which meet at 90 degrees, and so the angle must be half of 90 degrees, which is 45 degrees.
So I see the angle is in fact 45 degrees.
Now however, it's important here to remember that we are using the mathematical measure
of angle, not the familiar degree measure.
But as we saw in lecture 13, we're going to use the so-called radian measure of angle.
Radians contain the number pi in it, and in fact this is how we're going to get pi into
our famous formula.
Once around 360 degrees equals 2 pi, halfway around 180 equals pi, a quarter away which
is 90 degrees equals pi over 2, and so therefore half of that or 45 degrees would be a quarter
pi.
So that's how many radians, a quarter pi radians is that angle.
Therefore our angle is a quarter pi radians, and now the question is what's the length
from the center out to here where I went one over and one up.
Well that length we actually computed in lecture 8, because notice that we actually
have a square that's a one by one square.
And so a one by one square, this is in fact the diagonal, and we computed that to be the
square root of 2.
So we see in this case we can describe this point here as go up an angle of pi over 4 radians
and then go out square of 2 and you hit the point.
So any complex number x plus yi can be expressed, or at least its location can be expressed
in the complex plane as an angle and a length in this fashion.
In fact this angle and the red line segment can be used to form a right triangle in the
complex plane by simply drawing a perpendicular line from our point down to the horizontal
real axis, and all of a sudden we have a nice right triangle.
