until I get to 1.
So for example 4 factorial means 4 multiplied by 3 times 2 times 1 which equals 24.
Well now here's the amazing moment but this is going to take just a teeny bit of algebra
and we're going to get technical for literally a moment.
Now feel free to either follow every detail or just sit back and enjoy the big picture
as you wish as the mathematical story unfolds but in either case the algebra details here
will only last for a minute I promise.
Okay well using some deep ideas from calculus we can find formulas for both the sine and
the cosine that are similar to the one we have for e raised to the x power and this
is the key connection that links the trigonometric functions to our famous number e.
Well first for sine of a we could write that as a to the 1st power over 1 factorial minus
a cubed over 3 factorial plus a to the 5th over 5 factorial minus a to the 7th over 7
factorial and so forth.
Similarly for the cosine of a we could write that as 1 minus a squared over 2 factorial
plus a to the 4th over 4 factorial minus a to the 6th over 6 factorial and so forth.
Notice there's a pattern here.
First of all in each case the sines alternate from plus minus and in the sine of a we see
odd numbers appearing and in the cosine of a we see the even numbers appearing.
Now these formulas are extremely important, profound and by no means obvious.
Notice that if we add those two formulas together we almost get e to the a but not quite since
the negative sines get in the way and snare things up a little bit so we're very close
but this is where the number i comes to our rescue.
Ok well let's make sense out of the number e raised to the power pi times i.
Well the way we'll do that is we'll plug pi times i in for x in our formula for e to
the power x and we see something that's going to look a little bit unwieldy but just watch
it and enjoy it and watch how things all of a sudden get very simple after they get complicated.
We'd see e to the pi times i power equals one plus pi times i to the first power over
one factorial plus pi i squared over two factorial plus pi i cubed over three factorial plus
pi i to the fourth over four factorial and the pattern continues forever.
Now we could actually simplify that a little teeny bit because when we have pi i for example
squared then we know that that actually equals pi squared times i squared.
We could actually square each of those and then multiply them together so we could rewrite
e to the pi i as one plus pi to the first i to the first over one factorial plus pi
squared i squared over two factorial plus pi cubed times i cubed over three factorial
