triadic absolute value of eighteen?
How many factors of three do we see?
Well two.
Therefore we see one over three times three, or one-ninth.
When we multiply these two numbers together, we see one-third times one-ninth, which equals
one-twenty-seventh, so we see the same number again.
So the triadic absolute value of a product is equal to the product of the triadic absolute
values, and similarly, in terms of addition, we can show that the triangle inequality also
holds here, although we won't do it.
Anyway, so what we're seeing here are some examples that show that the triadic absolute
value really does satisfy all the rules required in order to be an actual absolute value, and
indeed, all these properties can be proven to hold true.
By the way, we can now find the triadic absolute value of fractions, in other words, rational
numbers, just by dividing.
So for example, suppose we want to find the triadic absolute value of eight-forty-fifths.
All we do is take the triadic absolute value of eight and divide it by the triadic absolute
value of forty-five.
The triadic absolute value of eight is just one, because there's no factor of three in
there at all.
So there's no, it's not a multiple of three, so we just have an absolute value of one.
And what about forty-five?
Well forty-five has a triadic absolute value of one-ninth, because we have a three times
three in its factorization.
So when I divide these two numbers, I see one divided by one-ninth.
This is always a little bit tricky here, so we need to think about this.
One divided by one-ninth, we have to actually take the reciprocal and multiply, if we remember
our rules from a long time ago, and we see that the answer is nine.
So the triadic absolute value of eight-forty-fifths is actually nine, which is quite large.
So here's the moral.
If we have powers of three in the denominator of a fraction, then the triadic absolute value
will become large.
And if we have a power of three in the numerator of a fraction, then its triadic absolute value
will be small.
Very very peculiar, but it's an arithmetical sense of distance.
And as we'll see in the next lecture, this very strange, piatic absolute value leads
to an even stranger notion of number.
New numbers that exhibit properties that are stranger still.
These numbers will actually defy our own intuition as to what number means.
And so we'll actually be at a crossroads.
We'll see things that we'll think they can't be numbers, and yet, numbers they are.
