using rational numbers.
Let me try to explain this in my own words just so you get the flavor for the idea.
You'll notice that it's actually slightly subtle because it's not going to be quite
right.
Well, he says, let's take a look at a list of rational numbers, a list of fractions,
which I'll just denote as terminating decimals, that are getting closer and closer to each
other.
3.1, 3.14, 3.141, 3.1415, 3.14159, and so forth.
You see this list coming out, in fact, what's actually happening here is I'm taking the
successive digits of pi, but let's just look at this list of numbers, and notice that these
numbers themselves are getting closer and closer to each other, if you take the difference
of any two consecutive numbers on this list, they'll differ in the far, far rightmost spot,
which of course means it's getting smaller and smaller, these numbers are getting closer
and closer together.
But unfortunately, if our world of number is just the world of rational numbers, then
we run into a problem because this limiting number that we're approaching is in fact pi,
which we know is irrational.
So what Koshy said was, well, all these numbers are getting closer and closer to each other,
so the number that these numbers are heading towards, let's just call that a real number.
In other words, let's take the target that we're heading toward in this list of fractions
and just say that target now is a real number.
Well, this is a great idea, except for the fact that the moment he says we'll take that
target and call it a real number, that implies that we have the target in hand, which at
the moment we don't.
So in fact, this wasn't quite rigorous and precise enough.
Now while his work was a major step forward, it did lack this rigor to satisfy some of
his contemporaries.
But soon afterwards, Carl Weierstrauss, now known to many as the father of modern analysis,
put Koshy's wonderful ideas on solid ground and then by yet again expanding the notion
of number.
And here's what he said.
So here's how he fixed the problem.
He said, you know what, this collection of rational numbers are getting closer and closer
together.
But in fact, they're not heading toward anything.
So let's just declare right now the real numbers to be just anything that's an infinitely
long decimal expansion.
So formally, anytime you put down a dot and then write down infinitely many decimal digits.
And of course, we know that they're rational precisely when we have a periodic repeating
part or a tail of just zeros.
