Here, we'll examine the real numbers from an entirely different vantage point.
We'll construct the real numbers from the rational numbers in an analytical manner.
That is, we develop ideas that are inspired by one of the most fundamental applications
of numbers, measuring how close two objects are by computing the distance between them.
This important approach, first considered by Augustine Louis Cauchy in the early 1800s
and later made precise by Carl Weierstrauss, Georg Cantor, and Richard Dedekin, not only
led to a deeper understanding of real numbers, but also allowed scholars to make many ideas
from other areas of mathematics, including calculus, more exact, and arguments more rigorous.
This seminal work was the inspiration and starting point for a modern branch of mathematics
known today as analysis.
At its very core, finding the distance between two numbers requires us to find the so-called
absolute value of the difference between those two numbers.
Using this simple idea, if we assume that our entire universe of number is the collection
of rational numbers, that is, the collection of fractions, then we discover that there
are lists of numbers whose terms are getting closer and closer together, and yet the value
that they're heading towards is, in fact, not a number, that is, not a fraction.
In other words, the collection of rational numbers has, in some sense, holes within it.
We'll then construct the collection of real numbers and thus expand our notion of number
by filling in these holes.
This construction leads to a whole free, continuous real number line.
We'll close this discussion with a very strange question.
Are there other measures of distance, in other words, absolute values, on the rational
numbers?
The surprising answer will lead us to an extremely important but entirely strange new universe
of number.
Well, let's open our discussion with a historical look at the construction of the real numbers.
As we discussed in Lecture 11, by the 1800s, there was a great desire among mathematicians
to set the notions of mathematics, especially the ideas of calculus, on more rigorous grounds.
The intuitive and geometric arguments used in that day were becoming less and less attractive
as the desire for precision grew.
This desire led to a serious interest in finding the precise meaning of real number.
In 1817, the Czech mathematician Bernhard Bolzano saw this need for a precise definition of
the real numbers.
Although he was not as influential as others to come, his work in this direction inspired
some to call him the father of arithmetization.
The basic goal was to begin with the world of rational numbers, the world of fractions,
that we all understand, and then use these familiar numbers to rigorously define all
the real numbers, including the irrational ones.
In the 1820s, Augustin-Louis Cauchy, the prolific French mathematician who wrote over 780 journal
contributions, developed a reasonable sounding definition of real number as a limiting process
using rational numbers.
Let me try to explain this in my own words just so you get the flavor for the idea.
You'll notice that it's actually slightly subtle because it's not going to be quite
right.
Well, he says, let's take a look at a list of rational numbers, a list of fractions,
which I'll just denote as terminating decimals, that are getting closer and closer to each
other.
3.1, 3.14, 3.141, 3.1415, 3.14159, and so forth.
You see this list coming out, in fact, what's actually happening here is I'm taking the
successive digits of pi, but let's just look at this list of numbers, and notice that these
numbers themselves are getting closer and closer to each other, if you take the difference
of any two consecutive numbers on this list, they'll differ in the far, far rightmost spot,
which of course means it's getting smaller and smaller, these numbers are getting closer
and closer together.
But unfortunately, if our world of number is just the world of rational numbers, then
we run into a problem because this limiting number that we're approaching is in fact pi,
which we know is irrational.
So what Koshy said was, well, all these numbers are getting closer and closer to each other,
so the number that these numbers are heading towards, let's just call that a real number.
In other words, let's take the target that we're heading toward in this list of fractions
and just say that target now is a real number.
Well, this is a great idea, except for the fact that the moment he says we'll take that
target and call it a real number, that implies that we have the target in hand, which at
the moment we don't.
So in fact, this wasn't quite rigorous and precise enough.
Now while his work was a major step forward, it did lack this rigor to satisfy some of
his contemporaries.
But soon afterwards, Carl Weierstrauss, now known to many as the father of modern analysis,
put Koshy's wonderful ideas on solid ground and then by yet again expanding the notion
of number.
And here's what he said.
So here's how he fixed the problem.
He said, you know what, this collection of rational numbers are getting closer and closer
together.
But in fact, they're not heading toward anything.
So let's just declare right now the real numbers to be just anything that's an infinitely
long decimal expansion.
So formally, anytime you put down a dot and then write down infinitely many decimal digits.
And of course, we know that they're rational precisely when we have a periodic repeating
part or a tail of just zeros.
But even if we don't have a tail of zeros, I don't care.
It's just an object.
It's a formal object.
And I'm going to declare that's what I mean by a real number.
So he fixes Koshy's little teeny issue by just declaring that that formal thing, that
decimal thing, will be a number.
He defines it to be so.
So in fact, what Weierstrauss does is he declares that all unending decimal expansions will
be numbers.
And for the first time, he puts the real numbers on solid footing.
Now Weierstrauss, by the way, was a very successful secondary school teacher before
he started to publish important mathematical papers in the area that would later be known
as analysis.
And then he soon moved to university.
During this same period, two other German mathematicians, Richard Dedekin and Georg
Cantor.
Cantor, by the way, who was one of Weierstrauss' PhD students, were also working on making
the real numbers precise.
In the late 1800s, they actually articulated what we've been taken for granted throughout
this course, that the points on a line can be placed in a one-to-one correspondence with
the real numbers.
That is, when we look at the number line, the fact that we call it a number line is exactly
what Cantor and Dedekin noticed.
And in fact, sometimes this fact is known as the Cantor-Dedekin axiom.
And in fact, the number line exists.
As we noted in lecture nine, this connection was considered first by the 16th century Flemish
mathematician Simon Stevan, who considered a continuum of real numbers, which he so beautifully
and poetically described as flowing like a river of magnitudes.
And here we see that this idea can be made very precise, and that's what these mathematicians
of the 1800s were doing.
In fact, the Weierstrauss' version of real number can be made even more rigorous, and
this leads to a method of defining real numbers that are known today as Dedekin cuts, named
in honor of Richard Dedekin, who derived the method, although we won't describe it here.
Well, these 19th century ideas have led to our modern view of real numbers, and I want
to outline how we consider the real numbers today within the world of mathematics.
Let us begin by starting with the view that number consists solely of the rational numbers,
and let's study how those numbers cluster among themselves.
We find sequences of rational numbers, that is, lists of fractions, for which those numbers
are getting arbitrarily close to one another.
That is, as we go down these lists of fractions, we see that the fractions are getting progressively
closer and closer to each other.
For example, consider the sequence a half, a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and so
on forever.
Notice that by just going down our list far enough, we can ensure that all subsequent
fractions on this list are as close as we wish, and so, in fact, they're coming closer
and closer to each other.
Well, such sequences are called today Cauchy sequences, of course, named in honor of Cauchy,
who was the first to describe this idea.
Now, remember that our entire pretend world of number consists solely of the fractions,
the rational numbers.
Within this hypothesized world, Cauchy sequences either are heading toward a target, namely
a number, a rational number, a fraction, or they're not heading toward a rational number.
For example, the Cauchy sequence we just looked at, one half, one third, one fourth, one fifth,
and so forth, is actually heading to the number zero.
Notice that zero, being a rational number, is indeed a number in our current context.
However, if we consider the Cauchy sequence of rational numbers expressed in decimal form
in the following list, we're going to see something a little bit different.
Let's consider 1.4, 1.41, 1.414, 1.4142, 1.41421, and so on.
Well, it turns out that these decimal fractions are getting closer and closer to each other
because they're agreeing further and further out.
And yet, they're not heading toward a fractional number.
Their target is a non-repeating decimal, which means it's not a rational number.
And that decimal is 1.41421356237, and it goes on, which, as an aside, is the decimal
expansion for the square root of 2.
A number that we've already proven is not rational.
For this example, we actually see a hole in which a number really should reside because
these rational numbers are getting closer and closer and closer together, but where
they're actually heading toward is missing because it's not a fraction.
Well, these holes, in fact, as you might remember, confounded the ancient Greeks.
As we noted earlier in the course, the ancient Greeks viewed the rational numbers as a gapless
list of numbers until they discovered the irrationality of the square root of 2.
This conundrum remained unresolved until around 360 BCE when Eudoxus offered his definition
of irrational numbers.
He defined irrational numbers in terms of an infinite list of rational numbers.
Notice how beautifully this notion foreshadowed 2,000 years earlier the formal idea of Cauchy
sequences of rational numbers.
It's really remarkable when you think about it.
So we are faced with these holes, points around which rational numbers accumulate, but are
themselves not numbers in this sense.
If we extend our notion of number from just the rational numbers to the rational numbers
together with these now undefined holes, then we produce the real numbers and the continuum
that we can now view as a line.
In other words, with just the rational numbers, we have a Swiss cheese-like number line riddled
with holes.
The holes are, in fact, the ever-present irrational numbers.
And when we include them, that is, we fill in the holes, we produce the continuous, unbroken
real number line that we know and love.
This perspective represents our current precise view of real numbers.
In mathematical terms, we have some language for this.
We say we complete the rational numbers.
That is, we fill in the holes.
So by filling in the holes and producing the real numbers, we say it's the completion
of the rationales.
That's the language that we use in the math biz.
Well, in fact, Dedekin himself acknowledged this evolution of number that we've just
experienced.
In fact, he wrote, just as negative and rational numbers are formed by new creation, and as
the laws of operating with these numbers must and can be reduced to the laws of operating
with positive integers, so we must endeavor completely to define irrational numbers by
means of the rational numbers alone.
And so we really get a sense that this is evolution, and here Dedekin himself acknowledged
that we're pushing forward from the numbers we have and the arithmetic to this new world.
We use the old numbers to build the new numbers in this fashion.
Now this new idea was not unanimously embraced by all mathematicians of the math community
of the time.
The influential and respected 19th century German mathematician Leopold Kronecker strongly
believed that all numbers should be derived from natural numbers and zero.
He thought that rational numbers, irrational numbers, and even complex numbers were derived
from false mathematical logic.
In fact, his famous quote remains, God made the integers, all else is the work of man,
meaning very much like the Pythagoreans, if you remember, where they thought of the natural
numbers as God given, we see that Kronecker, millennia later, still has this point of view.
In fact, there's a great story.
Remember that Lindemann was the mathematician who proved the amazing result that pi is an
irrational number.
Well, in fact, when Lindemann offered his remarkable proof of the irrationality of pi, Kronecker
wrote him a letter.
He wrote, of what use is your beautiful research on the number pi?
Why cogitate over such problems when really there are no irrational numbers whatever?
It's remarkable.
Here he was receiving celebratory notes from all over the math community at this triumphant
result about proving the irrationality of pi, and here is good old Kronecker saying,
well, they don't even exist, so why are you wasting your time with such things?
Well, of course, actually, in the last part of this course, we'll actually see Kronecker's
deep objections in an even more dramatic fashion against Georg Cantor in Cantor's revolutionary
work on infinity.
So, we'll see Kronecker later on in the course, and he's just as upset, in fact, more so.
Today, all serious mathematicians can prove that irrational numbers exist and view them
as real as the natural numbers themselves.
So the view of Kronecker is now old-fashioned, obsolete, and we've moved on.
I want to now focus on the main character in this story of real numbers up to this point
that's been totally overlooked.
In the 19th century attempts to give precise definitions for the real numbers, we encounter
the notion of distance.
Now, when we say that the values in a sequence of rational numbers are getting close together,
implicitly, we must be measuring that closeness.
Things are coming together.
We should be able to measure that shrinking, and we measure closeness by using what's called
the absolute value, usually denoted by two vertical lines.
The absolute value of a number is merely the distance away from zero it is.
So, for example, the absolute value of four is just four, because we could measure the
distance between zero and four.
The absolute value of negative five is five, because we just measure the distance from
zero to negative five.
For computational purposes, really, you don't even need to look at the number line.
All you need to do is just look at the number, and if it's negative, strip off the negative
sign, and that's the absolute value.
Well, to determine how close two rational numbers are, we take the absolute value of the difference
between those two numbers.
So, for example, the distance between four and seven is three, and this fact corresponds
to taking the absolute value of four minus seven.
Well, four minus seven is negative three, and the absolute value of negative three is
three.
That's the same answer.
The precise definition of the real numbers depends fundamentally on the notion of distance,
or more specifically, on the notion of this absolute value.
Well, given its importance, I want us to consider the absolute value and make an absolutely
surprising discovery.
An absolute value, by definition, is any formula that observes certain rules.
First, the absolute value of zero must be zero.
The distance from zero to itself, of course, is zero.
And the absolute value of any non-zero number must be positive, because it represents distance.
Second, and this gets a little bit more arithmetical, the absolute value of a product of two numbers
must always equal the product of their absolute values.
So let's look at an example.
Let's find the absolute value of the quantity four times negative three.
Well, four times negative three is negative 12, and the absolute value of negative 12 is
12.
Now, on the other hand, let's consider the absolute value of four multiplied by the absolute
value of negative three.
The absolute value of four is four.
The absolute value of negative three is three.
Four times three is, again, twelve.
So we see that the product, the absolute value of the product, equals the product of the
absolute values.
Put informally, the absolute value is very sympathetic to multiplication.
You can do it, you can do the multiplication inside or outside, you get the same answer.
And lastly, and most importantly, the absolute value conforms to the famous adage, the shortest
distance between two points is a straight line.
And we put this mathematically with an inequality that's called the triangle inequality, and
it reads as follows.
If we take the absolute value of a sum of two numbers, that quantity will always be
less than or possibly equal to the individual sums of the absolute values.
So put mathematically, we'd say the absolute value of a plus b is less than or equal to
the absolute value of a plus the absolute value of b.
Let's look at an example to see this make sense.
Let's let a be five and b be negative two.
Well then the absolute value of five plus negative two would be, well, that's just the
absolute value of three, which is equals three.
On the other hand, let's find the absolute values individually.
The absolute value of five is five, the absolute value of negative two is two, and five plus
two is seven.
And notice that seven indeed is larger than a three.
So three is less than or equal to seven as the triangle inequality asserts.
So this inequality is called the triangle inequality because it's related to the lengths
of sides of triangles, but that's of no consequence here.
The important thing is it allows us to think of the absolute value as a way of measuring
distance.
Now, in view of our mathematics studies from high school, we might guess that there's only
one absolute value on the rational numbers.
In other words, there's only one way to measure distance between rational numbers.
However, as we're about to see, the seemingly plausible assertion is, in fact, false.
There are other absolute values on the rational numbers that measure distance, but in an
arithmetic sense, rather than a geometric sense involving a ruler.
These strange new absolute values are called piatic absolute values.
The letter P here stands for a prime number P, and they're called the piatic absolute values
because they measure the size of numbers based on how many times the prime number P divides
evenly into that number.
The basic idea is the more factors of P a number has, the smaller the piatic absolute
value.
To make this strange and very counterintuitive idea more precise, let's fix a prime number
P in our minds.
For example, let's consider the prime three, although what we're about to do will work
with any prime at all.
For now, let's just describe the formula for the piatic absolute value on the natural numbers.
We write this absolute value with two vertical bars and a little subscript three.
The subscript three tells us this is the triadic, not the usual absolute value.
Here's the rules.
Here are the rules.
If a natural number is not a multiple of three, then its triadic absolute value equals one.
For example, the triadic absolute value of two is one because two is not a multiple of
three.
The triadic absolute value of seven equals one because seven is not a multiple of three.
Write a number like 100.
The triadic absolute value of 100 equals one because 100 is not a multiple of three.
Moving on, if a natural number contains exactly one factor of three when it's written out
as a product of prime numbers, then its triadic absolute value equals one third.
For example, the triadic absolute value of three itself would be one third, one factor
of three.
What about 12?
Well, 12 equals two times two times three, one factor of three, so the triadic absolute
value of 12 equals one third.
What about a number like 100?
Sorry, let's consider a 300.
300, if we were to factor it, is two times two times three times five times five.
It's three times 100.
There's one factor of three, so the triadic absolute value of 300 is just one third.
If a natural number contains exactly two factors of three when it's written out as
a product of prime numbers, then it's triadic absolute value equals one ninth.
For example, the triadic absolute value of nine equals one ninth.
The triadic absolute value of 36 equals one ninth because we have exactly two factors
of three in 36, two times two times three times three, and 72, which is two times two
times three times three, since there's two factors of three, the triadic absolute value
of 72 equals one ninth.
More generally, given any natural number n, we define the triadic absolute value of n
to equal the reciprocal of the highest multiple of three that divides evenly into n, so it's
what we've been seeing.
For example, let's compute the triadic absolute value of, say, 54.
Well first, we write 54 as a product of prime numbers.
54 equals two times three times three times three.
So we see three factors of three, and so we take the reciprocal of that, which would
be one over 27, and so the triadic absolute value of 54 equals one over 27.
Takes a while to get used to this formula, by the way.
This is very, very weird, very weird.
Since normally, we'd view 54 as a large number, and yet its triadic absolute value seems very
small, but that's because 54 contains several factors of three.
The more factors of three you have, the smaller the triadic absolute value will be.
Okay, now more generally, for any prime number, let's call it p, we define the p-adic absolute
value, which we write with two vertical lines and a little subscript p, on the natural numbers
in a similar way, so as follows.
In any natural number n, the p-adic absolute value of n equals the reciprocal of the highest
multiple of the prime p that divides evenly into n, just as we've seen.
We'll also declare that the p-adic absolute value of the number zero equals zero, just
as before, and for negative numbers, we just ignore the negative sign as we did before.
So for example, the triadic absolute value of negative six equals one-third, because
I just ignore the negative sign, take six, factor it, two times three, I see one factor
of three, I take its reciprocal, and I see that the triadic absolute value of negative
six equals a third.
Now, notice that given this description, the p-adic absolute value of a number is never
negative, because it's either going to equal zero, or it's a reciprocal of a product of
p's, and that is always positive.
Also the p-adic absolute value is very sympathetic to multiplication.
For example, let's find the triadic absolute value of six times eighteen.
Well, six times eighteen is 108, and if we write that as a product of primes, we'd see
that 108 equals two times two, times three, times three, times three, and so the triadic
absolute value of six times eighteen equals one-twenty-seventh, because we see three factors
of three in there, so we're at the reciprocal of three times three times three.
Well now, let's compute individually the triadic absolute value of six and multiply it by the
triadic absolute value of eighteen.
Triadic absolute value of six, we've already seen, is simply a third, and what about the
triadic absolute value of eighteen?
How many factors of three do we see?
Well two.
Therefore we see one over three times three, or one-ninth.
When we multiply these two numbers together, we see one-third times one-ninth, which equals
one-twenty-seventh, so we see the same number again.
So the triadic absolute value of a product is equal to the product of the triadic absolute
values, and similarly, in terms of addition, we can show that the triangle inequality also
holds here, although we won't do it.
Anyway, so what we're seeing here are some examples that show that the triadic absolute
value really does satisfy all the rules required in order to be an actual absolute value, and
indeed, all these properties can be proven to hold true.
By the way, we can now find the triadic absolute value of fractions, in other words, rational
numbers, just by dividing.
So for example, suppose we want to find the triadic absolute value of eight-forty-fifths.
All we do is take the triadic absolute value of eight and divide it by the triadic absolute
value of forty-five.
The triadic absolute value of eight is just one, because there's no factor of three in
there at all.
So there's no, it's not a multiple of three, so we just have an absolute value of one.
And what about forty-five?
Well forty-five has a triadic absolute value of one-ninth, because we have a three times
three in its factorization.
So when I divide these two numbers, I see one divided by one-ninth.
This is always a little bit tricky here, so we need to think about this.
One divided by one-ninth, we have to actually take the reciprocal and multiply, if we remember
our rules from a long time ago, and we see that the answer is nine.
So the triadic absolute value of eight-forty-fifths is actually nine, which is quite large.
So here's the moral.
If we have powers of three in the denominator of a fraction, then the triadic absolute value
will become large.
And if we have a power of three in the numerator of a fraction, then its triadic absolute value
will be small.
Very very peculiar, but it's an arithmetical sense of distance.
And as we'll see in the next lecture, this very strange, piatic absolute value leads
to an even stranger notion of number.
New numbers that exhibit properties that are stranger still.
These numbers will actually defy our own intuition as to what number means.
And so we'll actually be at a crossroads.
We'll see things that we'll think they can't be numbers, and yet, numbers they are.
