Here he was receiving celebratory notes from all over the math community at this triumphant
result about proving the irrationality of pi, and here is good old Kronecker saying,
well, they don't even exist, so why are you wasting your time with such things?
Well, of course, actually, in the last part of this course, we'll actually see Kronecker's
deep objections in an even more dramatic fashion against Georg Cantor in Cantor's revolutionary
work on infinity.
So, we'll see Kronecker later on in the course, and he's just as upset, in fact, more so.
Today, all serious mathematicians can prove that irrational numbers exist and view them
as real as the natural numbers themselves.
So the view of Kronecker is now old-fashioned, obsolete, and we've moved on.
I want to now focus on the main character in this story of real numbers up to this point
that's been totally overlooked.
In the 19th century attempts to give precise definitions for the real numbers, we encounter
the notion of distance.
Now, when we say that the values in a sequence of rational numbers are getting close together,
implicitly, we must be measuring that closeness.
Things are coming together.
We should be able to measure that shrinking, and we measure closeness by using what's called
the absolute value, usually denoted by two vertical lines.
The absolute value of a number is merely the distance away from zero it is.
So, for example, the absolute value of four is just four, because we could measure the
distance between zero and four.
The absolute value of negative five is five, because we just measure the distance from
zero to negative five.
For computational purposes, really, you don't even need to look at the number line.
All you need to do is just look at the number, and if it's negative, strip off the negative
sign, and that's the absolute value.
Well, to determine how close two rational numbers are, we take the absolute value of the difference
between those two numbers.
So, for example, the distance between four and seven is three, and this fact corresponds
to taking the absolute value of four minus seven.
Well, four minus seven is negative three, and the absolute value of negative three is
three.
That's the same answer.
The precise definition of the real numbers depends fundamentally on the notion of distance,
or more specifically, on the notion of this absolute value.
Well, given its importance, I want us to consider the absolute value and make an absolutely
surprising discovery.
An absolute value, by definition, is any formula that observes certain rules.
First, the absolute value of zero must be zero.
