The triadic absolute value of 36 equals one ninth because we have exactly two factors
of three in 36, two times two times three times three, and 72, which is two times two
times three times three, since there's two factors of three, the triadic absolute value
of 72 equals one ninth.
More generally, given any natural number n, we define the triadic absolute value of n
to equal the reciprocal of the highest multiple of three that divides evenly into n, so it's
what we've been seeing.
For example, let's compute the triadic absolute value of, say, 54.
Well first, we write 54 as a product of prime numbers.
54 equals two times three times three times three.
So we see three factors of three, and so we take the reciprocal of that, which would
be one over 27, and so the triadic absolute value of 54 equals one over 27.
Takes a while to get used to this formula, by the way.
This is very, very weird, very weird.
Since normally, we'd view 54 as a large number, and yet its triadic absolute value seems very
small, but that's because 54 contains several factors of three.
The more factors of three you have, the smaller the triadic absolute value will be.
Okay, now more generally, for any prime number, let's call it p, we define the p-adic absolute
value, which we write with two vertical lines and a little subscript p, on the natural numbers
in a similar way, so as follows.
In any natural number n, the p-adic absolute value of n equals the reciprocal of the highest
multiple of the prime p that divides evenly into n, just as we've seen.
We'll also declare that the p-adic absolute value of the number zero equals zero, just
as before, and for negative numbers, we just ignore the negative sign as we did before.
So for example, the triadic absolute value of negative six equals one-third, because
I just ignore the negative sign, take six, factor it, two times three, I see one factor
of three, I take its reciprocal, and I see that the triadic absolute value of negative
six equals a third.
Now, notice that given this description, the p-adic absolute value of a number is never
negative, because it's either going to equal zero, or it's a reciprocal of a product of
p's, and that is always positive.
Also the p-adic absolute value is very sympathetic to multiplication.
For example, let's find the triadic absolute value of six times eighteen.
Well, six times eighteen is 108, and if we write that as a product of primes, we'd see
that 108 equals two times two, times three, times three, times three, and so the triadic
absolute value of six times eighteen equals one-twenty-seventh, because we see three factors
of three in there, so we're at the reciprocal of three times three times three.
Well now, let's compute individually the triadic absolute value of six and multiply it by the
triadic absolute value of eighteen.
Triadic absolute value of six, we've already seen, is simply a third, and what about the
