In other words, there's only one way to measure distance between rational numbers.
However, as we're about to see, the seemingly plausible assertion is, in fact, false.
There are other absolute values on the rational numbers that measure distance, but in an
arithmetic sense, rather than a geometric sense involving a ruler.
These strange new absolute values are called piatic absolute values.
The letter P here stands for a prime number P, and they're called the piatic absolute values
because they measure the size of numbers based on how many times the prime number P divides
evenly into that number.
The basic idea is the more factors of P a number has, the smaller the piatic absolute
value.
To make this strange and very counterintuitive idea more precise, let's fix a prime number
P in our minds.
For example, let's consider the prime three, although what we're about to do will work
with any prime at all.
For now, let's just describe the formula for the piatic absolute value on the natural numbers.
We write this absolute value with two vertical bars and a little subscript three.
The subscript three tells us this is the triadic, not the usual absolute value.
Here's the rules.
Here are the rules.
If a natural number is not a multiple of three, then its triadic absolute value equals one.
For example, the triadic absolute value of two is one because two is not a multiple of
three.
The triadic absolute value of seven equals one because seven is not a multiple of three.
Write a number like 100.
The triadic absolute value of 100 equals one because 100 is not a multiple of three.
Moving on, if a natural number contains exactly one factor of three when it's written out
as a product of prime numbers, then its triadic absolute value equals one third.
For example, the triadic absolute value of three itself would be one third, one factor
of three.
What about 12?
Well, 12 equals two times two times three, one factor of three, so the triadic absolute
value of 12 equals one third.
What about a number like 100?
Sorry, let's consider a 300.
300, if we were to factor it, is two times two times three times five times five.
It's three times 100.
There's one factor of three, so the triadic absolute value of 300 is just one third.
If a natural number contains exactly two factors of three when it's written out as
a product of prime numbers, then it's triadic absolute value equals one ninth.
For example, the triadic absolute value of nine equals one ninth.
