The distance from zero to itself, of course, is zero.
And the absolute value of any non-zero number must be positive, because it represents distance.
Second, and this gets a little bit more arithmetical, the absolute value of a product of two numbers
must always equal the product of their absolute values.
So let's look at an example.
Let's find the absolute value of the quantity four times negative three.
Well, four times negative three is negative 12, and the absolute value of negative 12 is
12.
Now, on the other hand, let's consider the absolute value of four multiplied by the absolute
value of negative three.
The absolute value of four is four.
The absolute value of negative three is three.
Four times three is, again, twelve.
So we see that the product, the absolute value of the product, equals the product of the
absolute values.
Put informally, the absolute value is very sympathetic to multiplication.
You can do it, you can do the multiplication inside or outside, you get the same answer.
And lastly, and most importantly, the absolute value conforms to the famous adage, the shortest
distance between two points is a straight line.
And we put this mathematically with an inequality that's called the triangle inequality, and
it reads as follows.
If we take the absolute value of a sum of two numbers, that quantity will always be
less than or possibly equal to the individual sums of the absolute values.
So put mathematically, we'd say the absolute value of a plus b is less than or equal to
the absolute value of a plus the absolute value of b.
Let's look at an example to see this make sense.
Let's let a be five and b be negative two.
Well then the absolute value of five plus negative two would be, well, that's just the
absolute value of three, which is equals three.
On the other hand, let's find the absolute values individually.
The absolute value of five is five, the absolute value of negative two is two, and five plus
two is seven.
And notice that seven indeed is larger than a three.
So three is less than or equal to seven as the triangle inequality asserts.
So this inequality is called the triangle inequality because it's related to the lengths
of sides of triangles, but that's of no consequence here.
The important thing is it allows us to think of the absolute value as a way of measuring
distance.
Now, in view of our mathematics studies from high school, we might guess that there's only
one absolute value on the rational numbers.
