together with these now undefined holes, then we produce the real numbers and the continuum
that we can now view as a line.
In other words, with just the rational numbers, we have a Swiss cheese-like number line riddled
with holes.
The holes are, in fact, the ever-present irrational numbers.
And when we include them, that is, we fill in the holes, we produce the continuous, unbroken
real number line that we know and love.
This perspective represents our current precise view of real numbers.
In mathematical terms, we have some language for this.
We say we complete the rational numbers.
That is, we fill in the holes.
So by filling in the holes and producing the real numbers, we say it's the completion
of the rationales.
That's the language that we use in the math biz.
Well, in fact, Dedekin himself acknowledged this evolution of number that we've just
experienced.
In fact, he wrote, just as negative and rational numbers are formed by new creation, and as
the laws of operating with these numbers must and can be reduced to the laws of operating
with positive integers, so we must endeavor completely to define irrational numbers by
means of the rational numbers alone.
And so we really get a sense that this is evolution, and here Dedekin himself acknowledged
that we're pushing forward from the numbers we have and the arithmetic to this new world.
We use the old numbers to build the new numbers in this fashion.
Now this new idea was not unanimously embraced by all mathematicians of the math community
of the time.
The influential and respected 19th century German mathematician Leopold Kronecker strongly
believed that all numbers should be derived from natural numbers and zero.
He thought that rational numbers, irrational numbers, and even complex numbers were derived
from false mathematical logic.
In fact, his famous quote remains, God made the integers, all else is the work of man,
meaning very much like the Pythagoreans, if you remember, where they thought of the natural
numbers as God given, we see that Kronecker, millennia later, still has this point of view.
In fact, there's a great story.
Remember that Lindemann was the mathematician who proved the amazing result that pi is an
irrational number.
Well, in fact, when Lindemann offered his remarkable proof of the irrationality of pi, Kronecker
wrote him a letter.
He wrote, of what use is your beautiful research on the number pi?
Why cogitate over such problems when really there are no irrational numbers whatever?
It's remarkable.
