But even if we don't have a tail of zeros, I don't care.
It's just an object.
It's a formal object.
And I'm going to declare that's what I mean by a real number.
So he fixes Koshy's little teeny issue by just declaring that that formal thing, that
decimal thing, will be a number.
He defines it to be so.
So in fact, what Weierstrauss does is he declares that all unending decimal expansions will
be numbers.
And for the first time, he puts the real numbers on solid footing.
Now Weierstrauss, by the way, was a very successful secondary school teacher before
he started to publish important mathematical papers in the area that would later be known
as analysis.
And then he soon moved to university.
During this same period, two other German mathematicians, Richard Dedekin and Georg
Cantor.
Cantor, by the way, who was one of Weierstrauss' PhD students, were also working on making
the real numbers precise.
In the late 1800s, they actually articulated what we've been taken for granted throughout
this course, that the points on a line can be placed in a one-to-one correspondence with
the real numbers.
That is, when we look at the number line, the fact that we call it a number line is exactly
what Cantor and Dedekin noticed.
And in fact, sometimes this fact is known as the Cantor-Dedekin axiom.
And in fact, the number line exists.
As we noted in lecture nine, this connection was considered first by the 16th century Flemish
mathematician Simon Stevan, who considered a continuum of real numbers, which he so beautifully
and poetically described as flowing like a river of magnitudes.
And here we see that this idea can be made very precise, and that's what these mathematicians
of the 1800s were doing.
In fact, the Weierstrauss' version of real number can be made even more rigorous, and
this leads to a method of defining real numbers that are known today as Dedekin cuts, named
in honor of Richard Dedekin, who derived the method, although we won't describe it here.
Well, these 19th century ideas have led to our modern view of real numbers, and I want
to outline how we consider the real numbers today within the world of mathematics.
Let us begin by starting with the view that number consists solely of the rational numbers,
and let's study how those numbers cluster among themselves.
We find sequences of rational numbers, that is, lists of fractions, for which those numbers
are getting arbitrarily close to one another.
That is, as we go down these lists of fractions, we see that the fractions are getting progressively
