Here, we'll examine the real numbers from an entirely different vantage point.
We'll construct the real numbers from the rational numbers in an analytical manner.
That is, we develop ideas that are inspired by one of the most fundamental applications
of numbers, measuring how close two objects are by computing the distance between them.
This important approach, first considered by Augustine Louis Cauchy in the early 1800s
and later made precise by Carl Weierstrauss, Georg Cantor, and Richard Dedekin, not only
led to a deeper understanding of real numbers, but also allowed scholars to make many ideas
from other areas of mathematics, including calculus, more exact, and arguments more rigorous.
This seminal work was the inspiration and starting point for a modern branch of mathematics
known today as analysis.
At its very core, finding the distance between two numbers requires us to find the so-called
absolute value of the difference between those two numbers.
Using this simple idea, if we assume that our entire universe of number is the collection
of rational numbers, that is, the collection of fractions, then we discover that there
are lists of numbers whose terms are getting closer and closer together, and yet the value
that they're heading towards is, in fact, not a number, that is, not a fraction.
In other words, the collection of rational numbers has, in some sense, holes within it.
We'll then construct the collection of real numbers and thus expand our notion of number
by filling in these holes.
This construction leads to a whole free, continuous real number line.
We'll close this discussion with a very strange question.
Are there other measures of distance, in other words, absolute values, on the rational
numbers?
The surprising answer will lead us to an extremely important but entirely strange new universe
of number.
Well, let's open our discussion with a historical look at the construction of the real numbers.
As we discussed in Lecture 11, by the 1800s, there was a great desire among mathematicians
to set the notions of mathematics, especially the ideas of calculus, on more rigorous grounds.
The intuitive and geometric arguments used in that day were becoming less and less attractive
as the desire for precision grew.
This desire led to a serious interest in finding the precise meaning of real number.
In 1817, the Czech mathematician Bernhard Bolzano saw this need for a precise definition of
the real numbers.
Although he was not as influential as others to come, his work in this direction inspired
some to call him the father of arithmetization.
The basic goal was to begin with the world of rational numbers, the world of fractions,
that we all understand, and then use these familiar numbers to rigorously define all
the real numbers, including the irrational ones.
In the 1820s, Augustin-Louis Cauchy, the prolific French mathematician who wrote over 780 journal
contributions, developed a reasonable sounding definition of real number as a limiting process
