closer and closer to each other.
For example, consider the sequence a half, a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and so
on forever.
Notice that by just going down our list far enough, we can ensure that all subsequent
fractions on this list are as close as we wish, and so, in fact, they're coming closer
and closer to each other.
Well, such sequences are called today Cauchy sequences, of course, named in honor of Cauchy,
who was the first to describe this idea.
Now, remember that our entire pretend world of number consists solely of the fractions,
the rational numbers.
Within this hypothesized world, Cauchy sequences either are heading toward a target, namely
a number, a rational number, a fraction, or they're not heading toward a rational number.
For example, the Cauchy sequence we just looked at, one half, one third, one fourth, one fifth,
and so forth, is actually heading to the number zero.
Notice that zero, being a rational number, is indeed a number in our current context.
However, if we consider the Cauchy sequence of rational numbers expressed in decimal form
in the following list, we're going to see something a little bit different.
Let's consider 1.4, 1.41, 1.414, 1.4142, 1.41421, and so on.
Well, it turns out that these decimal fractions are getting closer and closer to each other
because they're agreeing further and further out.
And yet, they're not heading toward a fractional number.
Their target is a non-repeating decimal, which means it's not a rational number.
And that decimal is 1.41421356237, and it goes on, which, as an aside, is the decimal
expansion for the square root of 2.
A number that we've already proven is not rational.
For this example, we actually see a hole in which a number really should reside because
these rational numbers are getting closer and closer and closer together, but where
they're actually heading toward is missing because it's not a fraction.
Well, these holes, in fact, as you might remember, confounded the ancient Greeks.
As we noted earlier in the course, the ancient Greeks viewed the rational numbers as a gapless
list of numbers until they discovered the irrationality of the square root of 2.
This conundrum remained unresolved until around 360 BCE when Eudoxus offered his definition
of irrational numbers.
He defined irrational numbers in terms of an infinite list of rational numbers.
Notice how beautifully this notion foreshadowed 2,000 years earlier the formal idea of Cauchy
sequences of rational numbers.
It's really remarkable when you think about it.
So we are faced with these holes, points around which rational numbers accumulate, but are
themselves not numbers in this sense.
If we extend our notion of number from just the rational numbers to the rational numbers
