and so we see one-third, but we have to take the quotient, so we have one over one-third,
which if we take the reciprocal, we see the answer is three.
So, theoretically, one-sixth and zero are relatively far apart.
Their distance between each other is actually three.
Well, the triadic absolute value measures how many factors of a fixed prime number P
there are in a natural number.
The more factors of P there are in a number N, then the smaller the piatic absolute value
of N is.
Closeness in this piatic context means that the difference of two numbers is a multiple
of a high power of the prime P.
Well, this measure of distance leads to some very strange geometric consequences, which
I want to share with you.
To understand this new geometry within the rational numbers, we'll assume for the moment,
as we have in the past, that our entire notion of number consists solely of the rational numbers.
That is, the only numbers in our mind's eye for the moment are the fractions.
Now, since we're measuring distance in this arithmetical sense, the fractions no longer
line up on an orderly increasing line.
Instead, let's just visualize the rationals as an unordered jumble of numbers sitting
in a bowl.
In other words, we can consider all the fractions as tiny pieces of fruit inside an enormous
bowl of translucent jello.
Believe it or not, if we haven't specified how we're measuring distance between two
rational numbers, that is, in my opinion, this is probably the most accurate way to
visualize rational numbers, as points suspended inside a chilled gelatin number dessert.
Sounds delicious, doesn't it?
Well, in fact, when I actually do research in number theory in this area, I actually
visualize the rational sitting in this fashion.
Now, if we take any three fractions, we can imagine drawing three lines between those
three fixed points in that jello, and thus we'd see a shimmering triangle in our enormous
jello mold.
Let's now consider the lengths of the sides of these triangles formed by the rational
numbers.
For example, if we consider a triangle having vertices at the points 5, negative 1 and 7,
so remember, they're just sitting inside a jello, so 5 might be here and negative 1
might be here and 7 might be here, it's all mixed up, well, then the lengths of the sides
are the distances between these three numbers.
Well, using our usual absolute value, we can figure out the distances.
So to find the distance between 5 and negative 1, we look at the absolute value of 5 minus
negative 1, which equals 6.
