The algebra trick that we used to show that the previous sum equaled negative one-half
is not going to work here.
This fact means that we need to extend our notion of number so that all three attic Cauchy
sequences converge.
In other words, formally declare that the sum 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus
3 to the 8th plus 3 to the 16th plus 3 to the 32nd plus 3 to the 64th and so forth,
let's just call that a number, just like Weierstrauss did with the infinitely long decimal expansions.
We just call this a number.
This in fact is a new irrational number.
Well, this new irrational number is analogous in some sense to one of the irrational real
numbers that we actually found in lecture 10.
The decimal that begins 0.101, 001, 0001, 0001, and so forth, remember, we kept adding longer
and longer runs of zeros.
Well, here we're having a doubling the exponent each time is the corresponding idea to the
number we saw from lecture 10.
But our new irrational number is not part of the real number line and in fact it doesn't
have a decimal expansion.
Thus we see that if we consider the rational numbers and now measure closeness with a
piatic absolute value, then we again see that we're faced with holes, points in which fractions
are bunching up around, like going around a drain, but the target itself is not a fraction.
When we fill in these holes using the usual absolute value, as in the previous lecture,
then we extended our notion of number and discovered the irrational real numbers.
In this piatic context, if we fill in these new holes using a piatic absolute value, then
we extend our notion of number and discover new irrational numbers such as 3 plus 3 squared
plus 3 to the fourth plus 3 to the eighth plus 3 to the sixteenth plus 3 to the 32nd
and so on forever.
This new collection of numbers is not the collection of real numbers nor the collection
of complex numbers and neither resides on a line or even on a plane.
This new collection of numbers is known as the collection of piatic numbers.
Now if you remember from my gelatin vision of number, only the tiny bits of fruit, the
fractions suspended in the jello were considered numbers.
Now in essence, we're extending our notion of number so that we can view the jello itself
together with the points of fruit as the entire collection of piatic numbers.
We filled in all the space.
These new numbers are so strange upon first inspection and so counterintuitive that it's
difficult for us to see these infinite looking things as numbers.
Look, we're adding 1 plus 3 plus 3 to the fourth and so on.
It looks infinite.
It's hard to imagine that this really is a sensible notion of number.
