Many of us today might find it difficult to empathize with the Pythagorean's resistance
in accepting the notion that the counterintuitive irrationals should be considered as numbers.
Here we'll face numbers that will be as counterintuitive to us today as the irrational numbers were
to the Pythagoreans several thousand years ago.
Using an entirely new arithmetical measure of distance involving prime numbers called
the Piatic Absolute Value, we'll discover a very unusual world of numbers.
This modern perspective first discovered by Kurt Hensel in 1897 allowed for many important
advances in the abstract theory of numbers.
We'll see, for example, that when measured with this new notion of distance, all triangles
are isosceles.
We'll see a way of expressing rational numbers in a Piatic expansion that has reflections
of the different bases discussed in Lecture 9, but in fact will be fundamentally different.
While many of our previous observations about numbers will carry over into this new context,
there will be several dramatic differences.
We'll see that armed with this new measure of distance, the rational numbers still have
holes.
In other words, missing values.
Here as we plug up the holes and expand our notion of numbers, we do not build the real
numbers.
Instead, we produce a collection of very strange looking numbers.
These so-called Piatic numbers will appear as totally abstract consequences of arithmetic
with no meaning in our physical world.
However, we'll briefly describe how these seemingly unnatural numbers are, in fact, and
their analysis, in fact, are at the core to describe some delicate ideas in quantum physics.
Thus, on the one hand, we see again how nature fits, bringing together worlds that seem totally
unrelated upon first blush, and on the other hand, we see the great danger in believing
that at any moment in our history, we've captured all the numbers.
Well, let's open what will be the very, very strange discussion of numbers by first revisiting
the arithmetic absolute values from the previous lecture.
There we saw a new absolute value called the Piatic absolute value.
First, we select a prime number which we'll call P. Remember, the prime numbers are 2,
3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and so forth, the numbers that can't be broken down to the product
of two smaller natural numbers.
We then define the Piatic absolute value, which we write as two vertical bars with a
little subscript P, and we define it on the integers by declaring that, first of all,
if you plug in zero, the Piatic absolute value of zero will be declared to be zero.
And if n is a natural number, then the Piatic absolute value of n will equal the reciprocal
of the largest multiple of P that appears when n is written as a product of prime numbers.
For example, if we fix the prime to be 3, then we can find the Piatic absolute value
of 90 by first noticing that if we factor 90, we see 2 times 3 times 3 times 5.
So we see two factors of 3, which equals 9.
We take the reciprocal and discover that the Piatic absolute value of 90 will be declared
one-ninth.
Remember, the more factors of 3 a number has, the smaller the Piatic absolute value will
be.
Because we have such a Piatic absolute value for every single prime number P, and because
we have shown that there are infinitely many prime numbers, we can now conclude that there
are in fact infinitely many different absolute values on the rational numbers.
Well, these new absolute values were discovered by the extremely talented German number theorist
Kurt Hensel in 1897.
Now, once we have infinitely many absolute values, we've gone from the usual one to
infinitely many, we of course wonder, are there other absolute values?
Well the amazing answer is no.
In the 1930s, Ukrainian mathematician Alexander Ostrowski proved that the only absolute values
on the rational numbers are those that are equivalent to the usual one that we've always
used in school, or the familiar one, or one of these new Piatic ones.
In other words, the only measures of distance, either arithmetic or using a standard ruler
on the rational numbers that satisfy the rules of being an absolute value, are precisely
the familiar one and these new Piatic ones.
That's it.
There are no others.
Really amazing.
Well, using these Piatic absolute values, we can measure the distance between two rational
numbers.
In other words, the distance between two fractions.
Let's look at an example.
If we fix the prime number to be three again, then the triadic distance between five and
two is just the triadic absolute value of five minus two.
Well, five minus two equals three and the triadic absolute value of three is one-third.
We take the reciprocal.
And so, theoretically, five and two are relatively close to each other when measured through
this absolute value.
However, the distance between zero and one-sixth is what?
Well, it would be the triadic absolute value of zero minus a sixth, which is just the triadic
absolute value of negative one divided by the triadic absolute value of six.
Well, the triadic absolute value of negative one, there's no factors of three in there,
so it's just one.
And the triadic absolute value of six, well, six is two times three, one factor of three,
and so we see one-third, but we have to take the quotient, so we have one over one-third,
which if we take the reciprocal, we see the answer is three.
So, theoretically, one-sixth and zero are relatively far apart.
Their distance between each other is actually three.
Well, the triadic absolute value measures how many factors of a fixed prime number P
there are in a natural number.
The more factors of P there are in a number N, then the smaller the piatic absolute value
of N is.
Closeness in this piatic context means that the difference of two numbers is a multiple
of a high power of the prime P.
Well, this measure of distance leads to some very strange geometric consequences, which
I want to share with you.
To understand this new geometry within the rational numbers, we'll assume for the moment,
as we have in the past, that our entire notion of number consists solely of the rational numbers.
That is, the only numbers in our mind's eye for the moment are the fractions.
Now, since we're measuring distance in this arithmetical sense, the fractions no longer
line up on an orderly increasing line.
Instead, let's just visualize the rationals as an unordered jumble of numbers sitting
in a bowl.
In other words, we can consider all the fractions as tiny pieces of fruit inside an enormous
bowl of translucent jello.
Believe it or not, if we haven't specified how we're measuring distance between two
rational numbers, that is, in my opinion, this is probably the most accurate way to
visualize rational numbers, as points suspended inside a chilled gelatin number dessert.
Sounds delicious, doesn't it?
Well, in fact, when I actually do research in number theory in this area, I actually
visualize the rational sitting in this fashion.
Now, if we take any three fractions, we can imagine drawing three lines between those
three fixed points in that jello, and thus we'd see a shimmering triangle in our enormous
jello mold.
Let's now consider the lengths of the sides of these triangles formed by the rational
numbers.
For example, if we consider a triangle having vertices at the points 5, negative 1 and 7,
so remember, they're just sitting inside a jello, so 5 might be here and negative 1
might be here and 7 might be here, it's all mixed up, well, then the lengths of the sides
are the distances between these three numbers.
Well, using our usual absolute value, we can figure out the distances.
So to find the distance between 5 and negative 1, we look at the absolute value of 5 minus
negative 1, which equals 6.
To find the distance between 5 and 7, we look at the absolute value of 5 minus 7, which
would yield 2.
And finally, to find the last length of the last side, we would look at the distance between
negative 1 and 7, and we'd see that that distance would be 8.
Now, notice that the image that we're looking at here is really not drawn to scale, since
we know that with the usual absolute value, the rational numbers do line up perfectly on
the real number line.
So we'd see negative 1, 5, 7, and in fact, you can even check and see that the far length
is 8, which does equal 2 plus 6.
So in fact, the triangle in some sense collapses down.
But let's not worry about the image itself, let's just think abstractly.
Now we can just look at those three lengths and notice that each side has a different
length.
In other words, this is an example of a scalene triangle.
We call a triangle whose three sides have three different lengths.
Well, let's now consider the exact same triangle, but now measure the lengths using the three
attic absolute value rather than our usual familiar one.
Well, the lengths measured three adequately are, well, between 5 and negative 1, we would
see the three attic absolute value of 5 minus negative 1, which would be 6.
And what's the three attic absolute value of 6?
Well, 6 is 2 times 3, one factor of 3.
We take the reciprocal of that, so we see that that distance is going to be 1 third.
For the next length, we take the difference between 5 and 7 and take the three attic absolute
value.
That's going to be the three attic absolute value of negative 2.
Well, negative 2 has no factors of 3 in it.
And so, in fact, there we see that the three attic absolute value of negative 2 equals
1.
And what about the last length?
Well, we're looking for the distance between negative 1 and 7.
That would be negative 1 minus 7, which equals negative 8, and the three attic absolute value
of negative 8 would equal 1, since there's no factors of 3 in the number negative 8.
Again, we notice that this image is not drawn to scale, but let's not worry about the image.
Let's look at the actual numerical values, which we have precisely.
In this case, however, we see that two sides have actually equal lengths.
Thus, this three attic triangle is isosceles, the name we give triangles that have at least
two side lengths that are equal.
In fact, more generally, any triangle formed by three rational numbers will be an isosceles
triangle when the lengths of the sides are measured with any peatic absolute value.
Let's illustrate this amazing fact with another example to see this again in action.
This time, let's consider a triangle that has its vertices at 0, 3, and 12, again in
our number jello.
So, there's three points.
We've got a 0, a 3, and a 12.
There's swimming around in the jello, locked in there.
If we measure the lengths of the sides three adequately, what do we see?
Well, between 3 and 0, we see 3 minus 0, which is 3, three adequately, that's one-third.
Between 12 and 3, we measure that distance, and we see 9, 12 minus 3 is 9, three adequately,
that's one-ninth, since 9 is 3 times 3.
We take the reciprocal.
The final length, the distance between 12 and 0 would be, well, 12 minus 0 is just 12,
and the three attic absolute value of 12, well, let's see, 12 is 2 times 2 times 3.
There's one factor of 3, and so I see that this would have three attic absolute value
a third, and look again, we see that two lengths have the same measure, in this case, one-third.
So again, we see that two sides have equal lengths.
Now this is very, very counterintuitive and extremely hard to digest that all number triangles
are isosceles when measured using these peatic absolute value.
Really, really hard to swallow.
Really much harder to digest than the Jell-O itself, but a beautiful fact to try to wrap
our minds around.
What we're witnessing here is that these new, more arithmetic, peatic absolute values place
a simpler and more symmetric geometric structure on the rational numbers than the structure
inherited by the usual absolute value.
Again, we see this wonderful recurring theme that what first appears standard is really
unusual, and what first appeared to be exotic is really the norm, because remember that out
of all the infinitely many absolute values on the rational numbers, there's only one
usual one that we've seen in school, and then the infinitude of what remains is, in fact,
are these peatic ones.
And so what we see here is that the scaling triangles are now the peculiar ones in light
of the fact that all the other absolute values give rise to isosceles triangles.
So it really forces us to rethink what is familiar, and we think the norm, because within
the numerical context we see that's really the exception.
Well, we'll now discover that just as we saw with the usual absolute value in the previous
lecture when we built the real numbers, the rational numbers still have holes when we
measure distance with these peatic absolute values.
Let's look at an example of a peatic Cauchy sequence.
In other words, a sequence of rational numbers that are getting closer and closer to each
other when measured with the peatic absolute value, but are not heading toward any rational
number as a limiting value.
Now this is going to look very, very strange.
I want to warn you right out of the get-go, so I want to warm up to it by considering
a very weird-looking sum of numbers.
It's going to be an endless sum of numbers, it's going to look very peculiar.
Let's keep an open mind together.
So I want to consider the endless sum that begins 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed
plus 3 to the fourth plus 3 to the fifth, and so on endlessly.
Now of course we look at this, and it appears that this sum equals infinity, since the terms
are getting bigger and bigger forever.
But how are we measuring size?
Suppose we're using the periodic absolute value.
Then the terms are actually getting smaller and smaller.
In fact they're approaching zero.
For example, look at the term 3 to the fourth power, which equals 81.
Its periodic absolute value would be its reciprocal, 181, which you could see is very, very small.
Well while this is not at all obvious, let me just say that when measured theoretically,
our theorists can prove that this sum in fact is heading toward a number.
Well which number is it?
Well we can now apply the same idea we used to show that the decimal number, 0.99999 forever
equals 1.
If we adopt that same strategy, we can figure out what this sum is actually approaching.
So let's call this sum S, so we give it a name.
So S equals 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed plus 3 to the fourth and so on forever.
And now our trick will be to multiply both sides of this by 3.
Now on the left hand side we'll be left with 3S because we multiply S by 3, we get 3 times
S.
But what happens on the right hand side?
Well we have to multiply every term in the sum by 3.
When we multiply the 1 by 3, we get 3.
So in some sense we can line up that 3 underneath the 3 we have above.
When we multiply the second term which is 3 by 3, we now get 3 squared.
And 3 squared multiplied by 3 gives us 3 cubed.
And 3 cubed multiplied by 3 gives us 3 to the fourth.
What we notice is that basically the role of each term sort of shifts down by 1.
And so once we shift down, we see that they line up perfectly over their counterparts
above.
If we now subtract the two equations, what do we see?
But we see that endless list of powers of 3 cancel out because they line up perfectly
forever since there's no last term on either list.
But we do have that 1 on the top and 1 minus 0 is 1.
And then I see S and I'm subtracting 3S.
Well S minus 3S equals negative 2 times S.
So I have negative 2S equals 1.
And so if we solve, we could just divide both sides by negative 2 and we see that S equals
negative 1 half.
Well that is, when we measure closeness with a triadic absolute value, we see the very
disturbing fact that negative 1 half equals 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed plus
3 to the fourth plus 3 to the fifth and so on forever.
Well this equation is so disturbing to us and counterintuitive that it seems totally
impossible.
It just feels wrong because our intuition with distance between numbers is so firmly
planted in the real number line and the usual absolute value.
Which by the way, if we use the usual absolute value, indeed that previous expression is
complete nonsense.
But the moment we think about the real numbers and we think about the number 1 plus 3 plus
9 and so forth, we see that list going out this way.
It's hard to imagine that that list is actually approaching the number negative 1 half which
is over here.
Well the moment we look on the number line, then we're assuming we're using the usual
absolute value.
We have to free ourselves in some sense from the shackles of the real number line and let
our minds adrift to different notions of absolute values.
When we use the triadic absolute values, nothing lines up.
With the triadic actually absolute value, that equation is both provably correct and
believe it or not sensible.
Now how is that possible?
Well in the triadic jello, when we add 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed and so
forth, all those numbers are getting closer and closer to negative a half.
So remember in the jello where the points are sort of frozen in space, what we're seeing
is that if we take 1 and then add it to 3 and then add it to 3 squared and add it to
3 cubed and so forth, what we're heading toward is the number in the jello that happens
to be negative a half.
Well just to see this fact, let's just consider the sum 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared.
In other words, let's just truncate that sum, not consider the endless list, but instead
just consider up to 3 squared.
Well 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared is just 1 plus 3 plus 9, which equals 13.
Well let's see how close 13 is to this target negative a half, 3 adequately.
So we look at 13 minus negative a half and measure that difference 3 adequately to see
the distance between the two.
Well 13 minus negative a half is 13 plus a half and 13 plus a half is the same thing
as 26 halves plus 1 half, which is 27 halves.
Well what's the triadic absolute value of 27 halves?
The denominator is 2, has no powers of 3 at all, 27 is a power of 3 and so 27 halves has
triadic absolute value equal to 127th.
So look how close 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared is to the number negative a half.
They're within 127th of each other when measured 3 adequately.
And so in fact, if you continue this process and let the sum drift off endlessly, we actually
hit negative 1 half in that limiting factor, limiting case.
So really counterintuitive, it takes an awful long time to make this sensible, but we see
that it really is correct in this context.
Well by the same reasoning, we could see individual terms in this endless sum.
Let's consider 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus 3 to the 8th plus 3 to the 16th
plus 3 to the 32nd plus 3 to the 64th and so on.
Notice that the exponents here are doubling each time.
Well notice that each of these terms, in fact, are again getting smaller and smaller and
heading towards 0, 3 adequately.
Just as with the previous example, if we look at the successive finite truncations of the
sum, then we'd see the numbers 3 and then 3 plus 3 squared and then 3 plus 3 squared
plus 3 to the 4th and then 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus 3 to the 8th and so
on.
And in the eyes of the triadic absolute value, these numbers are actually getting closer
and closer to each other.
For example, what's the triadic distance between the 4th and the 5th numbers on this
list?
Well if we subtract them, we see that all the terms cancel except that last term, 3
to the 16th.
And so what's the triadic absolute value of 3 to the 16th?
Well it's 1 over 3 to the 16th, which is a really tiny number.
So the difference in those two numbers are very small.
Those two numbers are very close together, 3 adequately.
Well in fact, these numbers form what's called a triadic Cauchy sequence, a list of numbers
that continue to get closer and closer to each other when measured triatically.
Well as with the Cauchy sequences that we saw in the previous lecture, we would like
this Cauchy sequence of numbers to head toward a target, to head toward a number.
But unfortunately, because the exponents on the 3s are doubling each time, this sum is
not equal to a rational number or even a complex number.
The algebra trick that we used to show that the previous sum equaled negative one-half
is not going to work here.
This fact means that we need to extend our notion of number so that all three attic Cauchy
sequences converge.
In other words, formally declare that the sum 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus
3 to the 8th plus 3 to the 16th plus 3 to the 32nd plus 3 to the 64th and so forth,
let's just call that a number, just like Weierstrauss did with the infinitely long decimal expansions.
We just call this a number.
This in fact is a new irrational number.
Well, this new irrational number is analogous in some sense to one of the irrational real
numbers that we actually found in lecture 10.
The decimal that begins 0.101, 001, 0001, 0001, and so forth, remember, we kept adding longer
and longer runs of zeros.
Well, here we're having a doubling the exponent each time is the corresponding idea to the
number we saw from lecture 10.
But our new irrational number is not part of the real number line and in fact it doesn't
have a decimal expansion.
Thus we see that if we consider the rational numbers and now measure closeness with a
piatic absolute value, then we again see that we're faced with holes, points in which fractions
are bunching up around, like going around a drain, but the target itself is not a fraction.
When we fill in these holes using the usual absolute value, as in the previous lecture,
then we extended our notion of number and discovered the irrational real numbers.
In this piatic context, if we fill in these new holes using a piatic absolute value, then
we extend our notion of number and discover new irrational numbers such as 3 plus 3 squared
plus 3 to the fourth plus 3 to the eighth plus 3 to the sixteenth plus 3 to the 32nd
and so on forever.
This new collection of numbers is not the collection of real numbers nor the collection
of complex numbers and neither resides on a line or even on a plane.
This new collection of numbers is known as the collection of piatic numbers.
Now if you remember from my gelatin vision of number, only the tiny bits of fruit, the
fractions suspended in the jello were considered numbers.
Now in essence, we're extending our notion of number so that we can view the jello itself
together with the points of fruit as the entire collection of piatic numbers.
We filled in all the space.
These new numbers are so strange upon first inspection and so counterintuitive that it's
difficult for us to see these infinite looking things as numbers.
Look, we're adding 1 plus 3 plus 3 to the fourth and so on.
It looks infinite.
It's hard to imagine that this really is a sensible notion of number.
Well, once again, we see that as we travel further into the outer depths of mathematics,
our notion of number is challenged.
Now imagine how the Pythagoreans must have felt when their notion of God given natural
numbers and their ratios were challenged with the discovery of the square root of 2.
They couldn't fathom that quantity as number.
Just as here, it's very difficult for us to fathom a number like 3 plus 3 squared plus
3 to the fourth plus 3 to the eighth plus 3 to the sixteenth and so forth forever as
a number.
And yet it is.
And it's our job to see if we could somehow modify our view of number to embrace such a
strange looking object.
These strange piatic numbers provide a purely abstract arithmetical notion of number that
is extremely useful in the study of integers, the prime numbers, algebraic numbers, and
even transcendental numbers.
In fact, the piatic numbers were artfully applied by Princeton mathematician Andrew Wiles, who
in the mid-1990s provided a proof of the so-called Fermat's Last Theorem, a 350-year-old open
question about the natural numbers left unanswered by the famous French mathematician Pierre de
Fermat and was one of the most famous long-standing questions in mathematics.
Piatic numbers played an important role in that final solution.
Thus, we see that these foreign and strange numbers allow us to actually better understand
our familiar numbers.
It might appear as though these strange and foreign piatic numbers have no utility within
our everyday world or in any universe beyond the abstract universe of number, although
again this new idea of number might enable us to better empathize with the struggle that
the Pythagoreans had with irrational numbers.
However, this lack of practical utility of the piatic numbers in our real world appears
to be an outdated point of view.
Recently, physicists have used piatic numbers to create new models of space-time and new
theories of string theory and quantum mechanics.
So we see that these foreign numbers might help us better understand the nature of our
real universe.
They certainly challenge our notion of what numbers should mean and what numbers should
look like because at first blush, these objects seem totally infinite.
In fact, there's a sensible, reasonable notion of number right behind all this theory and
these numbers that look strange at first in reality are just as ironclad as all the numbers
we've seen up to this point.
