So we look at 13 minus negative a half and measure that difference 3 adequately to see
the distance between the two.
Well 13 minus negative a half is 13 plus a half and 13 plus a half is the same thing
as 26 halves plus 1 half, which is 27 halves.
Well what's the triadic absolute value of 27 halves?
The denominator is 2, has no powers of 3 at all, 27 is a power of 3 and so 27 halves has
triadic absolute value equal to 127th.
So look how close 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared is to the number negative a half.
They're within 127th of each other when measured 3 adequately.
And so in fact, if you continue this process and let the sum drift off endlessly, we actually
hit negative 1 half in that limiting factor, limiting case.
So really counterintuitive, it takes an awful long time to make this sensible, but we see
that it really is correct in this context.
Well by the same reasoning, we could see individual terms in this endless sum.
Let's consider 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus 3 to the 8th plus 3 to the 16th
plus 3 to the 32nd plus 3 to the 64th and so on.
Notice that the exponents here are doubling each time.
Well notice that each of these terms, in fact, are again getting smaller and smaller and
heading towards 0, 3 adequately.
Just as with the previous example, if we look at the successive finite truncations of the
sum, then we'd see the numbers 3 and then 3 plus 3 squared and then 3 plus 3 squared
plus 3 to the 4th and then 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 to the 4th plus 3 to the 8th and so
on.
And in the eyes of the triadic absolute value, these numbers are actually getting closer
and closer to each other.
For example, what's the triadic distance between the 4th and the 5th numbers on this
list?
Well if we subtract them, we see that all the terms cancel except that last term, 3
to the 16th.
And so what's the triadic absolute value of 3 to the 16th?
Well it's 1 over 3 to the 16th, which is a really tiny number.
So the difference in those two numbers are very small.
Those two numbers are very close together, 3 adequately.
Well in fact, these numbers form what's called a triadic Cauchy sequence, a list of numbers
that continue to get closer and closer to each other when measured triatically.
Well as with the Cauchy sequences that we saw in the previous lecture, we would like
this Cauchy sequence of numbers to head toward a target, to head toward a number.
But unfortunately, because the exponents on the 3s are doubling each time, this sum is
not equal to a rational number or even a complex number.
