forever since there's no last term on either list.
But we do have that 1 on the top and 1 minus 0 is 1.
And then I see S and I'm subtracting 3S.
Well S minus 3S equals negative 2 times S.
So I have negative 2S equals 1.
And so if we solve, we could just divide both sides by negative 2 and we see that S equals
negative 1 half.
Well that is, when we measure closeness with a triadic absolute value, we see the very
disturbing fact that negative 1 half equals 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed plus
3 to the fourth plus 3 to the fifth and so on forever.
Well this equation is so disturbing to us and counterintuitive that it seems totally
impossible.
It just feels wrong because our intuition with distance between numbers is so firmly
planted in the real number line and the usual absolute value.
Which by the way, if we use the usual absolute value, indeed that previous expression is
complete nonsense.
But the moment we think about the real numbers and we think about the number 1 plus 3 plus
9 and so forth, we see that list going out this way.
It's hard to imagine that that list is actually approaching the number negative 1 half which
is over here.
Well the moment we look on the number line, then we're assuming we're using the usual
absolute value.
We have to free ourselves in some sense from the shackles of the real number line and let
our minds adrift to different notions of absolute values.
When we use the triadic absolute values, nothing lines up.
With the triadic actually absolute value, that equation is both provably correct and
believe it or not sensible.
Now how is that possible?
Well in the triadic jello, when we add 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed and so
forth, all those numbers are getting closer and closer to negative a half.
So remember in the jello where the points are sort of frozen in space, what we're seeing
is that if we take 1 and then add it to 3 and then add it to 3 squared and add it to
3 cubed and so forth, what we're heading toward is the number in the jello that happens
to be negative a half.
Well just to see this fact, let's just consider the sum 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared.
In other words, let's just truncate that sum, not consider the endless list, but instead
just consider up to 3 squared.
Well 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared is just 1 plus 3 plus 9, which equals 13.
Well let's see how close 13 is to this target negative a half, 3 adequately.
