number as a limiting value.
Now this is going to look very, very strange.
I want to warn you right out of the get-go, so I want to warm up to it by considering
a very weird-looking sum of numbers.
It's going to be an endless sum of numbers, it's going to look very peculiar.
Let's keep an open mind together.
So I want to consider the endless sum that begins 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed
plus 3 to the fourth plus 3 to the fifth, and so on endlessly.
Now of course we look at this, and it appears that this sum equals infinity, since the terms
are getting bigger and bigger forever.
But how are we measuring size?
Suppose we're using the periodic absolute value.
Then the terms are actually getting smaller and smaller.
In fact they're approaching zero.
For example, look at the term 3 to the fourth power, which equals 81.
Its periodic absolute value would be its reciprocal, 181, which you could see is very, very small.
Well while this is not at all obvious, let me just say that when measured theoretically,
our theorists can prove that this sum in fact is heading toward a number.
Well which number is it?
Well we can now apply the same idea we used to show that the decimal number, 0.99999 forever
equals 1.
If we adopt that same strategy, we can figure out what this sum is actually approaching.
So let's call this sum S, so we give it a name.
So S equals 1 plus 3 plus 3 squared plus 3 cubed plus 3 to the fourth and so on forever.
And now our trick will be to multiply both sides of this by 3.
Now on the left hand side we'll be left with 3S because we multiply S by 3, we get 3 times
S.
But what happens on the right hand side?
Well we have to multiply every term in the sum by 3.
When we multiply the 1 by 3, we get 3.
So in some sense we can line up that 3 underneath the 3 we have above.
When we multiply the second term which is 3 by 3, we now get 3 squared.
And 3 squared multiplied by 3 gives us 3 cubed.
And 3 cubed multiplied by 3 gives us 3 to the fourth.
What we notice is that basically the role of each term sort of shifts down by 1.
And so once we shift down, we see that they line up perfectly over their counterparts
above.
If we now subtract the two equations, what do we see?
But we see that endless list of powers of 3 cancel out because they line up perfectly
