of 90 by first noticing that if we factor 90, we see 2 times 3 times 3 times 5.
So we see two factors of 3, which equals 9.
We take the reciprocal and discover that the Piatic absolute value of 90 will be declared
one-ninth.
Remember, the more factors of 3 a number has, the smaller the Piatic absolute value will
be.
Because we have such a Piatic absolute value for every single prime number P, and because
we have shown that there are infinitely many prime numbers, we can now conclude that there
are in fact infinitely many different absolute values on the rational numbers.
Well, these new absolute values were discovered by the extremely talented German number theorist
Kurt Hensel in 1897.
Now, once we have infinitely many absolute values, we've gone from the usual one to
infinitely many, we of course wonder, are there other absolute values?
Well the amazing answer is no.
In the 1930s, Ukrainian mathematician Alexander Ostrowski proved that the only absolute values
on the rational numbers are those that are equivalent to the usual one that we've always
used in school, or the familiar one, or one of these new Piatic ones.
In other words, the only measures of distance, either arithmetic or using a standard ruler
on the rational numbers that satisfy the rules of being an absolute value, are precisely
the familiar one and these new Piatic ones.
That's it.
There are no others.
Really amazing.
Well, using these Piatic absolute values, we can measure the distance between two rational
numbers.
In other words, the distance between two fractions.
Let's look at an example.
If we fix the prime number to be three again, then the triadic distance between five and
two is just the triadic absolute value of five minus two.
Well, five minus two equals three and the triadic absolute value of three is one-third.
We take the reciprocal.
And so, theoretically, five and two are relatively close to each other when measured through
this absolute value.
However, the distance between zero and one-sixth is what?
Well, it would be the triadic absolute value of zero minus a sixth, which is just the triadic
absolute value of negative one divided by the triadic absolute value of six.
Well, the triadic absolute value of negative one, there's no factors of three in there,
so it's just one.
And the triadic absolute value of six, well, six is two times three, one factor of three,
