Let's illustrate this amazing fact with another example to see this again in action.
This time, let's consider a triangle that has its vertices at 0, 3, and 12, again in
our number jello.
So, there's three points.
We've got a 0, a 3, and a 12.
There's swimming around in the jello, locked in there.
If we measure the lengths of the sides three adequately, what do we see?
Well, between 3 and 0, we see 3 minus 0, which is 3, three adequately, that's one-third.
Between 12 and 3, we measure that distance, and we see 9, 12 minus 3 is 9, three adequately,
that's one-ninth, since 9 is 3 times 3.
We take the reciprocal.
The final length, the distance between 12 and 0 would be, well, 12 minus 0 is just 12,
and the three attic absolute value of 12, well, let's see, 12 is 2 times 2 times 3.
There's one factor of 3, and so I see that this would have three attic absolute value
a third, and look again, we see that two lengths have the same measure, in this case, one-third.
So again, we see that two sides have equal lengths.
Now this is very, very counterintuitive and extremely hard to digest that all number triangles
are isosceles when measured using these peatic absolute value.
Really, really hard to swallow.
Really much harder to digest than the Jell-O itself, but a beautiful fact to try to wrap
our minds around.
What we're witnessing here is that these new, more arithmetic, peatic absolute values place
a simpler and more symmetric geometric structure on the rational numbers than the structure
inherited by the usual absolute value.
Again, we see this wonderful recurring theme that what first appears standard is really
unusual, and what first appeared to be exotic is really the norm, because remember that out
of all the infinitely many absolute values on the rational numbers, there's only one
usual one that we've seen in school, and then the infinitude of what remains is, in fact,
are these peatic ones.
And so what we see here is that the scaling triangles are now the peculiar ones in light
of the fact that all the other absolute values give rise to isosceles triangles.
So it really forces us to rethink what is familiar, and we think the norm, because within
the numerical context we see that's really the exception.
Well, we'll now discover that just as we saw with the usual absolute value in the previous
lecture when we built the real numbers, the rational numbers still have holes when we
measure distance with these peatic absolute values.
Let's look at an example of a peatic Cauchy sequence.
In other words, a sequence of rational numbers that are getting closer and closer to each
other when measured with the peatic absolute value, but are not heading toward any rational
