Many of us today might find it difficult to empathize with the Pythagorean's resistance
in accepting the notion that the counterintuitive irrationals should be considered as numbers.
Here we'll face numbers that will be as counterintuitive to us today as the irrational numbers were
to the Pythagoreans several thousand years ago.
Using an entirely new arithmetical measure of distance involving prime numbers called
the Piatic Absolute Value, we'll discover a very unusual world of numbers.
This modern perspective first discovered by Kurt Hensel in 1897 allowed for many important
advances in the abstract theory of numbers.
We'll see, for example, that when measured with this new notion of distance, all triangles
are isosceles.
We'll see a way of expressing rational numbers in a Piatic expansion that has reflections
of the different bases discussed in Lecture 9, but in fact will be fundamentally different.
While many of our previous observations about numbers will carry over into this new context,
there will be several dramatic differences.
We'll see that armed with this new measure of distance, the rational numbers still have
holes.
In other words, missing values.
Here as we plug up the holes and expand our notion of numbers, we do not build the real
numbers.
Instead, we produce a collection of very strange looking numbers.
These so-called Piatic numbers will appear as totally abstract consequences of arithmetic
with no meaning in our physical world.
However, we'll briefly describe how these seemingly unnatural numbers are, in fact, and
their analysis, in fact, are at the core to describe some delicate ideas in quantum physics.
Thus, on the one hand, we see again how nature fits, bringing together worlds that seem totally
unrelated upon first blush, and on the other hand, we see the great danger in believing
that at any moment in our history, we've captured all the numbers.
Well, let's open what will be the very, very strange discussion of numbers by first revisiting
the arithmetic absolute values from the previous lecture.
There we saw a new absolute value called the Piatic absolute value.
First, we select a prime number which we'll call P. Remember, the prime numbers are 2,
3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and so forth, the numbers that can't be broken down to the product
of two smaller natural numbers.
We then define the Piatic absolute value, which we write as two vertical bars with a
little subscript P, and we define it on the integers by declaring that, first of all,
if you plug in zero, the Piatic absolute value of zero will be declared to be zero.
And if n is a natural number, then the Piatic absolute value of n will equal the reciprocal
of the largest multiple of P that appears when n is written as a product of prime numbers.
For example, if we fix the prime to be 3, then we can find the Piatic absolute value
