To find the distance between 5 and 7, we look at the absolute value of 5 minus 7, which
would yield 2.
And finally, to find the last length of the last side, we would look at the distance between
negative 1 and 7, and we'd see that that distance would be 8.
Now, notice that the image that we're looking at here is really not drawn to scale, since
we know that with the usual absolute value, the rational numbers do line up perfectly on
the real number line.
So we'd see negative 1, 5, 7, and in fact, you can even check and see that the far length
is 8, which does equal 2 plus 6.
So in fact, the triangle in some sense collapses down.
But let's not worry about the image itself, let's just think abstractly.
Now we can just look at those three lengths and notice that each side has a different
length.
In other words, this is an example of a scalene triangle.
We call a triangle whose three sides have three different lengths.
Well, let's now consider the exact same triangle, but now measure the lengths using the three
attic absolute value rather than our usual familiar one.
Well, the lengths measured three adequately are, well, between 5 and negative 1, we would
see the three attic absolute value of 5 minus negative 1, which would be 6.
And what's the three attic absolute value of 6?
Well, 6 is 2 times 3, one factor of 3.
We take the reciprocal of that, so we see that that distance is going to be 1 third.
For the next length, we take the difference between 5 and 7 and take the three attic absolute
value.
That's going to be the three attic absolute value of negative 2.
Well, negative 2 has no factors of 3 in it.
And so, in fact, there we see that the three attic absolute value of negative 2 equals
1.
And what about the last length?
Well, we're looking for the distance between negative 1 and 7.
That would be negative 1 minus 7, which equals negative 8, and the three attic absolute value
of negative 8 would equal 1, since there's no factors of 3 in the number negative 8.
Again, we notice that this image is not drawn to scale, but let's not worry about the image.
Let's look at the actual numerical values, which we have precisely.
In this case, however, we see that two sides have actually equal lengths.
Thus, this three attic triangle is isosceles, the name we give triangles that have at least
two side lengths that are equal.
In fact, more generally, any triangle formed by three rational numbers will be an isosceles
triangle when the lengths of the sides are measured with any peatic absolute value.
