Well, once again, we see that as we travel further into the outer depths of mathematics,
our notion of number is challenged.
Now imagine how the Pythagoreans must have felt when their notion of God given natural
numbers and their ratios were challenged with the discovery of the square root of 2.
They couldn't fathom that quantity as number.
Just as here, it's very difficult for us to fathom a number like 3 plus 3 squared plus
3 to the fourth plus 3 to the eighth plus 3 to the sixteenth and so forth forever as
a number.
And yet it is.
And it's our job to see if we could somehow modify our view of number to embrace such a
strange looking object.
These strange piatic numbers provide a purely abstract arithmetical notion of number that
is extremely useful in the study of integers, the prime numbers, algebraic numbers, and
even transcendental numbers.
In fact, the piatic numbers were artfully applied by Princeton mathematician Andrew Wiles, who
in the mid-1990s provided a proof of the so-called Fermat's Last Theorem, a 350-year-old open
question about the natural numbers left unanswered by the famous French mathematician Pierre de
Fermat and was one of the most famous long-standing questions in mathematics.
Piatic numbers played an important role in that final solution.
Thus, we see that these foreign and strange numbers allow us to actually better understand
our familiar numbers.
It might appear as though these strange and foreign piatic numbers have no utility within
our everyday world or in any universe beyond the abstract universe of number, although
again this new idea of number might enable us to better empathize with the struggle that
the Pythagoreans had with irrational numbers.
However, this lack of practical utility of the piatic numbers in our real world appears
to be an outdated point of view.
Recently, physicists have used piatic numbers to create new models of space-time and new
theories of string theory and quantum mechanics.
So we see that these foreign numbers might help us better understand the nature of our
real universe.
They certainly challenge our notion of what numbers should mean and what numbers should
look like because at first blush, these objects seem totally infinite.
In fact, there's a sensible, reasonable notion of number right behind all this theory and
these numbers that look strange at first in reality are just as ironclad as all the numbers
we've seen up to this point.
