As we noted in lecture three, sometime within the fourth and first century BCE, the religious sect known as the Jains in India,
the group that in fact might have inspired Pythagoras to explore numbers, studied the mathematics of number extensively,
and actually believed that there were many different types of infinity.
They argued that, in fact, on the number line, for example, there would be a positive infinity, a negative infinity,
there was the infinity of area of the plane, and they even considered time a type of infinity.
So there were four types of infinity in the Jana view of infinity.
In a work published in 1638, Galileo observed that the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth,
could be placed in a one-to-one correspondence with the perfect squares, those are the numbers one, four, nine, sixteen, twenty-five, and so forth.
Now let's just think to see this correspondence that he came up with. Let's view those perfect squares as red numbers so we can just distinguish them from the numbers that are the natural numbers.
So his correspondence was, he paired the number one with the perfect square one, he paired the number two with the perfect square four,
the number three was paired with the red nine, the number four was paired with the red sixteen, and so forth.
So here, and here by the way, a double arrow just indicates the one-to-one pairing, how we're pairing up the collections.
So thus he observed that an infinite collection, in this case the natural numbers, had been put in a one-to-one correspondence with a proper sub-collection of itself, namely just the perfect squares.
Now notice that Galileo's observation ran counter to the sensible sounding ancient common notion of Euclid, which we actually discussed in Lecture 12 that stated that the whole is greater than the part.
Well, he thought that this seeming paradox was just one of the challenges provoked by infinity. In fact, Galileo wrote that infinity by its very nature is incomprehensible to us, so he actually viewed that maybe the view of infinity should be that which is incomprehensible.
Well, in order to make infinity comprehensible to us, we must first acknowledge that infinity is not a number, and thus we cannot count infinite collections.
The 19th century German mathematician Georg Cantor was the first to adopt this point of view and place the notion of infinity on a firm foundation.
Recall that we first met Cantor in Lecture 11, in which we examined his Cantor set. Remember that dusting of numbers on the number line between 0 and 1 that formed a beautiful self-similar fractal collection of numbers.
There we also learned that he required a very precise view of infinity in order to further pursue his work in function theory and in number theory.
His revolutionary ideas were grounded in a very simple reality. We cannot use ordinary counting methods to understand infinity.
In order to inspire Cantor's insight, let's return to our understanding of 5.
How would we know that the number of fingers on our left hand equals the number of fingers on our right hand?
Well, this seems like a ridiculous task. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Both are 5, we're done.
Well, suppose that we weren't able to count up to 5. We've seen in previous lectures that some cultures counted 1, 2, 3, many.
So suppose you couldn't count to 5. How would we know if in fact there are more fingers on this hand than this hand, more digits on this hand than this hand, or if in fact each hand is equally digitized?
Well, how would we do that? We would just do a very natural thing. We would just do this.
We would pair them up in a one-to-one fashion. And notice that I can see that every finger is associated with exactly one and only one finger from the other hand and vice versa.
And there's no finger left untouched. Therefore, I see that the number of fingers on one hand is the same as the number of fingers on the other hand, even though I have no idea what that number is.
Well, I want us to recall from lecture 2 that this one-to-one pairing, this comparing quantities rather than counting, was humankind's first attempt to grasp ideas of quantities.
Cantor's tremendous insight was that this ancient basic idea was the key to unlocking the mysteries of infinity.
So it's wonderful that in our course we come full circle back to the very dawn of counting, and that will take us out to the frontiers beyond into infinity.
Well, to formalize this idea, we want to say that a one-to-one correspondence between two collections is a way of pairing the elements of the two collections
