The letter Q might stand for quotients.
But actually, I'm not sure about that, and I'm not sure if anyone really knows for sure.
But the tradition in mathematics is to use a capital letter Q to denote the rational numbers.
Well, does the collection of natural numbers have the same cardinality as the collection of rational numbers?
Now, the answer surprised many people.
Because if you think about it, you'd say, well, the rationals must be much larger
because between any two counting numbers, like, for example, one to two,
there are infinitely many fractions, as we've seen.
In fact, we prove that the fractions are dense, so they're infinitely right in between there.
And so this would look like almost taking infinity and multiplying it by infinity.
We took half infinity, it didn't change the size.
We doubled infinity, it didn't change the size.
Now, in some sense, we're taking infinity and multiplying it by infinity.
That must change the size, wouldn't you think?
Well, the surprise is that these two collections, in fact, have the same cardinality.
In other words, we can find a one-to-one correspondence between all the rational numbers and all the natural numbers.
Now, this is a little bit tricky.
And so to inspire this particular one-to-one pairing, let's just first consider a cloud of dots.
So we had this cloud of dots, and the question is, how would we count how many dots we have?
Well, what we could do, of course, is what we've done when we were kids.
We just would connect the dots.
And as we connect the dots with little line segments, we could write a number at each dot.
But connecting the dots makes sure that we hit every dot and hit every dot exactly one.
So we count.
For example, I do it right now.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
So I see that we actually have ten dots.
And notice that those dots, those lines connecting them, sort of form a snake.
And that snake actually is snaking through these dots and shows us that we actually have a one-to-one pairing between the numbers from one to ten and the dots.
Right?
We see that every dot was hit and we didn't count any dot twice.
So this snake helped us.
