And so when he was there, when the parents were there, of course, I had to embarrass
poor Joe and say to the mother, by the way, we talked about infinity a month or so ago,
I asked what the definition was and Joe said it was a mother's love.
And as you can imagine, his mother was beaming.
So it was a great story.
The 18th century French writer Voltaire once wrote, the only way to comprehend what mathematicians
mean by infinity is to contemplate the extent of human stupidity.
Well, perhaps Einstein's point of view was inspired by Voltaire.
But anyway, I guess we will walk into the extent of human stupidity because we're about
to take on this vast notion of infinity and try to make some sense of it.
So given these thoughts, I mean, how can infinity be rigorously defined or understood?
Maybe by definition we should say that infinity is that which is beyond human comprehension.
Well we'll see that these vague ideas of infinity can be replaced by a very rigorous notion
which then can be analyzed as we analyze the numbers.
So let's begin our exploration by taking a look at some early ideas involving infinity.
As early as the 5th century BCE, scholars were contemplating infinity.
Around 450 BCE, Zeno considered paradoxes involving an infinite number of steps.
One such paradox was his argument to prove that motion is impossible and thus an illusion.
And he argued as follows, he considered an arrow that was going to be shot to a target.
And in order for the arrow to get from the archer to the target, it first must reach the half-way point.
Well, in order to reach the half-way point, it first has to reach half of that distance or a quarter of the way.
And in order to reach the quarter-way point, it has to reach half that distance, which is an eighth of the way, and so on.
And so as this goes on, what do we see?
Well, we see that the arrow must pass through infinitely many points in a finite amount of time,
which Zeno argued was impossible.
And thus he concluded that motion was merely an illusion.
Aristotle actually once wrote that which is in locomotion must arrive at the half-way stage before it arrives at the goal.
So again, we see getting to the half-way point is really an issue. How do we deal with that?
Well, this paradox was finally put to rest using the concepts of calculus, the rigorous mathematical study of motion.
In fact, Aristotle himself in the fourth century BCE concluded that infinity both existed and didn't exist.
He recognized that the natural numbers had no end, but also believed that an infinite object would not exist in the real world because it would be boundless.
And so you can see this dichotomy. In theory, it should exist, but does it exist in practice? And Aristotle struggled.
