Here, in the last part of our course, we'll journey beyond numbers and contemplate the
enormous question, what comes after we have exhausted all numbers?
We'll begin with a distinction between two basic types of number, ordinal and cardinal,
and then wonder how to extend these ideas past all numbers into the realm of the infinite.
Galileo wrestled with the infinite and in 1632 observed some perplexing paradoxes.
In 1851, a tract authored by Bernhard Abolzano first attempted to study infinite collections.
While others made contributions to this area, it was the pioneering and highly controversial
work of Georg Cantor in the late 1800s that laid the foundation for our understanding of infinity.
Cantor's realization was that counting infinite quantities leads us nowhere.
Instead, he returned to our ancient ancestors and their first notion of number he dared to compare.
Thus, we come full circle and revisit from the opening of this course the idea of a one to
one correspondence between two collections.
If the individual objects from two collections can be paired up in a one to one fashion,
we declare these two collections to have the same cardinality.
To illustrate this ancient idea within this abstract context, we'll consider several scenarios
in which we'll compare different infinite collections of numbers.
These examples will challenge our intuition and demonstrate that what we know about finite
collections might not carry over to infinity.
They'll also confirm one of our intuitively rock solid notions, infinity comes in just
one size, one unending size.
However, in the lecture that follows this one, we'll be forced to reconsider even this
intuitively sensible sounding opinion and yet again have the wonderful opportunity to
retrain our intuition.
Well, we open with the two most basic applications for numbers in our everyday lives.
We can place objects in a certain order and refer to them by their placement in this ordering
as first, second, third, fourth, and so on.
These numbers, first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and so on, are known as the
ordinal numbers because they're numbers that give order.
A different use for numbers is, as we've seen throughout history, as a means of enumerating,
in other words, counting the size of a collection.
These numbers, zero, one, two, three, and so forth, are known as cardinal numbers.
The number of elements in a collection is called the cardinality of that collection.
Now, both of these views of number can be extended to infinity.
In fact, there's been much study in what are called infinite ordinal and infinite cardinal
numbers, although numbers should really be in quotes.
These are some is referred to as transfinite numbers.
Here in the last part of our course, we'll explore infinite cardinal numbers.
Now, before moving on, this is a wonderful opportunity to challenge ourselves to ask,
what is our own definition of infinity?
What does infinity mean?
Well, while we think about what it means to us personally, I thought I would share with
you the thoughts of some others that came before us as they tried to wrap their minds
around this mysterious idea.
The 20th century British philosopher Bertrand Russell once wrote about how philosophers
themselves would talk about infinity.
He writes, if any philosopher had been asked for a definition of infinity, he might have
produced some unintelligible rigmarole, but he would certainly not have been able to give
a definition that had any meaning at all.
So here's the philosopher Bertrand Russell saying philosophers would have no idea.
The great 20th century German physicist Albert Einstein once wrote, two things are infinite,
the universe and human stupidity.
And I'm not sure about the universe.
Great quote.
The 15th century English statesman Thomas More once wrote, by confronting us with irreducible
mysteries that stretch our daily vision to include infinity, nature opens an inviting
and guiding path toward a spiritual life.
I once asked a class of mine at Williams, a math class, what was their notion of infinity
before we actually touched on the subject in depth.
And there was a student in the class whose name was Joe who raised his hand and said,
Infinity is a mother's love to which the entire class broke up in laughter and gales
of laughter.
And it was just a very funny moment.
And then about a month later, his parents actually came to visit him on campus and they actually
attended the class in which he was in, this math class.
And so when he was there, when the parents were there, of course, I had to embarrass
poor Joe and say to the mother, by the way, we talked about infinity a month or so ago,
I asked what the definition was and Joe said it was a mother's love.
And as you can imagine, his mother was beaming.
So it was a great story.
The 18th century French writer Voltaire once wrote, the only way to comprehend what mathematicians
mean by infinity is to contemplate the extent of human stupidity.
Well, perhaps Einstein's point of view was inspired by Voltaire.
But anyway, I guess we will walk into the extent of human stupidity because we're about
to take on this vast notion of infinity and try to make some sense of it.
So given these thoughts, I mean, how can infinity be rigorously defined or understood?
Maybe by definition we should say that infinity is that which is beyond human comprehension.
Well we'll see that these vague ideas of infinity can be replaced by a very rigorous notion
which then can be analyzed as we analyze the numbers.
So let's begin our exploration by taking a look at some early ideas involving infinity.
As early as the 5th century BCE, scholars were contemplating infinity.
Around 450 BCE, Zeno considered paradoxes involving an infinite number of steps.
One such paradox was his argument to prove that motion is impossible and thus an illusion.
And he argued as follows, he considered an arrow that was going to be shot to a target.
And in order for the arrow to get from the archer to the target, it first must reach the half-way point.
Well, in order to reach the half-way point, it first has to reach half of that distance or a quarter of the way.
And in order to reach the quarter-way point, it has to reach half that distance, which is an eighth of the way, and so on.
And so as this goes on, what do we see?
Well, we see that the arrow must pass through infinitely many points in a finite amount of time,
which Zeno argued was impossible.
And thus he concluded that motion was merely an illusion.
Aristotle actually once wrote that which is in locomotion must arrive at the half-way stage before it arrives at the goal.
So again, we see getting to the half-way point is really an issue. How do we deal with that?
Well, this paradox was finally put to rest using the concepts of calculus, the rigorous mathematical study of motion.
In fact, Aristotle himself in the fourth century BCE concluded that infinity both existed and didn't exist.
He recognized that the natural numbers had no end, but also believed that an infinite object would not exist in the real world because it would be boundless.
And so you can see this dichotomy. In theory, it should exist, but does it exist in practice? And Aristotle struggled.
As we noted in lecture three, sometime within the fourth and first century BCE, the religious sect known as the Jains in India,
the group that in fact might have inspired Pythagoras to explore numbers, studied the mathematics of number extensively,
and actually believed that there were many different types of infinity.
They argued that, in fact, on the number line, for example, there would be a positive infinity, a negative infinity,
there was the infinity of area of the plane, and they even considered time a type of infinity.
So there were four types of infinity in the Jana view of infinity.
In a work published in 1638, Galileo observed that the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth,
could be placed in a one-to-one correspondence with the perfect squares, those are the numbers one, four, nine, sixteen, twenty-five, and so forth.
Now let's just think to see this correspondence that he came up with. Let's view those perfect squares as red numbers so we can just distinguish them from the numbers that are the natural numbers.
So his correspondence was, he paired the number one with the perfect square one, he paired the number two with the perfect square four,
the number three was paired with the red nine, the number four was paired with the red sixteen, and so forth.
So here, and here by the way, a double arrow just indicates the one-to-one pairing, how we're pairing up the collections.
So thus he observed that an infinite collection, in this case the natural numbers, had been put in a one-to-one correspondence with a proper sub-collection of itself, namely just the perfect squares.
Now notice that Galileo's observation ran counter to the sensible sounding ancient common notion of Euclid, which we actually discussed in Lecture 12 that stated that the whole is greater than the part.
Well, he thought that this seeming paradox was just one of the challenges provoked by infinity. In fact, Galileo wrote that infinity by its very nature is incomprehensible to us, so he actually viewed that maybe the view of infinity should be that which is incomprehensible.
Well, in order to make infinity comprehensible to us, we must first acknowledge that infinity is not a number, and thus we cannot count infinite collections.
The 19th century German mathematician Georg Cantor was the first to adopt this point of view and place the notion of infinity on a firm foundation.
Recall that we first met Cantor in Lecture 11, in which we examined his Cantor set. Remember that dusting of numbers on the number line between 0 and 1 that formed a beautiful self-similar fractal collection of numbers.
There we also learned that he required a very precise view of infinity in order to further pursue his work in function theory and in number theory.
His revolutionary ideas were grounded in a very simple reality. We cannot use ordinary counting methods to understand infinity.
In order to inspire Cantor's insight, let's return to our understanding of 5.
How would we know that the number of fingers on our left hand equals the number of fingers on our right hand?
Well, this seems like a ridiculous task. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Both are 5, we're done.
Well, suppose that we weren't able to count up to 5. We've seen in previous lectures that some cultures counted 1, 2, 3, many.
So suppose you couldn't count to 5. How would we know if in fact there are more fingers on this hand than this hand, more digits on this hand than this hand, or if in fact each hand is equally digitized?
Well, how would we do that? We would just do a very natural thing. We would just do this.
We would pair them up in a one-to-one fashion. And notice that I can see that every finger is associated with exactly one and only one finger from the other hand and vice versa.
And there's no finger left untouched. Therefore, I see that the number of fingers on one hand is the same as the number of fingers on the other hand, even though I have no idea what that number is.
Well, I want us to recall from lecture 2 that this one-to-one pairing, this comparing quantities rather than counting, was humankind's first attempt to grasp ideas of quantities.
Cantor's tremendous insight was that this ancient basic idea was the key to unlocking the mysteries of infinity.
So it's wonderful that in our course we come full circle back to the very dawn of counting, and that will take us out to the frontiers beyond into infinity.
Well, to formalize this idea, we want to say that a one-to-one correspondence between two collections is a way of pairing the elements of the two collections
so that every element from the first collection is paired with exactly one element from the second collection,
and every element from the second collection is paired with exactly one element from the first collection, just like this.
Well, we say that two collections have the same cardinality if there's a one-to-one correspondence between the two collections.
That is, the collections are equally numerous. Informally, we're saying that they have the same size.
We don't want to say that they have the same number of elements because that won't work when we talk about infinite collections, so we say the same cardinality.
Well, it's easy to see that if finite collections have the same cardinality, then we could just simply count and we'd see that those counts would be equal.
One, two, three, four, five, one, two, three, four, five, they're equal.
But for infinite collections, we need to describe a one-to-one correspondence to verify the collections have the same cardinality.
So that's going to be our test. We see two collections. If we want to know if they're equally numerous or not, we have to find a one-to-one correspondence.
Well, let's now consider some examples to help solidify our intuition on infinity and this idea of the one-to-one correspondence.
Well, first, let's compare the natural numbers with just the even numbers.
In other words, we're moving now from the study of individual numbers to the study of the size of a collection and aggregate of numbers.
Now, we often use the capital letter N to denote the entire collection of natural numbers.
And so we'd write this as, formally, we'd say N equals, and then we'd have a brace, which is this curly type bracket.
And then we'd list one, two, three, four, and so forth, and then close the curly brace.
And the way you'd read that, the curly brace means a collection.
So we'd say in this case that N equals the collection of numbers one, two, three, four, and so on.
That's the collection, so N represents the entire aggregate.
Let's write capital E for the collection of all the even natural numbers.
That is, E will be the set, the collection of two, four, six, eight, and so forth, and we'd write it in a similar way.
Well, do these collections have the same cardinality?
Well, at first it appears not, since the even numbers are only half of the entire collection of natural numbers.
But we can't be fooled by such logical sounding distractions.
Here there's only one measure.
Does there exist a one-to-one pairing or not?
Well, let's try to find a one-to-one pairing between the numbers of these two collections.
So we take the number one from the natural numbers, and let's just pair it up with the number two from the even numbers.
We take the number two from the natural numbers, and why don't we connect it or pair it up with the number four from the even numbers?
Similarly, we'll take the number three and we'll pair it up with the number six from the even numbers.
Four and eight will be matched up, and in general we can actually give an almost a little formula for this, for the rule anyway.
If we take the number little n, the natural number little n, we would pair it up with its double, namely two times little n.
Now, is there any number that's left unpaired from the natural numbers?
No, every natural number is paired up.
Is there any even number that's not paired to a natural number?
For example, let's think of the even number 102.
Is 102 paired up with some natural number?
Sure, namely 51, because when we take 51 and we double it, we get 102.
Well, therefore we see that these two collections have the same size.
They have the same cardinality.
This realization is surprising, since we're realizing that in some sense, half of infinity is the same size of infinity.
Yet again, we see a counter-intuitive example to the Euclid common notion from 2000 years earlier that the whole is greater than the part.
In fact, this observation may have inspired Richard Dedekin, a good friend and close colleague of Cantor's,
to define an infinite collection to be, in effect, any collection that can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with just a part of itself.
In a mathematical sense, this is our first precise definition of what we mean by an infinite collection.
And in fact, now I can quickly prove that I do not have an infinite number of digits on my left hand.
Here's the proof.
I have to show you that it's impossible to put these digits in a correspondence, a one-to-one correspondence with just some of them.
Well, certainly I can't take these digits and put it in a one-to-one correspondence with just my thumb,
because I'd be missing a whole bunch of other fingers that would not be paired up,
nor could I do with just two fingers, because if I tried with two fingers, I wouldn't have anything else left for these,
or three, or four, the only one that works is five.
That means that this collection must be a finite collection.
Well, we now see that Galileo actually held the key to measuring infinite collections by means of a one-to-one pairing,
but viewed it as a paradox, namely seeing the whole as the same size as the part perplexed him.
And thus, again, unfortunately, he let this key idea slip through his fingers.
Well, let's now compare the collections of natural numbers with the collections of the integers.
Now, in mathematics, we traditionally use the capital letter z to denote the entire collection of the integers.
Now, remember, the integers are all the natural numbers together with zero and then all the negatives of the natural numbers.
So we'd write z equals the set of the natural numbers, zero, and then all the negative natural numbers.
Why do we use the letter z?
Well, z might stand for zahlen, which is German for number or quantity, and that's in fact where it comes from.
Well, what are we doing here?
We have the natural numbers, which go one, two, three, four, and so forth,
and now in some sense we're doubling it because we're throwing in all the negatives as well.
Well, so does the collection of natural numbers have the same cardinality as the collection of integers?
Well, let's just try it, but I'm going to warn you right now that we're going to fail,
but remember, failing is always good because it leads to insights.
See, on the one hand we could say, well, no, this doesn't work because I'll just pair, I'll imagine the natural numbers on top
and I'll imagine all the integers here.
I'll take one and pair it with one, two with two, three with three, four with four, and so forth all the way out.
And what do I see? I see that zero and all the negative numbers have no pairs,
and so therefore I see that this is not working, this is not a one-to-one correspondence.
Well, yes, it's not a one-to-one correspondence, but that just means that that particular try didn't work.
It doesn't imply that a one-to-one correspondence doesn't exist some other way.
So let's try it again and be a little bit more clever.
This time, let's take the, and I'm calling the integers red numbers to distinguish them from the natural numbers,
so let's take the red zero and pair it up with one.
Let's take red one and pair it up with two, and red negative one and pair it up with three, and red two and pair it up with four,
and red negative two and pair it up with five, and red three and pair it up with six,
and red negative three and pair it up with seven, and so forth.
And what we're doing here is we keep swinging back and forth from the positive to the negative integers,
like the hand on an old-fashioned metronome, you see it?
And we just keep counting and counting and counting.
So in this case, we see that, yes, there is a one-to-one correspondence,
because every natural number has been paired up with exactly one integer,
and every integer in turn has been paired up with exactly one and only one natural number.
So we see that, in fact, we have a one-to-one pairing here.
We actually are pairing the red positive numbers with the black even numbers and the red negative numbers with the black odd numbers.
In fact, that's the rule.
Okay, so we're trying here to compare sets, and we're seeing all sorts of counter-intuitive things.
If we take half of a collection that's infinite, it's the same size as infinity.
If we try to double the infinity, we see it's the same size.
Well, let's now compare the collection of natural numbers with the collection of rational numbers.
All the fractions, all the ratios.
We write capital Q for the entire collection of rational numbers.
In other words, we say capital Q equals the collection of all fractions.
The letter Q might stand for quotients.
But actually, I'm not sure about that, and I'm not sure if anyone really knows for sure.
But the tradition in mathematics is to use a capital letter Q to denote the rational numbers.
Well, does the collection of natural numbers have the same cardinality as the collection of rational numbers?
Now, the answer surprised many people.
Because if you think about it, you'd say, well, the rationals must be much larger
because between any two counting numbers, like, for example, one to two,
there are infinitely many fractions, as we've seen.
In fact, we prove that the fractions are dense, so they're infinitely right in between there.
And so this would look like almost taking infinity and multiplying it by infinity.
We took half infinity, it didn't change the size.
We doubled infinity, it didn't change the size.
Now, in some sense, we're taking infinity and multiplying it by infinity.
That must change the size, wouldn't you think?
Well, the surprise is that these two collections, in fact, have the same cardinality.
In other words, we can find a one-to-one correspondence between all the rational numbers and all the natural numbers.
Now, this is a little bit tricky.
And so to inspire this particular one-to-one pairing, let's just first consider a cloud of dots.
So we had this cloud of dots, and the question is, how would we count how many dots we have?
Well, what we could do, of course, is what we've done when we were kids.
We just would connect the dots.
And as we connect the dots with little line segments, we could write a number at each dot.
But connecting the dots makes sure that we hit every dot and hit every dot exactly one.
So we count.
For example, I do it right now.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
So I see that we actually have ten dots.
And notice that those dots, those lines connecting them, sort of form a snake.
And that snake actually is snaking through these dots and shows us that we actually have a one-to-one pairing between the numbers from one to ten and the dots.
Right?
We see that every dot was hit and we didn't count any dot twice.
So this snake helped us.
Well, let's now extend this idea to the cloud of ratios.
Well, to make room for the negative rational numbers in our list, we're first going to not worry about the negatives.
But instead, we'll just take a look at the positives.
So here's what we're going to do.
So let's back up here and think about it.
We're going to make a big array.
And the big array on the top, I'm going to list all the counting numbers.
But I'll start with zero.
So I'll say zero and then one, two, three, four, and so forth.
And then down here, I'm going to list all the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth, all the way down.
And then the way I'm going to fill up this array is I'll take this number and I'll look at the ratio of this number to this number.
And I'll put it right here.
So for example, three-fifths, I go over to the number three and I go down to five and there's three-fifths.
So I fill this grid with fractions.
And in fact, if you notice, every positive fraction is on this infinitely long chart.
Well, now what do I do?
Now, of course, the fractions appear quite often.
They repeat.
For example, two over two, three over three, four over four are all this the same number, the number one.
So when we go through this cloud of rational numbers, we have to make sure that we're never going to count something that we've already counted.
But now we're just going to proceed like we did with the cloud of dots.
I start in the upper top and I associate that first rational number with the number one.
Then I slide over to the next number associated with two.
Then I slide down and associate that with the number three.
Then slide over four, five.
Now, if I get to a number that I've already seen, I just pass over that number and go to the next one.
And I just keep zigzagging through this chart.
And each time I zigzag, I'm associating, I'm counting, one, two, three, four, five, six, and so forth.
It's like taking the number line and bending it up and snaking it through.
And we see a one-to-one correspondence for every natural number is used on this chart because the chart is endless and every fraction has been hit.
For example, let's think about, you know, 35 over 22.
Well, if we go over 35 and then down 22, there's that rational number.
And the snake you can see in a finite number of steps will eventually pass through that and it will be associated with some natural number.
So we have this one-to-one correspondence.
Now, what about the negatives?
Well, we now take our positive fractions and we just shift them over so that they're paired up with the even numbers.
In other words, let's slide the rational numbers down so that they're just paired up with every other natural number.
And so now the odd numbers, the odd natural numbers, have no partners.
And in this pairing, what we could do is just plug in the negative of every fraction next to its neighbor.
So we just sort of fill in the other half with the negatives.
And so we actually see a one-to-one correspondence in this way.
So again, if you try to find a formula for this, it's very, very tricky.
But we could visualize it very easily by snaking through and determining that, in fact, we have a one-to-one pairing.
Every natural number is paired with a particular rational number.
And conversely, every ratio is paired with a natural number.
So the size is the same.
These two collections have the same size.
In some informal sense, infinity multiplied by infinity still yields the same size of infinity.
We haven't upped anything.
Well, as we'll see in the next few lectures, infinity holds many more profound surprises.
As the great early 20th century mathematician David Hilbert once wrote,
No other question has ever moved so profoundly the spirit of man.
No other idea has so fruitfully stimulated his intellect.
Yet no other concept stands in greater need of clarification than that of the infinite.
That clarification and that wonderful journey to infinity will be the provocative conclusion to this challenging topic.
