so that every element from the first collection is paired with exactly one element from the second collection,
and every element from the second collection is paired with exactly one element from the first collection, just like this.
Well, we say that two collections have the same cardinality if there's a one-to-one correspondence between the two collections.
That is, the collections are equally numerous. Informally, we're saying that they have the same size.
We don't want to say that they have the same number of elements because that won't work when we talk about infinite collections, so we say the same cardinality.
Well, it's easy to see that if finite collections have the same cardinality, then we could just simply count and we'd see that those counts would be equal.
One, two, three, four, five, one, two, three, four, five, they're equal.
But for infinite collections, we need to describe a one-to-one correspondence to verify the collections have the same cardinality.
So that's going to be our test. We see two collections. If we want to know if they're equally numerous or not, we have to find a one-to-one correspondence.
Well, let's now consider some examples to help solidify our intuition on infinity and this idea of the one-to-one correspondence.
Well, first, let's compare the natural numbers with just the even numbers.
In other words, we're moving now from the study of individual numbers to the study of the size of a collection and aggregate of numbers.
Now, we often use the capital letter N to denote the entire collection of natural numbers.
And so we'd write this as, formally, we'd say N equals, and then we'd have a brace, which is this curly type bracket.
And then we'd list one, two, three, four, and so forth, and then close the curly brace.
And the way you'd read that, the curly brace means a collection.
So we'd say in this case that N equals the collection of numbers one, two, three, four, and so on.
That's the collection, so N represents the entire aggregate.
Let's write capital E for the collection of all the even natural numbers.
That is, E will be the set, the collection of two, four, six, eight, and so forth, and we'd write it in a similar way.
Well, do these collections have the same cardinality?
Well, at first it appears not, since the even numbers are only half of the entire collection of natural numbers.
But we can't be fooled by such logical sounding distractions.
Here there's only one measure.
Does there exist a one-to-one pairing or not?
Well, let's try to find a one-to-one pairing between the numbers of these two collections.
So we take the number one from the natural numbers, and let's just pair it up with the number two from the even numbers.
We take the number two from the natural numbers, and why don't we connect it or pair it up with the number four from the even numbers?
Similarly, we'll take the number three and we'll pair it up with the number six from the even numbers.
Four and eight will be matched up, and in general we can actually give an almost a little formula for this, for the rule anyway.
If we take the number little n, the natural number little n, we would pair it up with its double, namely two times little n.
Now, is there any number that's left unpaired from the natural numbers?
