Well, let's now extend this idea to the cloud of ratios.
Well, to make room for the negative rational numbers in our list, we're first going to not worry about the negatives.
But instead, we'll just take a look at the positives.
So here's what we're going to do.
So let's back up here and think about it.
We're going to make a big array.
And the big array on the top, I'm going to list all the counting numbers.
But I'll start with zero.
So I'll say zero and then one, two, three, four, and so forth.
And then down here, I'm going to list all the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth, all the way down.
And then the way I'm going to fill up this array is I'll take this number and I'll look at the ratio of this number to this number.
And I'll put it right here.
So for example, three-fifths, I go over to the number three and I go down to five and there's three-fifths.
So I fill this grid with fractions.
And in fact, if you notice, every positive fraction is on this infinitely long chart.
Well, now what do I do?
Now, of course, the fractions appear quite often.
They repeat.
For example, two over two, three over three, four over four are all this the same number, the number one.
So when we go through this cloud of rational numbers, we have to make sure that we're never going to count something that we've already counted.
But now we're just going to proceed like we did with the cloud of dots.
I start in the upper top and I associate that first rational number with the number one.
Then I slide over to the next number associated with two.
Then I slide down and associate that with the number three.
Then slide over four, five.
Now, if I get to a number that I've already seen, I just pass over that number and go to the next one.
And I just keep zigzagging through this chart.
And each time I zigzag, I'm associating, I'm counting, one, two, three, four, five, six, and so forth.
It's like taking the number line and bending it up and snaking it through.
And we see a one-to-one correspondence for every natural number is used on this chart because the chart is endless and every fraction has been hit.
For example, let's think about, you know, 35 over 22.
Well, if we go over 35 and then down 22, there's that rational number.
