Well, so does the collection of natural numbers have the same cardinality as the collection of integers?
Well, let's just try it, but I'm going to warn you right now that we're going to fail,
but remember, failing is always good because it leads to insights.
See, on the one hand we could say, well, no, this doesn't work because I'll just pair, I'll imagine the natural numbers on top
and I'll imagine all the integers here.
I'll take one and pair it with one, two with two, three with three, four with four, and so forth all the way out.
And what do I see? I see that zero and all the negative numbers have no pairs,
and so therefore I see that this is not working, this is not a one-to-one correspondence.
Well, yes, it's not a one-to-one correspondence, but that just means that that particular try didn't work.
It doesn't imply that a one-to-one correspondence doesn't exist some other way.
So let's try it again and be a little bit more clever.
This time, let's take the, and I'm calling the integers red numbers to distinguish them from the natural numbers,
so let's take the red zero and pair it up with one.
Let's take red one and pair it up with two, and red negative one and pair it up with three, and red two and pair it up with four,
and red negative two and pair it up with five, and red three and pair it up with six,
and red negative three and pair it up with seven, and so forth.
And what we're doing here is we keep swinging back and forth from the positive to the negative integers,
like the hand on an old-fashioned metronome, you see it?
And we just keep counting and counting and counting.
So in this case, we see that, yes, there is a one-to-one correspondence,
because every natural number has been paired up with exactly one integer,
and every integer in turn has been paired up with exactly one and only one natural number.
So we see that, in fact, we have a one-to-one pairing here.
We actually are pairing the red positive numbers with the black even numbers and the red negative numbers with the black odd numbers.
In fact, that's the rule.
Okay, so we're trying here to compare sets, and we're seeing all sorts of counter-intuitive things.
If we take half of a collection that's infinite, it's the same size as infinity.
If we try to double the infinity, we see it's the same size.
Well, let's now compare the collection of natural numbers with the collection of rational numbers.
All the fractions, all the ratios.
We write capital Q for the entire collection of rational numbers.
In other words, we say capital Q equals the collection of all fractions.
