Now, both of these views of number can be extended to infinity.
In fact, there's been much study in what are called infinite ordinal and infinite cardinal
numbers, although numbers should really be in quotes.
These are some is referred to as transfinite numbers.
Here in the last part of our course, we'll explore infinite cardinal numbers.
Now, before moving on, this is a wonderful opportunity to challenge ourselves to ask,
what is our own definition of infinity?
What does infinity mean?
Well, while we think about what it means to us personally, I thought I would share with
you the thoughts of some others that came before us as they tried to wrap their minds
around this mysterious idea.
The 20th century British philosopher Bertrand Russell once wrote about how philosophers
themselves would talk about infinity.
He writes, if any philosopher had been asked for a definition of infinity, he might have
produced some unintelligible rigmarole, but he would certainly not have been able to give
a definition that had any meaning at all.
So here's the philosopher Bertrand Russell saying philosophers would have no idea.
The great 20th century German physicist Albert Einstein once wrote, two things are infinite,
the universe and human stupidity.
And I'm not sure about the universe.
Great quote.
The 15th century English statesman Thomas More once wrote, by confronting us with irreducible
mysteries that stretch our daily vision to include infinity, nature opens an inviting
and guiding path toward a spiritual life.
I once asked a class of mine at Williams, a math class, what was their notion of infinity
before we actually touched on the subject in depth.
And there was a student in the class whose name was Joe who raised his hand and said,
Infinity is a mother's love to which the entire class broke up in laughter and gales
of laughter.
And it was just a very funny moment.
And then about a month later, his parents actually came to visit him on campus and they actually
attended the class in which he was in, this math class.
