No, every natural number is paired up.
Is there any even number that's not paired to a natural number?
For example, let's think of the even number 102.
Is 102 paired up with some natural number?
Sure, namely 51, because when we take 51 and we double it, we get 102.
Well, therefore we see that these two collections have the same size.
They have the same cardinality.
This realization is surprising, since we're realizing that in some sense, half of infinity is the same size of infinity.
Yet again, we see a counter-intuitive example to the Euclid common notion from 2000 years earlier that the whole is greater than the part.
In fact, this observation may have inspired Richard Dedekin, a good friend and close colleague of Cantor's,
to define an infinite collection to be, in effect, any collection that can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with just a part of itself.
In a mathematical sense, this is our first precise definition of what we mean by an infinite collection.
And in fact, now I can quickly prove that I do not have an infinite number of digits on my left hand.
Here's the proof.
I have to show you that it's impossible to put these digits in a correspondence, a one-to-one correspondence with just some of them.
Well, certainly I can't take these digits and put it in a one-to-one correspondence with just my thumb,
because I'd be missing a whole bunch of other fingers that would not be paired up,
nor could I do with just two fingers, because if I tried with two fingers, I wouldn't have anything else left for these,
or three, or four, the only one that works is five.
That means that this collection must be a finite collection.
Well, we now see that Galileo actually held the key to measuring infinite collections by means of a one-to-one pairing,
but viewed it as a paradox, namely seeing the whole as the same size as the part perplexed him.
And thus, again, unfortunately, he let this key idea slip through his fingers.
Well, let's now compare the collections of natural numbers with the collections of the integers.
Now, in mathematics, we traditionally use the capital letter z to denote the entire collection of the integers.
Now, remember, the integers are all the natural numbers together with zero and then all the negatives of the natural numbers.
So we'd write z equals the set of the natural numbers, zero, and then all the negative natural numbers.
Why do we use the letter z?
Well, z might stand for zahlen, which is German for number or quantity, and that's in fact where it comes from.
Well, what are we doing here?
We have the natural numbers, which go one, two, three, four, and so forth,
and now in some sense we're doubling it because we're throwing in all the negatives as well.
