Here, in the last part of our course, we'll journey beyond numbers and contemplate the
enormous question, what comes after we have exhausted all numbers?
We'll begin with a distinction between two basic types of number, ordinal and cardinal,
and then wonder how to extend these ideas past all numbers into the realm of the infinite.
Galileo wrestled with the infinite and in 1632 observed some perplexing paradoxes.
In 1851, a tract authored by Bernhard Abolzano first attempted to study infinite collections.
While others made contributions to this area, it was the pioneering and highly controversial
work of Georg Cantor in the late 1800s that laid the foundation for our understanding of infinity.
Cantor's realization was that counting infinite quantities leads us nowhere.
Instead, he returned to our ancient ancestors and their first notion of number he dared to compare.
Thus, we come full circle and revisit from the opening of this course the idea of a one to
one correspondence between two collections.
If the individual objects from two collections can be paired up in a one to one fashion,
we declare these two collections to have the same cardinality.
To illustrate this ancient idea within this abstract context, we'll consider several scenarios
in which we'll compare different infinite collections of numbers.
These examples will challenge our intuition and demonstrate that what we know about finite
collections might not carry over to infinity.
They'll also confirm one of our intuitively rock solid notions, infinity comes in just
one size, one unending size.
However, in the lecture that follows this one, we'll be forced to reconsider even this
intuitively sensible sounding opinion and yet again have the wonderful opportunity to
retrain our intuition.
Well, we open with the two most basic applications for numbers in our everyday lives.
We can place objects in a certain order and refer to them by their placement in this ordering
as first, second, third, fourth, and so on.
These numbers, first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and so on, are known as the
ordinal numbers because they're numbers that give order.
A different use for numbers is, as we've seen throughout history, as a means of enumerating,
in other words, counting the size of a collection.
These numbers, zero, one, two, three, and so forth, are known as cardinal numbers.
The number of elements in a collection is called the cardinality of that collection.
