his Cantor set, or the so-called Cantor dust.
Let's recall that the Cantor set is the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1,
whose base 3 expansion contains only 0s and 2s.
The digit 1 never appears.
That was the defining trait of the Cantor set.
In lecture 11, we described the 1 to 1 correspondence that Cantor himself gave
between the Cantor set and all the real numbers between 0 and 1.
Therefore, these two collections have the same cardinality.
In other words, the Cantor set is an uncountable collection of numbers.
What can we conclude from this particular discovery?
Well, since we know that there are only countably many algebraic numbers,
we now discover that there must exist transcendental numbers in the Cantor set.
Let's think about this now.
The Cantor set we've shown, in fact Cantor showed in lecture 11, is an uncountable collection.
That means that it's larger than the collection of algebraic numbers,
which is merely countably infinite.
Well, is it possible that this large collection, which is larger than the collection of all the algebraic numbers,
could this large collection actually contain only algebraic numbers?
Well, of course not, because the algebraic numbers are small and this set is even larger.
So there must exist at least one number in the Cantor set.
That's not an algebraic number, because the set's too big.
It can't fit in with all the algebraics.
And so therefore, we actually have established indirectly that there must exist transcendental numbers in the Cantor set.
In particular, numbers that when expressed in base 3, just using 0s and 2s,
will never be the solution to any polynomial equation with integers.
This is highly not obvious, and even using the modern technology of today's mathematics,
we don't know how to prove this result without going back to Cantor's amazing idea,
showing that the transcendental numbers, in fact, are uncountable.
Well, thus we see that not only does Cantor's incredible work allow us to slowly see a more accurate vision of infinity,
in particular that some infinities are larger than other infinities.
But by applying his ideas, we are drawn into an even richer understanding
and appreciation for the subtlety of number.
