So again, dramatic, but now on the other side, dramatic support.
Also during this period, the great mathematician David Hilbert had said,
no one shall expel us from the paradise that Cantor has created.
So here we go from corrupting youth and from a grave disease infecting mathematics to paradise.
You can see this dramatic shift once the math community has decided
that it will in fact embrace these correct ideas of Cantor despite their own personal biases before.
Hilbert also said Cantor's work was the most astonishing product of mathematical thought
and one of the supreme achievements of purely intellectual human activity.
So Hilbert is putting this work on the very summit of all intellectual thought,
which is again dramatic in a very positive way and justified.
Certainly in my opinion, I believe in the opinion of many.
Cantor himself felt the wrath of all the controversy surrounding his original work.
Cantor spent his entire career at the University of Hall,
a less prestigious institution than he felt he deserved.
In fact, he desired a position at the University of Berlin, the top German institution,
but the chair of the mathematics department was none other than Kroniker.
He actually imagined Kroniker's distress.
Were he to obtain a position in Berlin?
In fact, he wrote about this and it's almost comical,
so he's able to take a lighthearted approach to this grave feud between the two.
He writes of Kroniker's sense of what would happen if Cantor were to show up.
I knew precisely the immediate effect this would have,
that in fact Kroniker would flare up as if stung by a scorpion
and with his reserve troops would strike up such a howl that Berlin would think
it had been transported to the sandy deserts of Africa with its lions, tigers and hyenas.
So you really get a sense of the ruckus that Kroniker would kick up.
And while Kroniker did know how Cantor did know how Kroniker's reaction would unfold,
apparently he was unaware that there were no tigers in Africa,
but we'll let that go, it's still a wonderful quote.
Well, despite the enormity of all the controversy,
Cantor was extremely confident and steadfast about the truth of his work on infinity.
In fact, in 1888 he wrote,
