My theory stands firm as a rock.
Every arrow directed against it will return quickly to its archer.
How do I know this?
Because I have studied it from all sides for many years.
Because I have examined all objections which have ever been made against the infinite numbers.
So here we see Cantor as a victim, he feels as a victim, everyone's shooting at him
and he's going to repel all of these arrows that are being flung toward him
and he's going to stand strong.
And so very confident in his work, which is difficult to do.
I could imagine if an entire community is against you,
it's difficult to stand up and say, no, I'm right, and I will fight in that belief.
However, I should point out that the controversy inspired by his work
continued really to take a toll on Cantor, as we'll discuss in a later lecture.
So even though he was very firm in his beliefs, it did take a personal toll on his life.
Well, let's now return to the notion of number
and consider Cantor's work on some of the types of numbers that we've already explored in this course.
Now, in the previous lecture, we established that the collection of rational numbers
is a countable collection.
In other words, we found a one-to-one correspondence between the rational numbers, the fractions,
and the natural numbers.
Now, let's remember that the real numbers come in two basic flavors.
They're either rational ratios or they're irrational.
Now, since the entirety of real numbers is uncountable,
we can conclude that the collection of irrational numbers is uncountable as well.
And let's think about why that's true.
Let's pretend, let's do this indirectly like Cantor would do.
Let's pretend that the collection of irrational numbers was, in fact, countable.
Well, then we have the rational numbers, that's a countable collection,
and the irrational numbers, we're assuming a countable collection.
So we have two countable collections.
And in fact, if you take a countable collection and a countable collection and put them together,
we can interleave them like we did with the positive and negative numbers of the integers
