In this lecture, we offer one of the most counterintuitive and surprising facts about our world.
Infinity, just as the numbers that came before, comes in different sizes.
His incredible discovery was first made by Georg Cantor in 1874.
Here, we'll tell his story and his struggle to have his outrageous but totally correct mathematical ideas accepted by the mathematical community.
His wondrous argument at once simple and subtle proves that the collection of real numbers is a greater infinity than the collection of natural numbers.
While the natural numbers can be listed in an orderly fashion and in some sense can be counted, we cannot count the real numbers.
Collections that are larger than the natural numbers are known as uncountable collections.
Well, we'll then connect our discussion on the sizes of infinity with our earlier discussions on the likelihood that a real number selected at random will be irrational and transcendental.
We'll describe how both the collections of irrational numbers and transcendental numbers are so large that they are, in fact, uncountable as well.
We'll also connect our observations with the previous discussions of the Cantor set we had and we'll show that while on the one hand this set is a very dusty collection of numbers and its sparse,
on the other hand, it's actually quite robust and in fact the Cantor set we'll see is uncountable as well.
Once again, we open our minds to the reality that there's at least two sizes of infinity and once we do that, we see the nature of our universe in an entirely new light.
Well, let's open what will be the most mathematically dramatic and shocking lecture of this entire course with a totally innocuous riddle.
Why is it so easy to count the digits on my right hand?
Well, let's see. First of all, I can do it. Let me prove that to you. One, two, three, four, five. Okay. Now, why was that so easy?
Well, one answer is that they all lined up in a very orderly fashion or perhaps I should say in an ordinarily fashion because we're talking about order.
There's a first, a second, a third, a fourth and a fifth.
Okay. Well, let's notice that the collection of natural numbers, although they're infinite in size, can be easily and endlessly lined up in an ordinarily fashion.
One is the first, two is the second, three is the third and so on.
Well, I want us to now formalize this trivial observation and see where it leads.
We say that a collection is countable if that collection contains only finitely many elements or has the same cardinality as the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, a collection is a countable collection or we say it's countable if we can line up its elements from that collection so that there's a clear first element, then a second, a third, a fourth, a fifth and so on.
That is, I can list the elements in this collection even if our list is endless.
Well, for example, the collection of cards in a deck of playing cards is countable because in fact the number of cards in a deck of cards is finite, it's a finite number, it's 52 and we can count them just off the deck.
The first, second, third, so we have one, two, three, four, blah, blah, blah, blah, 49, 50, 51, 52 and there we can see we can actually count them, we can list them all.
Well, applying this new notion to our previous observations from the previous lecture, we can now say that the collection of even numbers is a countable collection because we found in that lecture a one-to-one correspondence between it and the collection of natural numbers, so it fits the bill.
The collection of integers is also a countable collection because remember there, what we did was we took the positive integers and the negative integers and we sort of shuffled them together and then we just were able to list them one after the other and pair them up with the natural numbers.
Even the collection of rational numbers is a countable collection because we found a one-to-one correspondence between it and then the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, we were able to produce an orderly list that contains every rational number and that was how we snaked through that large array of fractions.
Well, this idea brings us to a very natural question. Is the collection of real numbers countable?
Well, we know that the collection of real numbers is infinite, so we're asking is the collection of real numbers a countable collection, which means is there a one-to-one correspondence between the collection of real numbers and the collection of natural numbers?
Well, intuitively it seems obvious that infinity is infinity after all. In other words, any infinite collection should have the same cardinality as any other infinite collection.
Certainly every infinite collection that we've considered thus far has had the same cardinality as the natural numbers.
The big question now is, is the previous sensibly sounding assertion mathematically correct?
Well, this question captured Cantor's imagination and led to his ingenious insight. In a shocking turn of events, Cantor was able to prove that there cannot exist a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the collection of real numbers.
In other words, Cantor proves that the real numbers are too numerous to be paired up with the natural numbers. The collection of real numbers is not a countable collection.
Its cardinality is actually a larger infinity than the countably infinite collection of natural numbers.
Let's now follow in Cantor's logical footsteps and deduce this astounding fact for ourselves.
Cantor offers an indirect proof. In other words, he assumes that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the real numbers and then shows that this assumption leads to a contradiction, a logical impossibility.
Therefore, his assumption must have been false and so the collection of real numbers is larger than the collection of natural numbers.
Well, let's see how Cantor's argument unfolds.
To simplify the notation, we'll just consider the real numbers between 0 and 1 on the number line and show that this collection of numbers is actually larger than the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, instead of working with the entire real number line and all the numbers on it, we'll just restrict ourselves to the points between 0 and 1 and show that this collection is not countable.
I mean, of course, if the collection of real numbers in this small interval is not countable, then certainly the collection of all the real numbers must not be countable as well.
So Cantor's assumption, which we plan to prove is wrong, is that the cardinality of the natural numbers is the same as the cardinality of the real numbers between 0 and 1.
This assumption implicitly implies that there does exist a one-to-one correspondence between the collection of natural numbers and the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1.
Now, let's just recall that the real numbers between 0 and 1 can be expressed as an unending decimal expansion starting with 0 point.
So for example, 0.5698213 and so forth, that's one number, one real number between 0 and 1, and they all have that same flavor.
They start with 0 point and then an endless run of digits.
Well, what might such a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the real numbers between 0 and 1 look like?
Well, it would look like a list of real numbers, one matched up or paired, with each natural number.
Cantor is assuming that some such list exists, although we have no idea of the particulars of the numbers appearing in that list.
Now, just to give an illustration of what this presumed list might look like, let's consider a particular attempt.
Now, we'll use this example to just demonstrate the idea of Cantor's general argument.
So you see here a table where in the first column we see the counting numbers, the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on,
and then paired up with each in the second column we see this list of real numbers represented in decimal form.
Cantor now uses the digits of these real numbers appearing in his assumed one-to-one correspondence to rather generate a real number that is definitely absent from his list.
Now, in order to generate this missing number, Cantor focuses on the digits that lie along the diagonal in the column of real numbers.
Okay, and then he's going to describe his missing number by giving its decimal expansion.
So he describes this number's digits systematically one digit at a time.
Each digit of this missing real number is selected so that it differs from the corresponding digit along the diagonal digits from his real numbers in the chart,
in this assumed one-to-one correspondence.
So let's take a look at the example.
For this particular example, let's see what Cantor might do.
So we look at the number paired up with the natural number 1, and we see it's 0.8472651 and so forth.
Cantor only cares about the very first digit, which is an 8, and he'll now, in the number that he's constructing,
will just switch it to make sure that the digit that he writes down is different from 8.
So in particular, let's say he writes down a 5.
So he starts his number 0.5.
Okay, now we need the second digit of our allegedly missing number.
Where do we go?
We look at the number paired up with the natural number 2.
It's 0.5000 and so forth.
I look at its second digit, and I see that it's a 0, and I want to write a digit that's not a 0.
So I'll just put down a 5 again.
So now I see my second digit of my number is 5.
And I continue this process to find the third digit of the number we're constructing.
We look at the number associated or paired up with the number 3.
It happens to be 0.3333 and so forth.
I look at its third digit, I see that it's a 3, and so now I'll want to switch it to make sure that our digit doesn't equal 3,
and so I'll make it a 5 again.
So far our number is 0.5555.
What should our next digit be?
Well, I look at the fourth number on our list, which is 4, which is paired up with 0.1075963 and so forth.
I look at the fourth digit of that real number, which notice is a 5.
So I'll write down a digit that differs from 5, and I'll just pick 8.
So now my fourth digit is 8.
For the fifth digit, how do I select that?
I look at the number paired up with the number 5, which happens to be, in this example, 0.0100.
The fifth digit is a 0, and so what do I do?
I'll make sure that our digit is not a 0.
I'll select 5 again, and then I repeat this.
For the sixth digit, I look at the number paired up with 6.
I see 0.2160058.
I see that the sixth digit there is a 5.
I'll switch that and I'll make it an 8, and I do this and continue forever.
So I've built a real number between 0 and 1.
Now Cantor argues that this new real number, that is between 0 and 1,
never appears on our assumed 1 to 1 correspondence.
Now why not?
Let's think about this.
If it appears somewhere on my list, then that means that all the digits must be perfectly lining up somewhere on that chart.
Could it be in the first spot?
Could the number we just built be paired up with the number 1?
Well, no, because we know that it differs at least in the very first decimal spot.
The number paired up with 1 has an 8, and we switched ours, it's a 5.
So it can't be that number.
We don't even care about the rest of the digits.
We know it can't be because of that.
Well, could it be paired up with the number 2?
Well, no, because we know that the number paired up with the number 2
will differ at least in the second spot with our number,
because we picked our second digit to be different from the second digit of the second number.
And could this number actually be on the chart somewhere further down, like in the millionth spot?
Well, no, because the way we systematically developed this number,
if we go down to the millionth decimal spot, we see that whatever digit's there,
our digit in that same spot will differ.
Therefore, this number is not that number paired up with 1 million.
And this is true for all the numbers.
This number is genuinely not on our chart.
Well, notice that this argument works no matter what the real numbers are
and which ones we've written in that right corner, in that right column.
And so we can always look at the diagonal digits and create a real number
simply by just switching the corresponding digits
so that the newly constructed number is a real number that's definitely not on our list.
Thus, his assumption that there was a one-to-one correspondence between these two collections is false.
In other words, Cantor proved that any such list of real numbers will be incomplete.
Therefore, we're forced to conclude that the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1
is a larger collection than the collection of natural numbers.
It's impossible to pair them up in a one-to-one fashion.
Thus, Cantor proves that it's impossible to have a one-to-one correspondence
between the natural numbers and the real numbers.
Well, Cantor's method of proof is now known as Cantor diagonalization
because we use those diagonal digits to switch them in order to build a missing number from that list.
This straightforward argument is so subtle that it takes a long time to understand and digest it completely.
However, once we see that it's correct, we're forced into a totally counterintuitive realization.
Cantor discovered that infinity comes in more than one size.
Informally, the infinity that represents the cardinality of the real numbers
is a larger infinity than the infinity that represents the cardinality of the natural numbers.
In other words, the real numbers are not countable.
Cantor proved this startling result in 1874, and he called the collection of real numbers the continuum.
Today, we call collections that are not countable uncountable.
So we can say now that the collection of real numbers is uncountable.
Well, as we struggle to comprehend this counterintuitive idea that surrounds infinity,
it's perhaps comforting to realize that we're not alone.
The mathematics community itself struggled with and resisted the same ideas when it was first grappling with them.
In 1831, the great Carl Friedrich Gauss once wrote,
I protest against the use of infinite magnitude as something completed, which is never permissible in mathematics.
Infinity is merely a way of speaking, the true meaning being a limit,
which certain ratios approach indefinitely close, while others are permitted to increase without restriction.
So here he was thinking about, you know, heading up to infinity by going off the horizon, this was his view.
In 1906, one of France's greatest mathematicians, Henri Poincaré, once wrote,
There's no actual infinity.
That is what the Cantorians have forgotten and have been trapped by contradictions.
So Poincaré was in fact dramatically opposed to this idea.
In fact, he's said to have actually said of Cantor's idea that in fact the ideas were a grave disease.
Here we see Cantor in some sense in Poincaré's mind has infected mathematics.
It was a very dramatic thought, if you think about it, over a mathematical principle,
but it was so outlandish that it was hard to believe.
Now Poincaré was not alone in this point of view.
As we'll see in just a moment, Cantor's work actually established, among other things,
the existence of infinitely many irrational numbers.
In fact, uncountably many irrational numbers.
As we noted in lecture 18, Leopold Kronecker did not view irrational numbers as natural at all.
Remember that he wrote the famous line, God created the integers, the rest is the work of man.
Reminiscent of the Pythagoreans, in fact.
Even though Cantor was a former student, Kronecker called him a corruptor of youth and a scientific charlatan.
Really brutal words and emotionally charged because he just did not want to accept the arguments that Cantor was offering.
Now Kronecker was perhaps the most important and powerful mathematician in Germany during his lifetime,
so his opposition to Cantor had an enormous impact.
In fact, when Cantor published his paper showing that there were more real numbers than natural numbers,
he gave the paper an innocuous title.
In part, some suggest, so as not to draw Kronecker's attention to it during the review process.
So the title that Cantor gave the paper was,
On a Property of the Set of All Real Algebraic Numbers,
which really says almost nothing at all.
But the idea was that it would fall onto Kronecker's desk and he would just look it over very quickly
and say, OK, that's fine, we can just publish that and not read the details.
And in fact, that's exactly what happened and it was published.
Although if Kronecker would have looked a little bit closer,
he would have certainly never allowed the publication of this very controversial work.
Well, of course Cantor did have some supporters.
Carl Weierstrauss, another great German mathematician of the day,
and the PhD advisor for Cantor was impressed with Cantor's original and interesting and dramatic work.
And he encouraged Cantor to publish it and he defended Cantor to his detractors.
Richard Dedekin, another important German mathematician of the time,
was also a longtime friend and supporter as well.
Well, once the mathematics community had the time to absorb Cantor's groundbreaking ideas,
it was finally able to embrace them.
In 1917, Bertrand Russell wrote that Cantor had
conquered for the intellect a new and vast province which had been given over to chaos and night.
So here Cantor is combating the chaos and the darkness and is shining the light on infinity.
So again, dramatic, but now on the other side, dramatic support.
Also during this period, the great mathematician David Hilbert had said,
no one shall expel us from the paradise that Cantor has created.
So here we go from corrupting youth and from a grave disease infecting mathematics to paradise.
You can see this dramatic shift once the math community has decided
that it will in fact embrace these correct ideas of Cantor despite their own personal biases before.
Hilbert also said Cantor's work was the most astonishing product of mathematical thought
and one of the supreme achievements of purely intellectual human activity.
So Hilbert is putting this work on the very summit of all intellectual thought,
which is again dramatic in a very positive way and justified.
Certainly in my opinion, I believe in the opinion of many.
Cantor himself felt the wrath of all the controversy surrounding his original work.
Cantor spent his entire career at the University of Hall,
a less prestigious institution than he felt he deserved.
In fact, he desired a position at the University of Berlin, the top German institution,
but the chair of the mathematics department was none other than Kroniker.
He actually imagined Kroniker's distress.
Were he to obtain a position in Berlin?
In fact, he wrote about this and it's almost comical,
so he's able to take a lighthearted approach to this grave feud between the two.
He writes of Kroniker's sense of what would happen if Cantor were to show up.
I knew precisely the immediate effect this would have,
that in fact Kroniker would flare up as if stung by a scorpion
and with his reserve troops would strike up such a howl that Berlin would think
it had been transported to the sandy deserts of Africa with its lions, tigers and hyenas.
So you really get a sense of the ruckus that Kroniker would kick up.
And while Kroniker did know how Cantor did know how Kroniker's reaction would unfold,
apparently he was unaware that there were no tigers in Africa,
but we'll let that go, it's still a wonderful quote.
Well, despite the enormity of all the controversy,
Cantor was extremely confident and steadfast about the truth of his work on infinity.
In fact, in 1888 he wrote,
My theory stands firm as a rock.
Every arrow directed against it will return quickly to its archer.
How do I know this?
Because I have studied it from all sides for many years.
Because I have examined all objections which have ever been made against the infinite numbers.
So here we see Cantor as a victim, he feels as a victim, everyone's shooting at him
and he's going to repel all of these arrows that are being flung toward him
and he's going to stand strong.
And so very confident in his work, which is difficult to do.
I could imagine if an entire community is against you,
it's difficult to stand up and say, no, I'm right, and I will fight in that belief.
However, I should point out that the controversy inspired by his work
continued really to take a toll on Cantor, as we'll discuss in a later lecture.
So even though he was very firm in his beliefs, it did take a personal toll on his life.
Well, let's now return to the notion of number
and consider Cantor's work on some of the types of numbers that we've already explored in this course.
Now, in the previous lecture, we established that the collection of rational numbers
is a countable collection.
In other words, we found a one-to-one correspondence between the rational numbers, the fractions,
and the natural numbers.
Now, let's remember that the real numbers come in two basic flavors.
They're either rational ratios or they're irrational.
Now, since the entirety of real numbers is uncountable,
we can conclude that the collection of irrational numbers is uncountable as well.
And let's think about why that's true.
Let's pretend, let's do this indirectly like Cantor would do.
Let's pretend that the collection of irrational numbers was, in fact, countable.
Well, then we have the rational numbers, that's a countable collection,
and the irrational numbers, we're assuming a countable collection.
So we have two countable collections.
And in fact, if you take a countable collection and a countable collection and put them together,
we can interleave them like we did with the positive and negative numbers of the integers
to see that we can list them all.
So in fact, then their totality would also be countable.
But we've already said the totality, in fact, are the real numbers and they're uncountable.
So that's a contradiction.
Therefore, since the infinity of the rationals is so small and the infinity of the reals is so large,
the infinity of what's left over, which are the irrational numbers, must be large as well.
In particular, they must be uncountable.
Now this discovery amplifies our previous discussions of irrational numbers being the norm.
Remember, again, we see that this recurring theme,
that the at first exotic irrational numbers are actually abundant,
while the more familiar rational numbers are in fact really rare.
In fact, the irrationals totally dominate because they're uncountable.
Well, going a step further, by the modified diagonalization argument,
it's possible to actually establish the fact that the collection of all algebraic numbers,
that means like square root of 2 and the number i, square root of negative 1 and so forth,
they're countable as well.
Thus, since the real numbers are either algebraic or transcendental,
the opposite of being algebraic,
we discover that the collection of transcendental numbers is uncountable.
And it's by the same principle.
We have that the real numbers and uncountable collection are broken up into two pieces,
the algebraics and the transcendentals.
The algebraics are countable.
If the transcendentals were to be countable,
then these two collections together would be countable as well,
but the reals are in fact uncountable.
Therefore, the transcendentals must also be uncountable.
So again, we see the transcendentals are very robust,
whereas the algebraics, square root of 2, which we know very well,
are actually the exotic ones.
Well, let's conclude by returning to Cantor's original collection of numbers
that we've explored in lecture 11,
his Cantor set, or the so-called Cantor dust.
Let's recall that the Cantor set is the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1,
whose base 3 expansion contains only 0s and 2s.
The digit 1 never appears.
That was the defining trait of the Cantor set.
In lecture 11, we described the 1 to 1 correspondence that Cantor himself gave
between the Cantor set and all the real numbers between 0 and 1.
Therefore, these two collections have the same cardinality.
In other words, the Cantor set is an uncountable collection of numbers.
What can we conclude from this particular discovery?
Well, since we know that there are only countably many algebraic numbers,
we now discover that there must exist transcendental numbers in the Cantor set.
Let's think about this now.
The Cantor set we've shown, in fact Cantor showed in lecture 11, is an uncountable collection.
That means that it's larger than the collection of algebraic numbers,
which is merely countably infinite.
Well, is it possible that this large collection, which is larger than the collection of all the algebraic numbers,
could this large collection actually contain only algebraic numbers?
Well, of course not, because the algebraic numbers are small and this set is even larger.
So there must exist at least one number in the Cantor set.
That's not an algebraic number, because the set's too big.
It can't fit in with all the algebraics.
And so therefore, we actually have established indirectly that there must exist transcendental numbers in the Cantor set.
In particular, numbers that when expressed in base 3, just using 0s and 2s,
will never be the solution to any polynomial equation with integers.
This is highly not obvious, and even using the modern technology of today's mathematics,
we don't know how to prove this result without going back to Cantor's amazing idea,
showing that the transcendental numbers, in fact, are uncountable.
Well, thus we see that not only does Cantor's incredible work allow us to slowly see a more accurate vision of infinity,
in particular that some infinities are larger than other infinities.
But by applying his ideas, we are drawn into an even richer understanding
and appreciation for the subtlety of number.
