Certainly every infinite collection that we've considered thus far has had the same cardinality as the natural numbers.
The big question now is, is the previous sensibly sounding assertion mathematically correct?
Well, this question captured Cantor's imagination and led to his ingenious insight. In a shocking turn of events, Cantor was able to prove that there cannot exist a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the collection of real numbers.
In other words, Cantor proves that the real numbers are too numerous to be paired up with the natural numbers. The collection of real numbers is not a countable collection.
Its cardinality is actually a larger infinity than the countably infinite collection of natural numbers.
Let's now follow in Cantor's logical footsteps and deduce this astounding fact for ourselves.
Cantor offers an indirect proof. In other words, he assumes that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the real numbers and then shows that this assumption leads to a contradiction, a logical impossibility.
Therefore, his assumption must have been false and so the collection of real numbers is larger than the collection of natural numbers.
Well, let's see how Cantor's argument unfolds.
To simplify the notation, we'll just consider the real numbers between 0 and 1 on the number line and show that this collection of numbers is actually larger than the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, instead of working with the entire real number line and all the numbers on it, we'll just restrict ourselves to the points between 0 and 1 and show that this collection is not countable.
I mean, of course, if the collection of real numbers in this small interval is not countable, then certainly the collection of all the real numbers must not be countable as well.
So Cantor's assumption, which we plan to prove is wrong, is that the cardinality of the natural numbers is the same as the cardinality of the real numbers between 0 and 1.
This assumption implicitly implies that there does exist a one-to-one correspondence between the collection of natural numbers and the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1.
Now, let's just recall that the real numbers between 0 and 1 can be expressed as an unending decimal expansion starting with 0 point.
So for example, 0.5698213 and so forth, that's one number, one real number between 0 and 1, and they all have that same flavor.
They start with 0 point and then an endless run of digits.
Well, what might such a one-to-one correspondence between the natural numbers and the real numbers between 0 and 1 look like?
Well, it would look like a list of real numbers, one matched up or paired, with each natural number.
Cantor is assuming that some such list exists, although we have no idea of the particulars of the numbers appearing in that list.
Now, just to give an illustration of what this presumed list might look like, let's consider a particular attempt.
Now, we'll use this example to just demonstrate the idea of Cantor's general argument.
So you see here a table where in the first column we see the counting numbers, the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on,
and then paired up with each in the second column we see this list of real numbers represented in decimal form.
Cantor now uses the digits of these real numbers appearing in his assumed one-to-one correspondence to rather generate a real number that is definitely absent from his list.
Now, in order to generate this missing number, Cantor focuses on the digits that lie along the diagonal in the column of real numbers.
Okay, and then he's going to describe his missing number by giving its decimal expansion.
So he describes this number's digits systematically one digit at a time.
Each digit of this missing real number is selected so that it differs from the corresponding digit along the diagonal digits from his real numbers in the chart,
in this assumed one-to-one correspondence.
So let's take a look at the example.
For this particular example, let's see what Cantor might do.
