is a larger collection than the collection of natural numbers.
It's impossible to pair them up in a one-to-one fashion.
Thus, Cantor proves that it's impossible to have a one-to-one correspondence
between the natural numbers and the real numbers.
Well, Cantor's method of proof is now known as Cantor diagonalization
because we use those diagonal digits to switch them in order to build a missing number from that list.
This straightforward argument is so subtle that it takes a long time to understand and digest it completely.
However, once we see that it's correct, we're forced into a totally counterintuitive realization.
Cantor discovered that infinity comes in more than one size.
Informally, the infinity that represents the cardinality of the real numbers
is a larger infinity than the infinity that represents the cardinality of the natural numbers.
In other words, the real numbers are not countable.
Cantor proved this startling result in 1874, and he called the collection of real numbers the continuum.
Today, we call collections that are not countable uncountable.
So we can say now that the collection of real numbers is uncountable.
Well, as we struggle to comprehend this counterintuitive idea that surrounds infinity,
it's perhaps comforting to realize that we're not alone.
The mathematics community itself struggled with and resisted the same ideas when it was first grappling with them.
In 1831, the great Carl Friedrich Gauss once wrote,
I protest against the use of infinite magnitude as something completed, which is never permissible in mathematics.
Infinity is merely a way of speaking, the true meaning being a limit,
which certain ratios approach indefinitely close, while others are permitted to increase without restriction.
So here he was thinking about, you know, heading up to infinity by going off the horizon, this was his view.
In 1906, one of France's greatest mathematicians, Henri Poincaré, once wrote,
There's no actual infinity.
That is what the Cantorians have forgotten and have been trapped by contradictions.
So Poincaré was in fact dramatically opposed to this idea.
In fact, he's said to have actually said of Cantor's idea that in fact the ideas were a grave disease.
Here we see Cantor in some sense in Poincaré's mind has infected mathematics.
It was a very dramatic thought, if you think about it, over a mathematical principle,
but it was so outlandish that it was hard to believe.
Now Poincaré was not alone in this point of view.
