So I've built a real number between 0 and 1.
Now Cantor argues that this new real number, that is between 0 and 1,
never appears on our assumed 1 to 1 correspondence.
Now why not?
Let's think about this.
If it appears somewhere on my list, then that means that all the digits must be perfectly lining up somewhere on that chart.
Could it be in the first spot?
Could the number we just built be paired up with the number 1?
Well, no, because we know that it differs at least in the very first decimal spot.
The number paired up with 1 has an 8, and we switched ours, it's a 5.
So it can't be that number.
We don't even care about the rest of the digits.
We know it can't be because of that.
Well, could it be paired up with the number 2?
Well, no, because we know that the number paired up with the number 2
will differ at least in the second spot with our number,
because we picked our second digit to be different from the second digit of the second number.
And could this number actually be on the chart somewhere further down, like in the millionth spot?
Well, no, because the way we systematically developed this number,
if we go down to the millionth decimal spot, we see that whatever digit's there,
our digit in that same spot will differ.
Therefore, this number is not that number paired up with 1 million.
And this is true for all the numbers.
This number is genuinely not on our chart.
Well, notice that this argument works no matter what the real numbers are
and which ones we've written in that right corner, in that right column.
And so we can always look at the diagonal digits and create a real number
simply by just switching the corresponding digits
so that the newly constructed number is a real number that's definitely not on our list.
Thus, his assumption that there was a one-to-one correspondence between these two collections is false.
In other words, Cantor proved that any such list of real numbers will be incomplete.
Therefore, we're forced to conclude that the collection of real numbers between 0 and 1
