In this lecture, we offer one of the most counterintuitive and surprising facts about our world.
Infinity, just as the numbers that came before, comes in different sizes.
His incredible discovery was first made by Georg Cantor in 1874.
Here, we'll tell his story and his struggle to have his outrageous but totally correct mathematical ideas accepted by the mathematical community.
His wondrous argument at once simple and subtle proves that the collection of real numbers is a greater infinity than the collection of natural numbers.
While the natural numbers can be listed in an orderly fashion and in some sense can be counted, we cannot count the real numbers.
Collections that are larger than the natural numbers are known as uncountable collections.
Well, we'll then connect our discussion on the sizes of infinity with our earlier discussions on the likelihood that a real number selected at random will be irrational and transcendental.
We'll describe how both the collections of irrational numbers and transcendental numbers are so large that they are, in fact, uncountable as well.
We'll also connect our observations with the previous discussions of the Cantor set we had and we'll show that while on the one hand this set is a very dusty collection of numbers and its sparse,
on the other hand, it's actually quite robust and in fact the Cantor set we'll see is uncountable as well.
Once again, we open our minds to the reality that there's at least two sizes of infinity and once we do that, we see the nature of our universe in an entirely new light.
Well, let's open what will be the most mathematically dramatic and shocking lecture of this entire course with a totally innocuous riddle.
Why is it so easy to count the digits on my right hand?
Well, let's see. First of all, I can do it. Let me prove that to you. One, two, three, four, five. Okay. Now, why was that so easy?
Well, one answer is that they all lined up in a very orderly fashion or perhaps I should say in an ordinarily fashion because we're talking about order.
There's a first, a second, a third, a fourth and a fifth.
Okay. Well, let's notice that the collection of natural numbers, although they're infinite in size, can be easily and endlessly lined up in an ordinarily fashion.
One is the first, two is the second, three is the third and so on.
Well, I want us to now formalize this trivial observation and see where it leads.
We say that a collection is countable if that collection contains only finitely many elements or has the same cardinality as the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, a collection is a countable collection or we say it's countable if we can line up its elements from that collection so that there's a clear first element, then a second, a third, a fourth, a fifth and so on.
That is, I can list the elements in this collection even if our list is endless.
Well, for example, the collection of cards in a deck of playing cards is countable because in fact the number of cards in a deck of cards is finite, it's a finite number, it's 52 and we can count them just off the deck.
The first, second, third, so we have one, two, three, four, blah, blah, blah, blah, 49, 50, 51, 52 and there we can see we can actually count them, we can list them all.
Well, applying this new notion to our previous observations from the previous lecture, we can now say that the collection of even numbers is a countable collection because we found in that lecture a one-to-one correspondence between it and the collection of natural numbers, so it fits the bill.
The collection of integers is also a countable collection because remember there, what we did was we took the positive integers and the negative integers and we sort of shuffled them together and then we just were able to list them one after the other and pair them up with the natural numbers.
Even the collection of rational numbers is a countable collection because we found a one-to-one correspondence between it and then the collection of natural numbers.
In other words, we were able to produce an orderly list that contains every rational number and that was how we snaked through that large array of fractions.
Well, this idea brings us to a very natural question. Is the collection of real numbers countable?
Well, we know that the collection of real numbers is infinite, so we're asking is the collection of real numbers a countable collection, which means is there a one-to-one correspondence between the collection of real numbers and the collection of natural numbers?
Well, intuitively it seems obvious that infinity is infinity after all. In other words, any infinite collection should have the same cardinality as any other infinite collection.
