As we'll see in just a moment, Cantor's work actually established, among other things,
the existence of infinitely many irrational numbers.
In fact, uncountably many irrational numbers.
As we noted in lecture 18, Leopold Kronecker did not view irrational numbers as natural at all.
Remember that he wrote the famous line, God created the integers, the rest is the work of man.
Reminiscent of the Pythagoreans, in fact.
Even though Cantor was a former student, Kronecker called him a corruptor of youth and a scientific charlatan.
Really brutal words and emotionally charged because he just did not want to accept the arguments that Cantor was offering.
Now Kronecker was perhaps the most important and powerful mathematician in Germany during his lifetime,
so his opposition to Cantor had an enormous impact.
In fact, when Cantor published his paper showing that there were more real numbers than natural numbers,
he gave the paper an innocuous title.
In part, some suggest, so as not to draw Kronecker's attention to it during the review process.
So the title that Cantor gave the paper was,
On a Property of the Set of All Real Algebraic Numbers,
which really says almost nothing at all.
But the idea was that it would fall onto Kronecker's desk and he would just look it over very quickly
and say, OK, that's fine, we can just publish that and not read the details.
And in fact, that's exactly what happened and it was published.
Although if Kronecker would have looked a little bit closer,
he would have certainly never allowed the publication of this very controversial work.
Well, of course Cantor did have some supporters.
Carl Weierstrauss, another great German mathematician of the day,
and the PhD advisor for Cantor was impressed with Cantor's original and interesting and dramatic work.
And he encouraged Cantor to publish it and he defended Cantor to his detractors.
Richard Dedekin, another important German mathematician of the time,
was also a longtime friend and supporter as well.
Well, once the mathematics community had the time to absorb Cantor's groundbreaking ideas,
it was finally able to embrace them.
In 1917, Bertrand Russell wrote that Cantor had
conquered for the intellect a new and vast province which had been given over to chaos and night.
So here Cantor is combating the chaos and the darkness and is shining the light on infinity.
