which again is impossible. In other words, this law is so that no matter what Pierre does,
he either shaves himself or doesn't shave himself, whatever he does, he's breaking
the law. Well, that's a paradox. So, what's giving rise to this funny paradox? Well, the
answer is that a set must be so-called well-defined. That is, for the set to truly be a mathematical
set, it must be clear what things are in the set and what things are not in the set. The
barber's scenario is a paradox because we have a set of men for which Pierre can neither
be in the set nor not in the set, and that's impossible. Mathematicians today would say
this collection is not well-defined and would not consider it a set. This is why the area
of set theory, in fact, has so many subtle points. Well, Cantor's work was fundamental
in creating the subject that's known as set theory and actually laid the groundwork for
further progress in topology, calculus, and fractals. Well, given the notion of a set as
a collection of objects, we'll now consider subcollections of collections, which we'll
call subsets. So, by a subset of a set, we define that to be any collection that comes
from the original set. So, for example, the set that consists of Chico and Harpo is a
subset of the set Chico, Harpo, Groucho, because those two elements come from this larger set.
So, a subset means it's a smaller group of things from there. The empty set is the subset
that contains no elements at all, and usually we denote that by just two curly brackets with
nothing in there, zero, which, of course, we saw was a big problem in trying to understand
the number as a number zero, and so here we see the set that consists of nothing. The
entire set is another extreme example of a subset. For example, the set that consists
of catch-up and mustard is a subset of itself, catch-up and mustard, because all of the elements
from catch-up mustard are from catch-up mustard. So, the whole collection is another example,
an extreme example, of a subset. Well, armed with the idea of subsets as subcollections
of a set, we'll now gather together all possible subsets of a set and view them as one collection.
More precisely, we'll now raise the level of abstraction by considering collections
whose elements are themselves collection. That is, we consider sets consisting of a
set of sets. A little weird sounding, but let's think about it. Given a set, we define
