In this lecture, we extend our reach even further into the stratosphere of infinity.
Our goal is to construct a collection whose cardinality is greater than the uncountable
cardinality of the collection of real numbers. That is, we'll find a third size of infinity.
To this end, we'll again follow Cantor's own creative path and consider the abstract
but attractive idea of so-called power sets. A power set associated with a collection is
the totality of all possible subcollections of the original collection. After shoring
up our understanding of this new idea through several simple examples, we'll return to
Cantor's diagonalization argument, which established the cardinality of the reals being
greater than the cardinality of the natural numbers, and apply it to prove that given
any collection, the cardinality of its associated power set is greater than the cardinality
of the original collection. We will then apply this principle, now known as Cantor's
theorem, to show that there exists an infinite collection that has greater cardinality than
the collection of the real numbers. We'll prove that there are at least three different
sizes of infinity. So far in our journey through infinity, we've studied collections of numbers.
Well, now we'll abstract that exploration and study collections, not of numbers, but
of collections. In other words, we'll now study collections whose elements are themselves
collections. Let's begin by informally describing what mathematicians mean by set. By a set,
we mean an abstract collection of elements. For example, the collection that contains
the funny brothers from the Marx family, Chico-Graucho-Harpo. We can view that as a set of three elements,
and we denote that with that curly bracket, and we'd say Chico-Graucho-Harpo, and we'd
read that, the curly bracket would be read as the set consisting of Chico-Graucho-Harpo.
Notice that the order doesn't matter at all here, it's just the totality of all those
things. Another example is the collection of the two most popular condiments in this
country, catch-up and mustard. Again, we can write that as the set consisting of catch-up
and mustard. Order doesn't matter. In fact, throughout our course, we've been working
with sets of numbers, although we've referred to them as collections. Now, we'll adopt
a more standard mathematical terminology and call them sets. For example, the set of natural
