the power set of that set to equal the set whose elements are precisely all the subsets
of the original set. Let's consider a tasty example. Our set of condiments, let me call
it C, so C equals the set of catch-up and mustard. Well, it has the following four subcollections.
The empty set, that's always a subcollection, nothing. Just catch-up alone, so the subset
consisting of catch-up, the subset just consisting of mustard, and then of course the subset
consisting of both, catch-up and mustard, the other extreme, namely all of them. These
four subsets are the elements of the power set of the set, catch-up and mustard. And
we denote the power set by using the letter P for power, so P of C or P of the condiments
would be the set that consists of the empty set, the set that just has catch-up, the set
that just has mustard, and the set that has both catch-up and mustard. So you see four
elements in this big power set. By the way, again, remember the order in which we list
these things doesn't matter at all. Well, notice that the power set represents the four possible
toppings that we could put on a burger when faced with a rather skimpy condiment bar containing
just two options, catch-up and mustard. And so in some sense the power set depicts all
possible ways of selecting from the set. So with respect to a hamburger, you could either
put nothing on top of it, you could put just catch-up, just mustard, or both. And those
are the elements of the power set. Well, let's now consider a more comical collection to
illustrate the idea. Let's let S denote the set of brothers Chico Groucho Harpo. Well,
the power set of this collection, which is denoted as P of S, or the power set of S, is the
collection of all subsets of S. In other words, the power set is going to be a big set. It starts
of course with the empty set, so no brothers. Then just the set consisting of Chico, then
the set just consisting of Groucho, then the set just consisting of Harpo, then the set
consisting of Chico and Groucho together. Then the set consisting of Chico and Harpo
together. And then finally the set consisting of Groucho and Harpo together. And then one
last set, which is all of them, the entirety, the set consisting of all three, Chico, Groucho,
Harpo. Now notice that in this power set what we're doing here is we're looking at all the
ways of taking sub-collections of them, taking them off into a room. We either take none
