original set S. Hence, we've just established the validity of Cantor's theorem. Well,
we can now apply this beautiful and counterintuitive result of Cantor's to show that there exists
a collection that's even larger than the collection of real numbers. Let's warm up to this by
first recalling Cantor's discovery that the cardinality of the set of natural numbers is
smaller than the cardinality of the set of real numbers. Put more informally, just for
us, the infinity of the set of natural numbers is a smaller infinity than the infinity of
the set of real numbers. Well, how can we now find a collection whose cardinality is
larger than the cardinality of the collection of real numbers? Well, Cantor's theorem
gives us an answer. We can consider the power set of the real numbers. In other words, we
can consider the collection of all subsets of real numbers. Now, this is a really strange,
strange collection to visualize, because remember, the real numbers can be represented by the
points on a number line. All the infinite points on the number line, which we saw in
the last lecture is an uncountable set, so it's teeming lots and lots of points. And
now we're going to consider a new set, not the set of the points individually, but the
collection of all subsets of these points. Well, this contains all sorts of things. For
example, one element in the power set would just be the natural numbers all taken together.
That's a subset. Or all the numbers between the intervals 0 and 1. That's also a subset.
That becomes one element of the power set, because remember, the power set consists of
subsets. All the integers put together, so imagine all the dots just at the evenly spaced
0, 1, 2, 3, negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, and so forth. That entirety is just one
element in this power set. And there are lots of other subsets that we can imagine taking
a bunch of points and maybe a couple of intervals all together and mixing that up and scrambling.
It's hard to really wrap your mind around the totality of all these subcollections and
for good reason, because in fact, we're about to see that this is a very, very, very large
set. The point is that we are looking at a set whose elements are precisely all the subcollections
of points from the real line. Anyway, so the primes, the collection of primes forms one
element in the power set of the reels. Really hard to wrap your mind around a collection
