In this lecture, we extend our reach even further into the stratosphere of infinity.
Our goal is to construct a collection whose cardinality is greater than the uncountable
cardinality of the collection of real numbers. That is, we'll find a third size of infinity.
To this end, we'll again follow Cantor's own creative path and consider the abstract
but attractive idea of so-called power sets. A power set associated with a collection is
the totality of all possible subcollections of the original collection. After shoring
up our understanding of this new idea through several simple examples, we'll return to
Cantor's diagonalization argument, which established the cardinality of the reals being
greater than the cardinality of the natural numbers, and apply it to prove that given
any collection, the cardinality of its associated power set is greater than the cardinality
of the original collection. We will then apply this principle, now known as Cantor's
theorem, to show that there exists an infinite collection that has greater cardinality than
the collection of the real numbers. We'll prove that there are at least three different
sizes of infinity. So far in our journey through infinity, we've studied collections of numbers.
Well, now we'll abstract that exploration and study collections, not of numbers, but
of collections. In other words, we'll now study collections whose elements are themselves
collections. Let's begin by informally describing what mathematicians mean by set. By a set,
we mean an abstract collection of elements. For example, the collection that contains
the funny brothers from the Marx family, Chico-Graucho-Harpo. We can view that as a set of three elements,
and we denote that with that curly bracket, and we'd say Chico-Graucho-Harpo, and we'd
read that, the curly bracket would be read as the set consisting of Chico-Graucho-Harpo.
Notice that the order doesn't matter at all here, it's just the totality of all those
things. Another example is the collection of the two most popular condiments in this
country, catch-up and mustard. Again, we can write that as the set consisting of catch-up
and mustard. Order doesn't matter. In fact, throughout our course, we've been working
with sets of numbers, although we've referred to them as collections. Now, we'll adopt
a more standard mathematical terminology and call them sets. For example, the set of natural
numbers is the set one, two, three, four, and so on. The set of integers is the collection
of all the natural numbers together with zero and all the negatives of the natural numbers.
The set of rational numbers equals all the fractions, the set of real numbers, and so
on. We'll use the word set to mean collection. The word set appeared for the first time in
mathematics in 1851 in a work authored by Italian mathematician Bernhard Bolzano, considered
by many to be the father of set theory. The work was entitled Paradoxes of the Infinite.
Now in his text, he offers the very first definition of a set. In fact, he writes, I call a set
a collection where the order of its parts is irrelevant and where nothing essential is
changed if only the order is changed. So again, you see, it's this collection where order
doesn't matter. Now, it turns out that the concept of a set or a collection is much more
subtle than it would first appear. This observation was made famous by Bertrand Russell in 1901.
He illustrated the subtlety with an amusing paradox involving a barber. Today, this paradox
is actually known as the barber's paradox. Well, here we go. Suppose there's a small
village in which every man must shave, but there's only one barber in this town whose
name is Pierre. Let's further assume that there's a strange law declaring that this
barber must shave all men and only those men who do not shave themselves. Let's just think
about this for a second before we go on in the paradox. So we have a small village, there's
one barber. Each man must shave, and either he could shave himself or he must be shaved
by the barber, and the barber only shaves those men who decide not to shave themselves.
That's the law that was decreed for some strange reason. Well, let's now consider the set of
all men from this village who do not shave themselves. Okay? Well, here's the question
for us to contemplate. Is Pierre the barber in this set? Well, if he's in this set, that
means that he doesn't shave himself, which then by law means that he as the barber must
shave himself. In other words, if Pierre is in the set, then he is not in the set, which
is impossible. On the other hand, if Pierre is not in this set, that means that he shaves
himself. But by law, he's not allowed to shave those men who shave themselves. Thus, he cannot
shave himself. In other words, if Pierre is not in this set, then he must be in the set,
which again is impossible. In other words, this law is so that no matter what Pierre does,
he either shaves himself or doesn't shave himself, whatever he does, he's breaking
the law. Well, that's a paradox. So, what's giving rise to this funny paradox? Well, the
answer is that a set must be so-called well-defined. That is, for the set to truly be a mathematical
set, it must be clear what things are in the set and what things are not in the set. The
barber's scenario is a paradox because we have a set of men for which Pierre can neither
be in the set nor not in the set, and that's impossible. Mathematicians today would say
this collection is not well-defined and would not consider it a set. This is why the area
of set theory, in fact, has so many subtle points. Well, Cantor's work was fundamental
in creating the subject that's known as set theory and actually laid the groundwork for
further progress in topology, calculus, and fractals. Well, given the notion of a set as
a collection of objects, we'll now consider subcollections of collections, which we'll
call subsets. So, by a subset of a set, we define that to be any collection that comes
from the original set. So, for example, the set that consists of Chico and Harpo is a
subset of the set Chico, Harpo, Groucho, because those two elements come from this larger set.
So, a subset means it's a smaller group of things from there. The empty set is the subset
that contains no elements at all, and usually we denote that by just two curly brackets with
nothing in there, zero, which, of course, we saw was a big problem in trying to understand
the number as a number zero, and so here we see the set that consists of nothing. The
entire set is another extreme example of a subset. For example, the set that consists
of catch-up and mustard is a subset of itself, catch-up and mustard, because all of the elements
from catch-up mustard are from catch-up mustard. So, the whole collection is another example,
an extreme example, of a subset. Well, armed with the idea of subsets as subcollections
of a set, we'll now gather together all possible subsets of a set and view them as one collection.
More precisely, we'll now raise the level of abstraction by considering collections
whose elements are themselves collection. That is, we consider sets consisting of a
set of sets. A little weird sounding, but let's think about it. Given a set, we define
the power set of that set to equal the set whose elements are precisely all the subsets
of the original set. Let's consider a tasty example. Our set of condiments, let me call
it C, so C equals the set of catch-up and mustard. Well, it has the following four subcollections.
The empty set, that's always a subcollection, nothing. Just catch-up alone, so the subset
consisting of catch-up, the subset just consisting of mustard, and then of course the subset
consisting of both, catch-up and mustard, the other extreme, namely all of them. These
four subsets are the elements of the power set of the set, catch-up and mustard. And
we denote the power set by using the letter P for power, so P of C or P of the condiments
would be the set that consists of the empty set, the set that just has catch-up, the set
that just has mustard, and the set that has both catch-up and mustard. So you see four
elements in this big power set. By the way, again, remember the order in which we list
these things doesn't matter at all. Well, notice that the power set represents the four possible
toppings that we could put on a burger when faced with a rather skimpy condiment bar containing
just two options, catch-up and mustard. And so in some sense the power set depicts all
possible ways of selecting from the set. So with respect to a hamburger, you could either
put nothing on top of it, you could put just catch-up, just mustard, or both. And those
are the elements of the power set. Well, let's now consider a more comical collection to
illustrate the idea. Let's let S denote the set of brothers Chico Groucho Harpo. Well,
the power set of this collection, which is denoted as P of S, or the power set of S, is the
collection of all subsets of S. In other words, the power set is going to be a big set. It starts
of course with the empty set, so no brothers. Then just the set consisting of Chico, then
the set just consisting of Groucho, then the set just consisting of Harpo, then the set
consisting of Chico and Groucho together. Then the set consisting of Chico and Harpo
together. And then finally the set consisting of Groucho and Harpo together. And then one
last set, which is all of them, the entirety, the set consisting of all three, Chico, Groucho,
Harpo. Now notice that in this power set what we're doing here is we're looking at all the
ways of taking sub-collections of them, taking them off into a room. We either take none
of them, we take them one at a time, we take them in pairs, or we take all three. So again
notice that the order in which we list these elements or these brothers really doesn't
matter at all. Okay, now that we've seen a couple of examples of power sets, let's compare
the size of a set with the size of its associated power set. Reflecting on these examples, we
see that the set of condiments has cardinality two, there was mustard and ketchup, and its
power set has cardinality four. We also notice that the set of Marx Brothers has cardinality
three, while its power set has cardinality eight. Well, what do we notice? Well, we see
that the original set in both of these examples is smaller than its power set. Okay, but does
this observation always hold? In particular, the truly interesting question is, does this
observation hold for infinite sets? Well, we'll discover that the answer is yes. This
amazing fact is now known as Cantor's Theorem, and it states that the cardinality of a set
is always smaller than the cardinality of its associated power set. Cantor was able
to apply his powerful insights into sets to prove that even if a set is infinite, its
cardinality will always be smaller than the cardinality of its associated power set. Really
remarkable stunning theorem. Now, in fact, Cantor used his diagonalization idea from
the previous lecture to prove his result about the cardinality of power sets. And this is
standard in mathematics. When you have a great idea that allows you to prove a theorem, what
you try to do is after you have the theorem, you move on from that and see, can I take
the same idea, that germ of an idea, and actually prove much more? This is beautifully depicted
by Cantor's work, who proves what's called Cantor's Theorem, which is a dramatic extension
of Cantor's original result, showing that the reals are greater than the natural numbers.
And now in this context, with just the same idea of proof, and that's the power of thinking
about how we prove theorems, and if we can extend them. Now, I want to illustrate his
argument with our example involving the three Marx Brothers. Now, of course, in this case,
it's easy to see that the set of Marx Brothers is smaller than its power set, since we listed
all the elements and saw that the set of brothers has size three, while the power set has size
eight. So, of course, that's easy. However, let's apply Cantor's argument with the simple
set so we can see how his idea can be applied to any set, especially infinite sets. So,
let's assume that contrary to what we wish to establish, the set S and its power set have
the same cardinality. Now, remember that we're letting S represent the set of three Marx
Brothers, and P of S, or the power set, is the collection of all the subsets of S. Well,
given this assumption, there must be a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the
set S and the elements of the power set, in particular, a one-to-one correspondence between
the individual brothers and collections of brothers. Now, just as an example, just to
sort of set this on solid ground, let's just consider one. So, let's take Chico and pair
him up with the collection of Chico Groucho Harpo. Let's take Groucho and pair him up
with the subset of brothers that consists just of Harpo. And finally, let's take Harpo
and pair him up with the subset that consists just of Chico and Groucho. So, you can see
that in the first column we have the elements, the brothers, Chico, Groucho, Harpo, and then
each one is paired up with a particular different subset. Well, Cantor observed that for any
particular subset of the set S, any given element from the set S, they're exactly two
possibilities. Either that given element is in the given subset or not in the given subset.
In other words, every element is either in or not in any particular subset. So, given
an element and given a subset, we can look at this element and ask, is it in the subset?
And the answer is either yes or no. It's kind of like the binary arithmetic we looked at
which just had zero and one, yes, no. So, we see this binary arithmetic almost happening
here with these reflections of it. There's just a quantum decision. You're in or you're
out, yes or no. Well, armed with this basic idea and the assumed one-to-one pairing between
elements of S and the subsets of S, Cantor then modified his diagonalization idea from
the previous lecture to describe a subset of S that is definitely missing from the list
of pairings. Well, by finding a missing subset, we'll show that this pairing is not a one,
one-to-one correspondence because some subset was left off the list. Well, his method for
describing this missing subset requires us to consider each element from the set S and
decide if we're going to include it in this subset or not include it in this subset. So,
we make a yes or no decision with each element from our set S. What's Cantor's method for
systematically making these decisions to ensure that the subset we're creating is not on our
list? Well, the elements of the set S are listed in the left column of our correspondence.
So, let's look at the first element. In our particular example, we see Chico. Now, Chico
is paired up with a subset. In our example, it's Chico Groucho Harpo, so the entirety
of three brothers. Now, Cantor modifies his switch the first digit idea from his diagonalization
argument. In particular, he would say the following. He'd say, well, the brother Chico
is paired up with the subset Chico Groucho Harpo. Is Chico in this subset? If the answer
is yes, then I will not include Chico in the subset I'm creating. And if the answer is
no, Chico is not in the subset associated with Chico, then I will include Chico in the
subset that I'm creating. In other words, Cantor will do the opposite. If Chico is in
the first subset on the list, then he will not include Chico in his subset. And conversely,
if Chico is not in the first subset on the list, then he will include Chico in his subset.
In our particular example, we actually see that Chico is, in fact, inside the first subset
because that consists of all three brothers, so we'll not include Chico in our subset.
Let's now move to the next element in the left column. In this case, we see the brother
Groucho. Okay, we now have to decide if we want to include Groucho in our subset or not
include him in our subset. How do we decide? Well, we see and we look at the subset associated
with Groucho. If Groucho is an element of that subset, then we will not put him in our
subset. And if Groucho is not an element in that subset, then we will include him in our
subset. In other words, we again do the opposite. So in our specific example that we see, we
see that Groucho is paired up with a subset that just consists of Harpo. In other words,
Groucho is not in that subset. Therefore, we include Groucho in the subset that we're
building. Okay, we're always doing the opposite. Okay, so so far in our special set that we're
building, we don't include Chico, but we do include Groucho. Thus, our subset will not
match the first subset and will not match the second subset because they at least differ
in one element, consisting of an element or not. Now, what about Harpo? Well, we look
at the subset paired with Harpo on our list. Do we see Harpo in that subset? In our specific
example, we see no. That subset contains only Chico and Groucho. Therefore, we do the opposite
and we include Harpo in the subset we're constructing. Well, we've gone through every element from
our set S of Marx Brothers, and so we see that we've built the subset consisting just
of Groucho and Harpo. Okay, now Cantor claims that this subset must always be missing from
our pairing list. Now, how do we know that for sure in general? Well, we know that we
can our subset be the subset paired with Chico. Well, no. Since we saw that Chico is
in that subset and by our construction, we know that Chico is not in our subset. In other
words, these two cannot be the same subset. Well, can our subset be the subset paired
with Groucho? Well, no. Since we actually see that Groucho is not in that subset and
by our systematic construction, we know that Groucho is in our subset. In other words,
those two cannot be the same subset. Well, can our subset be the subset paired with Harpo?
Well, no. Since we see again that Harpo is not in that subset and we know that by our
construction, we put Harpo in our subset. In other words, those two cannot be the same
subset. Well, therefore we find that the subset we've just built is definitely not on our
list because it differs at least in one element with each of the elements there. Now, of course,
we tried to build another list like this. We could use the same exact idea of looking
along the diagonal and making the opposite decision about whether to include each element
or not. This would again create a subset not on our list. So no matter how we paired elements
of S with subsets of S, we see we can always find a subset missing from that list. Thus,
we conclude that there is no one-to-one pairing between the elements S and the subsets of
S. We always have more subsets left over. Well, as before, we can generalize this idea
to show that no one-to-one pairing between any set S and its power set can exist. Remember,
the power set is just the totality of all the subsets of S. We can always find, no matter
how we try to pair them up, the subsets with the elements of S, we can always find missing
elements from the power set whenever we try to pair them. In other words, the power set
of a set, remember that's the collection of all the subsets, is always larger than the
original set S. Hence, we've just established the validity of Cantor's theorem. Well,
we can now apply this beautiful and counterintuitive result of Cantor's to show that there exists
a collection that's even larger than the collection of real numbers. Let's warm up to this by
first recalling Cantor's discovery that the cardinality of the set of natural numbers is
smaller than the cardinality of the set of real numbers. Put more informally, just for
us, the infinity of the set of natural numbers is a smaller infinity than the infinity of
the set of real numbers. Well, how can we now find a collection whose cardinality is
larger than the cardinality of the collection of real numbers? Well, Cantor's theorem
gives us an answer. We can consider the power set of the real numbers. In other words, we
can consider the collection of all subsets of real numbers. Now, this is a really strange,
strange collection to visualize, because remember, the real numbers can be represented by the
points on a number line. All the infinite points on the number line, which we saw in
the last lecture is an uncountable set, so it's teeming lots and lots of points. And
now we're going to consider a new set, not the set of the points individually, but the
collection of all subsets of these points. Well, this contains all sorts of things. For
example, one element in the power set would just be the natural numbers all taken together.
That's a subset. Or all the numbers between the intervals 0 and 1. That's also a subset.
That becomes one element of the power set, because remember, the power set consists of
subsets. All the integers put together, so imagine all the dots just at the evenly spaced
0, 1, 2, 3, negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, and so forth. That entirety is just one
element in this power set. And there are lots of other subsets that we can imagine taking
a bunch of points and maybe a couple of intervals all together and mixing that up and scrambling.
It's hard to really wrap your mind around the totality of all these subcollections and
for good reason, because in fact, we're about to see that this is a very, very, very large
set. The point is that we are looking at a set whose elements are precisely all the subcollections
of points from the real line. Anyway, so the primes, the collection of primes forms one
element in the power set of the reels. Really hard to wrap your mind around a collection
that's so vast that all the primes together make up just one point in this power set. Well,
the power set of the real numbers has a greater cardinality than the set of real numbers.
That's what Cantor proved. He said that if you take any set at all and look at its power
set, the power set will always be larger. So in this case, what we're seeing is we just
found a third infinity. This incredible consequence of Cantor's mathematical logic is totally
vexing and requires much contemplation. What are the implications of different sizes of
infinity? Here we're seeing that we took the counting numbers, the natural numbers, they're
a certain size of infinity, countable. Then we saw that the real numbers, all the points
on a number line, is even a larger infinity. Then by Cantor's theorem, if we look at the
collection of all subsets of the points on a real line, that's even larger still. So
now we see three different levels of infinity, three different sizes of infinity. Well, how
do we interpret that? How do we wrap our minds around that? Well, I mean, how does it even
affect our view of the world, our view of the universe, and even our personal and spiritual
beliefs? We need to think about how this new realization, once we grapple with it, fits
in. Cantor himself felt that his work on infinity would have an impact far beyond the confines
of mathematics. He believed that his theory would have implications within the realms of
philosophy and religion. In fact, he believed that his set theory was shown to him actually
by God. In 1896, in fact, he wrote, from me, Christian philosophy will be offered for the
first time the true theory of the infinite. The way I interpret that is that Cantor is
saying, well, you know, Christian philosophy maybe talks about God as being infinite. Cantor
is saying, well, okay, you could believe that, but now this is really the true theory of the
infinite. And so it really is looking into this big collection of religious beliefs and
saying, well, here's how to do it mathematically correct. Well, independent of our individual
views and beliefs, the first time we encounter Cantor's revolutionary ideas were at once
surprised and mystified. Only over time can we embrace this new mindset, one that includes
the reality of different sizes of infinity.
