that's so vast that all the primes together make up just one point in this power set. Well,
the power set of the real numbers has a greater cardinality than the set of real numbers.
That's what Cantor proved. He said that if you take any set at all and look at its power
set, the power set will always be larger. So in this case, what we're seeing is we just
found a third infinity. This incredible consequence of Cantor's mathematical logic is totally
vexing and requires much contemplation. What are the implications of different sizes of
infinity? Here we're seeing that we took the counting numbers, the natural numbers, they're
a certain size of infinity, countable. Then we saw that the real numbers, all the points
on a number line, is even a larger infinity. Then by Cantor's theorem, if we look at the
collection of all subsets of the points on a real line, that's even larger still. So
now we see three different levels of infinity, three different sizes of infinity. Well, how
do we interpret that? How do we wrap our minds around that? Well, I mean, how does it even
affect our view of the world, our view of the universe, and even our personal and spiritual
beliefs? We need to think about how this new realization, once we grapple with it, fits
in. Cantor himself felt that his work on infinity would have an impact far beyond the confines
of mathematics. He believed that his theory would have implications within the realms of
philosophy and religion. In fact, he believed that his set theory was shown to him actually
by God. In 1896, in fact, he wrote, from me, Christian philosophy will be offered for the
first time the true theory of the infinite. The way I interpret that is that Cantor is
saying, well, you know, Christian philosophy maybe talks about God as being infinite. Cantor
is saying, well, okay, you could believe that, but now this is really the true theory of the
infinite. And so it really is looking into this big collection of religious beliefs and
saying, well, here's how to do it mathematically correct. Well, independent of our individual
views and beliefs, the first time we encounter Cantor's revolutionary ideas were at once
surprised and mystified. Only over time can we embrace this new mindset, one that includes
the reality of different sizes of infinity.
