numbers is the set one, two, three, four, and so on. The set of integers is the collection
of all the natural numbers together with zero and all the negatives of the natural numbers.
The set of rational numbers equals all the fractions, the set of real numbers, and so
on. We'll use the word set to mean collection. The word set appeared for the first time in
mathematics in 1851 in a work authored by Italian mathematician Bernhard Bolzano, considered
by many to be the father of set theory. The work was entitled Paradoxes of the Infinite.
Now in his text, he offers the very first definition of a set. In fact, he writes, I call a set
a collection where the order of its parts is irrelevant and where nothing essential is
changed if only the order is changed. So again, you see, it's this collection where order
doesn't matter. Now, it turns out that the concept of a set or a collection is much more
subtle than it would first appear. This observation was made famous by Bertrand Russell in 1901.
He illustrated the subtlety with an amusing paradox involving a barber. Today, this paradox
is actually known as the barber's paradox. Well, here we go. Suppose there's a small
village in which every man must shave, but there's only one barber in this town whose
name is Pierre. Let's further assume that there's a strange law declaring that this
barber must shave all men and only those men who do not shave themselves. Let's just think
about this for a second before we go on in the paradox. So we have a small village, there's
one barber. Each man must shave, and either he could shave himself or he must be shaved
by the barber, and the barber only shaves those men who decide not to shave themselves.
That's the law that was decreed for some strange reason. Well, let's now consider the set of
all men from this village who do not shave themselves. Okay? Well, here's the question
for us to contemplate. Is Pierre the barber in this set? Well, if he's in this set, that
means that he doesn't shave himself, which then by law means that he as the barber must
shave himself. In other words, if Pierre is in the set, then he is not in the set, which
is impossible. On the other hand, if Pierre is not in this set, that means that he shaves
himself. But by law, he's not allowed to shave those men who shave themselves. Thus, he cannot
shave himself. In other words, if Pierre is not in this set, then he must be in the set,
