of them, we take them one at a time, we take them in pairs, or we take all three. So again
notice that the order in which we list these elements or these brothers really doesn't
matter at all. Okay, now that we've seen a couple of examples of power sets, let's compare
the size of a set with the size of its associated power set. Reflecting on these examples, we
see that the set of condiments has cardinality two, there was mustard and ketchup, and its
power set has cardinality four. We also notice that the set of Marx Brothers has cardinality
three, while its power set has cardinality eight. Well, what do we notice? Well, we see
that the original set in both of these examples is smaller than its power set. Okay, but does
this observation always hold? In particular, the truly interesting question is, does this
observation hold for infinite sets? Well, we'll discover that the answer is yes. This
amazing fact is now known as Cantor's Theorem, and it states that the cardinality of a set
is always smaller than the cardinality of its associated power set. Cantor was able
to apply his powerful insights into sets to prove that even if a set is infinite, its
cardinality will always be smaller than the cardinality of its associated power set. Really
remarkable stunning theorem. Now, in fact, Cantor used his diagonalization idea from
the previous lecture to prove his result about the cardinality of power sets. And this is
standard in mathematics. When you have a great idea that allows you to prove a theorem, what
you try to do is after you have the theorem, you move on from that and see, can I take
the same idea, that germ of an idea, and actually prove much more? This is beautifully depicted
by Cantor's work, who proves what's called Cantor's Theorem, which is a dramatic extension
of Cantor's original result, showing that the reals are greater than the natural numbers.
And now in this context, with just the same idea of proof, and that's the power of thinking
about how we prove theorems, and if we can extend them. Now, I want to illustrate his
argument with our example involving the three Marx Brothers. Now, of course, in this case,
it's easy to see that the set of Marx Brothers is smaller than its power set, since we listed
all the elements and saw that the set of brothers has size three, while the power set has size
eight. So, of course, that's easy. However, let's apply Cantor's argument with the simple
