at the subset paired with Harpo on our list. Do we see Harpo in that subset? In our specific
example, we see no. That subset contains only Chico and Groucho. Therefore, we do the opposite
and we include Harpo in the subset we're constructing. Well, we've gone through every element from
our set S of Marx Brothers, and so we see that we've built the subset consisting just
of Groucho and Harpo. Okay, now Cantor claims that this subset must always be missing from
our pairing list. Now, how do we know that for sure in general? Well, we know that we
can our subset be the subset paired with Chico. Well, no. Since we saw that Chico is
in that subset and by our construction, we know that Chico is not in our subset. In other
words, these two cannot be the same subset. Well, can our subset be the subset paired
with Groucho? Well, no. Since we actually see that Groucho is not in that subset and
by our systematic construction, we know that Groucho is in our subset. In other words,
those two cannot be the same subset. Well, can our subset be the subset paired with Harpo?
Well, no. Since we see again that Harpo is not in that subset and we know that by our
construction, we put Harpo in our subset. In other words, those two cannot be the same
subset. Well, therefore we find that the subset we've just built is definitely not on our
list because it differs at least in one element with each of the elements there. Now, of course,
we tried to build another list like this. We could use the same exact idea of looking
along the diagonal and making the opposite decision about whether to include each element
or not. This would again create a subset not on our list. So no matter how we paired elements
of S with subsets of S, we see we can always find a subset missing from that list. Thus,
we conclude that there is no one-to-one pairing between the elements S and the subsets of
S. We always have more subsets left over. Well, as before, we can generalize this idea
to show that no one-to-one pairing between any set S and its power set can exist. Remember,
the power set is just the totality of all the subsets of S. We can always find, no matter
how we try to pair them up, the subsets with the elements of S, we can always find missing
elements from the power set whenever we try to pair them. In other words, the power set
of a set, remember that's the collection of all the subsets, is always larger than the
