set so we can see how his idea can be applied to any set, especially infinite sets. So,
let's assume that contrary to what we wish to establish, the set S and its power set have
the same cardinality. Now, remember that we're letting S represent the set of three Marx
Brothers, and P of S, or the power set, is the collection of all the subsets of S. Well,
given this assumption, there must be a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the
set S and the elements of the power set, in particular, a one-to-one correspondence between
the individual brothers and collections of brothers. Now, just as an example, just to
sort of set this on solid ground, let's just consider one. So, let's take Chico and pair
him up with the collection of Chico Groucho Harpo. Let's take Groucho and pair him up
with the subset of brothers that consists just of Harpo. And finally, let's take Harpo
and pair him up with the subset that consists just of Chico and Groucho. So, you can see
that in the first column we have the elements, the brothers, Chico, Groucho, Harpo, and then
each one is paired up with a particular different subset. Well, Cantor observed that for any
particular subset of the set S, any given element from the set S, they're exactly two
possibilities. Either that given element is in the given subset or not in the given subset.
In other words, every element is either in or not in any particular subset. So, given
an element and given a subset, we can look at this element and ask, is it in the subset?
And the answer is either yes or no. It's kind of like the binary arithmetic we looked at
which just had zero and one, yes, no. So, we see this binary arithmetic almost happening
here with these reflections of it. There's just a quantum decision. You're in or you're
out, yes or no. Well, armed with this basic idea and the assumed one-to-one pairing between
elements of S and the subsets of S, Cantor then modified his diagonalization idea from
the previous lecture to describe a subset of S that is definitely missing from the list
of pairings. Well, by finding a missing subset, we'll show that this pairing is not a one,
one-to-one correspondence because some subset was left off the list. Well, his method for
describing this missing subset requires us to consider each element from the set S and
decide if we're going to include it in this subset or not include it in this subset. So,
