we make a yes or no decision with each element from our set S. What's Cantor's method for
systematically making these decisions to ensure that the subset we're creating is not on our
list? Well, the elements of the set S are listed in the left column of our correspondence.
So, let's look at the first element. In our particular example, we see Chico. Now, Chico
is paired up with a subset. In our example, it's Chico Groucho Harpo, so the entirety
of three brothers. Now, Cantor modifies his switch the first digit idea from his diagonalization
argument. In particular, he would say the following. He'd say, well, the brother Chico
is paired up with the subset Chico Groucho Harpo. Is Chico in this subset? If the answer
is yes, then I will not include Chico in the subset I'm creating. And if the answer is
no, Chico is not in the subset associated with Chico, then I will include Chico in the
subset that I'm creating. In other words, Cantor will do the opposite. If Chico is in
the first subset on the list, then he will not include Chico in his subset. And conversely,
if Chico is not in the first subset on the list, then he will include Chico in his subset.
In our particular example, we actually see that Chico is, in fact, inside the first subset
because that consists of all three brothers, so we'll not include Chico in our subset.
Let's now move to the next element in the left column. In this case, we see the brother
Groucho. Okay, we now have to decide if we want to include Groucho in our subset or not
include him in our subset. How do we decide? Well, we see and we look at the subset associated
with Groucho. If Groucho is an element of that subset, then we will not put him in our
subset. And if Groucho is not an element in that subset, then we will include him in our
subset. In other words, we again do the opposite. So in our specific example that we see, we
see that Groucho is paired up with a subset that just consists of Harpo. In other words,
Groucho is not in that subset. Therefore, we include Groucho in the subset that we're
building. Okay, we're always doing the opposite. Okay, so so far in our special set that we're
building, we don't include Chico, but we do include Groucho. Thus, our subset will not
match the first subset and will not match the second subset because they at least differ
in one element, consisting of an element or not. Now, what about Harpo? Well, we look
