What's the big question in set theory these days?
And so this person, who was a little taken back by the mazzi of this young, brand-new,
newly minted PhD, said, well, the biggest question, of course, is the independence of the continuum
hypothesis.
You see, because in 1940, Gertl proved one direction.
He showed that you can't disprove it, but still it remained an open question whether
you can prove that you can't prove it.
And Paul Cohn had the audacity to say, you know what?
I'm going to go out and try this problem and work on it.
And he did.
And in fact, he solved it, which just goes to show you that sometimes it takes a lot
of guts and maybe almost arrogance, although I'm not implying that Paul Cohn was arrogant,
but it takes a lot of guts to face these big challenging questions.
But if we don't face those challenging questions, they'll never get resolved.
We'll never answer difficult issues if we don't have the guts to go and face them.
Anyway, this young, brand-new PhD produced a solution.
It was extremely complicated, took up pages and pages and pages of complicated advanced
mathematics, logic, and set theory.
And of course, it was so complicated that people didn't want to read it, right?
Who wanted to go through and read this beginner's solution to a very well-known, difficult problem
that great minds haven't been able to solve, only to go through, page after page, to inevitably
find the mistake that we're sure is there.
So people really did not want to read it, and they wouldn't look at it.
But Kurt Gerl himself got a copy of this manuscript.
Now, Kurt Gerl was at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, right next to Princeton
University.
And Paul Cohn was a visitor there as well at the same time.
And one afternoon, during tea in mathematics, the community gets together usually in the
afternoon and has an F's T. It's very civilized.
They get together to have tea.
There's also blackboards there, so you can do math, too, but you drink tea.
Well, this man, Kurt Gerl, walked up to this very young PhD and quietly said to him over
tea, congratulations, you've solved this problem.
And that was the first time that the math community acknowledged that, in fact, he had
produced a complete and correct solution.
