Here in this lecture, we'll visit the frontiers of our understanding and discover what humankind
knows and doesn't know about infinity.
After an overview of what we've seen thus far in our travels through infinity, we'll
turn to several important questions that we've yet to consider.
Are there infinitely many different sizes of infinity?
Is there a largest infinity, a mother of all infinities, if you will?
Is there a cardinality of numbers that actually is between the cardinality of the real numbers
and the natural numbers, or is the cardinality of the real numbers the next infinity after
the infinity of natural numbers?
In view of our previous discoveries, we'll be able to answer two of these questions.
However, the remaining question has a shocking answer.
This question, which preoccupied Cantor at the end of his life, remained unsolved for
decades.
Here we'll delve into the fascinating 20th century story of that question known as the
Continuum Hypothesis.
As we'll see, this question leads us to one of the highest cliffs of mathematics.
Its unusual answer, found by Kurt Gertl and Paul Kohn in the mid-1900s, literally brings
us to the very edge of that cliff.
We'll take a moment to enjoy the incredible sight and then carefully take one step back
to avoid falling off into the abyss.
Well, before we travel further into the endless wonder of infinity, I wanted us to reflect
on where we've been and what we've seen.
As demonstrated by the events of history, we've seen that it's a long and challenging
undertaking to transform the counter-intuitive theorems of infinity into reasonable, sounding,
believable, and dare I say, intuitive notions.
I know how difficult it is to wrap one's mind around these incredibly foreign ideas.
Thus, before we move forward, I want us to take a momentary pause and take in the panoramic
view of the mathematics of the infinite.
The first step in infinity is to admit that it's beyond all real numbers, and thus we
must immediately forego any desire to enumerate a collection containing infinitely many objects,
but instead compare these collections with other such collections.
If two collections are equally numerous, we say they have the same cardinality.
In this case, this implies that even if the collections are infinite in size, there's
a way of pairing up the elements from one collection with the elements in another collection
so that no element is without a partner and no element is partnered up with more than one
