Well, so a few thousand years later, these two mathematicians return from their voyage
through the galaxy of mathematics and they have these large tomes, these big books of
all the theorems of mathematics, one than the other.
And what do we see?
We see that when we look down their list of theorems, they are identical.
They agree exactly.
All the theorems up to the point of the continuum hypothesis match up perfectly.
Mathematics was unaffected by the truth or the falsehood of the continuum hypothesis.
And so when they go off into space, each having an opposite point of view, it doesn't change
anything at all.
That's a visual way that helps me think about what it means to be independent.
It means, in fact, that it doesn't change mathematics at all, whether we assume it's
true or not.
All the mathematics up to that point would be proven correct whether we assume its truth
or assume it's falsehood.
The continuum hypothesis can be either true or false.
Now, Gertl actually believed that the continuum hypothesis was false.
And Cohn also leaned to rejecting the continuum hypothesis, but we know it's independent of
mathematics.
She wanted to take a moment just to share with you the story of Paul Cohn, or at least
the story as I heard it when I was growing up in the math community as a graduate student,
because it's a great story, and probably it's probably true.
But as the story goes, Paul Cohn was a young mathematician.
He just earned his PhD, and he was attending a seminar in set theory and logic, which is
the area in which the continuum hypothesis resides.
Now, he wasn't an expert in this area.
His area was analysis, but he wanted to attend this seminar just for fun, if you could imagine
such a thing.
And so he was this young PhD sitting there in the audience, and apparently as the story
goes, he wasn't particularly impressed with what he heard.
The theorems that were presented and the mathematics didn't sound particularly profound.
Remember that Cohn wasn't expert in this area, so in fact, he just didn't seem to appreciate
this.
So after the seminar, as the story goes, he approached some people in the audience and
said, well, this didn't seem all that dramatic.
