the real numbers.
It's really a set theoretic tongue twister, if you will.
It's a collection whose elements are sets of sets.
Well, by Cantor's theorem, this new collection has a greater cardinality than the cardinality
of the power set of the real numbers.
Remember, Cantor proved that whenever you have a set, no matter how convoluted it may
be, if you take the power set, it's bigger.
So if we take the power set of the power set of the reals, that's going to be larger still.
Thus, we just produce a fourth size of infinity.
So the smallest infinity we considered was the set of natural numbers.
Then the next largest infinity we found was the infinity of the real numbers.
Even larger still was the infinity of the power set of the reals.
And now we're seeing an even larger infinity, the power set of the power set of the real
numbers.
Well, if we just repeat this process, we discovered that there are infinitely many different sizes
of infinity.
We could just take the power set of the power set of the reals and take its power set and
build from there.
This insight leads us to our second question.
Is there a largest infinity?
In other words, is there one all-encompassing mother of all infinities in which all other
infinities reside?
Well, given our previous observation, we see that the answer is no.
For if we had such an infinite collection, then we'd need only consider its power set
to produce a collection that, by another application of Cantor's theorem, must be larger still.
Thus, just like the natural numbers themselves, there's no largest or last infinity.
They keep growing and growing without bound, just like the natural numbers.
Amazing, amazing fact, which takes a while to become intuitive.
So we got from one infinity to infinitely many infinities.
Well, we now come to the final question in our quest toward infinity.
Is there an infinity between the sizes of the natural numbers and the real numbers?
Now, let's remember that the cardinality of the natural numbers is smaller than the cardinality
of the real numbers.
So we now wonder, is the cardinality of the real numbers the next infinity after the cardinality
of the natural numbers, or is there a collection whose cardinality is strictly between those
