He was 73.
Today, in the center of the University of Hall, there's a plaque that shows his face
and an image suggesting his diagonalization method.
Engraved, we find the words of Cantor himself.
The essence of mathematics lies precisely in its freedom.
It's difficult to know if Cantor was thinking about mathematics being the freedom to get
away from his personal problems and personal demons, or in a different context because
Cantor himself preferred the term free mathematics to mean the more traditional term, which we
call today pure mathematics, the mathematics that are not modeling the world, but instead
are understanding mathematics for mathematics' sake.
In either case, the statement and the quote seems very fitting for such a great man who
dealt with so many demons.
Well, let's now return to the story of the continuum hypothesis.
The continuum hypothesis proposes that the cardinality of the continuum, in other words,
the cardinality of the real numbers, is the next largest infinity after the countable collection
of natural numbers.
Well, this seemingly straightforward assertion has a very strange resolution.
The statement, in fact, resides outside of the domain of mathematics.
In other words, it can be shown to be neither true nor false within the narrow confines
of mathematics and its standard axioms.
The issue is extremely deep and involves advanced work in logic and set theory.
In 1940, the great Austrian logician Kurt Gertl showed that the continuum hypothesis cannot
be disproved using the tools and theorems from mathematics.
In 1963, Paul Kohn, who passed away in 2007, showed that it cannot be proved using mathematical
machinery.
So the continuum hypothesis is provably not provable and not disprovable, and we can prove
that.
Thus we say that the statement itself is independent.
It actually resides outside of the world of mathematics and her axioms.
This is very difficult to appreciate and even to wrap your mind around, but an analogy can
help make this idea a little bit more intuitive.
Let me offer you my intuitive sense of what this means to have a statement that's outside
of mathematics.
Let's visualize this.
Imagine that we have two spacecrafts, two spaceships that are going to be independently
