two infinities?
Well, this question leads to what is known as the continuum hypothesis.
The continuum hypothesis asserts an answer to this question.
Specifically, it states that the cardinality of the collection of real numbers is the next
largest infinity after the countable collection of natural numbers.
And remember, Cantor sometimes used the word continuum to mean the real numbers, and that's
why this is called the continuum hypothesis, hypothesizing that the continuum is the next
infinity.
Well, Cantor himself was the first to pose the continuum hypothesis and worked very
hard to prove it, but was unable to resolve the issue.
David Hilbert listed the continuum hypothesis as the very first challenge in his list of
23 that he posed in his keynote address at the International Mathematics Congress at the
turn of the 20th century, which we mentioned earlier.
For Cantor himself, the continuum hypothesis was almost an obsession.
This obsession, along with his combative relationships with Kroniker and others, had
serious and negative impacts on his life.
Now, to place these issues in historical context and expand our understanding of Cantor's struggle,
let's take a moment to consider some revealing moments from his personal life.
In 1874 and 1884, Cantor published his seminal papers on infinity, including six papers that
formed the foundation of modern set theory.
But in 1884, he suffered his first major bout with depression and was plagued by mental
health problems for the remainder of his life.
During the last 30 years of his life, Cantor was in and out of mental clinics.
While his professional struggles contributed to his difficulties, today he might have been
diagnosed as bipolar, manic depressive, and his problems only intensified with the loss
of his mother in 1896 and his youngest son in 1899.
Though he continued to do valuable research, his focus on mathematics did decline.
In fact, for a brief period, Cantor turned his energy to proving that Francis Bacon was
the author of Shakespeare's plays.
Some have argued that exposing Bacon to the world corresponded to Cantor's desire to
expose the ugly sides of Kroniker to the world.
As it turned out later in his life, it appears as though Kroniker and Cantor had some type
of reconciliation.
After finally living to see the mathematics community acknowledge and celebrate his incredible
contributions to mathematics, Cantor died of a heart attack in a sanitarium in 1918.
