other element.
This idea is called a one-to-one correspondence and allows us to determine if one collection
is larger, smaller, or equal in size to another.
Any infinite collection whose elements can be listed so that there's a first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, and so on without any element left unaccounted for is said to be
countable, or countably, or countably infinite set.
In other words, it has the same cardinality as the set of natural numbers, since we have
an immediate one-to-one correspondence.
We pair the natural number up with the first element, the natural number two up with the
second element, the natural number three up with the third element, and so forth.
We've shown that the even natural numbers are countable since we can list them and pair
them with each natural number which is equal to the double of the number.
So for example, one gets paired with two times one or two, two gets paired with the even
number four, three gets paired with six, four gets paired with eight, and so forth.
Even the integers, that is the collection of natural numbers, their negatives, and zero
are countable since we can shuffle together the negative and positive numbers and then
pair them with the natural numbers in this alternating fashion where we have the one-to-one
correspondence between the integers and the natural numbers.
The rational numbers, that is the collection of all ratios or fractions, first appears
to be much larger than the collection of natural numbers, but again, a systematic means of
expressing those ratios, in this case in an endless array of numbers, leads to a means
of snaking a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers.
Even the rational numbers are countable.
The situation changes dramatically when we turn to the collection of all real numbers,
that is, all the points on the number line, or equivalently, all endless decimal expansions.
For it is provably impossible to create a one-to-one correspondence between the real
numbers and the natural numbers.
There are just too many real numbers.
Cantor demonstrated this impossibility by assuming that there was such a one-to-one
pairing between the natural numbers and the endless decimal numbers, and then using his
idea of diagonalization, he successively switched digits along a diagonal of digits to construct
a real number in decimal form, that is, by its very construction, definitely not on the
list.
Hence, Cantor arrived at a contradiction, a logical impossibility, if you will, and thus
his assumption was wrong.
