launched out into the galaxy of mathematics and that will reveal the world of mathematics
and how it looks.
Let's think about how this will go.
We have two spaceships and we're going to have two mathematicians that are actually
going to enter into these spaceships.
In these spaceships we will give them every single axiom of mathematics.
Those are the self-evident truths upon which we start all of mathematics.
Those are the foundations.
We give them all of them these facts.
They're going to go out into outer space and they're going to now spend years and years
and years and years, thousands of years, producing all the theorems of mathematics up to this
point.
Okay.
Now what does that mean?
Let's back up here and think about what that means.
What it means is that they're going to go off and generate mathematics.
However, before the first spaceship goes off, I approach the capsule and go in and say to
the mathematician, okay, you've got all your axioms here, but I'm going to give you one
extra axiom, one extra fact that the other spaceship doesn't have which you can use.
That fact is that the continuum hypothesis is true.
There is no infinity between the natural numbers and the reals.
You can use that.
And so the mathematician astronaut is like, oh, great, I've got an extra one.
That's fantastic.
And so she takes off, goes out into the outer reaches of mathematics and starts to prove
all the theorems that are possible using the axioms and this one extra axiom.
Then I walk over to the other spacecraft and I walk in and I walk into the capsule and say,
okay, you've got all the axioms, the same as the other person, you're ready to go, but
I'm going to give you one more axiom.
One more axiom that you can use.
And that axiom is that the continuum hypothesis is false.
There does exist an infinity in between the natural numbers and the reals.
You can use that fact.
And so this astronaut mathematician is like, yes, one more, that's great.
Takes off into the outer reaches of mathematics to describe all of mathematics that's possible.
