Therefore, we see that the real numbers form a larger infinite collection than the natural
numbers.
The real numbers aren't countable.
We call collections that are not countable uncountable, and so the real numbers are,
in fact, uncountable.
Holding two different sizes of infinity, we wonder if there is a third.
Extending his original idea, Cantor was able to generalize his result and produce what
is now known as Cantor's theorem.
If we have any set, any collection, then the set of all its subsets is a larger infinity
than the original given set.
This remarkable theorem followed from a modification of Cantor's diagonalization argument, and
we illustrated this generalized technique with an example involving the set of three
Marx Brothers.
If we now consider the collection of all subsets of real numbers, then by Cantor's theorem,
this vast collection must be larger than the collection of real numbers.
Hence we uncovered a third size of infinity, one even larger than the uncountable collection
of all real numbers.
Well, with time, these ideas can be made our own, but it does take time.
Well, once our narrow view of reality, which stated that there's just one infinity, collapses
under the weight of Cantor's mathematical arguments, other previously unimaginable questions
soon arise.
For the remainder of this lecture, I want us to explore some of these interesting new
conundrums and their solutions.
Let's face our first question right off the bat.
Are there infinitely many infinities?
Great question.
In the previous lecture, we considered Cantor's argument that showed that the power set of
any set has a larger cardinality than the original set.
We used this result to find a third size of infinity.
Well, so are there infinitely many different sizes of infinity?
By applying Cantor's theorem again, we see the answer is yes.
Let's consider the power set of the power set of the set of reals.
Now this collection is the set of all subsets of the power set of the real numbers.
In other words, but this is not going to be clear.
In other words, this collection is the set of all subsets of the set of all subsets of
