Then we're introduced to a visualization of the complex numbers called the complex plane, where we have imaginary numbers running around this entire plane.
If we were to take a pin, close our eyes, and put it down on a plane, what do you think the likelihood is that we will hit that one particular horizontal real axis, the number line?
It's with probability 100%, we'll be off that line.
The real familiar numbers to us are, in fact, the exception, the complex numbers dominate the complex plane.
These moments in which our initial intuition runs counter to reality are moments in which we can grow for these very moments that feed the life of the mind.
We can retrain and fine-tune our intuition so that what first appeared strange will later appear commonsensical.
This refinement of understanding is the responsibility of every open-minded, learned individual.
Numbers evolve alongside of humankind's intellect and imagination.
Numbers have power and import within our physical universe and in our everyday world.
Given this intriguing balance between their utility in nature and their abstract countenance within our imagination, I now offer a second conundrum here to bookend the very first conundrum I offered at the very opening of this course.
And that conundrum is, are numbers created or discovered?
I'll leave this question with you to contemplate and discuss with others, but that's the question that really is one that deserves some contemplation.
Well, we've seen a panoramic of number that began over 30,000 years ago and took us right into the 20th century.
However, before we close this course, I would like to say a few words about the modern number theory of today, which I'm delighted to report is alive and well and as vibrant as ever.
Today, within the universe of number, we see many specialized areas.
These include elementary number theory, combinatorial number theory, the geometry of numbers,
Dauphantine analysis, arithmetic geometry, cryptography, and probabilistic number theory.
These areas, for the most part, fall into two very broad branches of study.
These two main branches are known as analytic and algebraic number theory.
And I wanted to highlight each and place these areas of interest today within the historical context of number that we've already seen together.
Analytic number theory is an area that exploits the ideas of calculus.
