Number theory research today remains as important as ever and is still going strong.
Throughout the course, I've shared my vision of how number theorists and mathematicians in general move the frontiers of our understanding forward.
I suggested that our understanding of mathematics is like a large copper orb, and we mathematicians are inside with ball-peen hammers tapping away on its surface, producing dimple upon dimple as very slowly the orb expands and grows.
Here in the last few minutes, I wanted to briefly describe this modern community of mathematical scholars and how, in practice, we extend our boundary of understanding.
Mathematicians stumble around in the dark trying to uncover some structure or pattern by examining simple things very, very deeply.
We study the mathematical works of others and ask how we can extend or generalize them. We create questions. We also fail.
Mathematicians are expert failures. Failing is the most important thing we can do. In our research, we're failing approximately 99% of the time.
It's true. Every failed attempt, though, brings to light some otherwise unseen subtlety in the issue and provides the opportunity to try something else.
After countless false starts, we finally discover some general principle or see some pattern that leads us to a conjecture.
Next, we struggle to find a logical and rigorous proof of this conjecture and then write up our results in the form of a research article.
These are usually very cryptic-looking papers that are teeming with notation and symbols and can even intimidate other mathematicians. It's true.
Well, now we're ready to present our work to the mathematical community.
We do this informally through lectures at seminars, colloquia, and addresses at conferences, but we do this formally by submitting our paper to a scholarly research journal.
The editor will select several experts in the subject and ask those mathematicians to review the work and assess the results.
These anonymous referees study the work and declare if the arguments are correct and complete and if the results are significant enough to warrant publication.
When our paper is accepted for publication and it appears in the literature, it has the endorsement of the mathematical community and the results contained within it are now viewed as theorems of mathematics for others to study and explore.
Captured in that published work is our creativity, our imagination, and our original contribution that moves the boundary of humankind's understanding ever slightly a bit forward.
This is the study of number.
It's a very human struggle filled with both passion and imagination.
Within numbers we find beauty, elegance, grace, and mystery.
Perhaps more importantly, the exploration into number is a liberating entertainment.
