Welcome to what I'm sad to say is our last lecture together in our exploration of number.
Here we'll reflect back on our journey and discuss how numbers are at once useful tools
and also abstract objects of the mind that allow us to understand our world and our lives with greater clarity.
For the number theorist and enthusiast far beyond numbers utility, numbers are objects of independent beauty, intrigue, and curiosity.
In this lecture, we'll open with a sense of what number is.
How throughout human history we've seen the notion of number evolve from a practical necessity to a creative art of nature.
We'll consider the subtle structure of numbers and explore the many means by which we can view them through their individual numerical personalities
in order to attain a better understanding of their nuance.
We'll then face the question what is number and explore how that notion evolved and in fact remains an ever moving target.
We'll then step outside of our historical journey and take a moment to consider number theory today.
Moving the frontiers forward requires the logic and rigor that have underscored our entire exploration together.
The ever present rigorous proof is both a science and an art.
Mathematics in general and the theory of numbers in particular are truly cultures with customs and traditions.
We'll offer a window into this modern world of mathematical research and how in practice those frontiers move outward.
Finally, we acknowledge and celebrate the human passion involved in moving the notion of number forward.
The study of number is not a cold austere discipline but instead one that is teeming with imagination, emotion, and excitement.
Human kind has been drawn to number like a moth to flame.
We're unable to resist the attraction.
The quest to understand and tame the notion of number has transcended human history and cultural divides.
What makes this intellectual quest so universally appealing?
Perhaps it is the realization that numbers have a life and a will of their own.
