That is, we can study the Gaussian primes, those Gaussian integers that cannot be written as a product of two smaller Gaussian integers.
For example, 2 plus i and 2 minus i can be shown to be Gaussian primes.
Well, what about 5? Is 5, which we can think of as 5 plus 0 times i, is 5 a Gaussian prime?
Well, we know that it's an ordinary prime, but let's carefully multiply our two new primes together, 2 plus i and 2 minus i.
Now, to multiply those two numbers together, we actually have to use the distributive property that we mentioned in lecture 12 to perform the multiplication correctly.
But don't worry about it. I'll just do it for you and you can just relax and enjoy it. It's our last lecture after all.
We take 2 plus i and multiply it by the quantity 2 minus i. I'll first take the second 2 and multiply it through by the 2 and the i.
And so I see 2 plus i all times 2 minus, and now I'll take that i and multiply it through by the 2 plus i and see 2 plus i times i.
Now, if I distribute that little 2 through, I see 2 times 2, which is 4, and then I see plus 2 times i, which is 2i.
And then I see minus 2 times i, which is 2i, so I have minus 2i, minus i times i, which is i squared.
So what do I see? Well, I see 2 times 2, which is 4 plus 2i minus 2i minus i squared.
Well, notice that the plus 2i minus 2i cancel, add to give 0, so I'm only left with 4 minus i squared.
Well, i squared is actually negative 1, so we have 4 minus negative 1, which is 4 plus 1 or 5.
So 5 is no longer a prime in this setting. It's the product of two other Gaussian primes.
Just as with the regular prime numbers, number theorists have proven that Gaussian integers also can be factored uniquely into Gaussian primes.
However, there are other generalizations of integers in which this unique factorization property no longer holds.
Thus, we discover yet again an entire new universe of number. This one at once has reflections of the regular integers and yet is dramatically different.
In algebraic number theory today, some of the unanswered questions of interest involve studying subtle issues surrounding this lack of unique factorization into primes.
Studying such strange new integers and strange new sense of prime numbers actually allows us to better understand our usual primes in a richer way.
In fact, we can actually use the ideas from algebraic number theory to devise algorithms that will allow us to factor very large numbers and test to see if large numbers are in fact prime.
These results have several practical applications, including within the modern study of cryptography, the study of codes, and thus even have national security implications.
