Every time we developed a new insight into numbers, it forced us to rethink our old notion of what number means.
In fact, so often, the numbers that at first seemed common and abundant turned out to be the exception and extremely rare,
while those numbers that first appeared as exotic and peculiar turned out to be the norm and in fact dominated the ever-expanding number world.
We saw this with the rational numbers. We started off with just the natural numbers, and then we looked at ratios and we built the rational numbers,
which seemed so familiar and so common to us that we see them everywhere, even in our everyday lives.
Then the Pythagoreans stumbled upon the square root of 2 and showed it was irrational.
What did this imply? Well, this implied that there was this different notion of number, but these numbers seemed strange, foreign, and peculiar.
Only later in our exploration did we realize that, in fact, those numbers were the more common.
On the real line, if we were to pick a number at random by randomly generating digits by rolling a fair 10-sided die,
with probability 100%, we would produce a screed of digits that never repeats that, in fact, is irrational.
The irrationals are, in fact, the more dominant, and the familiar rationals turn out to be the exotic.
We then saw this again with the algebraic numbers, where we studied these numbers, square root of 2, or the number i, square root of negative 1.
They became familiar to us, and then we discovered numbers like pi and the number e.
And we saw that these are actually transcendental numbers that don't conform to any polynomial equations,
for they're not the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Well, these seemed so foreign and strange to us that it was difficult for us to really visualize these as numbers.
And yet we saw later that if we were to pick a number out at random with probability 100%, they would be transcendental,
and we would never, in fact, accidentally stumble upon an algebraic.
That followed from Cantor's great work that the transcendental numbers are uncountable, while the algebraic numbers are an infinite set that are actually countable.
Well, then again we come across this when we look at the real numbers.
Okay, we have the real number line that's been with us for centuries, and we're comfortable with it, and we can understand points on it.
