In other words, if we could better understand the nuances of the seemingly imaginary complex numbers,
then we'd be able to say more about the grounded concrete prime numbers.
Again, we see an example in which different types of numbers and notions all hang together.
In fact, today there's some very exciting progress in understanding these subtle issues.
Mathematicians in this area are now exploiting a surprising connection between the study of primes and what are called random matrices.
Random matrices are mathematical objects that were originally applied to better understand the quantum behavior of large atoms in physics.
Thus, it seems wonderfully fitting that these mathematical objects might also unlock the mysteries of the basic atoms of numbers.
Moving now to the other main branch of modern number theory, algebraic number theory,
is an area that focuses on the numbers that are solutions to certain polynomial equations.
As we've seen in lecture 16, these numbers today are called algebraic numbers.
For example, the square root of 2 is an algebraic number because it's a solution to x squared minus 2 equals 0.
Another famous algebraic number we studied was i, again the square root of negative 1,
since it's a solution to x squared plus 1 equals 0, a different polynomial.
It turns out that using algebraic numbers, we can generalize the collection of integers.
Remember that the integers are precisely the natural numbers together with 0 and all the negatives of the natural numbers.
Within the integers, we find the prime numbers and saw that all the integers greater than 1 can be expressed uniquely as a product of primes.
Again, the primes are the atoms of the integers and thus, if we understand them better, we understand the integers better.
One way to generalize the integers is to define the collection of all numbers of the form integer plus integer times i.
This new collection is known today as the Gaussian integers, named after Carl Friedrich Gauss.
So, for example, 5 plus 7 times i, negative 4 plus 3 times i, and 9 minus 2 times i are all examples of Gaussian integers.
Well, within this collection of numbers, we can also identify the fundamental multiplicative atoms.
