Welcome to what I'm sad to say is our last lecture together in our exploration of number.
Here we'll reflect back on our journey and discuss how numbers are at once useful tools
and also abstract objects of the mind that allow us to understand our world and our lives with greater clarity.
For the number theorist and enthusiast far beyond numbers utility, numbers are objects of independent beauty, intrigue, and curiosity.
In this lecture, we'll open with a sense of what number is.
How throughout human history we've seen the notion of number evolve from a practical necessity to a creative art of nature.
We'll consider the subtle structure of numbers and explore the many means by which we can view them through their individual numerical personalities
in order to attain a better understanding of their nuance.
We'll then face the question what is number and explore how that notion evolved and in fact remains an ever moving target.
We'll then step outside of our historical journey and take a moment to consider number theory today.
Moving the frontiers forward requires the logic and rigor that have underscored our entire exploration together.
The ever present rigorous proof is both a science and an art.
Mathematics in general and the theory of numbers in particular are truly cultures with customs and traditions.
We'll offer a window into this modern world of mathematical research and how in practice those frontiers move outward.
Finally, we acknowledge and celebrate the human passion involved in moving the notion of number forward.
The study of number is not a cold austere discipline but instead one that is teeming with imagination, emotion, and excitement.
Human kind has been drawn to number like a moth to flame.
We're unable to resist the attraction.
The quest to understand and tame the notion of number has transcended human history and cultural divides.
What makes this intellectual quest so universally appealing?
Perhaps it is the realization that numbers have a life and a will of their own.
Even though the abstract notion of number came from our imagination, once born numbers conform to the laws of nature and mathematics.
What's surprising and intriguing plot twists lie ahead in the story of number?
That enticing, unending journey will fuel the creativity and imagination of our descendants for the next thousand years.
Well, before moving on, I wanted to say a word about the structure of our journey.
Perhaps there's still a question about this course.
Was it a history course or was it a math course?
Well, of course, this was the story of number and so plainly we frolicked among the delights of mathematics.
So then why the history?
Well, the history is the only means by which we can intuit the critical human element that gave rise to the ever-evolving notion of number.
If we were just handed a laundry list of numbers, here's the rational numbers, here are the natural numbers, here are the irrationals, the reals, the complexes, the algebraics, the transcendentals, the pediatrics, and so forth.
Well, then our view of numbers would be as a jumbled collection of abstract definitions that would have no real meaning and would not tell any story.
The story of number is really the story of humankind's ever-evolving imagination, creativity, understanding, and curiosity.
It's the history that breathes life into our story of number.
So was this a history or a math course?
Honestly, I don't know.
And I'm not really sure that we need to have our efforts here dropped into any particular pigeonhole.
My hope is that we feel the synergy between the two.
The history inspired the mathematics and the mathematics amplified the history.
It really was an incredible story.
Over 30,000 years ago, long before there was a notion of number, Sumerian shepherds didn't want to lose track of their flocks.
So they used pebbles to create a one-to-one pairing between the stones and the sheep.
Later, the pebbles were pressed into clay and the abstract writing of numbers began.
After thousands of years of trying to express numbers, humankind finally came upon the now-familiar 10 symbols for our digits
and a place-based system that allowed science and mathematics to race forward at breathtaking speeds.
With the Jains, Pythagoreans, and many others, numbers move from an attribute to an object.
Once those objects are named, they exist in our minds and take on a life of their own.
Numbers have captured the imagination of all people from all cultures throughout human history.
It's one of the few intellectual curiosities that truly unites humankind.
Of course, we've explored various perspectives on numbers.
If we just count, thinking of numbers as Ames did in the Rhine Papyrus as heaps, then we have the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so on.
When we consider ratios of these numbers, we see the rational numbers.
When we extend our imagination and our view of number, we can actually embrace negative numbers and even zero.
When we measure lengths, we discover irrational numbers such as the square root of two and pi.
When we measure growth, we find the number E.
When we consider numbers as solutions to certain polynomial equations, we naturally uncover the number I, the square root of negative one,
the complex numbers, and the distinction between algebraic and transcendental numbers.
When we use number to measure distance, our analysis allows us to produce a precise definition of real numbers
and explore parallel universes of numbers known as piatic numbers.
When we invoke the Sumerian Shepherd's idea of a one-to-one correspondence, we unlock the secrets of infinity and build an infinite tower of different infinities.
Well, now we arrive back at the very first challenge I offered all of us in the very first lecture.
What is number?
As we see now, there's no one all-encompassing definition that has any precise meaning.
Every time we developed a new insight into numbers, it forced us to rethink our old notion of what number means.
In fact, so often, the numbers that at first seemed common and abundant turned out to be the exception and extremely rare,
while those numbers that first appeared as exotic and peculiar turned out to be the norm and in fact dominated the ever-expanding number world.
We saw this with the rational numbers. We started off with just the natural numbers, and then we looked at ratios and we built the rational numbers,
which seemed so familiar and so common to us that we see them everywhere, even in our everyday lives.
Then the Pythagoreans stumbled upon the square root of 2 and showed it was irrational.
What did this imply? Well, this implied that there was this different notion of number, but these numbers seemed strange, foreign, and peculiar.
Only later in our exploration did we realize that, in fact, those numbers were the more common.
On the real line, if we were to pick a number at random by randomly generating digits by rolling a fair 10-sided die,
with probability 100%, we would produce a screed of digits that never repeats that, in fact, is irrational.
The irrationals are, in fact, the more dominant, and the familiar rationals turn out to be the exotic.
We then saw this again with the algebraic numbers, where we studied these numbers, square root of 2, or the number i, square root of negative 1.
They became familiar to us, and then we discovered numbers like pi and the number e.
And we saw that these are actually transcendental numbers that don't conform to any polynomial equations,
for they're not the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Well, these seemed so foreign and strange to us that it was difficult for us to really visualize these as numbers.
And yet we saw later that if we were to pick a number out at random with probability 100%, they would be transcendental,
and we would never, in fact, accidentally stumble upon an algebraic.
That followed from Cantor's great work that the transcendental numbers are uncountable, while the algebraic numbers are an infinite set that are actually countable.
Well, then again we come across this when we look at the real numbers.
Okay, we have the real number line that's been with us for centuries, and we're comfortable with it, and we can understand points on it.
Then we're introduced to a visualization of the complex numbers called the complex plane, where we have imaginary numbers running around this entire plane.
If we were to take a pin, close our eyes, and put it down on a plane, what do you think the likelihood is that we will hit that one particular horizontal real axis, the number line?
It's with probability 100%, we'll be off that line.
The real familiar numbers to us are, in fact, the exception, the complex numbers dominate the complex plane.
These moments in which our initial intuition runs counter to reality are moments in which we can grow for these very moments that feed the life of the mind.
We can retrain and fine-tune our intuition so that what first appeared strange will later appear commonsensical.
This refinement of understanding is the responsibility of every open-minded, learned individual.
Numbers evolve alongside of humankind's intellect and imagination.
Numbers have power and import within our physical universe and in our everyday world.
Given this intriguing balance between their utility in nature and their abstract countenance within our imagination, I now offer a second conundrum here to bookend the very first conundrum I offered at the very opening of this course.
And that conundrum is, are numbers created or discovered?
I'll leave this question with you to contemplate and discuss with others, but that's the question that really is one that deserves some contemplation.
Well, we've seen a panoramic of number that began over 30,000 years ago and took us right into the 20th century.
However, before we close this course, I would like to say a few words about the modern number theory of today, which I'm delighted to report is alive and well and as vibrant as ever.
Today, within the universe of number, we see many specialized areas.
These include elementary number theory, combinatorial number theory, the geometry of numbers,
Dauphantine analysis, arithmetic geometry, cryptography, and probabilistic number theory.
These areas, for the most part, fall into two very broad branches of study.
These two main branches are known as analytic and algebraic number theory.
And I wanted to highlight each and place these areas of interest today within the historical context of number that we've already seen together.
Analytic number theory is an area that exploits the ideas of calculus.
We noted in an earlier lecture that calculus is the study of motion and change.
Here we use the mechanics of this study to deduce facts about numbers.
For example, one of the jewels of analytic number theory is the prime number theorem.
This result, as we discussed in lecture 7, gives an estimate for how many prime numbers there are up to any given point.
Remember that the primes are the fundamental building blocks or atoms of the natural numbers,
because every natural number greater than one is either a prime or is a product of primes.
The study of how well the estimate in the prime number theorem approximates the number of primes up to any given point
leads to one of the most important unanswered questions in all of mathematics today.
This question has been around since 1859 and is known as the Riemann hypothesis.
The Riemann hypothesis is named after Bernhardt Riemann, an extremely influential German mathematician who first stated the conjecture.
Basically, the heart of the issue is to describe all the solutions to a certain equation.
What makes this question so difficult is that the equation itself has an endless sum of terms,
each term of which has the unknown x appearing.
Well, moreover, there are infinitely many numbers that actually satisfy this equation.
In other words, there are infinitely many solutions to this equation,
so we just can't list them all and be done with it.
The Riemann hypothesis asserts that every one of the numbers that satisfies this special equation exhibits a certain property.
Now, if we could show that the Riemann hypothesis holds,
then we would actually be able to say more about the placement of the primes within the natural numbers.
The surprising fact is that the numbers that are solutions to Riemann's endless equation are in fact complex numbers,
numbers that contain the imaginary number i, which equals the square root of negative 1.
In other words, if we could better understand the nuances of the seemingly imaginary complex numbers,
then we'd be able to say more about the grounded concrete prime numbers.
Again, we see an example in which different types of numbers and notions all hang together.
In fact, today there's some very exciting progress in understanding these subtle issues.
Mathematicians in this area are now exploiting a surprising connection between the study of primes and what are called random matrices.
Random matrices are mathematical objects that were originally applied to better understand the quantum behavior of large atoms in physics.
Thus, it seems wonderfully fitting that these mathematical objects might also unlock the mysteries of the basic atoms of numbers.
Moving now to the other main branch of modern number theory, algebraic number theory,
is an area that focuses on the numbers that are solutions to certain polynomial equations.
As we've seen in lecture 16, these numbers today are called algebraic numbers.
For example, the square root of 2 is an algebraic number because it's a solution to x squared minus 2 equals 0.
Another famous algebraic number we studied was i, again the square root of negative 1,
since it's a solution to x squared plus 1 equals 0, a different polynomial.
It turns out that using algebraic numbers, we can generalize the collection of integers.
Remember that the integers are precisely the natural numbers together with 0 and all the negatives of the natural numbers.
Within the integers, we find the prime numbers and saw that all the integers greater than 1 can be expressed uniquely as a product of primes.
Again, the primes are the atoms of the integers and thus, if we understand them better, we understand the integers better.
One way to generalize the integers is to define the collection of all numbers of the form integer plus integer times i.
This new collection is known today as the Gaussian integers, named after Carl Friedrich Gauss.
So, for example, 5 plus 7 times i, negative 4 plus 3 times i, and 9 minus 2 times i are all examples of Gaussian integers.
Well, within this collection of numbers, we can also identify the fundamental multiplicative atoms.
That is, we can study the Gaussian primes, those Gaussian integers that cannot be written as a product of two smaller Gaussian integers.
For example, 2 plus i and 2 minus i can be shown to be Gaussian primes.
Well, what about 5? Is 5, which we can think of as 5 plus 0 times i, is 5 a Gaussian prime?
Well, we know that it's an ordinary prime, but let's carefully multiply our two new primes together, 2 plus i and 2 minus i.
Now, to multiply those two numbers together, we actually have to use the distributive property that we mentioned in lecture 12 to perform the multiplication correctly.
But don't worry about it. I'll just do it for you and you can just relax and enjoy it. It's our last lecture after all.
We take 2 plus i and multiply it by the quantity 2 minus i. I'll first take the second 2 and multiply it through by the 2 and the i.
And so I see 2 plus i all times 2 minus, and now I'll take that i and multiply it through by the 2 plus i and see 2 plus i times i.
Now, if I distribute that little 2 through, I see 2 times 2, which is 4, and then I see plus 2 times i, which is 2i.
And then I see minus 2 times i, which is 2i, so I have minus 2i, minus i times i, which is i squared.
So what do I see? Well, I see 2 times 2, which is 4 plus 2i minus 2i minus i squared.
Well, notice that the plus 2i minus 2i cancel, add to give 0, so I'm only left with 4 minus i squared.
Well, i squared is actually negative 1, so we have 4 minus negative 1, which is 4 plus 1 or 5.
So 5 is no longer a prime in this setting. It's the product of two other Gaussian primes.
Just as with the regular prime numbers, number theorists have proven that Gaussian integers also can be factored uniquely into Gaussian primes.
However, there are other generalizations of integers in which this unique factorization property no longer holds.
Thus, we discover yet again an entire new universe of number. This one at once has reflections of the regular integers and yet is dramatically different.
In algebraic number theory today, some of the unanswered questions of interest involve studying subtle issues surrounding this lack of unique factorization into primes.
Studying such strange new integers and strange new sense of prime numbers actually allows us to better understand our usual primes in a richer way.
In fact, we can actually use the ideas from algebraic number theory to devise algorithms that will allow us to factor very large numbers and test to see if large numbers are in fact prime.
These results have several practical applications, including within the modern study of cryptography, the study of codes, and thus even have national security implications.
Number theory research today remains as important as ever and is still going strong.
Throughout the course, I've shared my vision of how number theorists and mathematicians in general move the frontiers of our understanding forward.
I suggested that our understanding of mathematics is like a large copper orb, and we mathematicians are inside with ball-peen hammers tapping away on its surface, producing dimple upon dimple as very slowly the orb expands and grows.
Here in the last few minutes, I wanted to briefly describe this modern community of mathematical scholars and how, in practice, we extend our boundary of understanding.
Mathematicians stumble around in the dark trying to uncover some structure or pattern by examining simple things very, very deeply.
We study the mathematical works of others and ask how we can extend or generalize them. We create questions. We also fail.
Mathematicians are expert failures. Failing is the most important thing we can do. In our research, we're failing approximately 99% of the time.
It's true. Every failed attempt, though, brings to light some otherwise unseen subtlety in the issue and provides the opportunity to try something else.
After countless false starts, we finally discover some general principle or see some pattern that leads us to a conjecture.
Next, we struggle to find a logical and rigorous proof of this conjecture and then write up our results in the form of a research article.
These are usually very cryptic-looking papers that are teeming with notation and symbols and can even intimidate other mathematicians. It's true.
Well, now we're ready to present our work to the mathematical community.
We do this informally through lectures at seminars, colloquia, and addresses at conferences, but we do this formally by submitting our paper to a scholarly research journal.
The editor will select several experts in the subject and ask those mathematicians to review the work and assess the results.
These anonymous referees study the work and declare if the arguments are correct and complete and if the results are significant enough to warrant publication.
When our paper is accepted for publication and it appears in the literature, it has the endorsement of the mathematical community and the results contained within it are now viewed as theorems of mathematics for others to study and explore.
Captured in that published work is our creativity, our imagination, and our original contribution that moves the boundary of humankind's understanding ever slightly a bit forward.
This is the study of number.
It's a very human struggle filled with both passion and imagination.
Within numbers we find beauty, elegance, grace, and mystery.
Perhaps more importantly, the exploration into number is a liberating entertainment.
We can discard the kid gloves of reality's restrictions and let our minds play where they will.
The theory of numbers is about what can be thought, what can be imagined, and what can be dreamed.
And it all leads to new truths.
Exploring the deep consequences of simple ideas takes us on a journey of startling sights and unexpected insights.
We compare flocks of sheep and numbers are born.
We keep track of inventories by pressing pebbles into clay and a symbolic language of numbers graces the page.
We look upon the spirals of nature and we see Fibonacci numbers.
We search for the atoms of the numbers and we uncover an infinitude of primes.
We measure a diagonal and we discover irrational numbers.
We look beyond the square root of two and we find the transcendental values pi and e.
We transcend the real line in the complex plane and we find ourselves suspended in a vexing world of the peatic numbers.
We look beyond all numbers and we travel to the universe of infinitely many infinities.
The history of numbers paints a story about casting off the constricting coil of bound thought.
The ever-evolving world of numbers is full of wonder, but our guide is the clear principle of following creative ideas to their logical conclusions.
We can all embrace this strategy of mathematical thinking to guide us in our everyday lives as well.
We've seen here just a glimpse of the vast richness that our minds can create.
Numbers in our imaginations have no bounds, no ends, no finish line.
Every horizon reached opens new horizons more glorious still.
Thank you very much.
