The lecture is Edward B. Berger, Professor of Mathematics in the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics at Williams College.
Professor Berger received his BA with distinction at mathematics from Connecticut College and
his PhD in mathematics from the University of Texas at Austin.
Professor Berger joined the faculty at Williams College in 1990.
For the academic year 1990 to 1991, he was a post-doctoral fellow at the University
of Waterloo in Canada.
During three of his sabbaticals, he was the Stanislav M. Ulam visiting professor of mathematics
at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Professor Berger's research interests are in number theory and he is the author of
more than 30 scholarly papers and 12 books.
With Michael Starbird, he co-authored The Heart of Mathematics, an invitation to effective
thinking which won a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton Book Award.
They also co-authored a general audience trade book titled Coincidences, Chaos and All That
Math Jazz.
Professor Berger is a renowned speaker and has given more than 400 lectures around the
world, ranging from keynote addresses at international mathematical conferences to mathematical
colloquia and seminars at colleges and universities, presentations at primary and secondary schools,
entertaining performances for general audiences, and television and radio appearances.
His teaching and scholarly work have been recognized with numerous prizes and awards.
In 2004, Professor Berger was awarded the Chauviné Prize, the oldest and most prestigious
prize awarded by the Mathematical Association of America.
In 2006, Professor Berger was listed in the Reader's Digest Annual 100 Best of America
Special Issue as Best Math Teacher, and in 2007, Williams College awarded him the Nelson
Bushnell Prize for Scholarship and Teaching.
Professor Berger prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
