Sex and love are fundamental in Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Perhaps that's why Jeffrey feels so depressed.
He's totally deprived from affection. A woman hasn't hugged him in months. Oh, to hold a woman.
Jeffrey wonders to himself why his generation feels so damn lonely. With the most socially connected generation ever,
maybe that's the problem. He looks around and sees everyone he knows with their heads buried into their phones.
It's hard not to feel depressed, and this is what our generation has come to.
Jeffrey wonders if he could make a change. If he could certainly make his generation more social, to take them away from their
addiction to technology. There was a movie that Jeffrey watched which said that if he killed the head of
vampire, all of the minions would follow. And so for the first time in Jeffrey's life, he has a mission. He has purpose.
The state of social media has become very ironic, where now social media makes you anti-social.
I think it's very clear for anyone to know that the more time you spend on social media, the worse your life becomes,
the worse your social skills becomes, the worse your mental health becomes.
And so what we see around us in our generation of young people is everyone who has succumbed to the addictions of these apps.
Because there's a lot of pleasure and dopamine to be gained when you invest into these apps and you get likes and you post pictures
and you get DMs and you get a response from someone. And look, there's attractive people and there's a sexy person and there's a successful person.
But when you take a step back and you objectively evaluate the consequences of social media on your individual life
and also on society and our generation as a whole, it's fucked us.
You and I are in the loneliest generation of human history. There's not been a generation before us that has been lonelier than we are.
You know, there's an argument for social media, which is it lets you connect with people all over the world.
What's interesting, we can connect to anyone, people all over the world.
So why are we even lonelier because of this technology?
Because the connection that you make through these apps, through technology is not even one tenth of the connection that you make in person.
But there is a level of discomfort and challenge and even pain involved in experiencing your social life in real life.
You know, you have to get ready, you have to put clothes on, you have to go outside, you have to face potential rejection in front of everyone else in the public.
Those things can be pretty scary, but previous generations navigated that well.
Now we have an alternative that is incredibly comfortable, quick, fast, pleasurable.
And so of course, most people choose this over this.
Most people choose social media over real life social connection.
And it's in the term social media.
You've always known media isn't good for you, whereas social connection is a very beautiful thing, so we've always wanted to connect with more people.
Well, it's just a struggle when they're currently addicted to Instagram.
I just randomly saw a glimpse of my 22nd birthday party.
I turned 22 years old, fucking hell.
And it was literally like the loneliest moment of my life.
So I just finished university and I had experienced quite like a vibrant social life.
I was in the party drug scene.
So of course, you know, the social life I did have wasn't incredibly high quality, but it was at least something.
And I did have people around me and, you know, friends and girls and everything.
And slowly and surely with worse mental health.
It's so clear when I look back now that of course my life went worse when I started overindulging in social media, video games, porn, junk food, drugs or smoking weed every day.
I started all those bad habits and my life just went down and down and down and down.
I went from being quite like a popular sort of party kid and I was known in like the clubs and everything by girls, by like the guys I would go out with.
And, you know, guys would come up to my apartment, my room and the student accommodations like pre-drinking and everything.
To just slowly becoming more of a recluse and just spending more time on the internet.
I remember my 21st birthday party was in a festival.
Like I turned 21 on the day that we all went to a festival, you know, so hype.
People running up to me that like, you know, I kind of knew from like Instagram and stuff and they'd run up and hug me and like, oh, you know, happy birthday and stuff.
And then my 22nd birthday party just one year later, I remember was in my apartment with the girl that I was living with.
And, you know, like the night before you stay up till 12 to like, you know, it's ticks over.
So June 9th, I stayed up because my birthday is June 10th.
I stayed up and she went to bed early and then as soon as it turned, like 12, I remember just being sat there just like by myself in a dark room, just sad.
And she was sweet.
Like she literally sat in a lawnmower.
She went to bed way early, but she sat in a lawnmower for like 11.59.
She walked in, gave me like a big hug and everything, but then I went to bed and I just kind of like sat there just like on my PC, just incredibly lonely.
I had lost friends and my social life.
And do you know what was interesting is that that was the loneliest period of my life.
And yet compared to the 21st birthday party where I was, you know, I felt so much more social.
At age 22, I had more Instagram followers.
I was getting way more likes on Instagram.
I had way more pictures by all accounts.
I would have seen more popular and more social and perhaps even happier at age 22, even though I was deeply lonely.
I had quite literally one person in my life and that was the girl that I was seeing and that was quite an ideal relationship, which is no disrespect to her.
Because honestly, when I look back, it's like she was actually like a wonderful woman.
And I just wasn't at the level of, you know, sort of developments, especially in terms of mental health, where I could actually be like a good partner and sort of like nourish her feminine energy and praise her and appreciate her so that she would kind of give it back to me.
So I wasn't at that level.
I just remember like, I just remember being very, very lonely that day.
And you know what's very interesting?
That shortly after that birthday, COVID happened, the lockdown happened, and then I decided to make like a very big change in my life.
You may know the date that I'm about to say it's May 2020 was like when I decided to make a change in my life.
I moved out.
So I left my girlfriend, I moved out, came back home, deleted everything, turned everything off and just lived like quite a peaceful life full of discipline.
I set like a military kind of routine, I would wake up at the same time, I would eat at the same time, I would go to sleep at the same time, I would work at the same time, I would stay fasted.
So I would wake up, not eat anything for a few hours work, go outside.
And this was through the COVID lockdown and stuff, but I'd go outside to like exercise and run.
And I started working out, outdoor in like woods, literally, I would work out in the fucking woods.
No social media, no friends, I promise you, I really promise you this is the truth.
I didn't have a friend for about five months, four to five months.
For about four to five months, I moved back home and the only time I would speak to people was either my family or just the off random person who had to kind of like walk past.
And I would like, you know, kind of awkwardly kind of say hello to them whilst I was trying to practice my social skills.
And that period of my life, I look back and I don't remember feeling lonely at all.
You know why?
I remember actually feeling quite socially fulfilled.
I remember that there was a need to make more friends.
And there was one guy that I made friends with, his name is Jonathan, and it was when I was working out in the woods,
so I would work out in this way called like gymnastic rings.
I would use this equipment.
And one time this guy just walked past him and said, Oh, you're on the rings.
Like I use the rings too.
And me and him became friends and we started working out a few times a week.
And I remember just having that one friend and then also just somewhat growing YouTube.
I had like 500 subscribers that actually fulfilled me enough.
I would meet my friend Jonathan to train three, maybe four, five, six times a week for, you know, an hour or two per day.
And then I would also just kind of post videos and just somewhat, you know, spend some time with my family, but not a lot at all.
And I felt completely socially fulfilled by that.
Guess why?
Because during that time, I wasn't on social media.
I was not on Instagram literally for like zero minutes per month.
What's interesting is that you get lonelier the more that you use social media, not just for the practical sense, you know, if you use it for six hours a day,
chances are you're just using it at home.
You're not doing something social.
But it's really because of like this social comparison that when you use social media, you kind of see other people too much.
You see and remember way too many people that shouldn't be in your mind.
Who are no offense to them, but they are irrelevant.
They're not important.
What matters is you in your real life and the people around you.
But when we're on social media, we see hundreds, thousands of more people.
And that really fucks our brain because our brain kind of understands like, oh yeah, like we're not really friends with them.
We haven't seen them in a while.
They don't talk to me.
They didn't invite me.
You know, they're all like, this is a group of people.
They didn't invite me.
You see this, this glimpse into perhaps a fake life that people are representing and your brain can't help but to feel like shit.
And so lonely because of it.
Loneliness is a very painful existence.
And I think we all experienced at least some form of that over the last few years.
I think it should be one of your priorities on your self-improvement journey as you go about trying to improve yourself and develop a new version of yourself to really consider the importance of social connection.
I remember once my friend said to me, my friend Chris said to me in the gym, we were sat in the sauna, we were talking about like happiness.
And he had just read a book called I think Akai, some like Japanese kind of book and it talked about like living a long life.
And he actually mentioned that one of the things that's found to be the biggest influencer of a long, happy life is social connection.
It is so incredibly important for us.
I see Mark Zuckerberg propaganda, like propaganda that's pushed by these social media companies, which this kind of lone wolf mentality that you don't need other people.
That's just not how life works for humans whatsoever.
You need brotherhood.
It's okay to say that.
I know it sounds scary to say that you need someone, but humans have always needed each other.
Our life expectancy was like 20 years, like 10,000 years ago, 50,000 years ago, our life expectancy was like 20 years long because we just kept on dying.
Like we weren't the formidable creatures that we are today.
We just kept on getting killed and like dying from accidents because we weren't around other people.
And as soon as we got into tribes and we're surrounded by more people, our life expectancy started going up and up and up because now we can actually make sure we have enough food.
Some guys can go out to hunt, the women can stay to farm, we can do things together, we can venture out to new habitats.
And even though those are a lot of like the natural caveman, you know, prehistoric kind of areas, it's still honestly very relevant today.
You can venture further when you have close male friends that you can rely on.
You feel stronger.
Like if you go out, like you're on a very simple, specific note, if you go out at nighttime in an environment that you don't feel comfortable, if you're by yourself or with a girl, you will feel quite anxious and it will fuck with your head.
And suddenly if you're rolling with five of your boys that you trust, that you respect, that you know are strong men who have been leveling up themselves just like you have, suddenly if you're way stronger and more capable and way more confident, that's exactly what we need.
You need to be in a gang.
You need to be in like a group.
You need brotherhood.
You need friends.
You need social connection.
It's okay to say that we need things because only with this level of awareness and humility to say, yeah, you know what, I do need other people.
I want, I so desperately need other people in my life.
I'm not okay with being by myself.
I'm not okay with being the fucking lone wolf.
That's boring as fuck.
I don't want to be solo for the rest of my life.
When you say these things and you admit them, that's when you can actually start to take some practical steps to fulfilling that need.
Social media makes you fine with not fulfilling it.
It makes you fine with just staying indoors and just getting some kind of fix, like some kind of feel that you're being social, like an arbitrary, artificial socialness.
And that's unacceptable.
When you delete social media, you will need social connection so much more and that will encourage you, that pain, that need will encourage you to get out there.
Click on this video to learn more right now.
Do the hard work, especially when you don't feel like it.
