We're here now to talk about the future.
Yes, well, you know, we were just at a conference together about transhumanism, and it means
a lot of different things to a lot of different people.
For instance, we learned at this TEDx conference that there's, for instance, a Russian-based
program that wants us all to transcend by 2045.
Project 2045.
Yes, we will, let's see, create avatars that are telepresent robots that we use from our
homes to go out and trans-live around the world, and then...
It sounds a little like my novel, Killin' People, but the idea of being able to have
a telepresence with your avatars that are first virtual, then robotic, then biorebotic,
and then the notion that you would dump...
Consciousness uploading, downloading, downloading.
Consciousness uploading, yes.
And these are all very familiar, fascinating notions out of sci-fi that are now being taken
seriously by people.
And I find myself again and again at these conferences, it's interesting, if I'm around
people who are stuck in the myopic presence, I'm one of the gun-ho singularity guys.
Wake up, snap out of it, change happens, you know, you guys are flying through the sky.
You ask somebody who's curmudgeon about the future, have you ever flown through the sky?
Have you ever walked into a room and made light happen with your fingertip?
These are the powers of gods.
And the reason we don't think of them as the powers of gods is that...
Habituate.
That's right.
The same reason that people actually got bored very quickly from the Apollo landings, and
that is they were shared immediately with everybody.
Well, that's painful to realize, but yeah, I guess you're right.
Oh yeah, yeah, look at all the people who put all that attention and adoration to the
Palantir Globe in Lord of the Rings, a magical, glassy thing on your desk that will let you
see any knowledge and converse with people far away.
Yes.
Woo!
And, of course, they're gushing over this thing while they have a magical screen on
their desk that lets them converse with people far away.
That's exactly the same thing.
And the only reason that the Palantir is better is because only the king and a couple of elfs
get it.
Restrict the supply.
Restrict the supply.
It's more valuable.
One of the best hacks you can use at your university professor for a class that you
have a hard time getting people into is you put on the flyers that you circulate around
the school.
Only 100 people.
Only 50 people are alive.
That's right.
That's right.
When you get lines out the door.
Suddenly it becomes valuable.
Well, you know, we saw this in the news just the other day that Peter Damondis and James
Cameron and a number of other billionaires, Google billionaires.
Yeah, it's very interesting.
Planetary resources.
Yeah, planetary resources that are going to mine asteroids.
And, of course, the biggest hoot was how this was received on Jon Stewart.
People ought to look at the YouTube and that Jon Stewart episode.
Oh, it was amazing.
He's saying, oh, do we have to talk politics again tonight?
Wait, we don't have to.
There's something cooler.
They show a news report about mining asteroids and he says, are you freaking kidding me?
Mining asteroids for trillions of dollars.
And the audience of New Yorkers is just going ape.
Just completely going ape.
This is the kind of news in 2012 that we all thought we'd see in 2012.
Where's my jet pack future, boy?
I know.
Where is it?
Last the future.
This 2045 or 2050 that we're talking about.
Yes.
The world in 40 years.
Yeah, the world of your novel, Existence.
Yeah, well, it's set then and the novel's coming out and it's set in 2050.
And the thing about the 30, 40 year projection that makes it both more difficult and so cool.
I enjoyed this so much with my other projection called Earth was the notion that it's this mix.
If you said something just five, 10 years from now, it's today's world, familiar world,
with something has disrupted it.
Something's changed.
Some one thing.
The aliens have invaded.
Maybe everybody's dead.
But some one thing, if you set it 200, 300, 400 years in the future, it's playing tennis
with the nut down.
You can say anything you want.
So many impacts, cross impact, second and third order consequences.
We've gone through one singularity and crashed and now we're on working on our second.
But the 30, 40 year projection.
Well, if I were to go back to 1962 and get my 12 year old self, pull him back up here 50 years,
he would spend half his time going, wow, we never thought of that.
And the other half of the time he would be saying, I mean, you're still doing that.
And that's the sense that you have to be able to convey in these 30, 40, 50 year projections
is notion that some things will be disappointingly the same.
Yes.
No matter how some things change, others just stay the same.
That's right.
And figuring out which of those things are going to be so depressingly or in some cases
reassuringly stable.
And when we are uploaded into Android bodies with IQs of 496, adolescent males will still
spend one third of their time thinking about things they shouldn't and another one third
wincing over stupid things they said and still wincing about them 50 years later.
Well said.
Yeah.
But in any event, what else?
50 years from now.
Well, you think we're going to transform?
Yes.
I appreciated your discussion.
You're calling me out on that in your presentation of TEDx talk.
I do.
I believe that the history of intelligence in the universe involves colonizing ever smaller
scales, ever more local slices of space time, and using resources ever more efficiently per
computation.
So virtualizing our resources.
Getting to a place where we're doing virtually everything with virtually no physical resources.
And this seems to be the history of complexity development when you move from galaxies to
replicating special replicating stars within those galaxies to special surfaces and the
center of these special planets between magma and vacuum where all the interesting things
happening.
And then the special subsections of those that are most hospitable to replicating life.
And then these...
Special life forms.
Special life forms.
Now we're manipulating quantum computers.
We're doing quantum encryption.
We've sent neutrino messages through solid Earth recently.
But this...
We're going into interspace.
And this is all fabulous, but it runs contrary to the science fiction notion that our future,
our destiny, our final frontier is out there and doing mega structures in mega civilizations.
And you think that this is the answer to the so-called Fermi paradox, what I've called
the great silence.
Yes.
Yeah.
And I don't know if it really does run counter.
What it does is it says that the frontier that was thought was the frontier, this expansion
into outer space is cold and sterile.
It may actually not be the frontier.
The frontier is still there, but the exploration, the discovery is really jumping into this
interspace world.
That's where the real computational resources, the real new ability to understand things,
the next level of sublime, if you will, seems to be...
We actually seem to be chasing into that as we're thinking.
As we're thinking about these grand explorations.
Now, I do believe that there is what I call the next adjacent.
There's a next adjacent expansion that always happens in order to reach the next level of
interspace.
Humans went through a next adjacent expansion from Africa, the modern human, expanding out
across the globe.
That was a next adjacent.
That was an outward, that was an outer space move.
But the reality is we were only colonizing a small subset of the space that the prokaryotes
had very effectively colonized long before us, miles deep into the crust of the Earth,
autolith, trophic bacteria, out to Venus and Mars on asteroids.
But they needed us to take them to the moon.
Good point.
Well, no.
I don't know if they did.
I would say the asteroids skipping off of Earth probably distributed spores of bacteria
all the way out to many of the other planets.
Well, I talk about that to a large degree in the heart of the comet.
That's the panspermia notion.
But nevertheless, what you're talking about is going to depress some people in certain
ways because they see this as just an extension of the video game.
We're getting in and in and in and in and even if it becomes these vast virtual realms
to explore, it's nevertheless a turning away from an older dream.
Well, it might not be.
Well, of course you think it is because you think it explains the silence out there,
that almost every species out there discovers these inner realms and these inner realms
are more persuasive and attractive.
Yes, and let me correct a small misunderstanding we seem to have with regard to this question
of does this answer Fermi's paradox.
I believe that if we are diving into these things that look more and more like a black hole
from our perspective, these interspace highly dense realms,
censored from our observation.
I do agree with your notion that there will be biker gangs.
There will be people who will disagree.
There will be exceptions.
Committed colonizers, grand explorers who want to leave.
However, if the universe is not just evolving, it's also developing, as I've argued in my
double, double universe community discusses this, then it's quite possible that the
interspace attractor is an attractor that has a force proportionate to the complexity
of the organism.
In other words, they impose law on the galaxy and they curb the few exceptions who want
to expand and change and manipulate the cosmos.
Certainly one thing is that we would do, there would be the prime directive that would
emerge in all these advanced planets.
Don't go out and send, because if we're all going into this interspace world and let's
assume the physics work out so that we all instantaneously connect with all the others
in the civilization by doing that.
That's one thing that would make it highly attractive.
I can go in and now I can instantaneously wormhole or whatever else that everybody else.
The speed of light and temporal coincidence both mitigate against that.
But we'll leave that aside and let's take your assumption.
In my paper, I argue that the weirdness of my paper, the Transition Hypothesis, which
was published in Act of Astronautica last year, I argue that the weirdness of black hole
time dilation is such that if we were able to go into a black hole, a black hole like
object, we would instantaneously, from our reference frame, merge gravitationally with
all the other black holes that are in the gravity well with us.
Well, that's a perspective.
I don't think Stephen Hawking or Kip Thorne would agree, but we can set that aside for
another time.
Basically saying that when you enter into the realm near an event horizon, you're in
connection with all the other event horizons.
I'm saying that the way space-time dilation works, the extreme space-time dilation that
happens at a black hole, and there's, of course, black hole physics is one of the hardest
things to get anybody around to agree on, but this is one of the oldest models of how
space-time works.
This is one of the most original classical, you know, Miesner talks about it in gravitation,
right, of how basically, you know, the astronaut that's moving into the, they basically are
frozen on the event horizon, and from your perspective, you're looking out at the universe,
everything in the universe instantaneously moves towards its heat depth.
So basically, a black hole event horizon is an instantaneous one-way forward-time travel
device in that perspective.
Well, yeah, that's clear, but the business of being connected with all other singularities,
well, let's set that aside for another time.
The point you're driving at is that the exceptions to this business of being attracted into inner
space, and you believe that most civilizations, most races, are attracted to the inner world
of unlimited virtuality, that the exceptions, the motorcycle gangs who try to claim the
universe might be stopped from doing so by the vast power of those who want the maximum
diversity in the cosmos and have this power because they have this ultimate virtuality
and computational ability.
Yeah, if we can make the claim that sending out a one-way message on your way into this
hole, this transcension, is going to condemn all the other civilizations that receive that
message, or probe, or whatever you send, to going down their holes in the same way you
did, then we can say that you've created cloneality in the computational, that sector of the galaxy.
Okay, next time.
So you would end up seeing yourself, a clone of yourself, on the other side, right?
I think...
I wouldn't be the same to you, of course, but what you would have done is you would have
reduced the diversity, the remaining diversity, you would have taken away what Arthur C. Clarke
liked to say, I think it might make more sense for us to figure out our own problems than
to have them spoon fed to us from another alien.
And that may be very well why, irrespective of the black hole, mumbo-chumbo, that may be
why advanced races insist on a prime directive, a non-interference policy, in order to maximize
the diversity so that young races like us can have time to develop interesting differences.
And of course, that is very appealing to the culture that we came from, where we appreciate
argumentation, we appreciate difference, we appreciate diversity.
It's almost a religion in this culture where it wasn't in many human cultures.
But on that thought, I think maybe we'd better give our brains a little rest.
Okay, we'll pour ourselves some more tea and welcome people back another time.
