All right. I think we're rolling then. Hey, well, thank you so much for this invitation.
It's really nice to be here, sort of. But let me go ahead and share my screen,
and we'll go ahead and start the process here. So,
so what I'll be sharing with you today is my vision for combined integrated unified
toward a more coherent clinical psychology in the 21st century. I'm honored to be a part of this
conference. I've enjoyed my conversations with Mark over many years and Sue and Caroline. I'm
really glad that we got a chance to chat. So, you know, I love the idea of the conference in
terms of buying, joining and be united as one. I think that's beautiful. And it certainly speaks
to my heart and it speaks to my passions over the course of my career and its exploration.
I'm looking out over at least a picture of Christchurch. I will say at least the commute
hasn't been bad. So that's a positive. And I appreciate that you guys are having a conference
there. That's what it's like to look like a lot of people in one room. I haven't seen that in a while.
But, you know, I am happy to be at a beautiful place myself. This is James Madison University
at dusk. And so we're actually many of us are very fortunate to be in the places that we are. So
thank you so much. It's very, very enjoyable to have this opportunity to share with you some of
my thoughts. So I'd like to just start by getting clear about why I titled my talk, What I Did,
Combined Integrated Unified, and we'll start with combined. What does that mean? Combined in our
language means combined across the practice areas of psychology. And the practice areas of psychology
in the United States are a clinical counseling and school. And so when I say toward a coherent
clinical psychology in the 21st century, I actually should be clear. I mean that with a little C,
not a capital C, because actually what we're exploring in James Madison University is combined
integrated doctoral program is a combined integrated approach. And that trains at the heart
of the practice areas. And what we really are affording is a coherent, integrated identity of
a psychological doctor. And while there may absolutely be specialty differences, for example,
between somebody who's a child family school individual, or somebody who works with adults,
and then many specializations may break off after there, we believe there's a coherent practice
identity of a health service psychologist that carries the identity of a psychological doctor.
And that's what combined means for us. There's also integrated, and I should say integrated and
pluralistic across both the paradigms and systematic levels of analysis. So all of us are for clinical
psychologists, we know that it's sort of a jungle of different approaches out there. There's cognitive
and psychodynamic and humanistic and emotion focused and behavioral and family systems,
not to mention a whole host of other possible perspectives. Our view is that each of these
have value. And at the same time, their organization is well, a bit chaotic, shall we say.
So one of our concerns are ways in which we might bring some order in integration
across levels of analysis and the paradigms. One example of that is what I call character
adaptation systems theory, character adaptation systems theory, the way to think about the individual
through the lenses of three different contexts, the context of one's biophysiological genetic
development, that's the lower left arrow, the psychological learning and developmental,
and the sociocultural ecological frame that somebody might be involved in. Now, this is
something that's very common across a wide variety of different trainings. We see, of course, the
biopsychosocial model, and at least the United States is a required aspect. But what we also see
in this diagram is a way to organize the modes of character adaptation, the systems of adaptation,
the systems by which individuals adjust. And my theoretical lens allows me to see the human mind
in terms of different systems of adaptation, such as a habit and procedural system, a felt
experiential system, a relationship system, a defensive system and a justification system.
And what you can note in relationship to this particular diagram is that actually each of
these systems of adaptation correspond to some of the key emphases and insights associated with
the major paradigms, most notably the habit and the behavioral system, the humanistic experiential
system with the emotion experiential system, psychodynamic focus on our core relational
attachments and our defenses, and cognitive and perhaps narrative therapies focused more on
the system of justification. So this is just an example about the ways in which our program
and our shared sense of understanding appreciates the various viewpoints, recognizes the need for
pluralism, and at the same time is looking for ways to integrate across paradigms, across systems,
and various levels of analysis. And finally, in relationship to unified, unified is in particular
at James Madison in terms of because it's heavily influenced by my work. I was program director
for there for 12 years. And for us, unified is a focus on how to define the science and practice
of psychology at what is known as the metaphysical and meta theoretical levels of analysis. These
are the very big broad views that we can take. Here is a depiction of what I call the metaphysical
empirical continuum. And I've come to see science as absolutely needing attention to
all aspects of this particular continuum. You see the right hand side, you see empirical,
which is data gathered by research methods. And those are nested in normal science paradigms,
nested in hypothesis and descriptive data techniques. And then there's theory, and that's
grounded in a particular paradigm. And that's mostly where our systems operate. The meta theoretical
lens focuses on the relationship between the paradigms and how they might be related. And
then finally, the metaphysical lens really emphasizes our concepts and categories,
like what are the fundamental concepts that we use, and how do they interrelate to one another
to create what's called a descriptive metaphysical system. That's basically your worldview,
your sense of what's real and how you know about it. Now, in my work, I developed a unified theory,
what I call the unified theory of psychology I published this in 2011. And this really was a
meta theoretical analysis, in the sense that what it looked at is it examined the various paradigms
and then introduced some key ideas that I argued that if we were to begin enter the field through
these ideas, we could then take the key insights of the major paradigms and coherently arrange them.
I'm currently in the process of developing a book which will hopefully be done by the summer
called the problem of psychology and its solution. And that's a metaphysical analysis of the field
that gets at the fundamental roots of what our subject matter is concerned with, what is a proper
ontology for psychology. So to summarize, we have the combined across the practice
areas that give us an identity of psychological doctors, an attitude of integrated pluralism
that cuts across the various paradigms in relationship to the theories and levels of
analysis and how to coherently arrange them in a particular way that affords us as practitioners,
and then fundamentally an attention to the field in relationship to its core concepts
and the ways in which the theoretical paradigms relate to each other and the seeking of a coherence
amongst those ideas. So what I'd like to share with you in the next 40 minutes or so is this
some of the narrative associated with this. I'll allude to some of my training and my training
in American clinical psychology. I want to emphasize American clinical here because our
concepts and categories, one of the things that I tend a lot to is how they exist in systems of
justification. They get their meaning in this context and it's very important for us. And I
hope our global consciousness is very much aware of how problematic it can be to transpose a set
of concepts that exist in one system of understanding onto another. And I'm very sensitive to that in
relationship to what we mean by psychology. What do we mean by the science of psychology? How does
that interact with say indigenous perspectives? How does it interact with psychological perspectives
from other cultures? It is crucial to contextualize the meaning of our terms and I'll be sharing with
you an articulation of my experience in the context of American clinical psychology. And I think it's
crucial because actually in terms of influence, American psychology is some of the most sort of
influential. It's spreading out into the world and I feel both good and anxious about that quite
frankly. And I think we need to be both aware of what it is and what its potentials are and that's
also one of its possible problems. And one of the problems that I encountered in my training,
which I'm sure all of you encountered in some ways that I'll speak to is the problem of psychotherapy
and how that turned into the problem of psychology. And one of my goals of this talk is to really
solidify for you what the problem of psychology is. And then I'll offer one aspect of my work
in relationship to the problem of psychology and a framework called the Tree of Knowledge System that
I developed now over 20 years ago. And how does it set the stage for a new way for us to think about
our discipline subject matter and to situate it in a more coherent naturalistic view of the world
that does justice to our souls and spirits in a much more effective way than traditional,
at least in my opinion, traditional empirical psychology does. Part of that sets the stage
for getting at a core understanding of what our core concepts of in American psychology,
psychology is defined as the science of behavior and mental process. I want to help you at least
get a glimpse of some of my work in relationship to understanding these very, very complicated
and ill-defined constructs and how the Tree of Knowledge sets the stage for us to approach these
concepts in a new and I believe more effective way. I'll then offer some thoughts, shift gears into
this sort of abstract theoretical, you know, metaphysical stuff and talk about the training
that I engage in. So I want everybody to know, although some of my ideas and work does get
into pretty high abstract, I'm definitely a theoretical psychologist at heart. I'm also
a clinician at heart. My journey started in the clinic room. I'm deeply concerned with human
suffering. My work is in training individuals to become effective, reflective, psychological
doctors to go into the world with appropriate levels of self-reflection and social responsibility
in relation. And I'll talk briefly then ultimately about a unified approach to psychotherapy,
how this sets the stage for a particular identity and the identity of a unified health service
psychologist. Now, some people will see the word unified and be like, oh, is this, you know,
there's one way of doing it. And the answer is no, not at all. In the sense that unified simply
means to pay attention to some of the core confusions in the field. And there are ways to
resolve those confusions and afford a lot more coherence in our understanding than is present.
Once we have coherence, the diversity and integrated pluralism, that is fundamentally the
attitude that we're cultivating, because of course, diversity and richness of ideas is actually present
in virtually every science. I certainly would want it present in both the science of psychology and
its practice. And I would embrace it as a fundamental principle of human existence in
relationship to our reaching, our potential is found in both the dialectic of unity and diversity.
So in terms of my own life, I start with an approach that embraces empirical mainstream
psychology. I am impressed by people like Albert Bandura. I'm a social and cognitive psychologist.
I say, oh, cognitive behavior therapy, oh, that's empirically supported. I'm really a big fan of
that. I also am actually impacted quite a bit by sociology and feminism. I become woke, and I
don't know what it means these days, but back in 1989, I know what it meant in relationship to
the frame of reference about issues of justice and concern about some historical issues.
I was really fortunate to be educated by Rich Tedeschi and Lawrence Calhoun at the University
of North Carolina in community and clinical psychology. I mention these folks because they
are pioneers in post-traumatic growth research. Over the last 10 years, this actually caught
some fire. You may have heard of post-traumatic growth. I heard that there may be some interest
in the power-threat meaning framework that the Brits are exploring in relation. Actually,
some of the post-traumatic growth stuff really offers a very interesting angle on psychopathology.
It offers a different angle about what is trauma and how do we think about both suffering and the
deepening of human experience. I feel very fortunate that I got exposed to that kind of
thinking early in my master's degree. Rich Tedeschi was my professor for my integrative psychotherapy
class. This is what sparked in me an awareness of what I would call the problem of psychotherapy.
I'm thinking about science. I want to do the best analytic work. Then, of course, what happens to
all of us is you actually get in the clinic room. There's a person in front of you and they're
suffering. You're wondering, what the heck am I doing in relationship to this? How do I intersect
my frame of reference for who they are and who I am in this real unique relationship relative to
theories. I'm in the process of doing psychotherapy. Basically, what I realize is that it is my
theoretical understanding that I'm actually going to make a bridge to whatever empirical
research people are doing to my actual work in the therapy room. I see what happens in the
therapy room, really, is there are all sorts of different interesting perspectives. I think they
all have some value. What I also noticed, really, the best of the best seem to do the best work.
That's not surprising. What it noted to me is, no, it's not just like CBT is some big winner here.
That's my strong opinion. It's really the best of the best is what the winner is in
relationship to what we should be cultivating. I went to the University of Vermont for getting my
doctorate in clinical psychology. It's in 1996 that I have what I think turns out to be a very
interesting, somewhat common sense idea. That is, as I saw the work of the different paradigms in
the psychotherapy room, I returned to psychology. I had this idea that, actually, why don't we
organize the psychotherapy paradigms based on the science of human psychology? Just like if we
look at Western medicine, generally, Western medicine is organized on the science of human
biology. Although there's all these different specialties, of course, there's a lot of opinion and
diverse practice in medicine, but it's also organized around the science of human biology.
Should we then be organizing our psychotherapies in relationship to the human psychology?
And then, when I returned to human psychology through this particular lens, then I realized just
how problematic the structure of empirical psychology is and what I became the problem of
psychology. What I'm trying to do here is I'm trying to say, hey, actually, it's our knowledge as
psychologists, which actually will become sexual and explanatory that will then cause us to draw
from empirical research and then put it into the therapy room. However, to the extent that all of
the paradigms are disorganized and different people use different frames of reference, the bridge
between research and practice is unbelievably chaotic and it threatens the entire coherence
of the system. Fundamentally, what we're talking about then is what is psychology? And ultimately,
what you get is psychology is this, as anyone in the field knows, it's a multiplicity of different
meanings. It overlaps some with philosophy and folk experience. In terms of my terminology,
I'm referring to modern psychology as a particular enterprise that falls under the scientific
sort of language and epistemological system that emerges in from Galileo to Newton
and then becomes part of what psychological science emerges as in the 19th century. Now,
if you know the history of the science of psychology, it starts off as psychophysics. That
is, you change a stimulus out here and somebody reports notes a just noticeable difference or
has an experience on the inside. Wilhelm von, the great German psychologist, finds psychology
really studying inner experience based on people's report. William James says, no, that's not what
psychology is. Actually, it's the functional relationships of mental life, both on the inside
and in relationship to how both animals and humans adapt and adjust. It then bleeds over into
philosophical considerations and this becomes the father of American psychology. Then we get a strong
empirical assertion and John Watson asserting basically we need to follow the experimental
natural sciences and he adopts an epistemology and an ontology of the physical sciences that says,
no, we need to look at behavior. Then, of course, we got Mr. Sigmund Freud coming along and basically
giving us a whole nother view, also a deterministic view, but nonetheless one that focuses on a very
different ontology about both the mind and, of course, the primary focus on the sub or unconscious
mind in relationship to the self-conscious mind and its implications for suffering.
What you see here is a wide variety of different phenomena. I could also add a number of perspectives
anywhere for Herve Evinghaus and experimental cognitive to the Gestalt psychology perspective.
What actually happens is that even by 1927, Lev Gaikotsky, one of the most brilliant psychologists
in the field, identifies this as a crisis. There is no coherent ontology. There is no
coherent description of what our subject matter is and fundamentally this is the problem of psychology.
Now, what did modern empirical, mostly American psychology do? Well, basically it said,
don't worry about it. It's like, we're going to be a science. As long as we're a science,
we will add to our knowledge through the empirical enterprise. Yes, there will be a pluralistic of
investigation. A thoughtful student will come on and say, hey, how can it be a science if it can't
define its terms? Basically, what modern science said, well, it's okay. This is what I'm going to
critique about the field. It's not okay. I'm going to argue that essentially what is happening
is what I call the sandcastle problem. The sandcastle problem is I believe that there are
a multitude of different research programs. I think they're brilliant and they're beautiful,
but at the same time, they're defined in a particular operationalized way. While you can
build sandcastles, what will happen is the tide of the next researchers will come in and that will
wash those sandcastles out, and then a new group will grow, but what will not happen, and Paul Mill
noted this, what will not happen is a cumulative knowledge structure. What I believe is a foundation
it can be seen in terms of our problems is to start with our basic definitions and take a look
at those. Let's see how this field is defined. Some individuals five to 10% in American psychology,
at least say that psychology is the science of behavior. There's still very respectable textbooks
that make this claim, and the reason that psychology is the science of behavior is because
that behavior is what's studied by science, and therefore that's what psychological scientists
should be interested in. Then we get other people that say, no, psychology is not about the science
of behavior. It's about the science of mind. Notice right off the bat, we have a fundamentally
different ontological or descriptive claim about what our subject matter is to this day.
Of course, it's worth noting that you also have now the emergence of cognitive science. What is
the relationship between cognitive science and psychology? That's an interesting question.
But if we're going to be a scientist, we still have the problem of why the behaviorist claim
made the claim they do, and many cognitive psychologists will say, well, yes, I am interested
in the mind, but I study the mind via the behavior. In fact, every psychological scientist, this is a
quote from George Mandler that basically says, well, we're all behaviors in the sense that we study
behavior, but with this, we interpret it as a mind unlike the behaviorist. So what do we do?
Most of the field basically then decides to, well, we'll go with mind and behavior. That sounds
reasonable. In fact, about 80% of the dominant textbooks define psychology as the science of
both mind and behavior. David Myers has a common textbook, the behavior and mental process. That's
actually probably the most common definition. And I thought I'd share a definition by Rosie
Spelman in a psychological book. Word psychology is coined at a time when concepts like soul and
mind were not clearly distinguished. Okay, well, that's a whole nother problem, right? We got soul,
and that's ultimately the root of psyche. But then we're really interested in mind. But here's the key
element. Since science studies only observable phenomena, and the mind is not directly observable,
we expand this definition to the scientific study of mind and behavior. And this actually,
she actually nails what modern empirical psychology does, but it really highlights,
I believe for us, what we have done then just for clarity is we've used the epistemology of science,
meaning the way in which science knows to dictate how we define our subject matter. And so psychologists
split behavior and mental processes off from each other, where behavior gets defined by what we
can assess directly in science. And then my mental processes are what we can infer as a
function of the epistemological constrictions that science places on us. Now, this actually
is a very, very problematic approach to defining one subject matter to go ahead and define it by
the method. Okay, so I want to say that we've been grappling with this issue for, you know,
almost 100 years, if not more really. And we have to ask, why is this so hard? Why is this
such a complicated thing? And actually, as I got more and more interested in theory and then
philosophy, I think I found basically, we can actually look outside and understand modernity
and understand the way modernity makes sense out of it, and see why this is so hard. And this is,
I generated the term called the enlightenment gap to explain why actually it makes perfect sense
that psychology would have such difficulty in defining what its terms is. What is the enlightenment
gap? Well, the enlightenment gap refers to two fundamental philosophical problems. In other
words, two problems that we really don't know how to address. One of the problems is understanding,
having a basic ontological or explanatory frame for what is mind relative to matter. We don't have
a good framework for that. And secondarily, we don't have a good framework really for understanding
what social knowledge is and how is it relative but also different from scientific knowledge
or the reverse. What is scientific knowledge? How did it emerge out of and how is it different
than social knowledge? How do we know that these are problems? Actually, you can just look out at
the landscape. For example, what we see is the mind body problem. It's everywhere in philosophy. We can
in the West, we can trace it to Renee Descartes, who gives us a mind body dualism. Virtually every
philosopher agrees that mind body dualism is really problematic, yet we still don't have a good
language or grammar to put mind body together. So one obvious factor is we don't have the right
field of understanding to define our terms. So that's, and that's the mind matter problem.
What about the science and social knowledge? Well, those of you that have any conversations
about modernism versus postmodernism will know. Here's a Michael Foucault, Michel Foucault notion.
Power is everywhere. It's diffused and embodied in discourse. And this gets to the authority
of knowledge, the nature of truth claims that's embedded in imminent context or is transcendent
and speaks to reality in a particular way. So here's an idea. If we can't define what scientific
knowledge is relative to social knowledge and we can't define what mind is relative to matter,
no doubt that we're going to have serious problems in relationship to defining our field.
And so what I would then posit is if we take a step back, why is the problem of psychology so
difficult? Well, actually, it's even a part of a larger problem where the problem of psychology
is actually in the shadow of the enlightenment gap. And so it's fundamental to our basic sense-making
structures. And so that's one of the points that I would then really like to say is that
modernity never really figured out a way to talk about matter in mind and to understand what
scientific knowledge is in relationship to social knowledge. And if that's the case,
how could we possibly have a science of mind and behavior? Because both of those things will
conflate and bounce up against one another, and different people are then going to have
different frames of reference. So we have a core fundamental metaphysical or epistemological
ontological problems. I'll be clear about these terms. So epistemology refers to how do we know
and psychology is trying to get an understanding of the psyche, which could be whatever that might
mean. But one thing it certainly probably means us to do with consciousness. However,
consciousness is not available through an exterior epistemology. But behavior is,
consciousness is available from the inside. So this creates an epistemological problem,
so whereby the inside is dependent upon, the inner consciousness is dependent upon an
interior epistemological view, but science is dependent upon an exterior view. There also is
an ontological problem. What is the ontological problem? Well, there are two aspects of the
ontological problem. One is called the hard problem. Philosophers discuss this a lot. You may
have heard, what's the hard problem of consciousness? Well, that's the difficulty in explaining
subjective conscious experience based in mathematical terms. And we can, I'm not going to talk about
that. But something that they don't talk about in relationship to the problem of psychology
is the ontological problem is that we psychologists have then gone ahead and developed many different
paradigms to define mental and behavioral processes in many different ways. I've already
reviewed some of these. So we have mind as behavior, because that's what's available through science,
then we can build models of behavior. Mind as information processing. There's a whole really
neurocognitive functionalism is arguably the most basic understanding of psychology. There's mind as
your conscious experience of being. There's mind as self-conscious reflection. And there's some people
that argue that mind should only be for human self-conscious reflection. That would go back to
Renee Descartes conception of mind. And we also have serious questions about whether or not we're
talking at the level of the animal or at the level of the human. And what does this mean? Basically,
what we're talking about here is these are very different reference points in reality. So to this
day, we do not have a zoomed out view that allows us to correspond these very different reference
points. And if we have radically different ontological reference points for what we're
talking about, we will ultimately kind of create mush in our understanding. Or at least there's
a tremendous vulnerability to what my friend John Verbecky calls equivocation across explanatory
frames. And this is one of the things that has driven my own passion is this notion that there's
no agreement. I wish that the problem of psychology was widely known and discussed. There's a problem
of quantum gravity in physics. Everyone knows about it. But I'm trying to get people to raise
their awareness that there is a foundational problem here. And we should wonder about what it
actually means and if there are viable solutions. And this takes me back then to my own timeline.
And in my doctoral training, I sort of had a transition into viewing the world that then
ultimately set the stage so that I built what I argued to then be a naturalist scientific ontology,
that's actually up to the task of defining behavior and mental process. One key idea was the
justification system idea. I actually started that in 1996. What that does, and I'm not going to get
into any details there, is it really separates out our culture person part of our mind from our
primate part of our mind. And those are very, very different. And one of the arguments that I will
make is that there's a primate part meaning of our mind and a person part of our mind. And it's
crucial to understand why and what is the relationship between those two domains. And that
relates then to what would ultimately become the overall map, what I call the Tree of Knowledge
System. That occurred in a flash of insight back in 1997. It was really interesting to me a year
later, Edward Wilson's conciliance came out. And really, my basic frame of reference is that the
Tree of Knowledge affords us a path into conciliance. Indeed, I characterize my overarching system as a
unified theory of knowledge in relationship that would be very much akin to Wilson's hypothesis
about conciliance. I argue Wilson fails at conciliance because he doesn't even address
the problem of psychology. And there would be no way to achieve conciliance if you don't understand
and deconstruct and resolve the problem of psychology. So in 2003, I did publish the Tree of
Knowledge System in the Theoretical Unification of Psychology. It's also important or worth noting
my day job during this time is at the University of Pennsylvania. And I work with Dr. Aaron Beck.
And we were running a randomized control clinical trial. And this also had a tremendous impact on
me and how I understood how the paradigms would frame what the experience was on the ground.
And while we certainly did some really interesting work, it's also the case, I'll tell you,
Franannus, the project director, the complexity of the cases and the ways in which we work from
far exceeded cognitive therapy's capacity really to frame it. Yet because that was the paradigm
that we were operating under, then virtually all the results were then framed and interpreted,
even in the Journal of American Medical Association, the high level scientific journal. But in fact,
I would argue that it was not the full picture to say the absolute, to say the least in relationship.
So this was one of my concerns in relationship to how do we actually do research and have
conceptual categories that are up to the task. So what is this tree of knowledge system?
Like I said, it's a naturalistic scientific ontology that I believe can define behavior
and mental processes. This is a part of the work that I'm currently doing in my book. If you're
familiar at all with the system, it's if you know big history at all, which if you don't,
I really encourage big history is the idea that we can really pull together a big naturalistic
view of the world. If we go back on the scale of time and down on the scale of complexity,
and then we can then come back and that means we start the our universe origin story at the Big
Bang as a state of energy information. And then out of that emerges the dimension, the material
dimension of complexity. The base of that material dimension is the quantum mechanical base. And then
across scale, and to explain the sort of shape of the universe and its relationship, the space time
relationship to gravity and mass is afforded by general relativity. And then we can go up scales
of complexification from particles into atoms into complex chemical molecules and then across scale
like up into planets and asteroids and stars and ultimately galaxies along those lines. So
that's the first dimension or plane of existence. The tree of knowledge then says there's a second
plane of existence that emerges about 3.8 billion years ago, at least that we're aware of on planet
Earth. And then over the course of a three billion year period, we see the emergence of the tree of
life. This happens as a function of natural selection operating on genetic combinations
that give rise to cells and cells then evolve, connect with each other, create multi cellular
creatures, and we see the emergence of the tree of life. And then the tree of knowledge makes an
interesting claim that says we see another dimension of complexity emerging around what's
called the Cambrian explosion. This is when we get complex active animals, a complex active animal's
got a complex body with segments, it has a brain and something like an insect would be a complex
active body. And then we see the evolution about 550 million years from the Cambrian explosion
up then into invertebrates like insects and crabs and then up into vertebrates like fish and then
birds and then ultimately primates. And this we can also model through an emergent variation
selection and retention model and neuro information processing that vary akin to genetics. Now,
importantly, I'm introducing a word to our vocabulary here called mind with a capital M.
It's now akin to life and it refers to the dimension of animal mental behavior. This is one of the
it's not a neologism in the sense that I'm not completely making up a word, I can show references
that people use. But it is a particular meaning of mind that then when you actually capture it,
it then affords us a new way to think about the relationship between inside outside activity
and the nervous system as a whole, that's going to get us out of defining things based in terms of
scientific methodology. But it's important to note that the first then dimension that we're talking
about in mind is the animal mental dimension. And then the Tree of Knowledge says there's a fourth
dimension that emerges between 200,000 and 50,000 years ago. What happens is our symbolic language
systems really take off and we start talking in propositional language. Propositional language
changes the game and it changes the game because it creates the problem of justification. What is
legitimately is and ought to be the case, both in an analytic sense and a social and personal sense.
And then all of a sudden we get into dialogue, question and answer dialogue, and then we build
systems of justification. And we see the evolution, both of our knowledge systems and then especially
in the last 10,000 years, our technological systems as we gain greater and greater control.
This is another emergent evolutionary process with the fundamental unit being then symbols that
are then organized into propositional statements that give rise to these networks of justification.
It's also important to note here that it's culture with a capital C. I very much believe other animals
have little C culture, but capital C culture refers to culture where people are coordinated,
self-conscious people coordinated by systems of justification. And although other animals are
very advanced, they do not have this very unique capacity, which makes us a very different kind
of primate. So we get the Tree of Knowledge system then affords us a new and I think better map of
big history. It defines the natural universe, the ontic natural universe through matter,
life, mind, and culture. And then it starts the process of potentially organizing our scientific
knowledge and corresponding to that. One of the things about it is that it then has these joint
points. Unfortunately, time limitations means that I won't be able to tell you exactly about the
meta theoretical structures. I've written a lot about them, but they do afford then a way to then
pull paradigms, models of understanding these domains together to create a big picture of coherence.
So fundamentally, so how does the system work? I'm going to share then the basic vision logic
of the system is that you have physics mapping the matter dimension, you have biology mapping the
life dimension. Then the current knowledge system is basically chaotic. As you get more and more
higher on the scales of complexification, that's somewhere in there psychology is about an American
psychology of can really see the most influential but also basically polar opposite figures and
radical behaviorism and via Skinner and Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis. I chose those figures
early on to show that I can assimilate and integrate them with with each other and mainstream
psychology. And then we can move from this confused set of ideas to a system that has a lot more
coherence in relation, ultimately arguing that through behavioral investment theory, I can bring
Skinner in accordance with emergent evolutionary theory. And then I can connect Freud to the
shift from primate to persons and then create a physical biological psychological social picture
of the whole. This is crucial. One of the things that it speaks to in relationship to what is
psychology is that when we talk about mental processes and behavior, the logic and architecture
of the Tree of Knowledge says we should define the science of psychology in very different ways,
whether we're talking about basic psychology, basic psychology is brain, mind, animal behavior
studies, and then there's human psychology, which would be a totally different subdiscipline
precisely because humans are both primates and they're persons that are socialized in particular
ways that fundamentally change the behavior and mental processes, which is why humans have
conferences and other animals do not seem to. So that is sort of a taste to suggest that we
could be in a position to use the Tree of Knowledge to define our terms and that's what
I would like to argue for in the next brief period of this talk. And one of the things that I'd like
to suggest is that the Tree of Knowledge highlights something very important about the concept of
behavior. It says actually the behaviors were sort of right and they were very wrong in some ways.
They were sort of right in that science, yes, is about behavior. They were very wrong to then say
psychology was about behavior because if science is about behavior, then that's going to have to
mean that psychology has to be a particular kind of behavior and that's a very, very different
argument to make. So one of the things that I want to suggest then is that science in general
does frame the universe in terms of in behavioral terms. There's an observer, there's an object field
change that the observer measures. That is a scientific epistemological stance about all
positions. In other words, behavior then becomes the goggles through an exterior epistemology
where it defines the observer looking through a change in object field. And that is important
because when we now go to the Tree of Knowledge we say, oh, actually behavior can be organized in
relationship to the different dimensions of complexity and actually I'll take that a step
further with this periodic table of behavior. What the periodic table of behavior suggests
is that we're going to organize different dimensions of behavior, matter, life, mind, and culture.
That gives us general object field relations and then there are these primary levels of analysis.
And actually when you look at nature this way and you look at the sciences, you get to see that
the sciences actually are organized around these different dimensions and these different levels
of analysis. So there's energy that then goes into particle physics and then that goes into
atomic physics like the periodic table and then that gets into chemistry and then that goes into
scale like I mentioned like Earth science. Then you jump over and you get some molecular biology
and genetics. Then you get into cytology, the science of cells, and multi-organism science like
botany and then you go across scale there and you get into ecology and then it gets confusing in
terms of our terms but I want to say we then get into neuroscience and then we get into animal
behavioral science which I want to call comparative psychology or basic psychology. In America it's
called ethology which is this weird blend between biology and psychology and then you have the social
behavioral ecology of groups and then finally that jumps over and we get the emergence of
propositional language and self-conscious justification and then we get into family. So
why is this model important? Well it shows the stratification of nature that's available when
we look through our behavioral glasses but what it means is that fundamentally there are these
different classes of behavior and that sets up the stage for a very interesting argument that says
well physics is about the material behaviors and biology is about the living behaviors now
psychology becomes basic psychology becomes about mental behaviors and then human psychology becomes
about well human mental behaviors that are embedded in a cultural context. So now what we have is
what is behavior? Behavior now takes on a completely different meaning whereas before
behaviors gets defined by the epistemological requirements of science here we have a broad
ontological view about what behavior is and then we classify it and what pops in relationship to
this is that there are certain kinds of behaviors that psychologists are interested in. So with
behaviors defined as such this brings us to an opportunity to then say well what do we mean by
mental process? If I had more time I would elaborate what are the various different
meanings and references but I will simply say that some people mean mind as the neuro information
processing, other people mean it in terms of this subjective conscious experience of being
and a subset of individuals mean it in terms of our self-conscious reflective dialogical
discussion and talk like in terms of human reasoning. What these three different domains of
mind can be mapped onto are different references now with this map that have different epistemological
views. So there's mind sub one that's the neuro cognitive analysis, mind sub two that is the
subjective conscious phenomenology and then mind three and what's interesting about this table is
that it suggests that actually yes these are different domains of mental process on the one hand
and they're available through different epistemological frames. One is the classic behavioral
epistemological frame, the second is a subjective phenomenological frame, the third is actually an
inter subjective frame because it's dependent upon the capacity to you for one to observe one
speaking a verbal behavior if you want to use the old behaviorist term but of course that requires
then an observer that actually speaks the language and comprehends the systems of justification that
are being advocated for. What does this mean? It ultimately sets the stage then for us to address
psychology's fundamental problem where we have consciousness and that is historically defined
by the interior epistemology of science versus behavior and now we can say actually there's
mind one which is functional awareness and response, mind two which is phenomenology and
mind three and these then have different frames of reference in relationship to exterior epistemology
which is anchored in behavior but includes overt reactions and somewhat neuro cognitive process
in public verbal talk, self-report and then there's interior epistemology which is centered
in subjective experience and also involves a private narrator. Why is this fundamentally useful?
Well ultimately it gives rise to what I call the map of mind one two three. The map of mind one two
three enables us to define exterior and interior epistemology first the neuro cognitive functionalism
mediated by the nervous system and then we have mind in terms of overt behavior what the animal is
doing we have the subjective conscious experience there's a theory behavioral investment theory
that unites these various domains and shows how they engage in informational informational interface
and then finally private and public justification. So now what this does is it then says oh what do
we mean by behavior on the one hand writ large and then what do we mean by the domains of mental
process and how are they interconnected? This allows us then to define mind as behavior that's
mind one B, mind as cognition, mind one A, mind as phenomenology, mind two and ultimately mind as
self-conscious both private and public. So now what we have is we don't have to be defined by the methods
of science but we actually can be defined by a naturalistic ontology and see what other reference
point people have and ultimately it gives rise to a unified ontology. Now my argument is that that
is a game changer when it comes to thinking about the science of psychology and if we go back to where
I began in relationship to my work in the clinic room all of this very very you know kind of crazy
abstract reflection in relationship to what are these deep concepts starts with the concern in
the clinic room and ultimately I'd like to then bring us back to my work in the combined
integrated program and share a little bit about what that fundamentally is about and what I'm
trying to leave you with is this idea that there are these different domains of fragmentation
and some of the work we're doing does seem to be able to put these very disparate domains together
in a way that affords coherence. So the combined integrated doctoral training program at James
Madison fundamentally what we call the Madison model is about training doctoral level health
service psychologists or psychological doctors. The program is designed as an integrative applied
professional psychology that seeks to train leaders and mental health in fact what we're
trying to invite individuals to come into our program is to look out at the landscape and ask
well what do we mean by mental illness how are we treating what are the cultural implications
what are the biological what are the developmental implications how do we understand systems and
how do we do it with philosophical reflection and scientific clarity and good responsible
practice in the new systems that we might enter. The mission is to produce leading professional
psychologists they're broadly trained in the science and practice of psychology we cultivate an
active level of self-reflection because I certainly believe that clinicians have to understand where
their beliefs come from we have to be reflective in relationship to what is our ideology our world
view our value structure what is our particular triggers and how those intersect with the different
rich and complicated and often dysfunctional psychological systems that we enter we then
want to cultivate individuals who are optimally prepared to work in a wide variety of settings
with diverse kind tell and we want we believe that this is a professional fundamental ethical
responsibility and when we cultivate personal social and global awareness and a sense of
contributing contributing to the greater good and fundamentally then reflectiveness about
what that actually means and how it becomes embodied in our lives. The program was sparked
before I got there by the recognition of the increasing complexity of human psychological
needs require a comprehensive and integrative approach to fostering psychological well-being
and as I mentioned at the beginning it offers this unique view of small c clinical and also small
c counseling and small c school and cultivates a particular in the center of the heart of a
psychological doctor. The vision of the AP of the program actually was recently adopted in 2017
by the American Psychological Association in fact if you encounter the term health service
psychology health service psychology is defined by the intersecting and central overlap of clinical
school and counseling and by the way that actually came from the leadership of our program back in
2003 when we hosted some conferences and set the stage for delineating this aspect of professional
practice. The rationale is that we can integrate synergistically across and we don't need to break
I mean what does it mean to be a counseling psychologist versus a clinical psychologist
in the 21st century? I appreciate in and deeply the counseling tradition but I also will argue
that in terms of the identity of what it means in relationship to the field it behooves us enormously
to have a consolidated professional identity around a generalist orientation and I believe
that in a global and international context that makes good sense although each system as I say
depends enormously on the institutional cultural dynamics. Very briefly because I'm aware of time
here the system then that I offer does allow us to share a picture of the institution of American
psychology and what you see here is that you have basic psychology the three great branches
sort of animal mind brain behavior you then have individual into social and cultural psychology
these are the scientific disciplines then that's organized into professional practice
there's applied psychological bridges and the fundamental domains of competence and ethical
commitments that define the field so I believe that the system that I afford sets the stage at
least in the context of American psychology to take the 50 plus divisions and actually place them in
coherent relation. The program has a number of goals and fundamentally basically what we want
to do is we want to create a sensibility of a unified professional psychologist who understands
both the coherence of the science and its enormous plurality appreciate the research and
appreciate the craft of entering into consultation assessment and intervention systems. I'm not going
to read these particular professional goals they speak to all of the issues that I mentioned
this goal four speaks to our appreciation and richness of human diversity and diverse context
in which people operate and goal five focuses on the program leveraging its privilege in relationship
to making a difference for the better in other systems and do so with humility and honor the
integrity and dignity of other systems. The last section that I would like to just briefly speak
about is embedded in this is this idea that there is an a unified or integrative approach to
psychotherapy and a subset of integrative I'm actually president-elect of the society for
the exploration of psychotherapy integration the society for exploration of psychotherapy
integration is an established professional frame for thinking deeply about integrative approaches.
I would argue that when we look broadly there are seven major approaches that we
should be thinking about the biopsychiatric biomedical evolutionary then there are these
major individual approaches and then fundamentally there's social family systems feminist critical
theory kinds of perspectives that need to be considered as we reflect on the work that we do.
As you know and as I began with it gives us the choice in relationships so what do we do do we
go to one of the paradigms and just hang out on a particular mountain the psychotherapy
integration people argue no there are these different paths common factors technical eclecticism
as a theoretical integration they have different focuses common factors emphasizes the relationship
and says really no matter what you call it it's all about the process you can then go technical
eclecticism that focuses on the particular domains of intervention and says hey what works empirically
you get then a simulative integration that says hey you can have a home but look and utilize the
perspectives of others and then there's theoretical integration which says hey we can pull key insights
say from learning theory and psychodynamic theory and blend them together to make a better model
all of these have value I've studied them all deeply I teach psychotherapy integration
I am a particular fan of a fifth pathway and that's this unification pathway and what it does is
there are ways I believe to build meta models I should introduce you to one that afford us the
opportunity to see the mountain range and then organize the key insights in relation and suggest
that each of the paradigms is playing a particular instrument if we try to listen at all at once
with no frame we get a lot of noise however if we step back at the right place and see the mountain
range we can then pull each instrument and see them in relation and then we can elucidate a much
more musical sense a musically coherent sense of what the field is speaking to us and then there
are the as I mentioned when I opened and again this is what I would have spent a day on exploring
character adaptation systems theory and what does it mean for how do you conceptualize and then
how do you intervene in real situations in relationship to the therapy um but what I would
like to do is end today in relationship to the cultivation of what we talk about in terms of a
unified whole service psychologist uh I practice as a psychological doctor who's trained broadly in
the science of human psychology especially personality relationships development psychopathology
and human change processes in the context of therapy to foster psychological adjustment
and more optimal psychological functioning for individuals in need of care to do this I engage
in a comprehensive assessment that examines key domains of function habits lifestyles emotions
emotional functioning relationships interpersonal styles defenses coping and identity and psychosocial
well-being both in terms of psychiatric diagnoses and maladaptive processes and problems associated
with living uh problems in living distress these elements are placed in a biological
learning developmental and socio-cultural context to delineate a clear case conceptualization and
problem formulation the results in a treatment plan which is developed in collaboration with
the client from a menu of bona fide interventions that might be appropriate taken into considerations
their values level of functioning in stage of change through a strong working alliance in a
process of awareness acceptance and active change skill development efforts the therapy is oriented
toward meeting appropriate goals which are set relative to prognosis based on the conceptualization
and problem formulation progress towards those goals and the quality of the relationship is
monitored and if successful we turn to maintenance and ultimately when appropriate termination
so fundamentally this is and I hope this speaks to a wide variety of you in the type of work that
you do uh and that's what I wanted to extend as I bring this to a close is the idea that there is
an opportunity for a rich textured skilled craft of a psychological doctor but one that actually
is informed by a particular frame of reference that has more coherence so fundamentally combined
across the practice areas integrated across the systems and paradigms unified the field
and then cultivate a unified identity as psychological doctor that's combined integrated
unified thank you so much for the time and the attention and the opportunity to share these
ideas uh with you so
