Welcome to Now You Talkin', a series of short videos on how to define key terms in the Utah
system. Today we're actually defining two terms, ontology and epistemology. The last
video we define, metaphysics. Ontology and epistemology are closely related, whereas
metaphysics are about the concepts and categories that then give rise to a worldview. Ontology
is the concept that pertains to what one says is real, or one's theories about what
is real, whereas epistemology is about what one knows, and how one knows it, and whether
one is justified in making those knowledge claims. So what is real, how one knows, and
how one's justified in making those claims, or ontology and epistemology. Although these
definitions clearly point to different things in the world, it's also the case that they're
actually tied together and create lots of different kinds of potential confusions. For
example, the first article I wrote on the theoretical unification of psychology, I argued
that the field faced a problem of epistemology. I've actually recently written a book that
sort of changes the focus in the sense that the actual core problem is one of ontology.
I share that to suggest that these things are really interconnected. Let's shift over
to the hard problem of consciousness. The hard problem of consciousness refers to what
is it like to be an organism or animal, and in particular, what are the neurobiological
mechanisms that give rise to this phenomenon. The neurobiological mechanisms are the refer
to the real things in the world that give rise to consciousness, and therefore it's
mostly an ontological problem. And they call it the explanatory gap because sort of we
don't understand the mechanisms. However, there's something really interesting about
consciousness related to epistemology, and that is if we're talking about the subject
of conscious experience of being, the only conscious experience of being that one can
observe is oneself from the inside. You can never observe another. So actually, the hard
problem of consciousness in terms of its mechanism is ontological, but since we can never see
it, there's a real epistemological problem that's associated with consciousness also.
Indeed, I would argue that there are at least two different problems, one of ontology and
epistemology, because we can't observe it when it's happening, especially if we ground
ourselves in the epistemology of science, which is based in observation. Let me go back
to psychology. Remember, I said that when I made the argument that I could theoretically
unify the field, I said there was a problem of epistemology. What I meant was all those
different schools of thought have different languages and use different kinds of evidence
to make their claims. And so I was correct in saying there definitely is a problem of
epistemology. However, when we ask the question, what is it in the world that psychology is
about, we have now shifted and are now talking about ontology. And basically, I argue we've
missed the dimension of mindedness, that mind animal dimension between life organism and
culture person. And it's that gap in our ontology that we need to solve the problem
of psychology. So you can see that epistemology and ontology are both related. They're separate
at the same time they're separate and they actually fit under the umbrella of metaphysics.
Utah really tries to tie these together in a coherent way. In fact, one of the things
that I argue is the concept of behavior connects to science metaphysically, ontologically,
and epistemologically. How does it do? The argument is that science takes the perspective
of organizing the world in terms of entities and fields and change. These are the metaphysical
concepts. It then uses this to map the world, the ontological world, and ultimately it does
it through justifying systematic empirical observation, measurement, logical analysis,
and experimentation. Those are all the epistemological structures that go into mapping the behaviors
in nature. So we can tie science to behavior metaphysically, ontologically, and epistemologically.
And when you do that, you see that we can understand ontology. Hey, those are the things
in the world that science maps. Epistemology, that's the way science does it. Utah helps
us make sense of both of these terms and how they're interrelated.
