Chemical bonds form the basis for not only organic chemistry, but indeed for all of chemistry.
And as we saw last time, just how important bonding is in determining the chemical properties
of elements.
So with the cosmos consisting of fewer than 100 naturally occurring elements, lack of
a way to bond multiple atoms of those elements together to create more complex materials
would lead to a pretty dull universe.
Now, fortunately for us, chemical bonding provides a way to take relatively simple
atom and combine it with other atoms, thereby creating a set of combinations so vast that
it's virtually infinite.
Bonding is, in fact, much more than just a way to connect atoms together.
Bonding has a way of changing atoms themselves in ways which alter their physical properties
and reactivity, and it can do so so profoundly that many materials of identical atomic composition
have drastically different chemical and physical properties.
Let's take the example of carbon, the star of our show.
Now, carbon atoms are so keen to bond to other atoms that atomic carbon is essentially unheard
of under the conditions we experience here on Earth.
And even when pure, a sample of carbon will take on one of several different bonding schemes,
which lead to some very familiar but strikingly different materials from our everyday lives.
This is graphite.
It's the principal component of bituminous coal, valued for its softness, giving it the
properties of a good lubricant.
It also makes up the lead in modern pencils, which isn't really lead at all.
It consists of pure carbon in a bonding arrangement which looks like this.
It consists of vast sheets of carbon atoms bonded together along a plane.
Now, take a look at this sample of carbon.
This familiar form of carbon is diamond.
And diamond is famous for its clarity and its hardness, exactly the opposite from graphite,
which is valued for being dark and soft.
Now, diamond gets these properties not because its composition is any different.
They're both pure carbon.
It gets the different properties because of the nature of the bonds holding the atoms
together.
Now, we call materials like these, these samples of pure elements, which differ only by the
way in which their atoms are bonded, allotropes.
And these two allotropes of carbon offer a clear example of just how critical it is
to understand chemical bonding in order to understand how organic compounds will behave.
So, let's investigate exactly why and how atoms bond to one another, and see if we can't
explain why graphite and diamond have such drastically different properties, even though
they're made up of exactly the same types of atoms.
So let's take a look at an atom.
Now, atoms are comprised of three types of subatomic particles, positively charged protons,
uncharged neutrons, and negatively charged electrons.
Niels Bohr is most famous for many of his scientific accomplishments, but the most notable is his
model of the atom, in which a dense, positively charged nucleus containing protons and neutrons
is surrounded by a cloud of very small, fast-moving electrons carrying negative charges.
Now, each of these three particles plays a role in the properties of a given atom.
So most of us have seen cartoon representations, which look like the one I have here.
But in truth, the relative positions of the particles in this particular model are accurate.
The scale has been drastically distorted to make the system easier for us to view.
Now, in reality, if the electron cloud were the size I've represented here, the nucleus
itself would only be about 40 microns wide, about the size of a dust mite, a little bit
smaller than the width of a human hair.
Now, instead, let's bring that nucleus back to the scale that we used today.
If I use this nucleus as my scale, the electron cloud surrounding it is going to be several
kilometers wide.
OK, so let's go back to our representation, the way that it was, so that we can study
these different parts of the atom.
Now, protons in the center provide the atom with its identity.
Our example here is a nucleus with six protons, so this would be a carbon atom.
Regardless of the number of other subatomic particles in the structure, the nucleus with
six protons will always be carbon.
The green neutrons that accompany those protons at the center of the atom do not alter its
identity.
So our example here has a carbon atom with six neutrons.
So this would be an isotope of carbon, which we call carbon 12.
But if I add an extra neutron to the nucleus, I still have carbon, but it's got a little
bit more mass, and we call this carbon 13.
If I add yet another neutron, still carbon, but now it's carbon 14.
So we call these combinations of neutrons that can accompany a specific number of protons
in the nucleus isotopes.
So neutrons have their place in organic chemistry, but it's really not in today's lecture, because
they don't have a tendency to affect the chemical properties of elements very strongly.
So we're going to concentrate more on protons and electrons for the rest of the day.
So let's get on to the electrons now.
Electrons most directly affect the charge of an atom, and in order for this atom here
to be neutral, we have to have the same number of electrons as we do protons.
So our central nucleus has six protons giving it a positive charge of six.
Therefore our electron cloud must have six electrons as well to create a neutral atom.
And when the number of electrons in the cloud is not equal to the number of protons, we'll
have a charged species resulting from that, and we call these charged species ions.
So if I were to add an extra electron to my atom here, I now have seven electrons and
six protons, meaning I'll have a negatively charged species, which we call an anion.
If instead I remove two electrons, so now I have my original six protons and only five
electrons, I form something called a cation, which carries a positive charge.
Now as the discrepancy in the population of electrons and protons grows, so does the
charge in the ion.
For example, a carbon atom with seven electrons in its cloud would have a net charge of negative
one, and a carbon atom if it could have eight electrons in its cloud would have a charge
of negative two, etc.
Now what I'd like to focus on now is what made Bohr's model truly unique when compared
to its predecessors.
And this is that Bohr's model was the first to suggest that electrons are not spread evenly
through the volume of an atom, but rather that they only made up the outer portion of
the atom.
Now furthermore, he suggested that there are distinct energy levels around the nucleus,
each of which can only hold a finite number of those electrons.
And they fill sequentially from the smallest to the largest.
He also postulated that each energy level was divided into specific volumes which could
only hold two electrons each, and we call those volumes orbitals.
Now as we'll often do for clarity in this course, we'll concern ourselves only with
the first three rows of the periodic table.
So when we apply this constraint, we see that there are three rows in the table, each of
which represents the filling of a different energy level by those electrons.
Now if we limit ourselves to neutral atoms, meaning the addition of electrons must match
the rate at which we add the protons, each of the first three rows of the periodic table
represents the filling of those different energy levels.
Since energy levels fill from lower to higher, only the highest energy level in any atom
can be unfilled.
We call that outermost energy level the valence shell.
So let's begin constructing an atom by adding protons and electrons to our hypothetical atom.
One pair at a time, tracking our progress through the periodic table.
Our first pair gives us a hydrogen atom.
Now obviously the first energy level will be the valence shell for this atom.
Currently it has one electron in that first level.
With the addition of a second pair, another proton and another electron takes us to helium.
Now helium has two electrons in the first energy level, so the first energy level is
still the valence shell.
But as we prepare to continue, we notice that the first energy level is completely filled.
So the third electron has to be placed in the second energy level.
So now we've begun a new row in the periodic table.
A row of elements with their valence shell in the second energy level.
Now the second energy level is much larger than the first, so it can hold as many as
eight electrons.
So as we progress through beryllium, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, and neon, we see
that the same energy level is being populated.
And as we round out our trip through the first three rows, we begin populating the third
energy level, which can also hold only eight electrons.
Now the filling of this energy level comprises sodium, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, phosphorus,
sulfur, chlorine, and argon.
Now in truth, the third energy level can hold even more electrons, but it's usually
just these eight which are of interest to us in introductory organic chemistry courses.
So we're going to stop populating our periodic table there.
So what is it about the structure of atoms, which really drives chemical bonds to form?
And why is it that there's a periodic trend in the number of bonds atoms tend to form?
Now the answer to these questions is deeply rooted in a concept which we'll visit time
and time again in this course, a concept called free energy.
The free energy of a substance is simply a measure of its stability.
It tells us something about how much potential the system has to do work.
And just as physical processes tend toward lower energy states, like a ball rolling down
a hill, or heat transferring from a hot radiator into a cold room, it's the more stable states
of matter which will tend to form in chemical processes as well.
Now this concept was developed by American chemist Willard Gibbs in the late 1800s.
And Gibbs modeled the free energy of a system as a function of two important factors.
So let's take a look at a process which will actually allow us to demonstrate how these
factors push a reaction.
And I'm going to start with an organic compound with which most of us are familiar.
This is a molecule of propane, the type of which you might find in a backyard grill.
So you probably didn't think that you were doing organic chemistry the last time you
grilled a steak on your patio, but the truth is actually something different.
You see, propane can react with oxygen.
And when one molecule of propane reacts with five molecules of oxygen gas, it produces a
few things.
First it produces carbon dioxide.
It also produces a little bit of water.
But it also produces something else.
In fact, what we're after is not the carbon dioxide or the water.
When we start our barbecue grill, what we're after is another byproduct of the reaction,
heat.
Now chemists have a different name for this.
We call it enthalpy, and we represent it with the letter H.
We can determine the approximate enthalpy change during a reaction simply by taking an
inventory of all the bonds broken and all the bonds formed in our reaction.
So in the case of reacting propane with oxygen in what we call a combustion reaction, the
breaking of two carbon-carbon single bonds, eight carbon-hydrogen single bonds, and five
oxygen-oxygen double bonds actually releases more energy than the formation of six carbon-oxygen
double bonds and eight hydrogen-oxygen single bonds.
So we can use this bond inventory to predict that this reaction should generate heat.
Now the second byproduct of this reaction is randomness, and this is something you may
not have thought of quite as much before.
Think about this as being the exhaust from the burning of the propane.
Now you'll notice that I've converted one molecule of propane, five molecules of oxygen
into three molecules of carbon dioxide, and four molecules of water.
So I've increased the randomness, or what chemists call entropy of the system, because
I've turned six molecules of gas into seven, so I'm making larger quantities of smaller
molecules throughout my reaction.
It is these parameters, the enthalpy and the entropy of a reaction, which we can use to
estimate the driving force behind the process.
So let's take a look at how we actually do this.
The Gibbs free energy equation for any system at any state is simple.
The Gibbs free energy is equal to the enthalpy of that system minus the absolute temperature
at which that system currently rests, so this would be temperature in Kelvin's, multiplied
by the total entropy for that system in a given state.
Now the problem with this is that we don't actually know this number.
We can't calculate absolute entropies or absolute enthalpies for a given system.
But remember that chemical reactions are all about change.
There's an initial state and a final state, and it's the difference in the free energy
between those two that really matters.
So if I take the Gibbs energy equation for the final state of a reaction and the Gibbs
energy equation for the initial state of the materials in my reaction, I can simply subtract
one from the other, and this gives me a more usable equation in the form of the difference
in free energies, equaling the difference in enthalpies, minus the absolute temperature
times the difference in entropies.
Now this is a long equation with a lot of letters, so chemists like to shorten it by
using the Greek symbol delta to represent change.
And when we do this, we get the familiar form of the Gibbs free energy equation.
Delta G equals delta H minus T delta S.
Okay so that's enough math for a moment.
Let's apply this to the system that we looked at earlier.
Remember we took propane and reacted it with five equivalents of oxygen to produce seven
equivalents of exhaust gases or products.
And in doing so we create some heat, we increase the randomness of the system.
So in this case, because it releases heat, the system's energy has gone down.
So the sign of my enthalpy change will be negative.
And because I've increased randomness, the delta S term of my equation will necessarily
be positive.
So in this case, I've got an equation where my free energy change is equal to a negative
number minus a positive number.
In other words, delta G has to be negative for this process.
So reactions which trend in this fashion, releasing heat and increasing randomness, tend to be
what we call spontaneous.
Now spontaneous is a little bit different than the term that we use colloquially.
When chemists talk about spontaneous processes, we're talking about a process which is favored
simply because the energy of the products is lower.
Now we can think of that as a situation where a reaction is going downhill.
So don't let this name fool you because sometimes the term spontaneous invokes thoughts of speed.
But here we're using it to mean proceeding without any outside perturbation.
So a spontaneous reaction will eventually happen on its own.
But it may not happen at all.
For example, ordinary temperatures and pressures, the conversion of diamond into graphite is
actually spontaneous.
But thankfully, it takes geologic time scales for this to occur.
So on the time scale of a human lifetime, your diamond jewelry is safe.
So one can easily guess that entropy or disorder, it's not on the side of chemical bonding.
So bonds attach freely moving atoms into higher order structures.
So there's an entropic penalty for bonding which must be overcome somehow if we expect
a bond to form at all.
So the key to chemical bonding is its effect on the enthalpy of a system, or the energy
released when a bond forms.
If this process of fixing atoms in space relative to one another is going to be spontaneous,
there must be something about the linkage which lowers the chemical potential energy.
But what's the driving force?
Well, the answer to that question is the octet rule.
An observation first made by Irving Langmuir in 1919.
He noted that atoms of smaller elements seem to have an unusual stability when the outermost
energy level of their electron cloud was filled with electrons.
Now octet rule might be a somewhat unfortunate choice of a name since it creates the conundrum
that the first principle energy level can only hold two electrons, not eight.
But the general spirit of the rule holds even for that energy level.
Having a full outer energy level, or valence shell, lowers the energy of an atom.
So you probably noticed in our previous discussion on energy levels in the electron clouds that
only helium, neon, and argon naturally have these completely filled outer energy levels.
This makes helium, neon, and argon particularly stable and unreactive, earning this column
of the periodic table the moniker noble gases.
But of our first 18 elements, only three of them have a naturally filled valence shell
when they're isolated neutral atoms.
So how is it that the atoms of other elements under consideration today can achieve a similar
condition?
And the answer to that question is chemical bonding.
Now so far we've established that very few elements in their isolated, neutral state
naturally have filled outer energy levels.
And we've also noted that having such a filled outer energy level lends extra stability to
atoms.
So all other atoms aspire to have the electron configuration of a noble gas, and we call
this tendency the octet rule.
I've already mentioned that the most available method for atoms to create that full valence
shell is a bond.
But what is bonding?
Well, chemical bonding, simply defined, is an energetically beneficial interaction between
atoms which requires them to maintain a specific distance from one another in space.
Bonds are so small, and when bonded, the distance is between them so short that a special unit
of distance has to be created, called an angstrom.
And we use this unit of distance to measure bond length.
It's about one ten billionth of a meter.
In introductory chemistry courses, we often teach that there are two kinds of bonds, ionic
and covalent.
But the truth is that there's a continuum of bonds, with ionic at one extreme and covalent
at the other.
And these two modes of bonding are distinct, but both are driven by the same drive for
atoms to obtain that full valence shell.
And the easiest way to understand this continuum of bonds is to first discuss the extremes.
Ionic bonding occurs when atoms of significantly different electro-negativity come together.
Simply put, electronegativity is a measure of how hungry an atom is for electrons.
And in general, if we neglect the noble gases, electronegativity increases as we move from
left to right across the periodic table, because the nuclei of atoms are becoming increasingly
positively charged.
Electronegativity also increases from bottom to top of the periodic table, because the
electron clouds are becoming smaller, screening the nucleus from the outermost electrons the
least.
For example, fluorine is the most electronegative of all elements, because within the second
row it has the most positively charged nucleus with nine protons.
And because it's small electron cloud with only two energy levels, makes the positively
charged nucleus better able to attract that extra electron.
If we move down and across our small portion of the periodic table, at the opposite end
we find sodium, which has just one weakly held electron in its outermost energy level.
This means that sodium is instead very eager to give up an electron.
And we call sodium either very electropositive or not very electronegative.
Either description works.
The combination of these two elements leads to a classic example of an ionic bond.
An atom of sodium having just one electron in its outermost energy level gives up that
electron to achieve a full outer energy level.
And fluorine, on the other hand, having seven electrons in its outer energy level, needs
to gain one to achieve an octet.
And adding one more gives it eight electrons in its valence shell.
So if sodium is very electropositive and needs to lose the electron to achieve an octet,
the fluorine is very electronegative, needs to gain an electron to achieve an octet, it
seems obvious that the two can strike a deal.
The unwanted electron from sodium is fully transferred to the fluorine, giving both an
octet, but also ionizing them in the process.
So sodium now has a charge of plus one.
And fluorine now has a charge of minus one.
And it's the electrostatic attraction between these two ions, which holds them together.
And we call this ionic bonding.
The alternative end of the bonding spectrum is the covalent bond.
When we pair two atoms of very similar electronegativity, neither is particularly willing to exchange
electrons with the other.
There are two atoms of fluorine.
With equal electronegativity, neither is willing to donate an electron to form an ionic bond.
But there is a second solution to the problem.
The sharing of electrons rather than the transfer.
So if the two fluorine atoms come together in an arrangement in space which allows them
to share one extra electron each, each atom has been fooled into thinking it has its own
octet.
And this is the driving force behind covalent bonding.
But the complexity of electron sharing doesn't stop there.
Two oxygen atoms, for example, must each donate two electrons to a bond, joining these atoms
in an oxygen molecule.
We call this arrangement a double bond, since two pairs of electrons are shared.
So now that we understand the process by which fully ionic and fully covalent bonds help
atoms to satisfy their octets, let's turn our attention back to that continuum of bonds
that I mentioned earlier.
Naturally, oxygen atoms need not bond only to other oxygen atoms.
We can instead envision a system in which an oxygen atom satisfies its octet by bonding
covalently to two hydrogen atoms.
In this case, we've bonded a more electronegative oxygen to a less electronegative hydrogen
atom.
And the electronegativities of each are not as drastically different as in our sodium
fluoride example, but they're not exactly the same as in our example of oxygen gas either.
So we expect sharing to take place, but the sharing is unequal, meaning that the bonding
electrons spend more time in the proximity of the more electronegative oxygen atom.
The result of this is what we call a polar covalent bond, which gives water its high
polarity among common solvents.
As the course progresses, we'll see many examples in which the relative polarity of
bonds is the driving factor in chemical reactions.
So it's important to understand this type of bonding early in the course.
In the previous section, we concerned ourselves only with the principal energy levels of an
atom's electron cloud and how they affect the bonding behavior of different pairs of
atoms.
But the representation that we used to show the relative energy of electrons didn't really
convey their true positions around the atom, just their approximate energies.
Simply put, our diagrams conveyed the energetics of bonding, but didn't finish the story by
telling us about the spatial arrangement of those bonds about the central atom.
To understand this geometry of bonding, we need to invoke one more fundamental component
of atomic structure, atomic orbitals.
You see, all valence electrons are not equal.
There's more to defining the orbits of electrons than just the principal energy level in which
they reside.
In order to show the specific volume of space in which each electron resides within an energy
level, we have to introduce a second level of organization, atomic orbitals.
Once again, we're graced by the simplifying fact that our discussion only entails the
first three rows of the periodic table, through which relatively simple progressions of atomic
structure evolve.
Now, all energy levels contain a single S orbital.
And S orbitals are spherical in shape, and increase in size with increasing principal
energy level.
This is to say that the one S orbital is smaller than the two S, which again is smaller than
the three S.
And since each S orbital can only hold two electrons, the remaining six electrons, from
the second and third principal energy levels, have to find another home.
And they do this in an array of three distinct P orbitals per level.
Now, just like S orbitals, P orbitals increase in size with increasing principal energy level.
But unlike S orbitals, P orbitals are shaped like a dumbbell, with a node at the nucleus
of the atom.
So if we were to plot out the energy of all the atomic orbitals in argon, the largest of
the atoms under consideration today, we would see something like this.
This would be a one S2, two S2, two P6, three S2, three P6 configuration.
Now notice that all three P orbitals of any given energy level are slightly higher in
energy than the corresponding S orbital, but equal in energy to one another.
Now chemists use the word degenerate to describe energetically equivalent orbitals like these
groups of P orbitals.
So I'll be using this word from time to time as well.
And now that we understand the size and shape of atomic orbitals, we can begin to understand
how these regions of space can overlap to produce new covalent bonds.
The two major classes of covalent bonds pervade the science of organic chemistry, and we
call these classes sigma bonds and pi bonds.
Sigma bonds form whenever orbitals overlap along the internuclear axis, such as two esatomic
orbitals overlapping.
Atoms with available P orbitals can also accomplish this type of bonding by overlapping one lobe
of a P orbital.
Placing electron density directly between the two positively charged nuclei screens
them from repelling one another, creating a very strong bond.
In fact, sigma bonds are so stable that they're always the first type of bond to form between
two atoms.
It does, however, create a bond around which the attached atoms can spin, like the axle
of a vehicle, giving these bonds what chemists call free rotation.
But pi bonds, on the other hand, form when P atomic orbitals overlap in a side-to-side
fashion as shown here.
Now notice that there's no electron density along that internuclear axis, but rather above
and below the bonded atoms.
This makes pi bonds a little bit weaker than sigma bonds, but also gives them some very
interesting properties, like restricted rotation, and in many cases greater reactivity since
their electrons are easier to remove.
So we'll explore both of those properties a little bit later in the course.
So far we've discussed atomic structure, the energetics driving bonding, and some of the
simpler ways in which orbitals can overlap to form new chemical bonds.
We've covered quite a bit, but there's still one last very important process which helps
us explain exactly why atoms take on the geometries they do when bonding.
So let's begin by taking a look at a methane molecule.
Now you'll notice that I've drawn the atoms here around a central carbon of methane in
a tetrahedral arrangement, and all four bonds are evenly spaced around that central carbon.
We know this is true from experimentation, but the atomic orbitals, those S and P orbitals
that I showed you previously, they don't have this tetrahedral geometry.
So if the sigma bonds holding each hydrogen to the central carbon were produced by either
a P orbital or an S orbital from the central carbon, the resulting molecule would have
a very unusual geometry, and yet here we have this beautiful elegantly symmetrical molecule.
That elegant simple symmetry of methane was actually a puzzle to chemists until the renowned
physical chemist Linus Pauling published a theory on orbital hybridization in 1931.
Pauling postulated that atomic orbitals could combine with one another, creating new sets
of orbitals with some S character and some P character.
So according to Pauling's new idea, any number of S and P atomic orbitals can combine to
form an equal number of degenerate hybrid orbitals.
And these new orbitals are neither S nor P, but a mixture of the two, having properties
of both.
And this led Pauling to refer to them as hybrid orbitals.
For example, one S and one P orbital can combine to form two SP hybrid orbitals.
Each of the new hybrid orbitals has about 50% S character and 50% P character.
The influence of both contributing atomic orbitals is evident.
Both can form sigma bonds and are at a 180 degree angle to one another.
Now this phenomenon extends to hybridization of one S and two P orbitals to form three
equivalent SP two orbitals.
These orbitals would be 120 degrees apart, and it also applies to the combination of
one S and three P orbitals to form four SP three hybrid orbitals, all of equal energy
and identical geometry spaced 109.5 degrees apart.
So in the case of SP three hybridization, the hybrid orbitals all point at the corners
of this tetrahedron.
This leads chemists to call atoms like methane, at least the central carbon of methane, tetrahedral
atoms.
Now remarkably Pauling's theory was spot on.
Hybridization is a perfect explanation for the symmetry of the methane gas molecule.
It's four identical carbon-hydrogen bonds spaced evenly can only be explained by Pauling's
new hybridization theory.
So let's sum up what we've covered today.
We've discussed the structure of the atom, how positively charged nuclei are surrounded
by a highly ordered cloud of orbiting negatively charged electrons.
We consider the octet rule, and how it is an atom's desire to have a full valence shell
which drives the process of chemical bonding.
We saw how atoms of drastically different electronegativity can exchange electrons completely
to form ionic bonds, which are then held together by an electrostatic attraction.
We also took a look at purely covalent bonds, in which atoms of identical electronegativity
share one or more pairs of electrons between themselves to increase their valence electron
count without altering their charge.
We also talked about how smaller differences in electronegativity between covalently bonded
atoms can lead to what are known as polar covalent bonds.
We studied how the principal energy levels of larger atoms can be divided into finer structures,
which are used to explain the two types of chemical bonding most often encountered in
organic chemistry.
How strong, freely rotating sigma bonds form along the inter-nuclear axis of the two bonded
atoms, and how somewhat weaker rotation-restricting pi bonds form by a side-to-side overlap of
p orbitals.
And finally, we took a look at how hybridization of atomic orbitals can create sets of hybrid
orbitals which explain the observed geometries in most organic molecules.
So now that we understand a bit about the process and geometries of chemical bonding,
our next task will be to put some atoms together into molecules and survey a few of the many
ways that chemists draw the resulting molecules.
This is our topic for next time, and I'll see you then.
