In 1540, a German botanist by the name of Valerius Cordus isolated a substance produced
when ethanol was mixed with sulfuric acid.
Uncertain of what he'd created, Cordus simply named his creation Sweet Oil of Vitriol after
the common name for sulfuric acid at the time, Oil of Vitriol.
In his time, Cordus had no way of knowing what a powerful and useful molecule he had
managed to create.
Three centuries later, on March 30, 1842, American physician Crawford Williamson Long
demonstrated the anesthetic effects of the very same molecule that Cordus had created.
In doing so, he effectively changed the practice of surgery forever.
Of course, I'm talking about ether, a compound with such a huge impact on the practice of
modern medicine that National Doctors' Day is marked on March 30 in the United States.
Today, ether has been replaced by safer alternatives in medicine, but it finds wide use as an industrial
solvent and in fuel blending.
More than just a useful medicine, ether is also an example of one of today's star compounds,
those containing oxygen.
We spend a great deal of time so far looking at the structures, properties and reactions
of just a small slice of the organic compound arsenal.
Specifically, we've investigated hydrocarbons, those compounds containing only hydrogen and
carbon, and alkyl halides, in which a fluorine, chlorine, bromine or iodine heteroatom is
present in place of a hydrogen.
Oxygen's made a cameo as nucleophiles and substitution and as bases in elimination,
but oxygen-containing species have a much greater utility and versatility in organic chemistry.
Today we're going to take a quantum leap forward, introducing this heteroatom to the
mix in earnest, looking at examples of oxygen-containing functional groups which find use as reagents,
solvents, catalysts and everyday commercial products.
This atom is present in acids, bases, explosives, medicines and countless other relevant organic
compounds.
It's in the air we breathe, the water we drink, the foods we eat and so much more.
Clearly, oxygen deserves some attention.
So before we start to explore oxygen in the context of organic compounds, let's quickly
review its characteristics as an element.
Oxygen is element number 8 on the periodic table, so it has a ground state electron configuration
of 1s2, 2s2, 2p4.
Now this of course means that oxygen has a strong tendency to form two covalent bonds
to complete its octet, either two bonds in an sp3 hybridized state with bond angles of
approximately 109.5 degrees, or as a double bond in an sp2 hybridized state.
In either case the oxygen atom will have two lone pairs of electrons to complete its octet.
So far, the only heteroatoms that we've significantly explored are halogens, which tend to form
only one bond to complete their octet.
This means that for halogens, reacting is almost always requiring that the halogen be
removed from or added to a chemical scaffold.
But the two bonds that oxygen can form allow it to remain connected to an organic scaffold
by one bond as it reacts with the other, making its chemistry much richer and even more useful
than that of halogens.
So let's begin by considering compounds containing a single sp3 hybridized oxygen atom.
So what went on in that flask that fateful day in 1540 when Cortis mixed ethanol with
sulfuric acid?
Well, he converted one oxygen containing compound into another.
Specifically, he converted an alcohol into an ether.
So let's start our day off by considering alcohols.
I'm going to show you some common aliphatic alcohols, meaning those that only contain
saturated hydrocarbons as their scaffold.
We can start with the simplest of all, methanol, with the formula CH3OH.
One additional carbon gives us ethanol, with the formula C2H5OH.
And I can continue adding carbons to my scaffold, giving N-propanol and N-butanol as the next
two in line.
Now, it probably won't surprise you to know that the boiling points of these compounds
increase as I increase the number of carbons in the chain.
This is analogous to what we would see for alkanes, for example.
So as I add additional carbons to my alcohol, I increase its boiling point and therefore
give it a greater tendency to be a liquid.
Just as with alkanes, when we reach a certain critical number of carbons, in this case three
carbons, we can form structural isomers.
Now there are only two structural isomers of three carbon-containing compounds, those
would be propanol and isopropanol.
So I'm going to show you instead the structural isomers of four carbon alcohols, because they
get a little more interesting at that point.
We've already learned about N-butanol, which has a four-carbon, linear chain with a hydroxyl
group attached.
But I can arrange these carbons in a different type of way to create a new structural isomer.
For example, I can create isobutanol by placing a branch in the chain near the other side
of the molecule away from the functional group.
If I instead branch that chain at a location adjacent to the functional group, I create
something called sec-butanol, which is short for secondary.
I can branch it even further and create tert-butanol, which of course is short for tertiary.
So all of these alcohols have exactly the same molecular formula, but clearly have different
arrangements of atoms.
And this has an effect on their boiling points as well.
Again, N-butanol has a primary carbon and a straight chain.
Isobutanol has a primary carbon bearing its hydroxyl on a branched chain, sec-butanol with
a secondary on an otherwise straight chain, and tert-butanol, which is as branched as I
can possibly get.
So knowing what we do about how branching affects the volatility of organic compounds,
we can predict, and we would be right, that the boiling point trend of these four isomers
of isobutanol is as follows.
T-butanol is the lowest, followed by sec-butanol, isobutanol, and finally, N-butanol having
the highest boiling point of all.
The IUPAC nomenclature of alcohols follows the usual system, keeping in mind that the
alcohol is treated as a functional group.
So for example, if I were going to name this compound, by IUPAC, I would first have to
identify the parent compound.
The parent hydrocarbon is here.
One, two, three, four carbons bearing the functional group.
So this is going to be a butanol molecule.
I have a single substituent in the form of a methyl group.
So all that's left now is to number my parent chain in such a way that my functional group
gets the lowest possible number.
So I have this numbering scheme available, and I have this numbering scheme here.
Naturally I'm going to choose the scheme which gives my hydroxyl group an address of one.
So I construct my name using these elements, and I get three methyl, one butanol.
Let's do another one.
Here's an alcohol that has a halogen as a substituent.
Again, I need to find my parent carbon chain which contains the hydroxyl bond.
Here it is.
Five carbons containing the bond to the OH group.
So this is going to be a pentanol molecule.
My substituent is a chlorine, so this is a chloro group.
And again, I will address my carbon chain starting with one end and giving the lowest
number to the functional group.
In this case that means putting a two on my alcohol group and a four on my chloro group
which gives me the name four chloro, two pentanol.
So now that we've taken a look at alcohols, let's switch gears a little bit and look at
ethers so that we can try to understand their differences in their properties and how they
are interconverted.
The simplest possible ether is dimethyl ether, and you should immediately notice what makes
it different from the alcohol examples in the previous slides, that the oxygen does not
contain a bond directly to hydrogen.
Instead it's bonded to two different R groups, in this case both methyl.
So this has a formula of CH3OCH3.
I can extend one of those R groups to a longer chain and get what we would call ethyl methyl
ether, which has this formula.
And I can extend the other chain even further to get diethyl ether, which has this formula.
But those common names of ethers get unwieldy just like any other organic compound as they
get larger and larger.
So as usual, the IUPAC has stepped in with some nomenclature rules.
But in the case of ether, since there's no hydrogen attached directly to the oxygen,
we don't treat it as a functional group.
Instead, we treat the ether motif as what we would call an alkoxy group.
This is best shown by example.
So let's name this compound.
Remembering that I have an ether here because my oxygen is connected to two distinct R groups.
This is not going to be a functional group, but rather a substituent.
So the longest possible carbon chain in the molecule I have here is five carbons long.
And I have, in this case, a pentane, which contains two different substituents.
Those substituents are the chloro, shown here, and the ethoxy substituent, which constitutes
my ether.
But because it is a substituent and not a functional group, it no longer gets that
special priority in numbering.
So I would number my chain from the left-hand side to give the lower number two to the alphabetically
first chloro group.
So in this case, I'm going to call my compound two chloro for ethoxypentane.
Just for fun, let's do the diethyl ether that Cortis created back in the 1500s.
In this case, it may seem funny, but my parent chain is going to be relatively small compared
to the rest of the molecule.
Here it is.
Two carbons long is the longest possible continuous chain of carbon atoms that I can find.
And of course, the substituent would be the entire ethoxy group.
So we would name this, under IUPAC rules, ethoxyethane.
No address is needed in this case, because whether it's on one carbon of the ethane or
the other, that's always going to be my number one carbon, and in cases like this where
there's no ambiguity, we frequently drop the address out of the substituent's portion
of the name.
Now, another property that we should discuss is the hydrogen-bonding characteristics of
alcohols and ethers.
Let's do this by looking first at the structure of alcohol.
Here's our molecule of ethanol, with which we're fairly familiar.
It has an OH bond, which should have a fairly strong dipole with a negative end near the
oxygen and a positive end near the hydrogen.
It also has a carbon-oxygen polar bond, which should have some positive charge density near
the carbon, which bears the hydroxyl, and again, some negative charge on the oxygen.
So overall, this particular molecule has a net molecular dipole.
Furthermore, when it is near another molecule of ethanol, it can form an extra type of intermolecular
interaction known as a hydrogen bond.
Whenever I have an OH, NH, or FH bond in a functional group, there's a potential that
the electronegative oxygen, fluorine, or nitrogen atom can share its lone pairs for
just a split second with the hydrogen from another molecule of the same type.
When this interaction takes place, it's fairly strong compared to a lot of other intermolecular
forces, and so we give it a special name.
We call it hydrogen bonding, or H bonding, and it is this hydrogen bonding that can occur
between two different molecules of ethanol that give it such a high boiling point.
If instead we compare how ethers look, we see that ethers have polar bonds in the form
of two different carbon-oxygen bonds, one here, one here.
So there is a little bit of polarity to this molecule.
Now those dipoles are almost pointed opposite to one another, so they cancel out a great
deal, but what's even more important here is that there's no potential for hydrogen
bonding in ether, and that's because the oxygen contains the lone pairs necessary, but there's
no polar hydrogen like there is here in my ethanol molecule.
So ethers make great solvents for dissolving compounds like ethanol, but they don't adhere
well to one another, and this translates to a lower boiling point.
So here we have an ethane compared to a methyl ether and an ethanol boiling point, and you
can see clearly that hydrogen bonding interaction is enough to make up almost 100 degrees difference
worth of boiling point here.
So this is a very important, very fundamental intermolecular force that we always have to
be mindful of.
It's the last property, let's talk about the acidity of alcohols and ethers.
Now the alcohol has this OH, which is a polar bond containing a hydrogen, so we expect it
to act as an acid, albeit a weak one.
To form an alkoxide conjugate base, we have a pKa of about 16.
So on the grand scheme of things, alcohols aren't terribly acidic, but they're certainly
much more acidic than, for example, alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes, all of which we've looked
at so far.
But alcohols can also act as a base.
When they accept a proton at that group, they form a species known as an oxonium ion.
Now oxonium ions have a lot of positive charge density right near an electronegative element,
so they're not very stable, and they tend to give up that proton very rapidly, giving
them a pKa of about negative 2.
So in this case, alcohols can act either as very weak acids, releasing a proton, or very
weak bases, accepting a proton.
When we call this property amphoterism, so ethanol, like all aliphatic alcohols, is amphoteric.
But what about ethers?
Let's look at the structure of ether.
Remember, we have that electronegative oxygen there with lone pairs, so there's a potential
here for some acid-base chemistry.
But there's no acidic proton.
In fact, the most acidic proton on ether, in this case dimethyl ether, would be one
of the six protons that it has on the adjacent methyl groups, which would have a pKa of somewhere
around 50.
Now from a practical perspective, when pKa's become this prohibitively large, we just
say, now this is not an acid at all.
But it can act as a base.
Just as the oxygen in alcohol can accept a proton, so can this oxygen in ether accept
a proton via one of the two lone pairs, creating a protonated ether which has a pKa of around
negative 3.5.
So in the case of ethers, we're not dealing with amphoterism, we're simply dealing with
a very weakly basic organic compound.
Alcohols are used widely in organic chemistry, as both reagents and solvents.
I'm sure that most of us are familiar with the means by which most of the world's ethanol
is prepared.
Fermentation of sugars by the bacterium Saccharomyces.
This is just a fancy name for yeast.
These little organic chemists are without equal when it comes to creating ethanol.
But what about other, more complex alcohols?
When larger, more complex alcohols are needed, we must often turn to the tools of organic
chemistry to create them.
There are many ways in which to do this.
In fact, we already saw how they can be produced by nucleophilic substitution of alkyl halides
using hydroxide ions.
There are many, many more, there are far too many in fact, to survey them all in this course.
In fact, we're now just going to focus on how alcohols are produced using starting materials
with which we're already familiar, alkenes, and a mechanism that we already understand,
addition.
To accomplish this, we'll discuss three types of reactions.
Hydration of alkenes, a technique called oxymercuration demercuration, and one known as hydroboration
and oxidation.
Each of these reactions has specific advantages and challenges associated with them, and in
many cases they will produce various structural isomers of the product alcohol.
So let's begin with a special kind of addition reaction.
This is a catalyst hydration of a very simple alkene, like propene.
As the name implies, we'll need three ingredients, an alkene, a mineral acid, and water.
In order to complete our reaction, we'll need to acidify the sample using an aqueous solution
of that mineral acid, being sure that it has a non-nucleophilic conjugate base, so we
use something like phosphoric or sulfuric acid for this purpose.
A strong acid like sulfuric acid protonates the alkene, but there are two possible carbocation
which could form, primary and secondary.
Of course, we know that hyperconjugation causes the secondary carbocation to be strongly
favored, and it's one of the driving forces behind Markovnikov's rule, and this reaction
is no exception.
Now if we follow the reaction with the isopropyl cation to completion, we see that our acid
selection has produced a non-nucleophilic base, leaving only water to act as the nucleophile,
attacking the carbocation and forming a new bond.
So we've created that species known as an oxonium ion.
Remember oxonium ions are very acidic, so they quickly lose that acidic proton to a molecule
of solvent or to another alkene perpetuating the reaction.
And if we evaluate the product obtained, we see that the extension of Markovnikov's rule
has held, with the added hydrogen on the less substituted carbon of the product, and the
hydroxyl group on the more substituted carbon.
So if the goal of our synthesis is to convert an alkene into an alcohol, without stereoselectivity,
and with obeying Markovnikov's rule, acid-catalyzed hydration seems to be the ticket.
But just as with all reactions involving carbocation, we have to be vigilant of the possibility
for rearrangements in the intermediate.
So how do we cope with this problem?
It's an interesting question, and one which no doubt vexed Markovnikov.
So this question was taken up by Carl Andreas Hoffman and Julius Sand in 1900.
Hoffman and Sand were part of a burgeoning subclass of chemists practicing what is known
as organometallic chemistry.
And metals, though they're rare in organic chemistry, are present and can form bonds
to carbon.
It was a very interesting phenomenon that they were investigating.
So the reaction that Hoffman and Sand developed involves the use of mercuric acetate, compound
consisting of one atom of mercury bonded to two acetate groups.
Hoffman and Sand realized that if this compound was used in place of a mineral acid to initiate
the hydration of an alkene, no rearrangement took place.
So as mercuric acetate is attacked by the alkene, the large mercury atom takes up residence
between the two carbons of the pi system, much like our cyclic halonium ion discussed
last time.
Because of this, it cannot rearrange that cyclic structure locks it down.
Attack by the solvent takes place, and finally the organomercury group is reacted with an
agent called sodium borohydride.
The borohydride removes the mercuric group and replaces it with a hydrogen.
So the use of this reagent allowed Hoffman and Sand to create the Markovnikov product
in this hydration without suffering the effects of rearrangement.
So we've seen how acid-catalyzed hydration of alkenes leads to Markovnikov products with
the potential for rearrangement, and we've seen how to produce the Markovnikov product
while avoiding rearrangement by use of oxymercuration and subsequent demercuration with borohydride.
But what if instead it were necessary to hydrate an alkene to produce the anti-Markovnikov
product?
Well we can accomplish this using boron-trihydride.
You see, what makes boron-hydride so interesting is that boron has very low electronegativity,
so low in fact that the hydrogen atoms of borotrihydride are at the negative end of the
bond dipole.
Very unusual.
The unusual orientation of the bond dipole in boron-trihydride causes it to interact
with the pi system of the alkene in such a way that the hydrogen preferentially positions
itself above the more substituted carbon.
This point we produce what's called an alkyl borane.
And finally, the borane group is reacted with hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide to replace
the borane with a hydroxyl group.
This leads to the anti-Markovnikov hydration of an alkene.
So this is an alcohol that's made with syn-stereochemistry.
A final distinction between ethers and alcohols is the lack of an acidic hydrogen in ethers.
Now, because ethers don't act as acids under common laboratory conditions, they find use
much more frequently as solvents than as reagents, but they're critical materials nonetheless.
So after everything that we've been through so far today, you're probably stealing yourself
for a new round of complex mechanisms depicting synthesis of ethers.
Well, I have some good news for you.
You can relax a little bit because ethers can be synthesized using analogs of two of
the three reactions that we just discussed simply by substituting the desired alkyl group
for the appropriate hydrogen.
For example, instead of acid-catalyzed hydration to form 2-methyl-2-butanol, we can simply
replace water with an alcohol leading to the corresponding sec-butyl ether.
In a similar way, oxymercuration and demercuration in an alcohol solvent rather than water leads
to a Markov-Nikov ether product without the rearrangement.
Now, unfortunately, the complexities of the oxidation step in hydroboration and oxidation
make it impossible to produce ethers from alkenes using this method.
But there is a solution to this problem.
It's not only the last reaction in our synthesis segment of the lecture, but the first in our
reactions segment.
Although alcohols, and particularly ethers, are most frequently used as solvents in organic
chemistry, there are situations in which alcohols can be reactants.
The difference in the utility of these chemical cousins lies in their most obvious difference,
the presence of an acidic hydrogen.
Recall from earlier that I mentioned the most simple aliphatic alcohols have a pKa of about
16, which makes them very weakly acidic.
But acidic nonetheless.
So in the presence of a suitably basic environment, alcohols can be deprotonated to form their
conjugate bases, called alkoxides.
So let's look at an example of the formation of an alkoxide.
Here's an alcohol that we've already discussed, t-butanol.
Now this has a pKa of about 16, so when placed in the presence of a reagent like sodium hydride,
which presents or reacts as a hydride, we have a reaction take place.
It's a proton transfer, in which the hydride removes the proton from that t-butanol.
This produces t-butoxide ion, sodium ions, and a little bit of molecular hydrogen.
The molecular hydrogen, remember, has a pKa of about 35 compared to 16 for my t-butyl alcohol.
So this reaction is highly favored.
And not only that, the hydrogen gas effervesces and escapes into the atmosphere.
Once it's gone, clearly the reaction can never go back.
So this is a very effective way to make t-butoxide ions.
We can use these t-butoxide ions in something called a Williamson ether synthesis, in which
the alkoxide is reacted with an alkyl halide of low substitution, something like methylchloride.
In this case, we expect the alkoxide will attack the electrophilic carbon here of the
methylchloride, displacing the chloride leaving group.
So it proceeds through this intermediate state, where one bond is forming and the other breaking,
and concludes with the formation of t-butyl methyl ether and a halide ion byproduct.
Now, Williamson ether synthesis are very useful, but they're not always useful.
We have to consider the substitution of the R groups on the ether.
This is best shown by example.
So here are three different ethers that we might want to make, di-t-butyl ether, t-butyl
methyl ether, and ethyl methyl ether.
So let's ask ourselves if we could form each one of these using a Williamson ether synthesis.
Let's start with di-t-butyl ether.
There's only one combination of alcohol and alkyl halide, which would lead to this particular
ether.
And because we're stuck using a tertiary substrate in what would be an SN2 reaction, this can't
be done.
So Williamson doesn't solve our problem of forming di-t-butyl ethers.
What about t-butyl methyl ethers?
Well, we can certainly accomplish it, and you know that I can because you've seen it in
the previous slide, using methyl chloride, because methyl chloride is completely unsubstituted
and therefore the backside of the carbon-chlorine bond is available for nucleophilic attack.
So what about turning the tables and trying to use methyl alcohol and t-butyl chloride?
Well, in theory this sounds good, but remember we have a tertiary substrate now in an SN2
reaction.
So this is going to be more of an elimination reaction setup and it's not likely to form
the ether that we want.
Similar analysis for ethyl methyl ether leads to the conclusion that we could use ethanol
and methyl chloride, which is a methyl substrate, or we could use methanol and ethyl chloride
because this involves a primary substrate.
So as you can see, there are situations in which the Williamson ether synthesis is completely
useless to us, situations in which it's useful to us as long as synthetic design is properly
conducted and others in which there are many different ways to make the same product using
different reagents.
But remember, alcohols are amphoteric, meaning they can also accept the proton to become their
conjugate acid.
So let's take a moment and think instead about that protonated oxonium ion.
Protonation of an alcohol under various acidic conditions changes what would be a poor hydroxide
leaving group into a much more stable water leaving group.
That's right, but was the nucleophile in basic solution is instead the electrophilic
substrate under acidic conditions.
This is, in fact, what Cordus had unwittingly accomplished.
By mixing ethanol with sulfuric acid, he created a situation in which a portion of the ethanol
was protonated and the remaining neutral alcohol molecules then attacked the oxonium ions creating
the diethyl ether he observed.
Now because this reaction wasn't really optimized for SN1 or SN2, it's likely that he unwittingly
produced a fair amount of ethylene as well because this is the elimination product obtained
when the dehydration of ethanol takes place.
But in defense of Cordus, Christingold's work which elucidated those mechanisms was
still about four centuries away from being performed.
So I think we can forgive him for his suboptimal synthetic design.
Nonetheless, alcohols in acidic solution are prone to substitution and elimination because
of the stability of the water group which leaves oxonium ions.
So alcohol functional groups can be turned into good substrates for substitution by altering
the hydroxyl group to make it a better leaving group.
Cordus used sulfuric acid to produce oxonium in which water is a leaving group, but many
other strategies exist.
For example, alcohols can be converted into chlorides using a reagent called thionylchloride.
The thionylchloride is first attacked by the alcohol producing an activated alcohol species
known as a sulfonate ester.
There's also a chloride ion made in this process.
Now the new leaving group is more stable than chloride ion which can now attack the electrophilic
center from the backside substituting.
Similar strategy can be used to brominate alcohols using phosphorus tribromide.
This reagent produces a phosphonate ester and a bromide ion.
Alcohols with a reagent called tosylchloride also produces a better leaving group called
a tosylate and this strategy is used frequently to activate primary and secondary alcohols
for use in SN2 reactions.
So let's finish up the day by taking a look at our sucralose synthesis again.
You'll recall that earlier we took a look at sucrose and asked ourselves how can we convert
this into sucralose and we concluded that we had to use an SN2 reaction and today we're
going to finish that discussion by choosing the SN2 reaction reagents to make it happen.
Now the way that this is done industrially is we first have to get rid of all these other
hydroxyl groups here that we don't want reacting when we introduce the substitution reaction.
This is done by placing something called an acetyl ester or an acetate group over the alcohols.
We basically have masked them with a protecting group.
Next we run our reaction.
In our case we're going to use thionyl chloride followed by hydrochloric acid to quench the
reaction and when this is done I'm going to substitute both of my primary alcohols for
chlorines and I'm also going to substitute my secondary with inversion because I'm running
SN2.
The final step of my process I'm going to remove the protecting groups that I placed
on to mask the other hydroxyls.
By doing that I've arrived at the product and this is actually how sucralose is produced
industrially today for consumption.
So let's take a few moments and summarize what we've covered today.
We took a look at the atomic structure and bonding behavior of oxygen, how its electron
configuration makes it most stable when it has two bonds, either as a pair of single
bonds or as a double bond.
We focused on the oxygen atom in sp3 hybridization states in which it has two lone pairs and
two sigma bonds and how it leads to three possibilities, either two bonded hydrogens
producing water, one alkyl group and one hydrogen producing an alcohol or two bonded alkyl groups
creating an ether.
We discussed how alcohol groups have that special designation of functional group in
IUPAC nomenclature and how their less reactive ether cousins don't enjoy the same distinction
instead being named as alkanes having alkoxy substituents.
We covered techniques for synthesizing alcohols and ethers including acid catalyzed addition
which results in Markovnikov products but which are prone to rearrangement.
We looked at how Hoffman and Sands solved the rearrangement problem with oxymer curation
and demer curation.
We also considered how one might make an anti-Markovnikov alcohol or ether product
from alkanes using hydroboration and oxidation as the pathway.
We took a look at the reactivity of alcohols and how their amphoteric nature makes them
prone to act as electrophiles or substrates in acidic media but as nucleophiles in extremely
basic environments.
Finally we investigated a few methods of activating alcohols by converting their hydroxyl groups
into more reactive leaving groups.
Specifically we looked at sulfonate esters, phosphonate esters and tosylates.
We saw specifically how sulfonate esters are employed in the synthesis of the sugar
substitute sucralose.
So there's no denying that alcohols and ethers are versatile solvents and reagents but there's
much more to the remarkable role of oxygen in organic synthesis.
We'll cover even more of it next time including a look at the role of oxygen containing compounds
and their chemistry in the aftermath of a night of enjoying a few cold beers.
I'll see you then.
