Potent alcoholic beverages from the waste product of yeast, drinkable water from the
sea, gasoline from crude oil.
Humanity has always had a deep interest in the purification of liquids to obtain commodities
of great value.
One of the earliest and most effective techniques to purify liquids relies on two simple physical
changes, boiling and condensation, which combine to create a familiar technique called distillation.
Most of us are predominantly familiar with this technique as a method of producing beverage
alcohol.
This application has been employed for so long that its true origins in human history
are lost to the ages.
What is certain is that many early civilizations independently discovered this trick, which
can be used to produce a beverage from such varied sources as fermented rice, bananas,
or even milk.
But ethanol is just one of many liquids which we find particularly useful in its purified
state.
In the 4th century BC, Aristotle observed this phenomenon related to water and wrote
on it in his work Meteorologica.
He wrote, salt water, when it turns to vapor, becomes sweet, and the vapor does not form
salt water again when it condenses.
Wine and all fluids that evaporate and condense into a liquid state become water.
Now, by sweet, what Aristotle meant was drinkable.
He had observed that seawater, wine, and all other common solutions of his day could be
made into fresh, potable water simply by boiling it, then recondensing the vapor in a new container.
Now, clearly seawater and freshwater were made from the same basic substance and modified
only by some admixture, which could be removed by this process.
Of course, in his day, Aristotle only had access to aqueous solutions, so his observation
that all fluids become water in this process would be a bit erroneous from a modern perspective.
But he did demonstrate an understanding that liquids can be vaporized, collected and recondensed
to form a liquid of a different composition than the original, a primary tenet of the
technique of distillation.
Now, Aristotle's observations weren't merely academic, either.
His ideas were applied in the centuries following his death.
For example, Greek sailors, according to the accounts from Alexander of Aphrodisius, boiled
seawater and suspended large sponges from the mouth of bronze vessels above them to
obtain drinking water.
Now, here Alexander is describing the desalination of seawater.
In the middle of the 1600s, an Englishman and physician named John French played a critical
role in thrusting distillation from the realm of an alchemical art to a chemical science.
He very eloquently writes in his now famous work, The Art of Distillation,
I shall not stand here to show where the art of distillation had its origin as being a thing,
little conducing to our ensuing discourse, but let us understand what distillation is.
In yet another of my favorite quotes of all time, French writes,
Before you take yourself to the work, propound to yourself what you seek and enter not upon
the practice until you are first well versed in the theory.
A more telling quotation of those times could not possibly exist.
French has always been on my list of top ten scientists I'd like to sit down for a beer
with, though perhaps in his case a whiskey would be a more appropriate drink.
In his time, French's work was the most influential universal compendium of distillation theory
and techniques that was ever published, a true asset to the growing science of chemistry.
Today, it offers us a fascinating insight into the change in thinking which was going on during his day,
a shift from the artistic and romantic descriptions of the alchemical world
to the factual and detailed observations of the chemical world.
But distillation is not simply an ancient technique relegated to the pages of history.
Modern fuels are particularly pertinent example of a more recent societal change made possible by this purification method.
A fantastic example of this is the refining of crude oil into useful materials.
And we owe a great deal of that practice to J.D. Rockefeller's standard oil company and his competitors.
You see, there's a good reason why we refer to fossil fuels as petroleum distillates.
It's because the refining process primarily relies on distillation to separate components of crude petroleum
based on little more than their boiling points.
Rockefeller's true genius was not to employ the technique. Now, that had been done long ago.
But what really helped to make Rockefeller successful was his realization that in addition to lamp oil,
he could use distillation to collect and sell many of the other products of various volatilities
which other companies simply treated as waste.
And this included octane for gasoline.
So just imagine that gasoline was once considered a waste product.
So distillation has found many uses through the ages, from producing potable water and alcoholic beverages
to refining oil and gasoline.
It also finds use frequently in the organic chemistry laboratory
as a method for isolating liquids of varying volatility from one another.
The applications of distillation go on and on, but in this lecture we'll take French's advice
and first take a look at the fundamental laws governing this influential chemical technique.
First, a bit of background on the process of vaporization.
All liquids exist naturally in equilibrium with just a little bit of their vapor,
even at temperatures well below their boiling points.
Now, the exact amount of vapor varies from one substance to the next
and depends on how well molecules of the same kind stick together through intermolecular attractions.
For example, under a given set of conditions, water will exert a lower vapor pressure than will acetone
because the water molecules can hydrogen bond to themselves,
causing them to prefer the liquid phase more than the gas.
This is easily observed.
Just place a drop of water next to a drop of nail polish remover on a countertop
and see which one evaporates first.
We measure the amount of vapor above a liquid in terms of the pressure that that vapor exerts.
So this property of liquids has come to be known as vapor pressure.
The higher the vapor pressure of a given liquid,
the faster and more easily it will be converted to the gas phase.
Now, we often report vapor pressures in units of torr.
One torr is equal to one millimeter of mercury in a barometer.
So, 760 torr is equal to one atmosphere of pressure,
the likes of which we would experience on a lab bench.
Now, increasing the temperature of a sample means increasing the kinetic energy in the molecules which make it up.
So, increasing the temperature of a liquid,
gives more of its molecules enough kinetic energy to escape the liquid and become a gas.
This increases the vapor pressure of the sample.
When a liquid is heated to a temperature at which its vapor pressure is equal to the externally applied pressure,
like the 760 torr of pressure exerted by the Earth's atmosphere, for example, the liquid boils.
When the pressure we are working against is one atmosphere,
we refer to this temperature as the liquid's normal boiling point.
This is most easily observed by heating a sample of pure water.
At room temperature, water's vapor pressure is only about 3% out of atmospheric pressure.
But as the temperature increases, more and more water increases.
But as the temperature increases, more and more water vapor can be seen forming at the liquid's surface,
until the water reaches 100 degrees centigrade,
at which point its vapor pressure is now one atmosphere, or 760 torr, and boiling takes place.
But that's pure water.
And our goal today is to show how we can separate mixtures of liquids from one another using this process.
So let's call on a few more great minds from the 1800s to help us with that.
Raoul's law, named for French chemist François-Marie Raoul, states that
the vapor pressure exerted by a component in a mixture of miscible liquids
is equal to its normal vapor pressure when pure, times its mole fraction in the mixture.
In other words, the vapor pressure of each component is proportional to the fraction of sample molecules it makes up.
So a solution which is 50% water at room temperature will only exert a vapor pressure of 1.5 torr instead of 3 torr.
Dalton's law, named for John Dalton, tells us that the sum of the partial vapor pressures exerted by all of the components of such a system
is equal to the total vapor pressure exerted by that system.
In other words, vapor pressures are additive.
For example, if our water was diluted to 50% using ethanol, we would have to include the vapor pressure of the ethanol
and the total vapor pressure of our mixture as well.
Now, ethanol's vapor pressure is about 50 torr at room temperature.
So it contributes 25 torr to the vapor pressure of the mixture according to Raoul's law,
giving the mixture about 26.5 torr total vapor pressure in accordance with Dalton's law.
So varying the amount of each liquid making up the mixture can alter that mixture's vapor pressure.
Finally, we're going to use ideal gas law, which is actually a combination of several other laws relating pressure,
volume, abundance, and temperature, all through a constant called the ideal gas constant, which we represent by the letter R.
So let's start our discussion about the process of vaporization and how it applies to distillation
in an object lesson using benzene and toluene to fairly simple hydrocarbons.
Now, I'll be using numbers for toluene and benzene, but I'll be representing the molecules as blue spheres and red spheres
throughout this demonstration so that we keep our attention on the physical behavior of the molecules
and not the structures of them themselves.
So here I have a beaker that's filled with benzene and toluene.
And this mixture of benzene and toluene is 50 mole percent of each.
Now that means that if I model my blue spheres as toluene and my red spheres as benzene,
I can begin to follow them as they change from the liquid to the vapor state.
Now, at a given temperature, the vapor pressure of toluene is normally 300 Tor.
And at the same temperature, the vapor pressure of pure benzene is normally 1200 Tor.
So I can use Raoult's law to calculate the vapor pressure exerted by each in my mixture.
For example, the vapor pressure exerted by toluene is equal to chi, the Greek letter chi, which is its mole fraction,
times the vapor pressure it would exert if it were pure.
In other words, the toluene should exert a vapor pressure of 150 Tor.
Now, a similar calculation for benzene allows me to predict that its vapor pressure above the liquid should be equal to 600 Tor.
And a quick check using Dalton's law tells me that this liquid will be boiling maybe on a cloudy day here in Washington D.C.
when the vapor pressure or when the atmospheric pressure is 750 Tor, which equals the vapor pressure.
Now, here's the interesting part.
If I take the vapor pressures of my liquids and use the ideal gas law, which allows me to predict that the pressures they exert
is proportional to the number of moles in the gas phase,
I calculate that the mole fraction of benzene in the vapor phase is 80 mole percent, not 50 mole percent.
So this means that in the headspace above my liquid, whatever vapor does form at this temperature,
is actually going to be enriched in benzene, which is the more volatile of the two components.
Now, this is very important to distillation and how it allows us to separate liquids.
So let's say that I could take a sample of benzene and toluene and place it in an apparatus in which it can vaporize
and in which that vapor is then channeled into a new region in space where it is then condensed back into a liquid.
Well, if I can do that, then the liquid I collect should be of the same composition as the vapor in that original sample.
So we use a device like this called the simple still, which consists of what we call a boiling flask, which is heated.
A still head whose job is to direct the vapor into another downward-facing region, which we call a west condenser.
Now, the west condenser has a water jacket to keep it cold, which induces condensation,
but that condensed vapor rolls downhill into a new receiving flask,
and it's directed that way through a flow controller or a vacuum adapter in this case.
So knowing what we know about how a mixture of benzene and toluene will vaporize,
if I run my still by adding heat to the boiling flask,
I expect that the vapor which is moving through the system will be enriched in the benzene,
and therefore at the end of my distillation run, when I remove my receiving flask,
it should contain 80 mole percent benzene.
So I've enriched my sample in the more volatile component through distillation.
So now that we've talked a little bit about the theory behind simple distillation, let's take a look at one in progress.
So I've constructed here a simple distillation apparatus, the type of which you might find running in an organic chemistry lab.
Currently, I'm distilling a mixture of 50-50 ethanol and water.
Now the apparatus consists of not only the elements we looked at previously in our slides,
but a few other practical pieces that help it work.
The first is this device called a lab jack, and the lab jack gives me a little bit of clearance
so that I can raise and lower my heat source when I need to.
On top of the lab jack is a stir plate.
Now this is also a heating plate, but I'm not using the heat,
because remember we talked about this in our previous lecture,
that it's not a good idea to put anything with organic solvents directly on top of a hot plate.
And since I'm working with ethanol, which in certain concentrations is flammable, I can't do that.
Instead, I've used a device which is called a thermowell.
A thermowell is a ceramic heater, and I'm controlling it with a little controller in the back here,
which is hidden from view, which regulates how much current is reaching the thermowell.
So that's how I set the temperature of the still just the way I like it.
Now right now, I have a round bottom boiling flask, which is clamped in place.
So this is the lowest piece of glassware in my apparatus,
and so I've clamped it on a ring stand so that when I lower the lab jack,
my heat source is removed from my organic sample.
So this is all about safety up to this point.
Now about the distillation.
The boiling flask contains a mixture of boiling water and ethanol.
And if you look very closely, you can actually see the vapor condensing within the still head here,
and a great deal of it is falling back into the boiling flask, and that's okay.
But some of that vapor traverses the still head into this arm,
which is in a downward sloping direction and is in line with a water-cooled condenser.
So this condenser here, actually, if I get wiped away some of the condensation that's on it,
you might be able to see this, has two concentric tubes.
The outside tube is actually plumbed to cold water,
which is circulating because of a pump that I have underneath the table.
So it's constantly keeping the inner portion of this column cold.
That's why the vapor is condensing in this cold region and rolling downward,
where my vacuum adapter is directing the flow into a receiving flask.
You may notice that it's dripping downward, and that's actually the origin of the term distill.
It's from the Latin meaning to drop downward.
So if I'm really enriching my sample here in ethanol,
I should be able to detect that in the temperature of the vapor as it moves through the still head.
So I have an infrared thermometer here,
and I've placed a few white stickers on my apparatus
so that I can get the proper reflection of the IR light to measure the temperatures going on in this still.
Now if I point my thermometer directly at the boiling flask,
I see that at least the surface of the boiling flask is somewhere around 80 degrees centigrade,
77 according to my thermometer.
But if the vapor which is moving into the condenser is of a different composition,
then it should be a different temperature.
If I've increased the concentration of the more volatile component,
I should see a decrease in temperature as it moves up into the still head.
So let's take a look at the still head temperature, at least on the outside of the still head.
See, it's moving around quite a bit as the vapor sort of moves and swirls inside,
but my reading never exceeds about 70 degrees.
So even though I've been measuring the temperatures of the outside of the still,
or the glass surface, rather than the actual liquid and vapor,
we can see the trend occurring here,
that it's much warmer down here where the boiling liquid is
compared to the temperature of the vapor which is moving through the still head.
Now if this were a pure liquid, that should not be the case,
because boiling means that the liquid and the vapor are in thermal equilibrium with one another,
which clearly they aren't,
and that is the source of the purification that we get during a distillation.
So we've seen how we can separate or at least enrich a sample
in a more volatile component using simple distillation.
But what if we want a really highly purified sample of a particular liquid?
Remember, in our calculations before, with benzene and toluene,
we determined that we would only get a distillate of about 80 mole percent benzene,
but what if we need one that's 90 or 95 or even practically 100 percent benzene?
We have a tool that we can use to predict exactly how liquids and vapors will behave
to determine the outcome of a distillation and whether or not we need to take extra measures.
Now for that we use something called a liquid vapor composition plot.
And a liquid vapor composition plot, simply put, is a phase diagram for a binary liquid system at boiling,
as opposed to a binary solid system which is melting like we looked at last time.
So remember, we were operating in a specific temperature,
boiling a mixture of benzene and toluene, which was 50 mole percent benzene,
but created a vapor that was 80 mole percent benzene.
So at that given temperature on my plot, I can place those two percentages of benzene.
Here 50 for the liquid and here 80 for my vapor composition.
But these calculations in this experiment have been done many, many times over
at many, many different compositions of benzene and toluene.
So if we plot similar results for different compositions at their boiling points,
we start to see a pattern emerge within the plot and connecting the dots gives us
what looks a lot like our phase diagrams for a binary system that we've seen before.
So this is the origin of the liquid vapor composition plot.
It's a tool which allows me to predict the outcome of a distillation
without ever having to go into the lab and run one.
So let's say that I really do want a very, very pure sample of benzene.
Can I use distillation to achieve that?
Well, our calculations would suggest otherwise for a 50 mole percent mixture with toluene.
But what if I were to collect that distillate and then redestill it?
Well, I could build an apparatus like the one I've shown you here in which I have a boiling flask
and then an intermediate flask which is a collection flask for a first round of distillation
but is a boiling flask for a second round of distillation.
Now, if I were to run a system like this, I would expect my 50 mole percent benzene
to collect in the first flask as an 80 mole percent benzene solution.
But that 80 mole percent benzene solution, when heated,
I would expect to distill yet again and form a new condensate which is even more enriched.
Now, just how enriched it is, I can determine using my liquid vapor composition plot.
Now, it turns out it's 97 mole percent, so let's see how I figured that out.
Using the liquid vapor composition plot, I started with a liquid of 50 mole percent,
which gives me a vapor of 80 mole percent, which gives me a condensate of 80 mole percent in the receiving flask.
Now, I'm going to heat that 80 percent liquid that I've recondensed.
That creates a vapor which recondenses to form a liquid with a composition of 97 mole percent benzene.
Now, I've set it up here as two sequential distillations,
but we'd really like to be able to do this in a system in which we can run a single run
without having to build all of this, or take it apart and clean all of this at the end,
or use two different sources of heat.
So, in short, is there a simpler way that we can do this?
The answer is yes, and we call it a fractional distillation.
This is a fractional distillation scheme,
and I've really only changed my simple distill by one very important thing.
I've added what's called a fractionating column to it,
and the insertion of this fractionating column gives lots and lots of surface area
onto which my vapor as it ascends the column can condense and then revaporize,
and then condense and revaporize as it climbs up the column.
So, if I charge this flask with 50 mole percent benzene and then run my fractional distill,
let's take a look at what goes on inside this region, this fractionating column that I've added.
As I heat the sample, I'll see vapor beginning to ascend,
but every time it condenses along the walls, falls into a slightly warmer region
and revaporizes, it becomes more and more enriched in the more volatile component,
in our case, benzene.
At the, or near the base of that column, it's as though I were doing a simple distillation.
I get about 80 mole percent.
But if you look carefully about midway up that column,
you'll notice that far fewer of my toluene molecules are making it to this location on the column.
And if you go even higher, near the very, very top, really none of them are.
So, if I run this particular column as I've depicted it here,
collecting the vapor that exits through the top of the column,
I expect to get what is essentially 100% pure benzene in a single distillation,
starting with 50 mole percent benzene.
So, here's how I was able to do that.
I started with 50 mole percent,
but my column here is running not as though a single round of distillation had taken place,
creating an 80% benzene distillate,
but rather as though a second one had taken place,
giving 97% and then yet again a third one had taken place,
finally getting me right around the limit of my diagram here to about 100% benzene.
Now, when I do a single run in a fractional still,
which gives me a distillate of a purity that resembles that
of something that's been distilled twice or three times,
I report on the efficiency of my still using a term called theoretical plates.
Simply put, a 97% pure distillate would mean that my fractional still operates at two theoretical plates,
because it's as though I had distilled and redestilled a second time.
If instead my fractional still gives me 100% pure benzene in the first run,
then it's three theoretical plates,
because it's as though I've gone over and down three times on my liquid vapor composition plot.
So, I've made a small change to my simple still setup from last time,
inserting not only the fractionating column itself, which is here,
but I've also, you'll notice, packed a little bit of steel wool inside.
And the purpose of that packing is to give extra surface area on to which multiple rounds
of condensation and vaporization can take place as my sample ascends the column.
In fact, if you look very closely, you'll see plenty of condensation falling back down,
because it's formed before the vapor actually reaches the sidearm.
So, only the most volatile of components can get to the top.
Now, again, in this case, I have 50-50 ethanol and water in my boiling flask.
So, if I take a look at the temperature of the boiling liquid,
it's no surprise that the temperature is somewhere around the mid-80 degrees centigrade.
But as my sample ascends the column, let's say about halfway up,
I've got another sticker here so I can measure my temperature.
Now, in this case, the temperature of the ascending vapor is no longer in the high-80s.
Now, it's about 80 degrees.
And finally, at the top, if I measure the actual temperature of the vapor which is reaching my west condenser,
I see that that vapor has a temperature of about 75 degrees.
So, what I've shown you here is proof that as the vapor ascends,
the boiling point of the associated combination of ethanol and water continually decreases.
Now, knowing that the boiling point of ethanol is lower than that of water,
it should come as no surprise that my distillate, that is, that liquid which is dripping down from the far side,
is dramatically enriched in ethanol.
In fact, it's just about 95% ethanol by volume.
Now, powerful though distillation is as a technique, it does suffer from limitations.
You may have seen this product for sale before.
It's a grain alcohol beverage which is labeled 190 proof.
Now, that means the mixture is 95% ethanol by volume and 5% water.
If you ever saw this product on the store shelf, you might have wondered to yourself,
if you're going to make alcohol that strong, why not just go for broke and make it 200 proof
or 100% absolutely pure alcohol?
Now, there's in fact a very good reason that the manufacturer decided to stop at 95%.
It's because ethanol and water simply cannot be distilled beyond that proportion.
You see, Raoult, Dalton's and ideal gas laws are just that, predictions based on ideal behavior
in which gas molecules don't interact with one another significantly.
And as you can imagine, the truth is often quite different from that.
So because these laws are not rigorously accurate models,
we often see distortions in the behavior of systems which we're trying to distill.
Ethanol and water is actually a rather mild example of this.
The liquid vapor phase diagram for this system looks like this.
With a small local minimum at about 95% ethanol.
It looks an awful lot like something we saw earlier, doesn't it?
Right, it looks just like the eutectic point in melting of solids,
which was very interesting because it was the only composition at which the liquid and solid were of the same composition.
When the analogous feature is seen in a liquid vapor system, we call that mixture an azeotrope.
This is derived from Greek terms, meaning no change on boiling.
It's a very appropriate name because the vapor above the liquid is of exactly the same composition as that liquid,
making distillation of such a mixture futile.
A fractionating column, which reaches the moon, would not be sufficient to obtain pure ethanol by distillation.
We'd have to resort to other means to chemically dry the azeotrope to make it 100% ethanol.
From the perspective of an alcoholic beverage, it simply isn't worth all of the extra effort to remove that last little bit of water
from a product which is most likely going to be mixed right back in with another aqueous solution to prepare a drink.
So let's sum up what we've covered today.
We started with a mathematical explanation for why vapors above boiling mixtures tend to be enriched in the more volatile component.
We relied on the concept of vapor pressure and Raoult's, Dalton's, and ideal gas laws to support our prediction.
We used the results of these calculations to construct a phase diagram, which is commonly called a liquid vapor composition plot.
And we explored how these plots can be used to graphically predict the outcome of a distillation.
Next, we investigated a commonly used simple distillation apparatus, which diverts vapor from boiling mixtures into a condenser,
which then directs the recondensed liquid into a separate collecting flask.
We also looked at a fractional distillation apparatus, which differs by the insertion of a special column between the boiling flask
and still had, allowing multiple rounds of vaporization and condensation to take place in a single run.
This increased efficiency can be compared to the liquid vapor composition plot to give it a numerical value in the form of theoretical plates.
Next, we covered the phenomenon of azeotropes, which are undistillable mixtures of liquids which form because of non-ideal behaviors.
We saw how they manifest themselves as a local minimum within the liquid vapor composition plot,
making the vapor and boiling liquid identical in composition, thereby rendering distillation ineffective.
So over our last two lectures, we've covered all of the phrases which we commonly encounter in the lab, solid, liquid, and vapor,
and how transitioning from one state to the other can be used to purify and sometimes even identify substances in the lab.
In our next lecture, we will return our attention to a different physical property, solubility.
We'll see how this property can also be used as a very effective tool for isolation of non-volatile organic compounds
in a process known as liquid-liquid extraction.
I'll see you then.
Thank you.
