In 1928, a Scottish chemist by the name of Alexander Fleming noticed something strange
in his laboratory.
He saw that a culture plate containing Staphylococcus bacteria had been left open overnight
and had been contaminated by mold.
Now, we can all thank Fleming for his keen powers of observation, as rather than simply
throw the plate away, he decided to examine it.
What Fleming saw was that the mold had produced a zone of inhibition around itself.
Clearly, the mold was producing and excreting something which was protecting its biospace
from the Staphylococcus.
So Fleming cultured the mold and determined that it was the presence of a bacterium called
Penicillium Rubens, which inhibited the growth of that Staphylococcus.
Now, he grew up a culture of that Penicillium Rubens, filtered the broth of that culture
and dubbed that filtrate Penicillin.
The age of modern antibiotic discovery had begun.
Now, it wasn't long before it was discovered that Penicillin was safe for human injection
or ingestion, and that its antibacterial properties remained intact in the bloodstream of humans.
And by World War II, this drug was being mass produced for use in protecting injured
soldiers from infection.
In 1945, its structure was determined by noted British x-ray crystallographer and Nobel
laureate Dorothy Hodgkin.
The floodgates of mass production were opened in 1957, when John C. Sheehan completed the
first total synthesis of Penicillin at MIT.
Now, since the discovery of Penicillin, its characterization in mass production, thousands
of antibiotic compounds have been discovered and put into use for medical purposes all
around the world.
But it all started with a botched experiment in the basement of St. Mary's Hospital in
1928.
Now, there's no doubt in my mind that all of our lives have been touched by an antibiotic
in some way or another.
And by the end of today's lecture, I hope you'll have a new perspective on exactly
how Penicillin, the seminal antibiotic compound, functions at the molecular level.
Let's get started.
Previously, we discussed linear and branched alkanes, in which the connectivity of carbon
atoms in these hydrocarbons leads to millions of possible geometric isomers.
But we left out one obvious type of connectivity, cyclization.
In light of the fact that the carbon can bond so well to itself, you might have already
asked yourself the question, can a chain of atoms turn back on itself and create a cyclic
chain?
The answer is not only yes, but frequently.
We see these cyclic chains in a variety of organic compounds, from medicines to explosives.
Today we're going to focus on the structure of cyclic hydrocarbons.
So let's get started by examining the simplest possible cyclic hydrocarbon, one with three
carbon atoms.
And don't be fooled by the apparent simplicity of this structure.
This compound has found uses as a starting material in many organic syntheses, as well
as medical applications as an anesthetic.
So this deceptively simple molecular structure belongs to a very powerful and versatile organic
compound.
If we start by taking a look at the linear cousin of our cyclic three-membered compound,
propane, what we want to do is cyclize this compound.
So I'm going to turn the carbon-carbon bonds in such a way that I can bring it together
and form my new cyclic compound with three carbon atoms.
Now cyclizing this compound, we can see that we have to bond the two terminal atoms together,
which has several consequences.
First, the terminal carbon atoms must each give up a hydrogen to make space available
for the cyclizing bond.
Now this means that the generic formula for my cyclic alkane is CnH2n compared to CnH2n
plus 2 as in its analogous linear hydrocarbon.
Next I want you to notice that even though all the carbons are sp3 hybridized, and so
they should have free rotation, that they in fact do not.
This ring structure prohibits the carbon-carbon bond axis from rotating.
So this lends a new type of isomerism, one in which the side of the ring to which a substituent
is attached makes a difference.
See when they're placed on the same side of the ring, we have to use the term cis to
describe their relationship, whereas when they're placed on opposite sides of the ring
like this, we have to use the term trans.
Now the IUPAC system of nomenclature for cycloalkanes is very similar to that for linear alkanes
with just a few basic modifications.
First the root name is given the prefix cyclo, as an indication that the parent chain is
in fact cyclic.
So our three-membered ring depicted here would be named cyclo-propane.
Similarly, rings of increasing size would be named cyclobutane, cyclopentane, and cyclohexane.
Our next consideration is that those cyclic alkanes with a single substituent don't require
a number to give that substituent its location on the ring, and this of course stems from
the fact that all carbons on any unsubstituted ring are equivalent.
So we would name this molecule methylcyclobutane.
Now when two identical substituents are bonded to the ring, we designate their locations
using one as the first and then proceeding around the ring in a manner which gives the
lowest second number to the other substituent.
For example, we begin by naming this compound 1-3-dimethylcyclobutane.
Now when two or more different substituents are present, we number the ring atoms, starting
with a substituent which comes first alphabetically, and then proceed around the ring in a direction
leading to the lowest possible substituent numbers.
For example, we would name this compound 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclobutane.
But there's more to this structure.
Because the carbon-carbon bonds can no longer freely rotate, placing my two substituents
on the same side of the ring produces an isomer which is distinct from that when I place
substituents on opposite sides of the ring.
And again, to distinguish the isomers, we have to name them cis for the same side and
trans for the opposite sides.
And I'm sure that you've also wondered about our discussion on chirality.
Can such molecules have a chiral center which must be ranked by the Conningold pre-log convention
and given R and S designations?
Well, absolutely.
So let's try working with cyclic compounds which don't contain a mirror plane like the
1-3-dimethylcyclobutane example.
How about 1-2-dimethylcyclobutane?
Now in this case, the cis isomer has equal and opposite chiral centers, which makes it
superimposable with its own mirror image.
This means it's a mesocompound.
In other words, the chiral centers are equal and opposite.
But the trans isomer doesn't meet this requirement.
The non-canceling chiral centers on trans 1-2-dimethylcyclobutane means that this compound is expected
to exist as a set of enantiomers, RR and SS, each of which is distinct from the other.
In addition to new nomenclature and isomerism, small cyclic alkanes, like those containing
three to ten atoms, come with another consideration, and this affects their reactivity.
You'll notice that in cyclopropane, the carbon-carbon bonds must be 60 degrees since the three atoms
are necessarily coplanar, yet we already know that sp3 carbons ideally form bond angles
of 109.5 degrees.
Now the fact that the ring structure forces bond angles into suboptimal geometries is
known as angle strain.
We sometimes also call this bier strain.
It's named for a notable chemist and a Nobel Prize winner, Adolf von Beyer, who first proposed
the concept.
Now also, if I turn cyclopropane on its side and produce a Newman projection along one
of the carbon-carbon bonds, it also becomes clear that all the substituents of this cyclic
compound are locked in an eclipsed conformation, and the inability to achieve a staggered conformation
is referred to as torsional strain.
When we combine these two forms of strain, the angle and the torsional, we get an overall
measure of instability known as ring strain.
It's the total energetic cost of having CH2 groups forced into the geometry dictated
by the ring, as opposed to freely rotating CH2 groups as you would have in a hypothetical
linear alkane.
So let's consider the conformation in ring strains associated with a few small cycloalkanes.
Cyclopropane, cyclobutane, cyclopentane, and cyclohexane.
First, imagine that I could somehow create a linear alkane with no end.
It could, in theory, achieve perfect 109.5 degree bond angles throughout, and a perfectly
staggered conformation for all substituents, which in this case are hydrogens.
If such a molecule existed, I could determine its free energy and use that as my reference
point for a perfect ring strain free hydrocarbon.
Now let's pit each of our cycloalkanes against this ideal alkane and see how they do.
Cyclopropane has only three ring atoms, and since three points define a plane, these atoms
are locked in a planar arrangement.
That results in 60 degree bond angles and 0 degree substituent dihedral.
These two factors combined lead to a ring strain value of 115 kilojoules per mole.
Now normalizing this to the number of CH2 groups in the molecule gives me 38.3 kilojoules
per CH2.
Cycloputane, on the other hand, has four ring atoms.
So looking down on the ring from above, we might estimate that its bond angles are exactly
90 degrees.
But we'd be wrong.
A 90 degree bond angle would require 0 degree substituent dihedral angles.
And unlike cyclopropane, cycloputane can twist or pucker just slightly in an attempt to remove
that torsional strain, even though that increases angle strain in the process.
So this results in a slightly puckered conformation in which all ring atom bond angles are about
88 degrees and all substituent dihedral are about 20 degrees.
This is slightly better than cyclopropane, but it's still a far cry from our ideal geometry.
So the total ring strain in cycloputane is about 110 kilojoules per mole, which corresponds
to 27.6 kilojoules per CH2.
Now when we get to cyclopentane, we're starting to get close to ideal bond angles, but we're
not quite there.
A flat 5-membered ring would have angles of about 108 degrees, but remember those eclipsing
interactions cause cyclopentane to pucker in very much the same way cycloputane does.
Now in its most stable conformation, four atoms are nearly coplanar and a fifth atom
is raised out of the approximate plane defined by the other four.
This leads to an arrangement commonly called the envelope conformation for cyclopentane.
This is because tracing out the surface created by the atoms leads to a shape that reminds
us of an open envelope.
So average carbon-carbon bond angles and dihedral angles in cyclopentane are beginning to approach
ideal values, but they're not quite there yet.
So there's still going to be some ring strain associated with this motif, but it's going
to be significantly reduced compared to cycloputane.
In fact, cyclopentane has a total ring strain of 27.2 kilojoules per mole, or only about
5.4 kilojoules per CH2.
Now our next example is cyclohexane.
And when we reach a cyclic hydrocarbon of six atoms, something special happens.
I can produce a conformation in which I have four coplanar atoms, one atom rising up above
the plane and one atom falling down below the plane.
We call this the chair conformation because we can imagine it as a lounge chair with a
headrest and footrest.
The chair conformation of cyclohexane produces a ring with 109.5 degree bond angles throughout
and ideal 60 degree bond dihedral angles among all of its substituents.
So with cyclohexane, we've come full circle as it were, to a situation in which there's
essentially no energetic penalty for ring formation.
So chair cyclohexane's ring strain is effectively 0 kilojoules per mole, which naturally leads
to 0 kilojoules per CH2.
So it might seem on casual observation that once we've passed the six carbon mark, we've
achieved the necessary flexibility to overcome any energetic penalties incurred by the act
of ring closure.
Organic chemists however rarely observe things casually and detailed consideration shows
that this is not the case.
Now construction of a model of cyclohexane shows pretty clearly that the addition of
a seventh atom to the ring creates a geometric problem, one in which bond angles of the ring
carbon atoms can no longer be optimized while also avoiding eclipsing interactions among
its substituents.
And this of course leads to a less stable cyclic alkane.
So just as three, four, and five membered rings have systematically decreasing ring
strain, seven, eight, and nine membered rings also have increasing ring strain associated
with them.
Even with the addition of more atoms and therefore more conformational flexibility, it's impossible
to produce the unique harmony of 109.5 degree bond angles and completely staggered substituent
relationships in cyclohexane.
In other words, the virtually non-existent ring strain of cyclohexane, and therefore
its unusual stability, cannot be recreated with any other number of ring atoms, up to
and including 16 carbons.
So what does all this have to do with the action of penicillin?
Well, penicillin works by inhibiting an essential enzyme called transpepsidase.
Now transpepsidase is used by certain types of pathogenic bacteria to build their cell
walls.
But when a molecule of penicillin interacts with the enzyme, a four-membered ring called
a lactam ring, which contains a nitrogen, so it's not just four carbons, but that nitrogen
is also sp3 hybridized, so it's subject to much of the same ring strain as a cyclobutane
would be.
Now that ring opens as it reacts with the enzyme's active site, and that active site
is the region where the cell wall reinforcing bonds are normally made.
So by bonding to the enzyme, penicillin chemically modifies the active site, causing the enzyme
to malfunction.
And it can do this with remarkable efficiency, because the formation of the new bond to the
enzyme is energetically driven by the opening of the four-membered lactam ring.
And this guarantees that the process proceeds with a reduction in overall free energy,
and therefore it's spontaneous.
So we just saw how a strained ring of sp3 atoms can give a molecule powerful chemistry.
But lack of strain can be every bit as important of a feature in a biologically relevant molecule.
For example, it's lack of strain which makes a cyclohexane such a pervasive motif in the
chemistry of life.
We see this structure in powerful hormones, like human sex hormones, testosterone and
estrogen.
We see it in the antibiotic drug Tobromycin, and in the metabolite, anacetol, which can
be modified to make chemicals with varied uses ranging from explosives to investigational
anti-cancer drugs.
So this ubiquity and versatility that makes cyclohexane the gold standard of cyclic alkanes
in any organic chemistry course.
And ours is not going to be an exception.
So let's take a little bit of time now and explore cyclohexane's conformational behavior
just a bit.
Okay, so here's a cyclohexane molecule in the chair conformation.
Now you can see that I've got my forcoplanar atoms, I have my headrest, and I have my footrest.
Now I can approximate this ring of carbon atoms with a circle if I tilt the molecule slightly.
When I do this, you can see that there are two distinct substituent positions, one above
and below the ring, and another which runs around the perimeter of the ring.
And since these positions are distinct from one another, we can give them special names.
We call them axial.
If they're up and down, we call them equatorial if they're along the perimeter.
But molecules aren't static entities.
They're bonds vibrate and twist under the influence of thermal energy.
And because of this, cyclohexane's capable of a remarkable transformation known as a
ring flip.
Now when a ring flip takes place, the headrest and footrest of my imaginary chair are going
to interchange.
And in doing so, they'll create a second chair conformer in which all of the axial substituents
are now equatorial, and all of the equatorial substituents are now axial.
So let's take a look at this.
Right now I have axial, white, and equatorial, red.
And now I'm going to do my ring flip.
Remarkable transformation, isn't it?
All my red atoms have now become axial, all my white atoms equatorial.
And I can ring flip right back the way I was.
Very simply.
No bonds are broken or formed, so this is simply a conformational change as a result
of bond rotation.
Now I did that ring flip pretty quickly.
So let's slow it down a little bit and explore this really important conformational change
a bit slower.
As a ring flip begins, one of the carbon atoms moves into a coplanar arrangement with the
four others.
We call this a half chair conformation.
And you'll notice that adopting that conformation increases the ring carbon bond angles and
also creates new eclipsing interactions.
So this is a very high energy state, and in fact it represents a transition state between
the chair conformation and the intermediate for our ring flip process called the twist
boat.
In a twist boat conformation, the foot rest of my original chair is now level with my
head rest.
But there's a slight twist to the structure which gives it its name.
Now recovering the ideal bond angles within the ring to form a boat conformation means
that I have to create some eclipsing interactions between certain substituents, and the ring
flip tries to attenuate these by twisting ever so slightly.
So this is the boat conformation.
It represents a transition state between the two different twist boat intermediates.
Now the ring flip completes with the twist boat passing again through the half chair
transition state on its way to the alternate chair conformation.
And generally speaking, although conformers like the twist boat do exist, they have a
much higher energy than the chair conformation.
So chemists tend to model cyclohexane conformational equilibria as two state systems with only
one chair or the other being possible.
So we're going to make this assumption ourselves in many cases.
Now you may find that somewhat uninteresting at the moment because all of the substituents
are the same.
They're all hydrogens.
But what happens if we're dealing with a substituted cyclohexane molecule with various
groups attached to the ring?
At this point, the ring flip becomes very, very important conformational change because
it will alter the location of that substituent from an axial to an equatorial or back again.
So let's keep our discussion as simple as possible and focus on the conformational behavior
of a very simple substituted cyclohexane.
This is methylcyclohexane.
Now as you can imagine, a methyl group is much larger than a hydrogen.
So we expect that this methyl substituent, which I've marked in red, will want to take
up a position which gives it the largest volume of free space.
So if I draw a cyclohexane in the chair conformation that looks like this with its methyl group
in an axial position, is this really the best representation of the molecule?
The way that I've constructed this, the methyl group is close in space to two other hydrogens.
With the physical collisions of these larger groups with one another, we call one-three
diaxial interactions because the influencing substituents are on positions of the ring,
which would be one and three if we were labeling it as disubstituted.
In the case of methylcyclohexane, the diaxial interactions among these groups can be relieved
by a ring flip.
Notice that the ring flip places my larger methyl group in the equatorial position and
in the case of methylcyclohexane, having it out here where there's more space, lowers
its energy by about seven and a half kilojoules per mole, which corresponds to a 20 to 1 excess
of the equatorial conformer over the axial conformer.
So if it's my goal to approximate the chemical and physical properties of methylcyclohexane,
the best single representation that I can offer is that of the equatorial conformer.
Now you might have noticed in my previous example that the cyclohexane ring on testosterone
is not an isolated ring structure, but rather it's part of a larger network of rings, all
of which are bonded together in a very specific geometry.
So when two carbon or two hydrocarbon rings share one or more atoms, we call them bicyclic
systems and by extension we might call a molecule like the testosterone tetracyclic molecule
because it actually has four rings, each of which shares atoms with others.
Now today I'd like to show you just the most basic bicyclic systems in detail and show
you how we name them and how their connectivity can have a profound influence on their geometry
and therefore their behavior.
So let's begin by considering the different types of bicyclic structures.
There are actually three that we'll talk about today.
The first is sphero.
We define a sphero bicyclic structure as one which contains a single common carbon.
So here I have what we can view as two six-membered rings which are being conjoined by a single
atom that they share in common.
An example of this is a molecule cannabis spiran, also called cannabis spirone, which
is found in marijuana plants.
We can see very clearly that there is a sphero carbon here which creates this bicyclic motif.
Now the second type is a fused bicyclic and my example here is a molecule called decolin.
These fused bicyclics contain two adjacent carbons which fuse the rings together and
when this happens we call them bridgehead carbons.
So here I have two common carbons directly bonded to one another.
When this happens we call it a fused ring and a classic example of a fused system is
again our testosterone molecule.
We can see the fused motif right here.
Finally there's a third way to combine two rings and that is in a bridged motif.
And in the bridged motif we have two non-adjacent bridgehead carbons.
So in this case my two bridgehead carbons are not bonded to one another but are connected
through other atoms on all sides.
Example of this is the familiar molecule camphor.
You can see the motif right there.
So let's take a moment and think about how chemists actually think about bicyclics.
We call these structures bicyclic because we can create them mentally by combining two
rings together.
Now this is not how they're actually synthesized but rather this is how we think about them
from a structural perspective.
So we're not going to do a reaction here but I am going to show you what happens when we
put two rings together in our minds.
For this example I'm going to use five-membered rings.
The first example I bring my five-membered rings together and combine them at a single
common atom.
So that single bridgehead carbon is a spiro compound.
If I take my two five-membered rings and combine them at adjacent carbon atoms I now
have a fused system.
And again if I take my two rings and conjoin them at non-adjacent atoms I have what we
would call bridged.
So this is the way that we think about these kinds of systems.
Finally of course we need to know how to name them.
So if we know how we think about them naturally the next task at hand is to figure out how
to tell other people about them.
So we name these compounds using a system that is very akin to other IUPAC names but
we have a few extra considerations here.
For example in the spiro compound that I've just created I need to communicate how many
carbons are present in all of the bridges within the molecule.
So I have a bridge here which consists of four carbon atoms.
And I have a second bridge which also consists of four carbon atoms.
So my goal is to tell my reader that I have two bridges of four connected through a spiro
carbon.
So I start by naming my compound a spiro compound.
And then in brackets I indicate the size of each bridge separated by a period.
Finally I count all of the atoms within the molecule and use that to generate the final
name.
So in this case I have nine atoms in the total molecule meaning this is a spiro, four, four,
no name.
In the case of a fused bicyclic I have a bridge of three in my example here.
I have a second bridge of three and I have two directly connected bridgehead carbons
which can be thought of as a bridge of zero.
So to distinguish this system from the spiro I call it a bicyclo and I give the length
of all three bridges even though one of them is zero.
So this compound is a bicyclo 330.
And finally counting all of the atoms within the molecule I can get the root of the name
this is a bicyclo 330 octane molecule.
Alright now let's name our bridge compound.
We'll do exactly what we did with the fused.
We have a bridge of two, another bridge of two, and now a bridge of one.
So I'm going to call this also a bicyclo system because it, just like the fused, has two bridgehead
carbons.
What the distinction here is that I don't have any zeros in my brackets.
So this bicyclo 2, 2, 1 compound clearly has to be bridged, it's not fused.
And finally I do exactly what I've done for my other two which is I take an inventory
of the total number of atoms within that scaffold.
This is a bicyclo 2, 2, 1 heptane molecule.
So in this lecture we discussed the general formula of cyclic alkanes and how closing
a loop of carbons removes two hydrogens and gives us the general formula CnH2n.
We discussed nomenclature of this new class of hydrocarbons and we also touched on how
cyclization creates new geometric relationships among hydrogens and substituents known as
cis and trans.
We covered the phenomenon of ring strain, a combination of the two factors of angle
strain and torsional strain.
We saw how three, four and five-membered rings are unable to fully relieve this strain, making
them more unstable than their normal chain counterparts.
And we also noted that although more stable than very small cycloalkanes, rings of seven
atoms and more are also unable to achieve zero ring strain.
We then met cyclohexane, a very special cyclic hydrocarbon with virtually no ring strain
at all.
And we saw how its chair conformation can interconvert between two different conformers
which interchange axial and equatorial substituents.
We also considered how the size of substituents on substituted cyclohexanes can affect the
equilibrium between the two chair conformers, with larger groups pushing the equilibrium
in favor of their equatorial conformers.
Finally, we looked and named a few bicyclic hydrocarbons.
We saw how spirobicyclics contain two rings conjoined at a single carbon atom, fused bicyclics
share adjacent bridgeheads, and how bridged bicyclics share non-adjacent bridgeheads.
Along the way, we also saw how a laboratory error in an English basement in 1928 ultimately
led decades later to the discovery of the reaction between penicillin and transpepsinase.
And it's this reaction which gives this history-altering drug its antibiotic properties.
And it's our understanding of this reaction, which gave birth to a whole class of antibiotics.
And it's all driven by the energy released when a strain ring opens.
Next time, we're going to turn our attention back to linear and branched hydrocarbons,
but we're going to explore the effects of the presence pi bonds.
I'll see you then.
