So last time we took a look at how benzene rings were first discovered, the debate over
their structure, and exactly why they possessed such an unusual stability.
The benzene ring is a pervasive motif in organic chemistry, not only because of its stability,
but also for its complex, yet predictable and controllable reactivity.
As we discussed previously, benzene is an aromatic compound.
In fact, it's the structural basis for aromatic compounds, though how they got this name is
something of a mystery since only some of them have strong or pleasing odors.
Nonetheless, this moniker has stuck with benzene in its derivatives for nearly two centuries.
Now, as an aromatic, the pi electrons in a benzene ring are not nearly as susceptible
to undergoing addition reactions as their non-aromatic counterparts.
We discussed how heats of hydrogenation are evidence of just how stable benzene rings
really are in the face of addition reactions, which require them to sacrifice their aromaticity.
But what about substitution reactions?
Is it possible to entice benzene to react in such a way that one of its six-ring hydrogens
can be replaced with a more complex functional group of our choosing without sacrificing
its aromaticity?
The answer to this question is yes, and one of the most frequently employed pathways to
accomplish this is electrophilic aromatic substitution.
During the late 1800s and early 1900s, the science of organic chemistry was booming
in both Europe and America.
Many names with which we are familiar today were hard at work during this time period,
devising new ways to make and break chemical bonds in a useful fashion.
One such chemist was Adolf von Beyer, who in 1873 was working at the University of Strasbourg
in Germany.
Now, Beyer was supervising a graduate student by the name of Othmar Zeidler, whose graduate
project included the synthesis of a substituted benzene compound known as Dichlorodifenyltrichloroethane,
DDT for short.
Zeidler's synthesis of his compound was accomplished using chlorobenzene and chloral, under acidic
conditions.
Under these conditions, the two chlorobenzene rings are joined by substituting the chloral
for hydrogens in the parallel location on each ring.
Zeidler's synthesis in 1873 was largely viewed as an academic exercise.
Neither he nor his revered mentor, Beyer, had any idea that this compound would ultimately
alter the course of human history some seven decades later.
See, it was only during and after World War II that the insecticidal properties of DDT
were discovered and applied with breathtakingly effective results.
The Swiss chemist, Paul Mueller, is credited with later discovering and documenting, and
also obtaining Swiss patents for, the insecticidal use of this compound, after which the US government
tested and used the compound to combat infectious diseases abroad.
You see, DDT was such a powerful, broad spectrum and long-lasting insecticide that its use could
eradicate entire populations of disease-carrying insects, so efficiently that the disease they
carried was eliminated as well.
This includes a notable quelling of a typhus outbreak in Naples in the dead of winter.
Until that time, such insect-borne epidemics could only be combated by bearing down and
waiting for spring.
Additionally, there are many examples in which DDT was used to wipe out malaria completely
in confined populations.
Shortly after the conclusion of World War II, the US government began to allow commercial
use of DDT for pest control and domestic crop production.
Clearly, DDT had changed the world.
In the Nobel Prize Award Ceremony speech for Dr. Mueller, Professor G. Fisher noted of
Mueller's discovery, quoting here,
At requisite insecticidal dosages, it is practically non-toxic to humans and acts in very small
dosages on large number of various species of insects.
Furthermore, it's cheap, easily manufactured, and exceedingly stable, unquote.
Clearly, in 1948, the scientific community was riding high on the success of this newly
discovered use of DDT.
Unfortunately, the stability and long-lasting effects of DDT also proved to be its undoing.
DDT lasted so long in the environment that it could be transmitted from insects to fish,
and from fish to birds, where it had the unintended effect of inhibiting calcium production in
those birds.
This caused them to produce eggs with thinner shells than normal,
and many bird species, most notably birds of prey like eagles,
osprey and hawks, suffered tremendous population declines due to the presence of DDT in their
food sources.
In 1962, environmentalist and Johns Hopkins University-trained marine biologist,
Rachel Carson, published the book Silent Spring.
This book is considered one of the seminal works in modern environmentalism,
and it spends a great deal of its time on the U.S. agricultural industry's use of DDT
as a prime example of how rampant use of such compounds can lead to environmental disaster.
It was only in 1972, just shy of a century after its first synthesis, and three decades
since its implementation as an insecticide, that the U.S. banned the use of DDT in agricultural
applications.
Today, it only finds use in emergencies as a vector control agent to prevent the spread of disease.
So why am I telling you this story?
Well, because it's a shining example of how organic chemistry can change the world,
both for the better and for the worse.
The synthesis of DDT is also a shining example of an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction,
the topic of today's lesson.
Today, we will build on our understanding of the structure of benzene by investigating this
very useful class of reactions.
We'll investigate the general mechanism by which it takes place.
We'll discuss how other reagents often need to be activated to make them reactive enough
to entice the substantially stabilized benzene ring to react with them.
We'll learn about just a handful of the many modifications that we can make to benzene.
And finally, we'll consider how already modified benzene's can be further modified to produce
some of those orthometa and paraisomers that we talked about last time.
Electrophilic aromatic substitution is so named because the newly attached motif starts out as
an electrophile, unlike nucleophilic substitution in which the newly added group is nucleophilic.
So let's begin by looking at a reaction coordinate diagram for the reaction of benzene
and a generic electrophile. Here, I'm just going to use E plus to identify the electrophile,
but we'll soon look at some real examples.
Recall that even though they're in an aromatic system, the pi electrons of benzene are still
not held as tightly as most sigma bonding electrons. And although it takes an extraordinarily
electrophilic reagent to coax them into attacking, it can be done.
When an adequately electrophilic reagent is added to benzene, the pi electrons of benzene
simply can't resist attacking, and in doing so, they generate a tetrahedral center adjacent to
a resonance stabilized carbocation. We call this intermediate a sigma complex because we
have traded two of our pi electrons to make a new sigma bond to the electrophile.
Clearly, even with the newly formed more stable sigma bond, the sigma complex is a much higher
energy than the starting material. And this is mainly because the ring has lost its aromaticity
and the associated stability that comes from that aromaticity.
Under conditions like this, the intermediate will immediately begin to look for ways to dispense
with the positive charge of the carbocation and recover its aromaticity. Naturally, the simplest
way to remove the newly acquired positive charge is to lose a proton to the solvent,
but which proton exactly will be lost? We'll take a look at that tetrahedral center we generated
in the first step. If we remove one of the substituents about this center in a heterogenic bond
cleavage, we can repopulate the aromatic ring using the bonding electrons which were holding
that substituent in place. Removal of the electrophile would produce an uninteresting result
since we'd simply return to the starting materials. But what if instead we remove the proton on the
same tetrahedral center? A molecule of solvent or another weak base is usually all it takes
to abstract that proton, leading to a return to aromaticity and therefore stability,
while leaving the new benzene electrophile bond intact. Our substitution reactions complete.
Zeidler's synthesis of DDT relied on this mechanism to couple two molecules of chlorobenzene
to a compound known as chloral. He was able to substitute chloral for one of the ring hydrogens
of chlorobenzene, creating an intermediate which substituted for yet another ring hydrogen
on a second molecule of chlorobenzene. This somewhat complicated use of electrophilic
aromatic substitution will make more sense to us as we continue through the lecture.
As simple as our electrophilic aromatic substitution mechanism seems,
getting such a reaction started can be complicated because it requires a species so
electronegative, so hungry for electrons that it can compensate for the temporary loss of
aromaticity during the reaction's first step. Indeed, the key to successful substitution
is to generate an adequately electrophilic substitution reagent. Now remember what makes
a good electrophile, high positive charge density, and the ability to accept electrons to form a new
bond. Back to Zeidler's synthesis of DDT, chloral itself is not electrophilic enough to react with
the aromatic electrons of chlorobenzene, and this is why he added a small amount of sulfuric acid to
his reaction. Sulfuric acid is strong enough to protonate a carbonyl group like that of chloral,
increasing the electrophilic character of its carbonyl carbon. It's this protonated carbonyl
species which is key to starting the reaction, which ultimately produced his history-changing compound.
Over the past two centuries, many researchers have devised ways to substitute benzene using
many familiar functional groups. Now three of these groups we'll discuss today. Those are
nitration, halogenation, and alkylation. In all three of these cases, simply mixing benzene with,
say, nitric acid, molecular bromine, or an alkyl halide will not achieve the desired reaction.
We need to find ways to make each of these three reagents even more electrophilic than they already
are. So let's look at how each of these three can be accomplished one by one.
Nitration of benzene is typically achieved by adding a bit of sulfuric acid to the mixture.
The purpose of the sulfuric acid is to protonate the nitric acid. That's right,
nitric acid is going to act as a base. And this may sound crazy, but sulfuric acid is extremely
strong, with a pKa of about negative two. Strong enough that it can protonate just a small amount
of nitric acid and get the process started. Once protonated, nitric acid can lose a water molecule
to form a species known as nitronium. The electron cloud around the nitronium is similar to that of
carbon dioxide, but it has a central nitrogen atom instead. Now, that extra proton in the nucleus
of nitrogen means that the nitrogen now has a plus one charge associated with it. And this dense
region of positive charge, complete with oxygen atoms ready to accept pi electrons as the attack
occurs, is all that it takes to make an effective electrophile for nitration.
This reaction can be used to produce nitrobenzene, which is frequently used as an organic solvent,
but it can also be used to create a number of very useful products. Let's take a look at one now.
Let's nitrate a compound called phenol using the same strategy that we just discussed.
This is the structure for phenol. It's benzene with a hydroxyl group attached
and is very easily obtained from coal tar extracts. So this compound was available to
chemists working in the early 1800s. If we add to that sulfuric acid H2SO4 with the sulfur atom
indicated here in yellow and nitric acid HNO3, the nitrogen atom in the center here in blue,
we can expect to generate a nitronium electrophile. Now, all of these materials have been readily
available for quite some time, so this was a very simple reaction to run very early in the
history of organic chemistry. Our sulfuric acid is going to transfer its proton to the nitric acid.
Even if only a small amount does this, it's enough to get the reaction started.
The product of this is our protonated nitric acid and a hydrogen sulfate anion,
the conjugate base of H2SO4. Now, once protonated, the nitric acid can lose this water functional
group, generating the nitronium ion and a water byproduct. As the reaction proceeds, the nitronium
ion is attacked by the phenol and forms that new sigma bond to create the sigma complex.
But we've lost our aromaticity now and we have a carbocation instead.
So to relieve this loss of aromaticity, in this case I'm going to show water
taking the proton from the tetrahedral center, which is in back here just behind the carbon,
and in doing so it will reestablish aromaticity, having left behind the newly attached nitro group.
So we've completed one round of nitration of phenol,
but it doesn't have to stop there. There are four more hydrogens on the ring,
and in the case of nitronium and the case of phenol, they react so well together that using a
little bit more nitric and sulfuric acid can result in this compound, a trinitro phenol
known as picric acid. Now picric acid is noteworthy because it's a chemical cousin of trinitrotoluene
or TNT, but it was easier to make, was discovered much earlier, and believe it or not, has an even
higher explosive yield. No community can attest better to the explosive power of picric acid
than the community of Halifax Nova Scotia, which was devastated by an immense blast from a French
cargo ship carrying this wartime munition in 1917. After colliding with another ship in the bay,
the French ship Mont Blanc caught fire, prompting the crew to evacuate the ship.
The resulting blast when the cargo detonated has been estimated at a force equivalent to about
three kilotons of TNT, creating a one mile wide swath of complete and utter destruction.
Now that yield is about one-fifth the explosive yield of the nuclear bomb which destroyed Hiroshima
nearly 30 years later at the end of World War II. This is a true testament to the
reactivity of nitro groups and what they can bring to organic compounds. As the aromatic
stabilization of benzene is clearly dramatically overwhelmed by the instability of the three
nitro groups which are introduced to it by this method. Halogenation of benzene is another useful
synthetic process, but again one which cannot be achieved simply by mixing benzene and molecular
halogens like chlorine. In this case inorganic complexes like aluminum-3 chloride or iron-3
chloride are used to induce a strong dipole in the molecular halogen bond.
This method of chlorination is so effective that when taken to extremes all six hydrogens from a
benzene can be substituted with chlorine producing hexachlorobenzene. Now this halogenated hydrocarbon
is a powerful antifungal agent which was used in the 1940s 50s and 60s to protect wheat crops
before its use was discontinued over, you guessed it, environmental concerns.
The same type of catalyst can be used to enhance the dipole of an alkyl halide to produce an alkylation.
Now alkylated benzene compounds produced in this way can be used to make such useful products as
synthetic detergents. And there's a long library of catalysts and tricks to attach a wide variety
of functional groups to benzene, but we're going to conclude our discussion with these three examples
and as I continue through the remainder of the lecture I'll try to use these three for
demonstration purposes, but keep in mind that the huge range of modifications are possible.
So we've taken a look at what happens when we substitute just one hydrogen on a benzene ring,
like its nitration, and when we substitute all of its protons like we did using chlorine and
aluminum-3 chloride catalyst. In cases like these only one possible isomer of the intended product
exists, but we also took a look at picric acid which has some but not all of the hydrogens
around its aromatic ring substituted, and this presents a new consideration. The isomer that
I showed you in the slide has three nitrates at the two, four, and six positions, but why not this
isomer, right, two, three, four, or maybe this isomer, three, four, five. Now you can see the
issue that we're facing here. Once a substituent has been placed on the ring the remaining hydrogens
are no longer equivalent. We have two ortho, two meta, and one para positions around the ring.
So we must now ask ourselves if the second substitution will take place preferentially
at one of these positions, or will we get a statistical mixture of all three possibilities.
This consideration is well illustrated by Zeidler's successful DDT synthesis. I say successful in the
sense that he was able to modify two chlorobenzines only at their para positions. If his electrophilic
aromatic substitution methodology caused substitutions at random locations around the ring we would
expect that any given sample of chlorobenzine molecules should produce a mixture of products
which are 40% ortho, 40% meta, and only 20% para. Moreover, the chances of a second substitution
occurring at the para position are again 20%, leaving a paltry 4% of the final product in the
preferred configuration. Yet when Zeidler's synthesis is performed the desired regioisomer
is the major product that's obtained. So how did it come to be that chlorobenzine selectively
undergoes electrophilic substitution at its para position? We call this tendency for a reaction
to occur at one particular position among several similar positions, regiospecificity.
Functional groups attached to benzene rings alter not only the reactivity of the ring,
but the regiospecificity of subsequent additions as well. Now recall we noted earlier that there
are three different positions available to react in a substituted benzene ring, two ortho, two meta,
and one para. So based on this distribution one might expect that, for example,
brominating in nitrobenzene molecule would yield a mixture of products which is 40% ortho,
40% meta, and 20% para substituted. Yet when we conduct this reaction we find that this
distribution of products is rarely the case. In fact, we usually find a preponderance of one
product with just a small amount of the others. So how does this preference to substitute at a
particular location on the ring happen? Well the answer lies in the stability of the sigma complex
intermediates of all three reaction pathways. So let's start by analyzing the three possible
pathways for the electrophilic aromatic substitution of a chlorobenzene molecule.
Notice that when an electrophile finds itself at the meta position we see an intermediate form
in which re-resonance contributors can form, all of which look very similar to those in a simple
benzene ring undergoing substitution. However, when an electrophile attaches to the para position
or the ortho position of the ring something interesting happens. We can draw a fourth resonance
contributor and you may recall from our earlier discussions on resonance that more resonance
contributors means a more stable species. And we can rely on something called Hammond's Postulate
which tells us that a more stable intermediate and a rate limiting step leads to a faster reaction.
So plotting reaction coordinate diagrams for the three possible products of any electrophilic
substitution of chlorobenzene might look something like this. With the meta intermediate being similar
in energy to the substitution of benzene but the ortho and para intermediates being lower in energy
thus lowering the activation energies of the pathways for those two products.
So we have successfully demonstrated why the meta position of chlorobenzene is less reactive than
the ortho in the para positions. In fact, chlorine is part of a class of substituents which we call
ortho-paradirectors. However, we've not yet explained exactly why the para position is
substituted more than the ortho in this case. This requires that we look to our second consideration,
ring activation and deactivation.
See the second consideration here is that the already attached group may withdraw or
donate electron density to the ring. Reducing electron density within the ring makes it less
likely to attack. Since doing so would only increase the magnitude of the charge generated on the
intermediate. Conversely, donating additional electron density to the ring would be expected
to activate the ring and make it even more reactive. One of the traits which makes chlorine and
bromine so interesting in this reaction type is that they withdraw electrons from the ring
inductively. This means that the electronegativity of chlorine causes it to pull electrons out of
the ring through bonds like current through a wire. And unlike resonance which has the effect
of causing charges to jump every other atom, inductive effects attenuate with distance.
So this gives us an explanation for the strong preference for the para substitution over ortho.
The higher positive charge on the ortho atoms of chlorobenzene simply makes them less likely
to attack an electrophile and take on even more positive charge.
If we turn our attention to the synthesis of DDT one more time, we now understand how Zyla was able
to produce the specific isomer he wanted. The chlorine substituent on his starting material
directed the chloral substitution to the para position, ensuring that the proper structural
isomer was obtained. Not only that, but the newly attached chloral group quickly dehydrates under
acidic conditions to produce a new electrophile. This deactivates the already attached ring,
discouraging additional substitutions, while simultaneously encouraging a second chlorobenzene
to attack, leading to the product DDT. The final product of Zydler's synthesis can be
thought of as two disubstituted rings bearing deactivating substituents. So the desired product
forms in great abundance with very limited byproduct formation. So now that we understand
how substituents can affect the sites on which substituted benzenes are modified in electrophilic
aromatic substitutions, let's take a quick look at some common motifs and how they affect reactivity.
Activating ortho-para directors include groups such as the amine group of aniline,
the hydroxyl group of phenol, and the methoxy group of anisol.
Groups like these have the ability to donate electrons to the ring by resonance.
Deactivating ortho-para directors include halogens like fluorine, chlorine and bromine.
These groups direct by donating electrons in resonance, but deactivate because of the strong
dipole they create in the carbon halogen bond. Finally, we have deactivating metadirectors,
such as nitrates, carboxylic acids and aldehydes, which all draw electrons strongly by resonance.
Now notice that all of these groups contain a heteroatom two bonds away from the ring,
while all of our activators contain the heteroatom adjacent to the ring. That's not a coincidence.
Now the true utility and importance of directing effects on synthesis can be seen in this simple
illustration. The bromination of nitrobenzene produces mainly meta-bromonitrobenzene,
owing to the metadirecting nitro group. Yet the nitration of bromobenzene produces mainly
para-bromonitrobenzene, owing to the ortho-paradirecting bromogroup. So in this case, the order in
which I carry out my substitutions on the benzene has a direct effect on the product that I obtain.
Now let's consider the activating effects of substituents and how they can affect a synthetic
outcome as well. A one-to-one mixture of benzene and chlorine with a small amount of aluminum
chloride catalysts should produce a quantitative or complete conversion to chlorobenzene, owing
to the deactivating nature of the chloro groups. Since chlorobenzene itself is less reactive than
benzene, we don't expect much of the chlorinated product or rather we don't expect much of the
dichlorinated product to form. Yet a one-to-one mixture of benzene with ethyl chloride and
catalytic aluminum chloride produces a mixture of benzene, ethyl benzene, diethyl benzene isomers,
and even some triethylbenzene. Now the reason for this is that the alkyl groups are activating,
so as a small amount of ethyl benzene forms in the reaction mixture, its increased reactivity
means that its conversion to diethylbenzene will outpace alkylation of the remaining starting
material. In situations like this, we have to turn to some tricks to achieve a single alkylation.
For example, using a huge excess of benzene in order to dilute the electrophile to the point
at which two alkylations on a single molecule becomes very unlikely.
Today we have investigated the ability of electrophiles to substitute themselves for ring
hydrogens of benzene molecules. We've discussed how the resonance stabilization of the resulting
transition state makes it possible to entice a ring to give up its aromaticity, even if only for
an instant while the modification is occurring. We've looked at ways to generate electrophiles,
including acidification of substrates like nitric acid and chloral, as well as the use of a Lewis
acid catalyst like aluminum III chloride to activate halogens and alkyl halides.
And finally, we considered the effect of having a substituent already attached to the ring.
We saw how substituents like amine, hydroxyl, and methoxy groups, which donate electrons to the
ring, activate an ortho-paradirect. How substituents like aldehydes and nitrates,
which withdraw electrons from the ring by resonance, deactivate and metadirect.
And we also considered how the high electronegativity of halogens gives them the very unusual
property of deactivating while ortho-paradirecting. And of course, along the way, we considered how
all of these factors combined in a simple, highly efficient synthesis of a remarkably stable
molecule. A molecule with such powerful biological activity that it not only changed the world,
but ultimately the way that humans think about how we interact with the world.
Powerful chemistry indeed. Speaking of biological systems, in the next few lectures,
we're going to take our organic chemistry knowledge to the interface between chemistry
and biology. As we investigate the large, complex molecules of life, including carbohydrates,
nucleic acids, proteins, through the eyes of an organic chemist. I'll see you then.
