So, we've seen how Friedrich Voller's synthesis of urea, from non-biological starting materials
in 1828, toppled the long-standing dogma known as vitalism, which stated that only organisms
could produce the molecules of life.
Now, as the 1800s pressed on, other notable chemists advanced this idea by putting it
into practice.
Justice von Liebig demonstrated the role of abiological nitrogen in plant fertilization,
and he also extracted and manipulated carbohydrates under controlled laboratory conditions.
Miescher had isolated DNA from the nuclei of cells, and as a century drew to a close,
Alexander Butlerov and Hermann Emile Fischer both managed to synthesize carbohydrates and
other biologically relevant compounds in their laboratories, also without the help of living
organisms.
So, by the end of the 1800s, organic chemists were beginning to get a hold on exactly how
to produce, characterize, and even manipulate the chemicals of life abiologically.
One could argue that today we have successfully, if not yet completely, dissected life all
the way down to the molecular level.
We can take molecules out of living systems and use them in vitro.
We can synthesize compounds like carbohydrates, RNA, and DNA in labs, and insert them back
into living systems to show that they function exactly as one would predict for their biologically
synthesized equivalents.
But there remains one great burning question, which is unanswered to this day.
If all of these molecules of life are truly devoid of any vital essence, shouldn't we
be able to use those synthetic compounds not just to sustain or manipulate existing life,
but to create life itself?
Now, life on Earth must have originated by some accidental, abiological synthesis of
some of the compounds necessary to achieve life.
But what were those compounds, and how did they come to be with no living organism or
human scientist around to create them?
It's an intriguing question, and one which is difficult to answer considering that it
took place at least 2.7 billion years ago, and nobody was around to see it happen.
Was it DNA, RNA, maybe carbohydrates, or amino acids?
And whatever these seminal biomolecules were, how did they come together in a way which
allowed them to cross that critical barrier of simply existing to self-replication, allowing
them to reproduce, grow, and eventually evolve?
So scientists started on a new quest, not one to learn how biomolecules function, per
say, but rather how they came to be in the first place.
And two of these researchers were Harold Urie and Stanley Miller.
Miller was a student of Urie in the 1950s.
Now, already a Nobel laureate at the time, Urie had developed an interest in the origin
of life and had asked if it were possible for simple, vital organic compounds to form
under the reducing, stormy conditions of the Earth's early atmosphere.
Miller had just arrived at the University of Chicago as a graduate student and was slated
to work on a project aimed at understanding the synthesis of elements in the furnaces
of stars.
But Miller found himself inspired by Urie's interest in the origin of life and asked for
permission to try a different experiment.
Come to imitate the conditions of the primordial Earth and probe the resulting material for
signs of biologically relevant molecules.
Urie agreed, and Miller went straight to work, designing a system which simulated the early
Earth's atmosphere and closed conditions on a lab bench.
The conditions on the Earth some three billion years ago were very different from those today.
Balkanism was rampant, oxygen was scarce, and electrical storms were commonplace.
So to model this, Miller devised an apparatus which enclosed water, methane, ammonia and
hydrogen in a sealed vessel.
Now he allowed an electrical current to arc through that mixture for an extended period
of time as the water was boiled.
After running his apparatus for a week, Miller tapped the circulating solution and analyzed
it.
And sure enough, when he did, he found evidence of several amino acids.
Now Miller published the results in the prestigious journal Science in 1953 under the title, A
Production of Amino Acids Under Possible Primitive Earth Conditions.
And remarkably, the paper is published citing Miller as the lone author.
This was done at Urie's insistence lest he received the credit for Miller's ingenious
experiment.
So perhaps it was amino acids which were the very first biological molecules to participate
in life on Earth.
But if they were, these are some pretty small molecules, and life would need something larger,
more complex, to really generate diversity and get a foothold.
But amino acids are able to create these kinds of molecules by joining together into long
strands through a special linkage known as an amide bond.
During this lecture, we're going to talk about a class of materials which not only
make up 20% of the mass of your body, but which find use in medicine, materials, detergents
and many other functions.
Today we're going to talk about proteins, usually associated with skin, hair and muscle
fibers.
Proteins are really much more than that.
They also make up a class of catalysts which mediate every chemical reaction that your
body carries out.
But before we can develop an appreciation for these large, complex kings of catalysis,
we have to review their building blocks, amino acids.
Amino acids are so named because this class of compound always has two distinct functional
groups.
Amine and an organic acid, joined together by one or more carbons.
The simplest possible example is an amino acid in which the amine and acid groups are
joined by a single CH2 group, also called a methylene group.
When only one carbon separates the functional groups, we call these alpha amino acids.
You can imagine that extending the chain by one more methylene creates a beta amino acid
and yet another insertion creates a gamma amino acid and so on.
Of course, I've drawn these compounds as completely neutral species, but each contains
a carboxylic acid with a pKa of about 5 and an amine whose conjugate base has a pKa of
about 11.
So a more proper way to draw these compounds might be like this, with an intramolecular
proton transfer reaction creating two regions of charge.
We call these species zwitterions.
The charged regions of these species don't interact favorably with most low polarity
organic solvents, so they can make dissolution in organic solvents a painful process for
amino acids.
It's a good thing that you're made mostly of the very polar solvent water, so they
dissolve in you quite readily.
Although there are many other ways to connect an amine group and a carboxylic acid, in today's
lecture we will keep our attention squarely focused on alpha amino acids, because this
class of amino acids was chosen by nature as the basis for proteins, a very special
set of compounds which carry out the chemistry of life.
So getting back to our simple alpha amino acid.
We commonly call this little guy glycine, it's one of the first amino acids detected
by Stanley Miller.
Now notice that glycine has two hydrogens on the alpha carbon.
It's this position which is modified to create a short library of 20 alpha amino acid compounds
which are used to produce nearly all of the proteins and enzymes that drive the chemistry
of life.
When something other than a hydrogen is present in one of those two positions, we refer to
the group replacing that hydrogen as a side chain.
Now there is really no side, front, back, top or bottom to a molecule of course, but
when we align various amino acids for the purpose of comparison, we usually line the
amino acid portions of the molecules up and treat the side chain as a motif branching off
in the same direction, hence the name.
Even so, we know that these bonds can twist and rotate and do not necessarily exist locked
in the configurations that I'm going to show you.
Side chains can be broken down into several classes.
Okay, let's take a look at a few of these amino acids now.
We've already discussed a little bit about the simplest of all amino acids, which would
be glycine.
Glycine is unusual among the amino acids because it has two of the same groups attached to
its central carbon or its alpha carbon.
So in this case, glycine is unusual because it's really unmodified, but as we begin modifying
one of those groups, we start to create our library.
Adding a methyl group creates alanine, another one of the amino acids, which was detected
by Stanley Miller.
If I continue to increase the complexity of that side chain, I can create valine, leucine
and isoleucine.
As you can see here, I've highlighted all of their side chains by sort of a grayish glow.
The reason I've grouped these five together is that their side chains are hydrophobic.
In other words, they're all made strictly of carbon and hydrogen, and so they behave as
though they were very low polarity arms on the molecule.
But that's only true for these five.
Let's take a look at some others.
Aspartic acid and glutamic acid are acidic side chains, meaning that in most physiological
environments, you actually see them as their conjugate bases, so they have a tendency to
carry negative charges.
Asparagine and glutamine are two amino acids which have amide functional groups at the
ends of their chains, so these are specialists at hydrogen bonding to other side chains and
other molecules.
The amino acids lysine, histidine and arginine all contain slightly basic amine groups, or
in this case, histidine has a cyclic side chain.
Nonetheless, it has a nitrogen which is basic, and so all three of these can become fairly
easily protonated and therefore carry a positive charge.
So these are the basic side chains of the amino acid library.
Moving on, we have serine, threonine, cysteine and methionine, all of which contain either
an OH, an SH group known as a thiol, or a group known as a thioether, where the sulfur is
contained in between two carbons.
The reason I placed all of these together is that they all contain fairly good nucleophiles.
So these four are particularly good at creating covalent bonds between other molecules and
their own side chains.
Moving on, we have aromatic side chains as well, in the form of phenylalanine, tyrosine
and tryptophen.
All of these amino acids contain large conjugated or more accurately aromatic pi systems, which
can be used to create all sorts of different interactions that you wouldn't get otherwise
using, say, hydrophobics or any other amino acid for that matter.
And finally, we have proline, which stands alone among amino acids because of a very
special feature.
Proline's side chain actually wraps around and bonds back to the nitrogen of the amino
acid.
So proline is unusual in the sense that its side chain is locked in a cyclic conformation
rather than being free to move attached to an sp3 carbon.
So proline is going to have some very special roles in biochemistry.
But we're still not done characterizing these amino acids.
Now you probably noticed that all but glycine contained a chiral center at the alpha carbon,
meaning that there are two possible enantiomers of each compound.
Now what's remarkable is that all 19 amino acids with a chiral alpha carbon take on the
same stereochemistry in living systems.
So only one enantiomer of each amino acid is useful biologically.
The reason for this is twofold.
First, chiral RNA is responsible for sequestering and using these amino acids to build proteins.
So, only one handed form interacts properly with the ribosomal RNA.
The other reason is that many amino acids are manufactured from one another in the body.
In fact, only 8 of the 20 that I just showed you are absolutely essential in your diet.
All the others can be made in your body from other starting materials, sometimes by chemically
modifying some of the eight essential amino acids.
So why was Miller's discovery so sensational?
What is it about amino acids which make their presence in his primordial concoction so newsworthy?
Well, now that we have a firm grasp on the structure of amino acids, let's consider
what happens when we start putting them together via a series of condensation reactions which
form chains of amide bonds.
We call these polyamides peptides or proteins, and the distinction between the two is one
of size, with the former generally referring to polymers of less than a hundred condensed
amino acids and the latter encompassing larger molecules.
So let's begin with just glycine.
If I could condense two glycine amino acids together in an end-to-end relationship, I
would find that I have created a very short chain, consisting of two glycines, minus a
water molecule of course.
Now I can continue the process condensing another to make a triglycine, then another,
and so on for as long as I like.
The result will be a chain of glycine residues, and we call them residues instead of amino
acids since they've lost one equivalent of water when they are placed into the chain.
Polymers like to arrange their polyamides so that the nitrogen-containing terminus is
at the left, and the sequence can be read like a sentence from left to right, from end
terminus to C terminus.
Now our polyglycine peptide is pretty boring as peptides go, but remember that nature has
provided us with 19 more options for each position in that peptide.
It's this variety which leads to the stunning complexity in the possible number of sequences
for peptides.
Let's consider a protein of 100 residues, fairly short by biological standards.
This sequence has 100 positions, with 20 possibilities in each position, for 20 to the 100th power
number of possibilities.
That's roughly 10 to the 130th power, far more possibilities than there are atoms in
the known universe.
So clearly, variety is not a problem when it comes to proteins and peptides.
Now we call each unique sequence of condensed amino acids a primary structure, but the rabbit
hole goes much, much deeper than that.
You see, when amino acids condense to form an amide bond, the amine nitrogen from one
residue and the carbonyl from the preceding residue participate in a resonance which locks
a plane defined by the N, H, C, and O of the amide bond.
We call this small collection of atoms the amide plane.
But that leaves the alpha-carbon bonds free to rotate, and this gives proteins a tendency
to twist and collapse on themselves in very specific arrangements which maximize intramolecular
attractions created by backbone atoms and those side chains as well.
We call this process protein folding.
Now not only do alpha-carbon backbone bonds and side chain bonds rotate, but they tend
to do so in ways which form just a few specific geometries called secondary structures.
These structures include many different versions of essentially three basic motifs, helices,
strands, and turns.
So let's take a look at the most common versions of each of these now.
Let's start with a short polyalanine molecule.
Now polyalanine tends to form a secondary structure known as an alpha helix.
Now in this example I've created an idealized helix which is perfect in all angles and interactions.
The alpha helix is characterized by a helical pitch of 3.6 residues, meaning that one full
turn is completed for every 3.6 residues I move along the chain.
What this pitch accomplishes is to bring the amide NH of one residue into proper alignment
to hydrogen bond with the carbonyl four residues down the chain.
We can see the alpha helices in the structure of myoglobin for example.
If we include all of the atoms in a molecule of myoglobin, it's very difficult to see.
But if instead we remove the side chains while leaving their effects on the structure in
place, we can begin to see repeating turns of quite a few helices in the protein.
But biochemists like to make things even prettier than organic chemists, so they like to show
colorful 3D ribbons to map out the backbone of a peptide or protein, making it look more
like this.
Now the secondary structural elements of this protein are unmistakable and they're beautiful.
Another common structure is the beta strand in which a peptide chain is fully extended.
Now causing a chain to take on an extended geometry like this might seem a bit implausible
at first because the driving force for the substructure only becomes clear when we align
two or more of them anti-parallel to one another.
This creates a network of NH to carbonyl hydrogen bonds in between two strands and the resulting
network is referred to as a beta sheet.
And this appears in many well characterized proteins as well.
A third type of motif, and incidentally one which is all but essential to make a beta sheet,
is the turn.
There are many potential angles which can accomplish turns in proteins and certain amino acid residues
seem better suited to inducing them.
Among others, glycine and proline are very common turn residues, but for very different
reasons.
Glycine because the lack of a side chain allows it a greater range of angles.
And proline because the cyclic nature of its chain restricts it to just a few angles which
are consistent with turns.
So it has the tendency to disrupt other patterns in chains and sheets allowing turns to begin.
But the structural complexity doesn't even end there.
Notice that each element of secondary structure in our protein packs against other secondary
structures in that protein.
And the interactions between the faces of these two structural elements is a stabilizing
factor as well and brings different portions of the sequence into proper proximity and
orientation for proper function.
We call the arrangement of secondary structural elements in space relative to one another
a protein's tertiary structure.
Now additionally, entire proteins can act as subunits of a single large complex such
as this, a voltage gated potassium ion channel characterized by Rod McKinnon in 1998.
This conduit is designed to span the cell membrane and create a channel through which
ions can flow, but it only functions when all four of its subunits are mated together
creating a superstructure which forms a tunnel traversing the membrane of the cell.
And this tunnel is lined with oxygen atoms of MI bonds from the protein's backbone.
This creates a negatively charged conduit which is exactly the width of a potassium
ion.
And these very specific primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures combine
to form a molecular device with powerful selectivity for potassium ion transport.
So all of these higher order elements of structure, quaternary, tertiary and secondary, are in
theory dictated simply by the sequence or the primary structure of a protein.
If we simply construct an unfolded protein for nearly any naturally occurring enzyme,
we often find that protein will most likely fold right back into its functional form,
usually with startling speed.
In rare instances however, the functional form of the protein is actually not the most
stable fold.
Proteins can become misfolded and trapped in an arrangement which will not allow them
to fold properly.
Now ordinarily it wouldn't be too alarming if a single protein in your body were to misfold.
After all, you have millions and millions more to help get the job done.
But it does get disconcerting when one misfolded protein encourages the misfolding of others,
producing plaques of proteins which potentially can have devastating health effects.
And this situation most notably happens when amyloid plaque builds in the brain of an Alzheimer's
disease victim.
Ok, so we clearly can benefit from understanding how protein sequence affects protein folding.
The next order of business is to figure out how to make samples for study.
Of course, biologically synthesized proteins can be produced using complex RNA machinery
within cells, but what do chemists do when they want to make highly purified peptides
and proteins in the laboratory for study?
Several techniques are available, including the use of special strains of E. coli bacteria
as manufacturing plants for proteins, as we saw in the manufacture of human insulin.
We saw in our DNA lecture how that genome of that very special, already genetically
modified E. coli was altered to encourage the bacteria to produce massive quantities
of that one desired protein.
Now this technique is startlingly effective when large proteins containing naturally
occurring amino acids are the target.
But this isn't a microbiology course, it's a chemistry course.
So there's a method for synthesizing even peptides and proteins with exotic side chains
and very interesting organic chemistry, absolutely.
And its developer, Bruce Merrifield, won the 1984 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his development
called Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis, sometimes also called the Merrifield Synthesis.
Merrifield's technique starts with an insoluble polymer resin, to which is attached a single
amino acid.
The connection to the resin is made through the C-terminus and the N-terminus is available
for reaction.
Now Merrifield then turned to a classic technique for making amide bonds, called an active ester
coupling.
By mixing amino acids with a special reagent, which turns them into very electrophilic esters,
the exposed amine of the growing chain can be enticed to attack the carbonyl of an amino
acid in solution.
Of course, this is a problem when the amino acids in solution have amine groups of their
own.
If unchecked, the growing peptides will extend in an uncontrolled fashion.
So Merrifield applied a special protecting group to the N-terminus of the amino acids
prior to reacting them with the growing peptide on the resin.
Now Merrifield used a group called a T-butoxy carbonyl motif.
When attached to an amide, this N-terminal protecting group prevents more than one amino
acid from attaching to any given growing peptide in a single reaction step.
The excess reagent could then be washed away from the resin, and the N-terminal protecting
groups removed from the on-resin peptide before introducing the next coupling reagent.
In this way, Merrifield was able to produce peptides in sufficient yield and purity to
be used in lab experimentation.
So let's review what we've covered.
We've discussed amino acids, most extensively alpha amino acids.
We looked at the structural features which define them, and we identified the side chains
of the 20 amino acids which are necessary to maintain life.
We talked about the Miller experiment, and how it can be used to create amino acids,
a biologically, though at best it can produce racemic mixtures or achiral amino acids.
We also covered how amino acids can be condensed together into chains of varying length joined
by amide bonds.
We defined the amide plane and the backbone dihedral angles, phi and psi, associated with
rotation of the carbon-carbon bond at the alpha carbon.
We looked at how different phi and psi angles produce backbones leading to different secondary
structures.
Specifically, we looked at alpha helices and beta sheets and the network of hydrogen bonds
which hold them together.
We also talked about turns and how proline and glycine tend to concentrate themselves
in those areas.
We talked about tertiary and quaternary structures in proteins as well, and we looked at very
large complexes consisting of multiple protein subunits, like the one characterized by Rod
McKinnon.
Finally, we addressed the issue of creating proteins in the lab, so that we can continue
to study the structure and interaction of these compounds on a lab bench, with the hope
that we can someday relate what we have learned to how they behave in organisms.
So we finished our quick three lecture survey of large biological molecules, most of which
can simply be thought of as very large organic compounds, consisting mostly of the same elements
as the smaller molecules making up those classic small molecules of our science.
The time has come for us to consider some new additions to organic chemistry, metals.
In our next lecture, we'll move slightly away from organic chemistry's interface with
molecular biology, and focus more on its connections with the chemistry of metals.
We'll tackle this special class of compounds called organometallics next time, and I'll
see you then.
