In the latter part of the 1830s, a desperate businessman by the name of Charles Goodyear
was near the end of his rope.
Having already failed in the hardware business in Philadelphia, he had turned his attention
to a newly available material from Brazil called rubber.
Like many other entrepreneurs at his time, Goodyear believed that this pliable, moldable
substance had enormous potential to be put to work in a number of potentially profitable
applications.
But there were some problems.
Despite its usefulness in waterproofing applications, rubber itself was very soft, pliable, and
tended to deform plastically, meaning that once pulled or otherwise misshapen, it retained
the new shape.
Now Goodyear had worked with natural rubber for about a half a decade, seeking out ways
to strengthen it so that it could be used to produce objects which could be molded into
a desired shape, but would then retain that shape across a great range of conditions.
As seems to usually be the case with great discoveries, Goodyear's breakthrough was reached
quite by accident.
There are several variations of the story, but the most inspirational is this.
Being nearly bankrupt, Goodyear had attempted to remove paint from one of his rubber samples
for reuse.
To do this, he tried using nitric acid.
He noticed that after removing the paint with nitric acid, the properties of his rubber
sample had changed.
He realized then that treatment with various other materials might alter the structure
of rubber or even become incorporated into it, changing its properties for the better.
Now Goodyear wasn't much of a chemist, so he had to rely on blind trial and error to
concoct his modified rubber materials.
Being readily available and inexpensive, one of the modifiers he tried was elemental sulfur.
Now as the story goes, Goodyear walked into the general store in the town of Woburn, Massachusetts,
where he was then living.
It was then that he accidentally dropped a sample of his latest sulfur-treated rubber
concoction onto a pot-bellied stove.
In the ensuing charred mess, he noticed that some of that material's properties had changed.
Goodyear later worked out a more controlled process for producing the material he had
first observed in the aftermath of his accident.
And he finally settled on a method for production by steam-heating a mixture of natural rubber
with sulfur.
His new material was first used by his brother-in-law to induce the then sought-after ruffles in
the fabrics of men's shirts.
Now it turns out that Goodyear wasn't only limited in his chemistry skills.
He didn't fare too well in the world of business either.
Goodyear managed to obtain an American patent for his new material, but he failed to seize
the same opportunity in the British market.
It was an English entrepreneur and a competitor of Goodyear's by the name of Thomas Hancock,
who reverse engineered his invention from one of Goodyear's own samples and obtained
the British patent.
Shortly thereafter, one of Hancock's associates coined the term Vulcanized Rubber, naming the
material for the Roman god of fire.
Perhaps some would say that Hermes, Roman god of thieves, would have been a better namesake.
So Vulcanized Rubber became not just a world-changing material from which many durable rubber products
could be made, but also one of the first artificially modified polymers in human history.
Polymers are defined as a very large set of molecules consisting of repeating units known
as monomers.
We've already looked at some biologically relevant polymers, including DNA, RNA, proteins
and starches.
But Goodyear's invention is noteworthy because it may have represented the first semi-synthetic
polymer created by man.
But it wasn't long after that that German apothecary by the name of Edward Simon managed
to create a substance with similar properties, not by modifying an existing natural polymer,
but from individual molecules of styrene he treated to induce polymerization.
By no fault of his own, Simon lacked the insight to fully understand what he had just done.
He only knew that heating styrene led to a material with properties very similar to
rubber.
This observation went largely unnoticed.
To those who did notice, the simplest explanation was that he had created a conglomerate of
small molecules held together in aggregates by intermolecular forces.
After all, the creation of a covalent molecule with thousands upon thousands of atoms was
not a reasonable explanation.
That could never happen, right?
It was nearly a century later that Simon's countryman, Hermann Staudinger, finally elucidated
the structure of Simon's creation.
It took some outside-of-the-box thinking to finally understand Simon's material.
Staudinger finally postulated publicly that the heated styrene molecules had reacted with
themselves to create immense molecules of great size.
Staudinger's initial efforts to reach this idea, or to research this idea, were met with
remarkable skepticism.
He found it difficult to secure the support of his colleagues, who all believed rubbers
were aggregates of small molecules stuck together by some messy non-covalent force.
Even the eminent Hermann M. L. Fisher went on record against Staudinger's theories.
Staudinger stood fast, and it's a good thing that he did.
His theory proved true.
And having fought the good fight to prove it, he received his Nobel Prize in 1953.
Ultimately, it was realized that styrene molecules had been joined together through their vinyl
groups, creating carbon chains with hundreds or even thousands of atoms.
With the benefit of 100 years of additional insight and his willingness to continue supporting
his theory in the face of substantial opposition, Staudinger's theory of polymers, which he
referred to as macromolecules, ultimately had proven true.
Since the days of Staudinger's work, a tremendous amount of attention has been poured into understanding,
designing and creating useful polymers.
From the tires on your car, to the man-made fibers in some clothing, to medical equipment,
body armor, food packaging, and even more, the importance of synthetic polymers to our
modern lifestyles simply cannot be overstated.
So in this lecture, we're going to take a short survey of polymer chemistry, how polymers
are designed, how they're made, and a few ways in which they've changed the world.
Synthetic polymers are classified in more than one way, but a typical method is to distinguish
them based upon how they're prepared.
From this perspective, most polymers fall into one of two general classes.
Addition polymers, also called chain growth polymers, or condensation polymers, sometimes
called step growth polymers.
So let's take a look at each of those classes one at a time.
The first class of polymers based upon their synthesis are addition polymers, also called
chain growth.
Any polymer will be constructed from a set of small molecules known as monomers.
I've represented my monomers here as simply these red objects that are going to do the
chemistry that we would expect of a molecule, which is very small, but is a monomer.
To this, we're going to add another type of molecule called an initiator.
That's because in the case of addition polymers, my individual monomers are not reactive in
and of themselves.
But in the presence of an initiator, my monomer can react.
And only when attached to the chain will that new monomer become reactive again, sequestering
more and more of the monomer to the chain.
In short, addition polymers grow from one end to the other in a fashion much like this.
So their sizes are very predictable and very easy to manipulate.
A classic example of an addition polymer are those formed from alkene subunits.
Using less stable pi bonds or the new sigma bonds which link them together.
The first entirely synthetic polymer, polystyrene, falls into this class of compounds.
The process of creating addition polymers consists of three phases, the initiation,
the propagation, and the termination.
In the case of polystyrene, polymerization reaction can be initiated when a sample of
styrene is heated in the presence of just a small amount of benzoil peroxide.
Now the heat causes the benzoil peroxide to dissociate into two phenyl radicals, a process
encouraged by the loss of carbon dioxide gas.
In the second step, propagation.
As each monomer encounters the reactive radical at the end of a chain, a new sigma bond is
formed homogenically, meaning one electron from each side.
This regenerates the radical at the end of the lengthening chain and perpetuates the
reaction.
In the case of polystyrene, this process repeats itself several thousand times before the third
phase, termination takes place.
In termination, either two growing radicals react with one another or something of that
like forming one last sigma bond which will ultimately consume the radicals without generating
a new one.
Addition polymers are very attractive targets for commercial materials because their properties
can be turned or tuned by controlling the overall size of the macromolecules produced
in the chain growth reaction.
For example, the size of the polystyrene polymer molecules can be controlled simply by altering
the relative amount of benzoyl peroxide initiator which is added.
Relatively fewer benzoyl peroxide molecules means fewer growing chains.
And because growth can only take place at the end of an initiated chain, one expects
to obtain longer polymers in this kind of scenario.
Additionally, fewer growing chains means less likelihood that two growing chains will encounter
one another in a termination step.
Some other examples of addition polymers include polyethylene used in plastic bottles,
formed by the addition of ethene monomers to one another.
Polyvinyl chloride, or PVC, most well known as a substitute for metal plumbing pipes,
is assembled in a similar reaction using vinyl chloride monomers.
Even the once popular cookware coating Teflon is formed by polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene.
Now let's take a look at the second class of polymers, condensation polymers, also sometimes
called step growth polymers.
This has become a very popular class of polymers because they're relatively easy to make.
Condensation polymers form, again through conjoining more than one, obviously, monomers, right?
We want long chains, so we need lots and lots of monomers.
But in the case of condensation polymers, each monomer itself is reactive without any
initiator necessary.
So in the case of condensation polymers, rather than having an initiator dictate when and
where my monomers can join together, my monomers can really join together anywhere at any time.
So in this case I have a growing set of ever larger and larger polymers forming as my monomers
become dimers, which can condense with other monomers or dimers, and so on and so on.
But you'll notice that in this process, I get a wide variety of lengths in my polymers
as they grow.
So although condensation polymers are very easy to make, they are very difficult to
control from a polymer length standpoint.
Now generally, condensation polymers differ from addition polymers in that their growth
is not driven by trading of pi bonds for sigma bonds, but by the formation of small molecule
byproducts like water or hydrochloric acid.
A perfect example of this is the formation of nylon 6, in which molecules of 6-aminohexanoic
acid are joined together in a reaction which produces not only an amide union between monomers,
but also a molecule of water as a byproduct.
Now so far in this lecture, I've shown examples of polymerization reactions in which only
one type of monomer is used, leading to very simple repeating structures of that monomer.
Now make no mistake, polymers like polystyrene, PVC and nylon 6 are extremely valuable and
useful materials, but we can significantly increase the complexity and therefore the
tunability of polymers if we use more than one monomer in the process.
When we use more than one monomer to create a polymer, we call the class of compounds
created copolymers.
So the examples I'm going to show here are using only two different monomers, but we
could just as easily have three or four or any number of different monomers.
Now copolymers can be constructed using either one of our two major mechanisms for building
a polymer, so they're not necessarily chain growth or step growth polymers.
But what is true is that when I have a collection of monomers like this one where I have indicated
one monomer in red and one monomer in blue, they can combine in several different geometric
relationships, each of which can lead to a polymer with different properties.
Possibly the simplest example of this is what we would call an alternating copolymer,
in which each monomer is spaced with two of the other monomers around it, so red, blue,
red, blue, red, blue all the way across.
The second arrangement would be what we would call a random copolymer, in which the order
of each monomer within the overall chain is completely statistically random.
A third potential arrangement is what we call a block copolymer.
In a block copolymer, long stretches of a certain type of monomer exist, which are then
punctuated by long stretches of the other monomer or monomers within the copolymer.
And as one last example of a type of structure that copolymers can form, we have something
called a graft copolymer, in which one of the monomers serves to form the backbone while
the other decorates that backbone by branching away from it.
So an alternating polymer that we're familiar with is produced when vinyl chloride and vinylidine
chloride react in a radical chain growth polymerization.
In this reaction, monomers add in an alternating order, with vinyl chloride monomers reacting
at initiated vinylidine termini and vinylidine chloride monomers reacting at initiated vinyl
chloride termini.
The result is an alternating polymer called saran.
This is the polymer used to make the very popular food wrap which bears its name.
Isn't that remarkable?
Just one additional chlorine atom on every other monomer unit, and we go from PVC, which
is used in plumbing, to saran wrap, which is very flexible and is used as a food wrap.
But alternating polymers can just as easily be produced using condensation polymerizations.
One example of this is the polymer nylon 6-6, not to be confused with nylon 6.
Nylon 6-6 is prepared using equal parts of adipic acid and 1-6 hexane diamine.
By producing nylon in this way, the orientation of alternating amide bonds is reversed from
those in nylon 6.
In fact, it would be more accurate to say that the amide bonds in nylon 6 are reversed,
since nylon 6-6 was actually the first of these to be prepared and patented by DuPont
in 1935.
The development of the homopolymer nylon 6 by BASF was an attempt to produce a material
with similar properties, which didn't infringe on DuPont's intellectual property.
In fact, both of these polymers were a huge success and are still used today as the backbone
for some of the most modern materials produced by both companies.
Random copolymers are produced by mixing monomers, but unlike alternating copolymers, growing
random copolymers can incorporate any of the monomers in any order, leading to a statistically
random distribution of monomers in the molecule.
An example of a random copolymer is polybutyrate, which is a polyester compound, built from
two distinct subunits.
The distinction here is that these subunits are randomly oriented throughout each polymer
strand.
But what's really special about polybutyrate isn't how it's made, but the fact that its
ester bonds make it fully biodegradable.
Plastic bags and wraps produced from this flexible, random copolymer are completely deconstructed
by moisture and microbes in the ground, making it a popular choice for disposable items of
this kind.
One of the more exciting advances in more recent decades has been the development of
block copolymers, which aim to exploit the best properties of more than one polymer by
linking together large regions of each, which we call domains.
For example, the block copolymer SBS is used in many modern applications, including tires
and running shoe soles.
SBS stands for polystyrene butadiene styrene.
So in a single molecule of this block copolymer, a domain of polybutadiene is sandwiched in
between two polystyrene domains.
The polystyrene blocks give this polymer great toughness, while the polybutadiene domain
becomes softer under high temperature conditions, allowing the material to be more easily moldable
like softer rubbers.
The result is a material which behaves more like a plastic at high temperature, but more
like vulcanized rubber when cooler, a perfect recipe for manufacturing tires.
I think Mr. Goodyear would be proud.
Our fourth class, graft copolymers, are characterized by a uniform backbone polymer which is decorated
by strands of a different polymer attached covalently along its length.
In many cases, graft copolymers can be designed to have certain properties of both polymers
which make it up.
For example, long polysaccharides like cellulose onto which other polymers are grafted.
This has the effect of producing a very large molecule with the properties of those smaller
grafted polymers, but retaining the biodegradability of the cellulose backbone.
And while we're back on the subject, Mr. Goodyear, let's take a look back at his creation,
knowing what we do now about polymers.
Natural rubber is a somewhat complex mixture created by trees to defend themselves from
wood-eating insects.
It has quite a few minor components, but the big player in its chemical properties is this.
A polyisoprene macromolecule made on long, unsaturated hydrocarbons, making it very thick
and insoluble in water.
Now, the problem in Goodyear's days is that these polyisoprene macromolecules are only
held together by intermolecular dispersion forces stemming from their electron clouds.
So let's look at this.
These forces are enough to make the molecule viscous, but they can be overcome.
So when I pull on my natural rubber molecules, they can slide back and forth on one another.
Now, what Goodyear had accomplished by the addition of sulfur was to cross-link the
polymer molecules with covalent bonds to sulfur.
So let me pull that polymer back together here.
So some of these pi bonds within the rubber were replaced by a sulfur bridge.
So we'll put in a few sulfur bridges.
And now let's pull on that polymer again and see if it deforms.
I can deform the polymer, but as soon as I release it, it snaps back into place.
This is because of the bridging sulfurs.
So the presence of these cross-links is what gives vulcanized rubber its toughness and
ability to retain its shape, exactly what you would hope for in a product like an automobile
tire.
But also, unfortunately, makes the material very difficult to deconstruct, meaning that
vulcanized rubbers are very difficult to recycle.
Now this is the reason that tire yards exist.
For many decades, non-biodegradable, non-recyclable vulcanized rubber tires were simply piled
up in huge tire yards with no obvious fate.
Today we do our best to reuse vulcanized rubber by cutting or chipping it into smaller pieces
for use in paving projects and other applications.
But melting and reforming vulcanized rubber is simply not possible.
So truly recycling a tire by making it into another tire is not a viable strategy.
Yet another common polymer motif is polycarbonates.
These polymers are found in materials as tough and rigid as bulletproof glass and as soft
and supple as commercial water bottles.
Both of these products are made from the condensation of carbonic acid with bisphenol
A to form an alternating copolymer.
Recently, concern has arisen over the possibility that these polymers can hydrolyze back into
their starting materials over time, leaching bisphenol A into the water or beverage that
they contain.
The reason for so much concern is mounting evidence that bisphenol A imitates estradiol
in the body, potentially causing developmental or reproductive problems in those who are
exposed to it.
Some studies suggest that BPA is less than one-ten-thousandth as powerful of a hormone
as estradiol is, suggesting that this whole controversy may be overblown.
Still, we simply don't know what the long-term effects of exposure to low levels of BPA might
do.
No one is sure exactly what the risks are, but one thing is undeniable.
Many people are sufficiently wary of BPA that they are willing to purchase products
labeled BPA-free without giving much thought to what's actually in the product.
The polymers industry has responded to these concerns by offering BPA-free plastics with
a great deal of fanfare.
Sounds great, doesn't it?
What they don't tell you is that most of these products are still polycarbonates, which
are simply made using molecules like bisphenol S or bisphenol F in place of bisphenol A in
an analogous reaction.
If there is concern over a molecule like bisphenol A imitating estradiol, something tells me
it's only a matter of time until bisphenol S, F, and others come under similar scrutiny,
putting us right back where we were before.
One last hot button plastics issue that you may have heard of is the use of compounds
called phthalates.
Phthalic acid is a small organic diacid, which looks like this.
It's easily esterified with a number of aliphatic alcohols to produce small molecules called
phthalates.
Phthalates, like this diputyl phthalate, are sometimes added to polyvinyl chloride to soften
the plastic enough to make it useful over a wider range of applications.
Plasticizers work by disrupting the packing of polymer chains, in this case in the PVC,
thereby softening it.
That new car smell that so much of us enjoy is caused by these plasticizers escaping the
newly prepared plastics into the air.
It's worth mentioning that polyethylene tetrothalate, commonly called P-E-T-E, is used in food packaging
and does not contain isolated phthalate molecules at all.
The phthalate portion of P-E-T-E's name refers to the monomer which is condensed in the prepared
polymer.
So in this case, the phthalate is locked securely in the matrix of this non-biodegradable plastic
where it can't easily be released.
So P-E-T-E doesn't release phthalates into the environment, even though phthalate is
in its name, and PVC very often does release phthalates, even though the term phthalate
is nowhere to be found in its name.
So in this lecture, we graze the surface of nearly 200 years of synthetic polymer chemistry.
Starting with the accidental vulcanization of rubber by Charles Goodyear during a clumsy
moment in 1830s Massachusetts.
We talked about the two major classes of polymerization reactions, addition and condensation, also
called chain growth polymerization and step growth polymerization respectively.
We saw how chain growth usually involves the reaction of alkene subunits with an activated
growing polymer chain until termination takes place.
Specifically we took a look at radical polymerization which is initiated by the dissociation of
a small bit of benzoyl peroxide to initiate chain growth.
By contrast, condensation polymers tend to proceed with the formation of small molecules
as monomers, dimers, trimmers, tetramers, and more, and condense with one another forming
ever larger chains until the reagents are exhausted.
We then took a different view on polymers, classifying them not based upon the reaction
which makes them, but the morphology of the polymer chains themselves, including homopolymers
and the many layers of complexity added when copolymers come into play.
We saw the alternating copolymer saran and the random copolymer polybutyrate, both of
which blend monomers closely together, usually forming a polymer with totally new properties.
Then we considered how graft copolymers and block copolymers can preserve certain properties
of each homopolymer from which they are derived, helping chemists to design polymers perfectly
suited to an intended application.
Finally, we looked at a few recent concerns regarding popular polymers, including the
estrogen-emulating bisphenol compounds used in polycarbonates and the use of plasticizers
like phthalates.
Of course, what we saw in this lecture is just a small slice of polymer chemistry, a field
made incredibly diverse by not only the vast library of monomers and linking motifs, but
by the sheer titanic size of the molecules involved.
So macromolecules bring us to a fitting end to our survey of organic compounds in their
reactions.
In our next few lessons, we're going to focus not on how new compounds are made and put to
use, but on how they are identified.
Organic chemists use a very special set of techniques to be their eyes as they navigate
the long and sometimes complex road to an effective synthesis, and no organic chemistry
course is complete without it.
We'll begin to develop an understanding of the techniques that have been used to verify
so much of the information that I've already given you.
From identifying specific functional groups, to discerning regioisomers and enantiomers
of small molecules, to determining full protein structures, spectroscopy is the tool that lets
us observe the fruits of our labor in the lab.
It's an exciting science in its own right, and it will be the topic of our next few lectures.
And I'll see you for those soon.
