Over our last few lectures, we've considered some of the techniques that organic chemists
use to characterize organic compounds in their structures.
Specifically, we've looked at UV-visible spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, polarimetry, and continuous
wave NMR spectroscopy.
Now all of these techniques were developed in the late 1800s and early 1900s and have
no doubt contributed significantly to developing the basis for our understanding of organic
chemistry.
But in many cases, most notably the case of NMR, these techniques are not locked in time.
They've been relentlessly expanded, improved upon, and even supplemented with newer techniques
for identifications, just a few of which we're going to explore today.
Now last time we explored the technique pioneered by Isidore Rebe and his contemporaries in the
middle of the 20th century.
Specifically we discussed the phenomenon of resonance and how factors like shielding
and magnetic coupling can all affect the resonance behavior of specific protons within a sample.
Today we will apply all of these principles and more as we investigate modern NMR spectrometers,
which cannot only collect these spectra faster and more precisely, but are fundamentally
different in the way which they do so.
Several advances in technology have led to the development of what's called the pulsed
NMR technique.
First and foremost is the development of superconductors.
See all modern high-field spectrometers use a superconducting magnet to generate an extremely
high applied field, which helps us to achieve better resolution in the spectrum.
Keeping these superconducting magnets cold is critical to their function, so spectrometers
contain a series of concentric vacuum-walled compartments called duers.
There's an exterior duer filled with liquid nitrogen and an interior duer containing liquid
helium and the superconducting magnet itself.
The liquid helium keeps the magnet itself at four kelvins, that's colder than the dark
side of the moon.
Meanwhile, just inches away from it is the organic sample at room temperature.
The second advancement which opened the door to the pulsed NMR method is computer technology.
The detector in NMR is more often called a receiver, because the response it creates
is not a spectrum, but rather a raw data set which has to be manipulated by a computer
before it can be used.
So these two technologies, the superconducting material development and computing power advancement,
have allowed us to use this very effective technique to do so much more with NMR than
could ever have been done in rabies day.
As we try to explain the pulsed NMR method, we're going to rely on all the knowledge that
we've gained in the previous lecture.
That in the presence of a magnetic field, protons align their dipoles in the parallel
alpha spin state or the anti-parallel beta spin state, and that the populations of these
two states is governed by the Zeeman splitting.
Zeeman splitting is the energy difference between the alpha and beta states and can
be calculated using the field strength at the nucleus and the gyromagnetic ratio.
But to really understand pulsed NMR will require us to acknowledge two additional principles.
First, when an individual atomic dipole aligns itself with external magnetic field lines,
the two are not actually perfectly parallel.
You see the dipole processes about the applied field, much like this gyroscope, which I'm
about to wind up so that we can see this for ourselves.
So you can clearly see what's going on here.
Let me quiet it down a bit for you so we can discuss.
So the axis of that gyroscope was processing about the axis of the Earth's gravitational
field, which is oriented straight up and down.
Now just as that gyroscope would process, say, slower in the reduced gravity of the
moon but faster in the higher gravity of Jupiter, so will the magnetic dipole of a nucleus
process slower in a weaker field and faster in a stronger one.
The frequency of this procession is known as the Larmore frequency, which is exactly
the same as the resonance frequency for a given nucleus.
So we can calculate the Larmore frequency for a given proton using the same equation
relating it to the gyromagnetic ratio and effective field.
Our second consideration.
In a large collection of similar nuclei, the vector sum of all dipoles within the system
will in fact be aligned with the applied field because of the dispersion of the rotating dipoles
and the slight excess of the alpha spin state in the group.
And it's the net magnetization, which is the source of the pulsed NMR signal.
So let's set the stage for our first pulsed NMR experiment.
First we need to get our bearings.
So let's define a coordinate system such that three axes, x, y, and z, are present.
The z-axis will be aligned with the applied magnetic field lines and therefore also with
the net magnetization of the sample.
Now what makes pulsed NMR so fundamentally different from the continuous wave experiment
is this.
There's no continuous wave.
There is simply the magnetization generated by the protons within the sample.
So they rely on a hard pulse of radio energy containing a very broad range of frequencies.
This type of pulse electromagnetically pushes the net magnetization downward into the x,
y plane.
Now in my example, I've placed the magnetization along the x-axis.
But just as soon as that hard radio frequency pulse is removed, the magnetization wants
to return back to its original orientation.
But here's the catch, its path is not straight.
Instead, it processes about that z-axis at its Larmore frequency as it relaxes.
It's this procession which is the basis for the raw data collected in a pulsed NMR experiment.
But just how is this frequency measured?
Well, consider first the analogy of a lighthouse with the beacon of light rotating at a given
rate.
If an observer stands at a fixed location and watches that lighthouse beacon rotate
over a given period of time, what will they observe?
Well, they'll observe the intensity of the beam first diminishing as the source rotates
away, and then intensifying as it sweeps back in the observer's direction.
And this process will continue for as long as that beam rotates.
If we were to plot this intensity as a function of time, we would expect to observe a trigonometric
function, specifically a cosine wave.
So a Fourier transform of this function should transform my cosine function into the time
domain into a single peak in the frequency domain.
Now, a modern NMR spectrometer works on a similar principle, listening with the radio
antenna which produces an alternating current in response to the rotation of the magnetic
vectors in the sample.
Now, where this analogy breaks down is the fact that the magnetization of our sample
not only rotates, but also relaxes back to its original orientation.
So the x, y vector component of this magnetization is not only rotating, but also weakening as
the experiment progresses.
And this produces a decaying AC current at the detector.
It's a plot of that decaying AC current intensity versus time, which is the raw data produced
by the spectrometer.
And we call this the free induction decay, or FID for short.
So now that we understand how a spectrometer collects information about the Larmore frequency
of a collection of protons, I want to show you how we convert this information into something
more useful to us, like a completed NMR spectrum, the likes of which we saw last time in the
continuous wave experiment.
So let's begin by looking at a raw data set for a pulsed NMR experiment known as a free
induction decay.
On my horizontal axis will be time, because I'm in the time domain, and my vertical axis
will be the intensity of the AC current.
So I expect to see something like this.
Now what's interesting about this particular data set is that it's so simple that I can
interpret it without transforming it.
So let's do that first.
There are really only two different frequencies embedded within this particular free induction
decay.
One frequency, which is rather fast, frequency A, so the amount of time for one oscillation
to take place here is very short.
But if you look carefully, frequency A is embedded on top of a larger, longer frequency
here.
This would be frequency B.
So my data set contained two frequencies.
Now NMR data sets for actual samples can contain dozens or even hundreds of different
frequencies all superimposed on one another, so it's not always quite this easy.
And to solve that problem, we use a mathematical operator known as the Fourier transform.
The Fourier transform is very complex, and we won't cover in detail today exactly how
it's done, but what's important here is the outcome.
If I Fourier transform my data set, I alter the time domain and start looking at my data
instead in the frequency domain.
So my higher frequency, frequency A, is somewhere down here in the downfield region of my continuous
wave experiment, whereas a longer frequency or a lower frequency like frequency B would
be somewhere up here in my upfield region of the spectrum.
So we actually plot our data with higher longer frequencies at the left-hand side of
our plot, which might seem a little bit counterintuitive, but remember, this is the same type of information
that's included in a continuous wave experiment.
So to be sure that we can compare spectra collected in, say, the year 2014 with spectra
collected in the 1950s, we alter the axis in such a way that our frequencies are sort
of reversed from what we would expect.
So let's move on to another technique.
In 1895, a new class of electromagnetic radiation was discovered by German physicist
Wilhelm Rundgen.
Rundgen immediately realized the significance of his discovery and published his findings
the same year, referring to the uncharacterized radiation only as x-rays.
Rundgen was not the only one who saw potential in his new discovery, either.
He was awarded a Nobel Prize in physics, in fact, the first one ever in 1901, just six
years after his discovery.
But it would be a decade after Rundgen's Nobel Prize award that one of the most impactful
applications of x-rays would be developed.
English physicist William Lawrence Bragg, working in collaboration with his father, opened
up this entirely new part of the electromagnetic spectrum to the art of identifying organic
molecules when he developed a technique to elucidate the structure of crystalline materials
using x-rays.
Bragg and his father had recognized that crystalline materials had a peculiar effect on x-rays as
they interacted.
There's a scattering effect caused by the electron cloud of each atom in the solid substance,
producing a spherical, diffracted wave of the same wavelength as the one which first came
into the crystal.
Now in a crystalline material, the atoms or ions are spaced regularly and evenly, creating
planes of evenly spaced positions capable of creating these spherical waves which propagate
out.
Now to give you an idea of how we can use this to get information about structure, I'm
going to show you a very simple relationship between just two atoms.
Each atom is represented here by one of my blue spheres.
So in the left case example, my two atoms are closer together in space than are the two
on the right side.
So how can I use x-rays to get information about the distances between these two?
Well, the key is in the scattering.
So if I have a coherent x-ray beam which in this case is going to be coming in from the
left hand side of my monitor and striking these atoms, their electron clouds respond
by emitting a spherical wave.
And that spherical wave has a very well-defined wavelength, exactly the same as the incident
light.
So let's create, in this case since it's on a two-dimensional surface, circles but
they'll represent the spherical waves that are created during diffraction.
Now the pattern looks pretty complicated, doesn't it?
But it's actually not as complicated as you may think.
Now x-rays have the ability to expose photographic film.
So if I place a photographic plate in a certain proximity to my crystal, only those locations
where the propagating spherical waves interfere with one another constructively, should I
see exposure?
So in this case, I expect to see a pattern of spots developing along my film where there
is constructive interference causing those spherical waves to continue propagating through
space.
Now let's do the same experiment but on my atoms that are spaced farther apart.
Again, my spherical waves propagate and in some places interfere constructively and in
others destructively.
But if I place my photographic plate at the same distance and do the same analysis, look
what's happened.
The spatial relationships of the exposures on my film have changed.
So by analyzing the patterns that result from this diffraction phenomenon, we can back-calculate
the spatial arrangement of atoms within a crystal and structure.
This is the principle on which x-ray diffraction works.
Now understanding how the diffraction patterns develop and actually observing them is always
challenging for students, in part because our eyes can't see x-rays, but our eyes can
see visible light.
And while the distances between atoms are so small that they require x-rays to resolve,
we can create little gadgets that we use in the classroom, in the laboratories, to show
a diffraction pattern using visible light.
I'm going to do that for you right now, so to help you out, I need to dim the lights.
Alright, I'm going to begin by showing you a dot from my laser pointer.
Not very exciting, is it?
But it's coherent light.
It's light of a single wavelength.
And when that light interacts with a grating, which is spaced somewhere around the wavelength
of that light, I can cause that light to diffract just like the x-rays do within a crystal.
For example, this is a diffraction pattern for a relatively simple grating.
And depending upon the spacing and the geometry of the separations, the striations and the
slides I'm using, I can create different patterns using just one laser pointer.
And encoded within these patterns is all the information about the geometry within the
striations in the slides.
In fact, with a little bit of practice and the right kit, I can show you the exact structure
that Rosalind Franklin and Watson and Crick saw when they characterized the structure
of DNA for the very first time.
This in fact contains all the symmetry elements of a DNA double helix.
It's a pretty amazing trick, isn't it?
All of those different patterns created using just a single beam of coherent red light and
some special slides, which you can't quite tell by looking at them, but they contain
striations that are just a few hundred nanometers wide and therefore interact with that visible
light in a very similar fashion to the way that the atoms within a crystal interact with
X-rays.
So by shining a beam of X-rays on a crystal, then exposing a photographic film to the diffracted
waves, a circular pattern like those we just saw with visible light can be obtained.
Encoded within this image are all the angles of these symmetry planes within the crystal
that produce them.
Now, in 1913, Bragg and his father famously published a paper detailing the crystal structure
of diamond by X-ray diffraction.
This structure is special because it proved for the first time that carbon was in fact
a tetrahedral atom in its SP3 hybridized state, just as chemists had suspected for decades.
And for that contribution, Bragg and his father shared the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1915.
X-ray diffraction has since been used to validate many structural theories, including some of
those offered by chemists long before its creation.
A great example of this is the concept of aromaticity and anti-aromaticity.
It validated Kikuli's benzene ring with Robert Robinson's six evenly spaced carbon atoms
about a symmetrical six-membered ring.
It also has been used to test Huckel's rule for aromaticity and anti-aromaticity using
cyclo-octotetraene, which clearly has a puckert to the ring and also clearly has two different
carbon-carbon bond lengths within the ring because of its anti-aromaticity.
In recent years, it has helped to produce many of the amazing protein and DNA models
which we used in the associated units of this course, including the remarkable potassium
channel protein structures which won Roderick McKinnon and his Nobel Prize.
In short, X-ray crystallography may be the most powerful structural determination tool
ever invented.
Our final technique in this lecture will be mass spectrometry.
Now we call this technique spectrometry rather than spectroscopy because unlike the other
techniques that we've discussed so far, in mass spectrometry we're not measuring the
direct interaction of light with matter.
See, mass spectrometers were first developed to help us better characterize the structure
of atoms, but modern mass spectrometers are used more commonly in a variety of applications.
They find use in criminal forensics labs, searching for the residue of gunpowder or
the metabolites of illegal drugs.
Anyone who's traveled through the American airport system in recent decades has almost
certainly seen a security agent swab the baggage or clothing of a traveler inserting that swab
into a small device and then waiting for a result before allowing that passenger to pass
on.
Well, the device that they're using is a mass spectrometer, searching for trace amounts
of chemicals used in the creation of explosives.
Modern mass spectrometers even have the ability to help us sequence sophisticated proteins,
characterize DNA and learn more about complex biomolecular systems too.
The influential analytical technique was first developed by British scientist Sir Joseph
John Thompson in the first decade of the 20th century.
Thompson was already a prolific physics researcher, having won the 1906 Nobel Prize
for his discovery of the electron a decade earlier.
Now you might think that reaching such a pinnacle of scientific achievement would mean that
Thompson would relax and enjoy his acclaim, but most researchers with the passion, talent
and determination required to win the Nobel Prize are not the kind to rest on even such
a high laurel, and Thompson was no exception.
As he continued his research into subatomic particles, Thompson turned his attention to
the nucleus of the atom, seeking any clue of the existence of subatomic particles there.
He found what he was looking for when he was able to create a beam of ionized neon gas
in his lab.
He aimed that beam at a piece of photographic paper, passing it through a magnetic field
to get it there.
And Thompson knew that when a charged particle moves through a magnetic field, it experiences
a force which is dependent on its charge and velocity, but not on its mass.
So basically the field pushes all ions moving through it with equal force.
So naturally he expected to see all of his neon ions being deflected to the same extent,
striking the photographic paper in the same exact spot.
But what he saw was different and remarkable.
Two different spots formed on the developed paper.
So Thompson had observed neon atoms behaving as if they had two different masses.
He had proven the existence of elemental isotopes.
Atoms of the same element, different atomic masses.
The only logical explanation for his observation was that atomic nuclei must be made up of
something smaller than themselves.
But mass spectrometry is useful for much more than the study of atomic structure.
In the past half century it has become a favorite technique of chemical researchers
and forensics laboratories because of its amazing ability to identify unknown compounds
quickly and efficiently.
So let's get busy exploring a simple mass spectrometry experiment using an organic
compound.
For this discussion I'll be using a rather simple molecule, pentane, and describing
the most basic of mass spectrometry techniques.
The mass spectrometry experiment is extremely sensitive and requires that we generate a
high energy, very reactive species.
So the experiment has to take place in a really high vacuum.
This basically ensures that frequent collisions of our analyte ions with others or with atmospheric
gases are avoided.
Now inside of a typical mass spectrometer, the pressure is about the same as it is on
the outside of the International Space Station.
There are three main components to a mass spectrometer, an ionizer, a mass analyzer,
and a detector.
As the name implies, the ionizer is responsible for creating a beam of gas phase ions.
These ions then pass through a mass analyzer, which modifies their motion using an applied
magnetic field.
Finally, the ions collide with the detector placed such that only ions taking a specific
trajectory will strike it.
So step one for our pentane molecule is the ionization process.
In our example, we're going to use electron impact ionization as the ionization technique.
This method involves passing the gas phase pentane molecules through a beam of high
energy electrons.
And as this happens, occasionally an electron strikes a pentane molecule, knocking an electron
out of its cloud.
This process generates a radical cation of pentane.
Something like this would most likely never form in a lab bench, but in a high vacuum
being bombarded with electrons, we can expect to see some pretty strange things.
If the pentane survives the ionization process, it moves to a magnetic field which is carefully
shaped to deflect ions in a known direction.
Singly charged ions like ours moving through a field will experience a force.
Since force equals mass times acceleration, the acceleration or curvature of the ions
path is inversely proportional to its mass.
And because all moving singly charged positive ions experience the same force in our field,
we can say that more massive ions are deflected to lesser extents.
So knowing the mathematics governing the physics of deflection, we simply increase or decrease
the strength of the magnetic field until the detector indicates a hit.
So when using only monovalent ions, meaning ions with a single charge, we expect to see
just one peak for pentane at a charge to mass ratio of 72.
There will also be a few smaller peaks produced by the natural abundance of deuterium and
carbon-13 in our sample, so those will weigh 73, maybe even 74.
But this mass spectrum wouldn't be as useful as I led you to believe, would it?
After all, how many different organic compounds are there with a mass of 72?
There's plenty.
Just for a start, how about the three geometric isomers of n-pentane, isopentane and neopentane?
So how is it that mass spectrometry is so useful for identification when so many molecules
share the same molecular mass?
The answer lies in a phenomenon we initially neglected, which takes place during the ionization
process.
So let's rewind and look at our experiment one more time.
So let's set a few tenets before we continue our discussion here.
All mass spectrometry experiments require some kind of ionization.
Now the type that I'll talk about today isn't the only kind, but it's called electron impact
ionization, and it's very popular for use in small organic molecules.
And in this technique, a high-energy electron is going to impact a molecule and knock another
electron out of the cloud in a sort of game of molecular billiards.
So as a cartoon representation, here I have a gas-phase molecule, and my gas-phase molecule
has an electron cloud.
And I'm going to strike one of the electrons from that cloud with a high-energy electron
from outside the molecule.
Not pleasant for the molecule.
But what it does is relieve it of one electron, generating a cation with an unpaired electron,
which is a very unstable species.
So they don't always survive.
In fact, they rarely survive.
In many cases, they break apart.
And when they do so, most often, the charge and the radical or the unpaired electron
go the separate ways.
OK, so let's get out of the cartoon world here and look at a real molecule, pentane.
One more time.
We're going to ionize this with electron impact.
So my pentane has an electron cloud, which is depicted here in motion, and I have an
incoming high-energy electron, which strikes one and then ejects it from the electron cloud.
I've created a radical cation.
But remember, radical cations are very unstable.
And in the case of pentane, there can be a fragmentation.
I'm going to draw my fragmentation occurring here at one of the terminal carbon-carbon
bonds.
What takes place most often is a homolytic bond cleavage, which means the two electrons
go in different directions.
And when this happens, the bond breaks.
But not only that, but my radical and my positive charge go to separate sides of that broken
molecule or that broken ion.
So in this example, I've created a methyl radical and a butyl cation.
And the relative stabilities of these ions and radicals is what's going to dictate how
many of them form in my experiment.
So let's take a quick moment here and finish out our day by looking at what we expect to
be the mass spectrum of pentane.
The mass of pentane, or m over z as we report it, because z is a factor of charge, but remember,
our process only creates charges of 1.
So my m over z can be thought of as a mass.
I have my molecular ion with a mass of 72.
But I also can expect there to potentially be fragments involved in the breaking of the
terminal bond.
When this happens, I can get two possible pairs, a methyl radical and primary cation or a primary
radical and a methyl cation.
In these cases, the masses of the ions generated are 57 and 15 respectively.
Similarly, I could have the internal carbon-carbon bond break, generating another two pairs.
But notice that this time, the two pairs that are generated are both primary, so a primary
radical and a primary cation, slightly more stable than the others.
So my peaks at m over z of 43 and 29 are expected to be a little bit larger.
In fact, that's exactly what we see in the mass spectrum of pentane using this method.
We see a mass spectrum in which the peaks at 29 and 43 are larger than those at 15,
57, and even at 72.
We also see a little bit of those isotope peaks in there.
So here we have smaller peaks for the ions that are generated along with radicals that
are of lower substitution.
We see larger peaks when there's greater substitution.
And again, in this case, the molecular ion itself is one of the smallest peaks in the
spectrum.
So if we continue thinking about our simple example of pentane, by comparing its fragments
and their abundance with those produced in isopentane and neopentane, we can find clear
and predictable differences which enable us to discriminate between their mass spectrum.
Of course, hydrocarbons are not the only compounds with this molecular mass.
Consider acrylic acid, also 72 atomic mass units.
Its molecular ion is the same mass as that of pentane.
But look at its fragmentation pattern.
It's quite different, isn't it?
So it's clear from the masses of the fragments that ions created by loss of a hydroxyl group,
loss of a carboxylic acid group, and also by loss of a vinyl group are all present.
So this example shows very clearly how not the molecular mass but the fragmentation pattern
is the key to much of the utility of this technique.
We've all probably heard the amusing story of a person making the unfortunate decision
to eat a poppy seed bagel before a urinalysis drug screening, only to be told afterward
that they've tested positive for heroin use.
The situation has been explored by such popular programs as mythbusters and parodied on popular
comedy programs like Seinfeld.
If the MS used in the urinalysis is so powerful and accurate, how then can it be defeated
by something as simple as a poppy seed?
The answer is actually quite simple.
And it's a perfect illustration of the limitation of spectroscopy and spectrometry in general.
You see, morphine and heroin only differ in structure by the presence of two acetyl groups.
Now these acetyl groups are added to the naturally occurring morphine from poppy seeds by a
sterification with acetic and hydride, a technique which we explored in our estrus module.
Now of course the seed from mature flowers is needed, and I'm leaving out a few important
details from the process in the hopes of avoiding a visit from the United States DEA after this
taping.
But where the story comes to bear on the limitations of spectrometry is this.
Once injected a fraction of the heroin molecules are slowly hydrolyzed back into morphine by
enzymes in the user's blood.
The resulting morphine is modified and further broken down in the liver.
And finally these metabolites are eliminated from the user's system winding up in their
urine.
Many drug urinalysis techniques use mass spectrometry to search for the metabolic byproducts of heroin
which are practically identical to those of morphine which is present naturally in poppy
seeds used in the food industry.
This is a fantastic example of the utility of even the most powerful instruments can
be not only a function of the technology, but of the human element as well.
In short, no spectral analysis is ever complete without careful contemplation on the part
of the researcher.
So let's summarize the last of our spectroscopic techniques.
Today we looked at pulsed NMR and how modern technology allows us to use superconducting
magnets and radio receivers to measure the larmor frequency of spin one half nuclei.
This reproduces the information from a continuous wave experiment, but in a miniscule fraction
of the time.
We touched on x-ray crystallography and how scattering of these high energy rays by the
electron clouds of highly ordered atoms leads to a pattern of interference in the scattered
light and this pattern can be used to back calculate that regular arrangement.
We viewed a few of these structures and discussed how this technique has been used to validate
many of the structural theories which preceded it.
Then we took a look at mass spectrometry and we saw how ionization, mass analysis and
detection systems work and specifically how electron impact generates the molecular
ions and fragment ions, how a magnetic field is used to deflect each ion to a detector
which generates an electrical current when struck by ions.
We discussed how the identity and abundance of fragments in the spectrum can be used to
deduce the structure of compounds analyzed even when multiple candidates have the same
molecular mass.
And finally we had an object lesson in the human element of identifications and how we
must always remember that these techniques have their limitations.
So we finished our short survey of techniques used for identifying organic compounds once
they've been made or extracted in the labs.
But we have yet to really discuss how we can achieve high levels of purity, the levels
of which are necessary to use some of these spectroscopic techniques.
We're going to broach this subject in our next lecture when we start by discussing how
to get the purest possible sample using a technique known as recrystallization.
I'll see you for that talk next time.
