In 1666, a young Isaac Newton first documented the separation of white light into its constituent
visible colors using a prism.
And in his notes on this now famous experiment, he described the rainbow of colors he saw
as a spectrum from the Latin word meaning apparition.
But what we didn't know at that time was that what he saw was only part of the story.
It was another hundred years, more than that, in 1801 when a young self-taught scientist
by the name of Wilhelm Ritter acted on a hunch that maybe there was more to the spectrum
than what Newton had seen with his own eyes more than a hundred years earlier.
The problem is that Wilhelm is a human and his eyes couldn't see any further along the
spectrum than Newton's could.
So Ritter needed a different kind of eye and he had just the tool for the job, silver chloride.
Now silver chloride is an inorganic compound which is most famous for its use in photographic
films.
Solutions of silver chloride undergo a chemical reaction in the presence of visible light
which causes them to dissociate into a suspension of silver metal and chlorine gas.
In other words, the solution turns dark when exposed to light.
It was known even before Ritter that this reaction did not proceed at the same speed
in different colors of light.
He could disperse light with a prism, then place vials of silver chloride solution in
different parts of the resulting spectrum, and clearly see that the reaction was fastest
in blue, slower in green, and slower still in the red portions of the spectrum.
Ritter's real contribution was that he decided to place a vial of silver chloride solution
outside of the blue colored light from the prism.
His hunch paid off.
The solution outside of the blue end of the spectrum reacted even faster than any of the
samples in the visible area.
This experiment is remarkable because it clearly demonstrated the existence of light
with a frequency even higher than the violet light at the edge of the visible spectrum,
one which was not detectable to the human eye but had even more energy than visible light.
Ritter had discovered ultraviolet light.
If you're watching these lectures in order, I'd like to congratulate you on completing
the structures and reactions segment of the course.
You now have the basic knowledge and skills needed to understand and predict the reactivity
of organic compounds on paper.
But you must have asked yourself more than once during these lectures.
How do we know how these molecules are reacting and behaving?
How can these structures and the changes we make to them be confirmed experimentally?
After all, organic chemistry is about science, and science is about what we can prove.
So where's the proof?
Well, today we begin answering these very fair and very crucial questions by discussing
the techniques which organic chemists and many others use to identify the products of
their work.
Today we begin to explore the science of spectroscopy.
Now most simply put, spectroscopy is the observation of the interaction of light with matter.
Now before we can dive into spectroscopic techniques, we need to take a step back and
characterize what we generally refer to as light.
Light is in fact electromagnetic radiation, a form of self-propagating energy composed
of perpendicularly oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
It exhibits both wave and particle-like properties, and it carries energy and momentum.
Now it's the wave properties of light and the energy it carries, which are most interesting
to spectroscopists, and we're going to tend to classify light based on those properties.
Now one of these properties associated with waves is the wavelength, or the distance from
one point on the wave to the next analogous point.
For example, the distance from the top of the peak on this end to the top of the next
peak here on my wave, this is defined as the wavelength.
Now another property of light which interests us is its velocity.
See light has a fixed speed at which it travels in a given medium, regardless of its wavelength.
Light in a vacuum always travels at 3 times 10 to the 8th meters per second.
Now I'm going to start my wave in motion, but I'm not going to start it at the speed
of light.
So let's just move our wave now and pretend that this is the speed of light.
Now the frequency of light is the number of equivalent points along that wave, which pass
by a given location in a specified time.
For example, my wave here has a frequency of about one oscillation per second.
Now since the maxima pass designated points in one second intervals, that's my frequency.
Now it sounds a little bit awkward to say this wave has a frequency of one per second,
so we instead use a unit called Hertz.
This is a unit named in honor of German physicist Heinrich Hertz, who first characterized electromagnetic
radiation in 1887.
So the constant speed of light becomes a proportionality constant for the relationship between wavelength
and the reciprocal of frequency.
For example, if I were to decrease my wavelength by a factor of two, I'd just increase the
frequency by a factor of two.
Now one last property of light, which is going to be of crucial importance to understanding
spectroscopy, is this.
Light does still have some particle character.
We call these particles of light photons.
A single photon of light contains an amount of energy, which is directly related to its
frequency by a factor called Planck's constant, sometimes shown in mathematical equations
as the letter H.
So a single photon of light has an associated wavelength, frequency, and energy, all of
which are related to one another mathematically.
So we classify light according to its frequency or wavelength, which are related to the amount
of energy carried by a single photon of that light.
We call this range of wavelengths the electromagnetic spectrum.
The spectrum includes, in order of increasing frequency and therefore energy, radio waves,
microwaves, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma rays.
Radio waves can have wavelengths kilometers wide, and as we reduce the wavelength to about
the diameter of a baseball, we cross into the microwave region.
Continuing to reduce the wavelength to about the size of a human cell gets us to the infrared.
The visible has wavelengths of several hundred nanometers or about the size of a typical
virus, and the ultraviolet begins to approach the size of some of the larger molecules that
we've studied in the course, like proteins.
Finally, from about ten nanometers on down, x-rays constitute the smaller extremes of
wavelengths, including the very high energy gamma rays that have wavelengths smaller than
the diameter of a single atom.
So the electromagnetic spectrum spans a dramatic scale of wavelengths, and therefore a dramatic
range of energies per photon.
Because of this, each class of radiation tends to interact with molecules in its own unique
way, and scientists have devised a way to exploit all of them.
So let's try a spectroscopy experiment.
You ready?
Here I have two glasses of water and a flashlight.
I'm going to shine my flashlight through the water.
Now you can see that both glasses of water basically allow all of the visible light to
transmit through them.
Simple enough, right?
Now I'm going to add just a small bit of red food coloring to one of the two glasses of
water.
And I'll use my highly specialized scientific tool to stir that.
Be sure it's well mixed.
Now I'll pass my white light back through the same two glasses, the original and the
one with the added food coloring.
You notice a difference?
You see something different, don't you?
Of course, the light reaching your eyes appeared white when it went through the first glass
because it contained only water, which didn't absorb anything, and you were able to see
all the wavelengths of light which were generated by the flashlight.
But in the second glass, you saw the light that was passing through appeared to be red.
And that's because the contents of the solution were absorbing the complementary color of
red or green.
So you know that something in that dye has to have the ability to absorb light of about
520 nanometer wavelengths.
Congratulations, you are now a spectrophotometer.
You just observed the interaction of light with matter.
And measurement of the interaction of light with matter is the function of all optical
spectroscopy instruments.
Now what distinguishes optical spectrophotometers in a lab from your eyes and mine is their increased
sensitivity and the ability to see the electromagnetic spectrum with far greater precision over a
far wider range of wavelengths than the human eye ever could.
Instead of seeing a combination of all visible wavelengths simultaneously, spectrophotometers
can give us information about each wavelength individually, telling us exactly which photons
are absorbed by our sample and which photons are not absorbed.
For the next few lectures, we will take a look at some of the ways scientists coax structural
information from molecules using spectrophotometers to sense how they interact with different
forms of light.
And we'll begin in the visible and ultraviolet regions of the spectrum today.
Of course, since Ritter's Day, the science of spectroscopy has come a long way.
We no longer have to move a sample from one band of light to the next to observe how a
sample is interacting with light.
Instead, we rely on sophisticated instruments called spectrophotometers to get this job done.
Now all spectrophotometers have the same basic functional parts.
How each part functions can be very different depending on the design and the technique
needed to solve a particular problem.
But all spectrometers or spectrophotometers consist of several crucial parts.
First, there's a light source, which generates a broad spectrum of light.
Now this can be as simple as an ordinary incandescent light bulb or a much more advanced lamp
capable of producing ultraviolet.
The light from this source is sent to a device called a monochromator.
The simplest example of this would be one of Newton's prisms in between two slits.
The purpose of the first slit is to ensure that all the light from the source reaches
the monochromator in a parallel pathway.
Once it gets into the center of the monochromator, we will see this beam being fanned out into
its spectrum just as Newton did in the 1600s.
The final slit is there to allow only one very small region of that spectrum to pass
on through.
The next element of our spectrophotometer is a beam splitter, which is really just a fancy
array of mirrors which accomplishes the task of dividing our monochromatic light beam into
two different beams which pass through two different regions of space.
These different regions of space are our sample and reference compartments.
So the beam which passes through my reference compartment will encounter really nothing,
just the reference.
So this would be like our glass of water in the original experiment today.
But the other beam passes through a sample cell and that sample cell contains not just
say water but water with dye in it, as in our example before.
So the difference between these two cells is the presence of the sample that we want
to study.
Finally, the exiting light beams encounter detectors.
And detectors have many different designs as well.
But essentially what a detector does is it turns the impact of photons into some kind
of an electrical signal which can be sent off to a computer which monitors the experiment.
And it's the differences in those signals between the light exiting the reference cell
and the light exiting the sample cell which are interpreted as the result of our experiment.
So the advent of the modern spectrophotometer allows me to not only say that my sample appears
red and therefore is absorbing green light, I can go much farther and determine exactly
how much of every wavelength in the visible spectrum is being absorbed to create the color
that I see.
But there's even more information available from this kind of experiment.
See, one of the very first of these devices was built by a German physicist by the name
of August Bier.
Now Bier is most well known for his law of absorbance which he proposed in 1852.
His law is concerned not with the maximum wavelength of absorption but with just how
strongly a given compound or sample absorbs.
What Bier observed is that incrementally increasing the concentration of a chromophore
or light absorbing molecule cut the transmittance of a sample by one half each time he increased
it.
Now similarly, for a given concentration of a sample the transmittance was cut in half
when the length of the cell was increased incrementally.
This relationship produces an exponential relationship like the one I'm showing you
here.
But scientists prefer to work with linear relationships whenever possible because they're much easier
to predict.
So Bier converted transmittance into a new unit called absorbance.
The absorbance is calculated by taking the negative logarithm of a sample's transmittance.
And when this is done the resulting plot is a very simple and useful relationship in which
incremental concentration or path length increase leads to incremental absorbance values
as well.
So Bier's equation relates absorption to three important factors.
A property of a given molecule called its molar absorptivity, which is essentially a
measure of how well it absorbs at a given wavelength, the concentration of the sample,
and the path length of the cell used in the experiment.
So if you know two of these three parameters for a given sample, measuring the absorbance
would allow you to calculate the third variable using Bier's law.
So this gives us a simple way to determine the concentration of solutions of known compounds
or to help identify compounds in solutions of known concentrations.
Now we saw in our discussion of conjugated alkenes how the frontier molecular orbital
energy of conjugated compounds decreases as additional p-atomic orbitals join the system.
So let's begin by restating a crucial proviso here.
That a single photon of light carries a specific packet of energy with it and that this energy
can be calculated from its wavelength and from Planck's constant using a relationship
of energy is equal to Planck's constant times the speed of light divided by the wavelength
of that particular photon.
So for example, using this equation I can determine that a photon with a 520 nanometer
wavelength carries with it exactly 3.82 times 10 to the minus 19th joules of energy.
No more, no less.
We sometimes convert these energies from joules per photon into kilojoules per molar photons
to make the numbers a little more manageable.
So in our example, 3.82 times 10 to the negative 19th joules per photon becomes 230 kilojoules
per mole of photons.
Second, let's set the rule that this photon will only be absorbed by a molecule when it
can promote an electron to a higher energy state.
In other words, when the orbital energy gap between occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals
are exactly equal to the energy packet of the photon.
Now let's take a look at a few molecules with distinctive UV spectra, compounds with
which we're pretty familiar by now, the conjugated alkenes.
Simple conjugated alkenes have pi systems which overlap very well with one another,
creating a virtual superhighway for electrons to move from one orbital to the next.
And when electrons move from the highest occupied pi molecular orbital to the lowest unoccupied
pi molecular orbital, we call the transition a pi to pi star transition.
Now because of the fantastic geometric overlap of the associated orbitals, this absorption
occurs nearly every time an electron of sufficient energy strikes that molecule.
In other words, the extinction coefficient for the absorption can be very, very large.
Now recall from our lecture on conjugated alkenes that I can construct an energy diagram
for the molecular orbitals of a conjugated system.
And that when we did this for 1,3-butadiene and 1,35-hexatriene, we discovered that the
frontier molecular orbitals are closer in energy in the more conjugated compound.
Now if we were to carefully calculate the energies of the frontier molecular orbital
gaps, we would see the following trend for the first three alkenes in the series.
686 kilojoules for ethene, 540 kilojoules for 1,3-butadiene, and 452 kilojoules for
1,35-hexatriene.
Assuming that our earlier rules hold, this means that promoting one electron from the
homo of each compound to the lumo should require a photon with the exact same energy.
So ethene should require a photon of 686 kilojoules per mole or one with a wavelength of 171 nanometers.
1,3-butadiene requires a photon of 217 nanometers and 1,35-hexatriene requires a photon of 258
nanometers.
So there is a distinct correlation between the wavelength of maximum absorption and the
extent of conjugation in organic compounds.
And this trend continues into the visible spectrum as well, where compounds like beta-carotene
with its 11 conjugated double bonds has a maximum absorption at 454 nanometers.
So let's take a look at another example in the form of a compound so well understood
that it's frequently used as a reference standard for experiments like these.
I'm talking about our old friend benzene.
Now benzene has a maximum absorption at 255 nanometers, lower than 1,35-hexatriene because
promoting electrons causes benzene to lose some of its aromaticity.
But let's take a look at the maximum absorption of benzene's cousins, naphthalene and anthracene.
Now see when we do, we notice that the overall trend of increasing lambda max or maximum wavelength
of absorption with increasing pi system size holds for our aromatics as well.
Of course, no discussion of the ultraviolet region of the spectrum is ever complete without
the mention of the single most well-known source of electromagnetic radiation, the sun.
In addition to the intense visible light emitted by the sun, it also constantly bathes the
planet in strong ultraviolet radiation which is capable of causing damage to cellular DNA.
The overall ultraviolet region of the spectrum is defined as the region between 100 and 400
nanometers in wavelength.
But spectroscopists and other scientists break the UV spectrum down into three general regions
which are commonly called UV-A, UV-B and UV-C.
So let's look at those one by one.
UV-C radiation spans 100 nanometers to 280 nanometers in wavelength.
UV-C is that portion of the UV spectrum which isn't normally found at the surface of the
Earth because it's naturally absorbed by the gases in the Earth's atmosphere.
This high energy, potentially damaging radiation, is absorbed by two naturally occurring atmospheric
gases in particular, oxygen which absorbs between 100 and 200 nanometers and ozone which
absorbs between about 200 and 280 nanometers.
So these two gases work in concert to protect us from all of the most dangerous UV light
reaching the planet.
UV-B radiation spans 280 to 315 nanometer wavelengths.
Now, it's that portion of the UV spectrum which reaches the surface and causes reddening
of the skin which we commonly refer to as sunburn.
Because of this, it was long thought that UV-B rays were the only dangerous form of
UV radiation reaching the planet's surface, leading companies to produce sunblock formulations
containing compounds like para-amino-benzoic acid or PHABA, which absorbs very well right
up to the edge of the UV-B.
UV-A radiation spans the 315 to 400 nanometer region of the spectrum.
And for a long time, it was thought that this lower energy UV light wasn't harmful to humans
because it didn't cause sunburn the way that UV-B does.
In the later decades of the 1900s, though, medical researchers began to recognize that
UV-A light can in fact cause cellular damage even though it doesn't cause a reddening
of the skin.
So modern sunblock formulations have abandoned PHABA in favor of compounds like octocrylene
and avalbenzone, shown here as its enol-tautomer.
So when we take a look at the UV spectrum as a whole and all those materials which we
use to protect ourselves from it, both man-made and naturally occurring, we should start to
notice a distinct trend.
Increasing the size of the conjugated pi system in the compound correlates directly with their
wavelength of maximum absorption.
From oxygen to ozone to PHABA, octocrylene and avalbenzone, each larger and more conjugated
than the next.
So using this predictive tool of extended conjugation, these products have been carefully
engineered to have very large extinction coefficients at very specific wavelengths to fill in the
gaps that Mother Nature left behind.
Some aromatic and conjugated compounds are also titratable, meaning that they can accept
and release protons, which can change their absorptive properties.
So let's belly up to the bar here.
Take for example, the anthocyanins in this red wine, well, blush wine.
Now anthocyanins are polyphenols, and that means that not only are they highly conjugated,
which gives them beautiful colors, but they also have hydroxyl groups on them which can
be protonated and deprotonated.
Now if you're an enophile, you might want to look away for this demonstration, because
I'm going to take this wine, which is currently at a pH of about five, and I'm going to bring
it up, and we're going to watch the effect it has on the color.
Now to do this, I'm going to use a solution of sodium hydroxide, which is caustic, so
I'm going to find a glove that isn't destroyed, and I'm going to cover up my hands just for
safety's sake.
Of course what I'm about to do is also going to render the wine undrinkable.
So I'm probably going to make a few enemies, or at least not make any new friends by doing
this today.
So here we have the original wine.
You can see it's clearly red in color.
This is because of a compound called malvadenglucoside, and I have here a small Erlenmeyer flask
with an aqueous solution, that's water-based, of sodium hydroxide.
Now as a control, just to prove to you that there's nothing magical about what I'll be
adding to these wines, I'm going to put a few drops of my solution into a glass full
of water, and of course we see no color change or reaction of any kind taking place.
So clearly if we see any changes in these wines as a result of adding my hydroxide to
it, it has to be coming from something already in the wine.
I'll leave my second glass unaltered as our control, so we have a reference.
Now I'm going to add a little bit of my aqueous sodium hydroxide to my first victim today.
Did you see a change?
I know I certainly do.
Now the change that's taking place here is a result of deprotonating some of those phenolic
compounds, most notably the malvadenglucoside in the red wine.
But I can go even farther than that, and add a very large amount of my sodium hydroxide
to my third glass.
Let's give it a little bit more just for good measure.
I'll cap my sodium hydroxide solution and give my wines one last swirl to be sure that
they're thoroughly mixed.
Now what should be very apparent here is that something has changed.
Clearly changing the pH conditions of the wine has altered the structure of these compounds.
Quite an impressive color change, isn't it?
So let's recap what just happened here.
The compounds which impart the color to the wine like malvadenglucoside have become deprotonated,
and removal of one or more hydroxyl protons allows the newly deprotonated oxygen atoms
to partake in resonance with the rest of the aromatic system, thereby extending the conjugation
and changing the frontier molecular orbital energies of the color-giving organic species
in the wine.
I've actually prepared some more samples here of the same wine that had been altered
with sodium hydroxide as well in varying proportions, and you can see that there's
actually a broad range of colors that can be achieved in this way.
Now as the conjugated pi systems here grew in energy, the pigments absorbed first in
the green, then in the orange, which resulted in a blue color, and finally in the red portion
of the spectrum, which your eyes detect as green.
And that is the chemistry of destroying a perfectly good rosé.
So today we started on our journey through the task of probing molecular structures.
We talked a little bit about light and the electromagnetic spectrum which comprises it.
We explored the relationships among wavelength, frequency, and energy in any given photon.
And we noted that a single photon carries a packet of energy which can only be absorbed
in a transition of equal energy.
We talked about UV light in particular, how Wilhelm Ritter discovered this type of electromagnetic
radiation using decomposition of silver chloride solutions with light separated by a prism.
We examined the general structure of a UV visible spectrophotometer from light source
to monochromator to beam splitter, sample and reference compartments, and finally detectors,
and how these units all work in concert to produce a UV visible spectrum.
Next, we discussed how extending conjugation in a compound leads to lower energy homo-lumo
transitions within the pi system of molecules lengthening the wavelengths of the associated
molecules' maximum absorption.
We saw how this concept can be used to explain how the Earth's atmosphere protects us from
UVC radiation, but we need to devise our own methods to protect ourselves from UVB and
UVA radiation.
And finally, you witnessed me doing the unthinkable and rendering a perfectly good wine undrinkable
by altering its pH.
In doing so, however, I demonstrated that the protonation state of many organic compounds
can profoundly affect their absorption characteristics as well.
Next time, we're going to turn our attention to the other side of the visible spectrum
and explore its other neighbor, infrared light, and how it interacts with molecules by a completely
different mechanism, yielding completely different information about structures.
And I promise, I won't destroy one single beverage during the entire lecture.
I'll see you then.
