In today's health-conscious world, we often see the terms saturated and unsaturated used
in reference to fats, which are part of our diets.
Most of us are familiar with the general idea that saturated fats tend to be solid at room
temperature, compared to unsaturated fats, which commonly exist in the liquid form.
In our lecture on alkenes and alkynes, we discussed how these terms are used by chemists
to describe the presence and number of pi bonds in hydrocarbons.
Saturated hydrocarbons contain no pi bonds at all, while unsaturated hydrocarbons do,
sometimes one, sometimes more.
In the case of fats, we're using these terms in exactly the same way.
They also refer to the presence and number of pi bonds, but this time they're on the
hydrocarbon tails of fat molecules.
The kind of fat molecules I'm referring to look something like this.
Now this would be an example of a triacylglyceride, or a fat consisting of three long hydrocarbon
tails, which are coming off of a motif that we call glycerol motif, or a triacyl motif.
But we don't really want to look at that right now, so we're more interested in the
chains on the fats.
Now in this animal fat product here, you'll notice that all of the hydrocarbons within
the tail, all three of them, consist entirely of sp3 carbons.
But if I bring up a similar triacylglyceride, or fat, but one that you might find in a plant
product, what you should immediately notice is that the tails in the hydrocarbons are
no longer saturated.
They contain pi bonds, and those pi bonds cause the chains to kink and move outward in
different directions instead of packing together nicely as they do in the saturated version.
So this is our explanation of how and why vegetable oils tend to be liquids, whereas
animal products tend to be solids.
So most of us know that medical science has determined that saturated fats are far less
healthy for human consumption than their unsaturated counterparts.
But what you may not know is that the scientific world's very first foray into the chemistry
of this type of compound was actually a crusade to find ways to convert unsaturated fats into
their saturated counterparts.
Yeah, that's right.
In the early decades of the 1900s, a great deal of chemistry was developed, and even
a Nobel Prize awarded for techniques which are used to turn healthy plant oils into artery-clogging
saturated fats by removing the double bonds in favor of additional bonded hydrogens.
In short, any reaction which converts unsaturated carbons, or those in SP, or SP2 hybridization
states, into saturated carbons, or those in SP3 hybridization states, is referred to
as an addition reaction.
This class of reaction represents the third permutation in our trifecta of simple organic
reactions.
And today we're going to take a look at several examples of this class of reactions, including
the now infamous, but often necessary, process of hydrogenating oils to change their chemical
properties.
So far we've covered substitution and elimination.
Substitutions can be simply described as molecules exchanging groups, like the exchange
of chloride for a hydroxyl group.
Elimination can be described as a decomposition in which a molecule loses some attached groups
to become less saturated, like the conversion of ethyl chloride into ethylene.
Today, we're going to complete that trifecta of fundamental organic reactions by discussing
that third possibility, adding new groups to unsaturated molecules by sacrificing pi bonds.
This is what we call addition.
So addition reactions involve the replacement of a pi bond with new sigma bonds to new substrates.
And this means that these reactions tend to be entropically disfavored.
They create fewer molecules than they consume.
But from an enthalpy standpoint, they're usually favored, since the newly created sigma bonds
are lower in energy and therefore more stable than the pi bonds in the starting materials.
So let's begin by considering the reactivity of unsaturated hydrocarbons, those alkenes
and alkynes that we looked at earlier in the course.
The presence of a pi bond gives them an ability, unique among those compounds we've investigated
so far, to act as nucleophiles themselves instead of as a substrate.
They use their pi electrons to attack electrophilic species.
So let's consider what happens when an alkene, like propene, attacks a generic electrophile.
Since we're concerned with the behavior of the alkene itself, for now I'm just going
to use a letter E to represent that electrophile.
Now our propene molecule sees an opportunity to convert its pi bond electrons into more
stable sigma bonding electrons by attacking that electrophile.
But doing so means that the resulting species must take on a positive charge and become
a carbocation.
So the tables have turned now.
The original nucleophile is now an electrophile.
The adjacent carbon is electron deficient, positively charged and ready to be attacked
itself by anything nucleophilic enough to do so.
So you may notice I've been deliberately vague about exactly what this electrophilic
intermediate looks like.
And this is because unlike substitution and elimination reactions, even some of the most
elementary addition reactions can proceed through a wide variety of transition states
and intermediates owing to the complex structure of that transition state that's produced
during the process.
Today we're going to be investigating a few of these mechanisms in an attempt to understand
some of the more fundamental addition reactions of organic chemistry.
Now before his epic clash with Zetsev over the regiochemistry of elimination reactions,
Markovnikov had already made a name for himself by publishing his famous rule governing the
regiochemistry of addition reactions.
These addition reactions can be used to produce alkyl halides from alkenes.
And we call this class of reactions hydrohalogenation because the reaction involves adding a molecule
of HCl or HBr across a double bond.
You see, even though he was never quite certain exactly how it happened, Markovnikov was able
to demonstrate that any time an alkene with sp2 carbons of differing substitution, like
our propene, was reacted with a hydrogen halide, like this hydrochloric acid.
The newly added halogen is always added preferentially to the more substituted carbon of the alkene,
and consequently the hydrogen would end up on the less substituted carbon.
So let's take a look at Markovnikov's rule in action and see if we can mechanistically
explain exactly how and why this happens.
It took about 30 years and the proposal of the carbocation structure to finally bring
it all into focus.
So here's the reaction that we've been discussing so far today.
We have a molecule of propene with a double bond, and it's going to react with a molecule
of hydrochloric acid.
I've highlighted the hydrogen from the hydrochloric acid, so it's easy to follow it through the
reaction and not confuse it with the other hydrogens from the propene molecule.
So we have this set of pi electrons that's willing to act as a nucleophile, and it's
going to attack, obviously, the most electrophilic site on our acid, the proton.
When this happens, there are actually two different ways that this proton can attach
itself to the propene molecule.
In the first, we have the proton from the hydrochloric acid attaching itself at the end
of the molecule, creating our secondary carbocation, and in the other possibility, it attaches itself
here to the secondary carbon, creating a primary carbocation.
So we've got two potential intermediate states here, in which our hydrogen from the hydrochloric
acid is in a different position on the carbocation.
Now in the top example, my carbocation is attacked by the resulting chloride from the
initial process, creating a molecule of 2-chloropropane.
But in my second example, the reactive site is now on the primary carbon, and that would
generate 1-chloropropane.
And we already know from our discussions about alkyl halides in the carbocation they can
produce that the secondary carbocation is far more stable than the primary carbocation.
Markovnikov simply made this observation that the products are consistent with this.
So when we have a more substituted alkyl halide forming, as is the case here with our secondary
product, we call it the Markovnikov addition product.
Whereas if it ends up at the less substituted carbon of the original double bond, we call
this an anti-Markovnikov.
And Markovnikov's rule simply states that the major product will be the one of greater
substitution.
So there's some evidence for this that we've managed to collect over the years as organic
chemists, not the least of which is the fact that we can't make a chiral product using
this type of reaction.
And the reason is, as follows.
I have my attack on my hydrogen from my hydrochloric acid just as before.
But in this case, the substrate I've used has a more substituted carbon, which contains
three different groups, a methyl group represented by Me, an ethyl group represented by Et, and
what would be over here a three-carbon group, which is eventually going to be propyl.
So when my addition reaction takes place, I produce my carbocation intermediate, which
is planar at this location.
And that means that the chloride nucleophile can attack either from the top of my molecule
or from the bottom.
And there's nothing in particular stopping it from coming in from either direction.
The result of this is that we make a perfectly equal mixture of the R and S enantiomers of
the products.
We call this a racemic mixture.
And it's the presence of these racemic products in reactions like this that gives us some
evidence for carbocation formation.
Now additionally, this mechanism is supported by the fact that we see rearrangements in
hydrohalogenations of alkenes.
Now an example of a reaction in which this might happen is the reaction of 3-methyl-1
butene with hydrochloric acid.
So again, I'm going to conduct my reaction just as we discussed previously.
My alkene will attack the hydrogen from the HCl, creating my new nucleophile in the form
of chloride ion.
Now when this happens, I have that magic recipe of a secondary carbocation adjacent to a tertiary
center on the molecule.
So this is a perfectly primed carbocation to undergo what we would call a hydride shift.
So I've labeled the shifting hydride here in orange and I've introduced it into my line
angle formula below so that we can track it through the shift.
So as the shift takes place, my carbocation increases in substitution from secondary to
now tertiary and that tertiary carbocation is what's attacked by the chloride ion to
complete the reaction.
So the fact that I generate a tertiary alkyl halide here in this reaction, instead of the
expected secondary alkyl halide, tells me that I'm probably going through a carbocation
since they're so, so very prone to rearranging like this.
So one might wonder how a rule governing such a small subset of reactions led to such great
fame for Markovnikov.
But the truth is that although his rules originally were focused on the addition of hydrogen halides
like hydrochloric acid, they're remarkably consistent when applied to many, many more
reactions, some of which we'll investigate in future lectures.
So from time to time, you'll hear me refer to addition reactions as being Markovnikov
or Antimarkovnikov, just as I'll be referring to eliminations as Zetsev or Antizetsev, sometimes
called Hoffman.
Now very similar chemistry takes place in the case of hydrohalogenation of alkynes.
They can be hydrohalogenated either once or twice.
The major difference here is that to complete the first addition requires the formation
of a vinyl cation.
Now the word vinyl actually comes from the Latin for wine and it's sort of a tie to
the ethanol molecule because they both have two carbons.
Now it's difficult to say if this is really how the reaction proceeds, but what's undeniable
is that it proceeds much more slowly than does the hydrohalogenation of an alkene.
Nonetheless, it can be achieved, creating what we call a vinyl halide in accordance with
Markovnikov's rule.
Of course, in the presence of excess hydrogen halide, this is a little consequence to us
because any stereochemistry that's introduced in the form of ENZ isomers will be wiped out
when the carbocation forms in the second hydrohalogenation step.
When this takes place, Markovnikov's rule holds yet again.
But even in situations involving equally substituted sp2 carbons, the halogen will end up on the
same carbon atom as its predecessor.
This is because the attached halogen atom stabilizes the carbocation by resonance on
its way to becoming what we call a geminal dihalide.
Now geminal is a word meaning twins and it implies that those two halogens are on the
same carbon.
The alternate possibility would be called a visceral dihalide from the word for neighbor.
That indicates the halogen atoms are on adjacent carbons, but this doesn't happen in this type
of reaction.
So how might one go about making that visceral dihalide?
Well, another commonly used addition reaction is the addition of molecular chlorine or bromine
to alkenes.
Unlike radical halogenation of alkenes, we don't have to resort to extremes like photoactivated
radical chemistry to halogenate these alkenes and alkynes.
This reaction is typically accomplished simply using molecular halogens like chlorine or
bromine.
And we do this in a non-nucleophilic solvent like dichloromethane to try to discourage
any outside or unexpected reactions from taking place.
In the case of a halogenation of an alkene, we actually have a very unusual intermediate
which forms.
So in order to show you this first, I'm going to run a reaction between chlorine gas depicted
here as my green diatomic molecule and a very familiar molecule from class ethene.
It's going to proceed through something called a chloronium intermediate and a chloride ion
will attack my chloronium intermediate to complete the reaction.
So let's watch this reaction take place.
Now we're used to seeing ethene drawn like this in sort of a plan view where I'm looking
down on all of the atoms in the plane of the page.
But to show you this reaction properly, I'm going to have to turn that molecule 90 degrees
and look at it end on.
When I do this, the reactive position of a chlorine might be something like this.
So remember, there's a double bond here.
The second bond is sort of obscured by the rotation, but it's still there.
And that means that it can attack my chlorine gas molecule.
And you probably are already ready to stop me here and say, wait a minute, Professor Davis,
you just told me that this is a nucleophile attacking an electrophile, but I don't see
any dipole here.
I see two equal atoms of equal electronegativity.
You'd be right about that.
But you've got to remember that halogens have very large electron clouds and are very polarizable.
So as the alkene attacks one of these two chlorine atoms, the electrons can run away
to the other side, inducing a dipole and ultimately breaking the bond between the two chlorine
atoms.
When this takes place, I create something called a chloronium ion.
Now unlike a carbocation, a chloronium ion has a cyclic structure consisting of three
atoms, the two original carbons from the alkene and one of the chlorines from the original
chlorine molecule.
And the bonds I've shown you here are sort of partially formed.
They're not really a very excellent representation of how it looks, but it's the best that we
can do while drawing these on a page.
But what is true is that the chlorine that's part of the chloronium ion is sitting on top
of what used to be the double bond.
It's not really, hasn't been claimed really by either one of these two carbons.
And because it sits directly in the middle and because it's so large, it sterically
obstructs the nucleuride ion from attacking from the same side.
So the only way that this chloride ion can get around and reach these electrophilic carbons
is to move to the other side of the molecule.
At this point, attack can occur and one of those bonds holding the cyclic chloronium
ion together will break.
So I'll end up with a visceral dihalide in this case.
Not only that, but my visceral dihalide is the product of what we call an anti-addition,
meaning that the two new bonds are made from opposing sides rather than from the same side
of that alkene.
So the consequences of this anti-addition become more important when we consider halogenation
using more complex alkenes, like 3,4-dimethyl-3-heptene.
Since the starting material is planar, the chloronium ion, of course, can form from either
side.
But once a chloronium ion is formed, only the opposing side can be attacked by the chloride
ion to complete the reaction, leading to a mixture of enantiomers.
So halogenation of the Z-isomer of my starting material will produce a set of enantiomers
in the RR and SS form.
But these products are distinct from that produced when I halogenate the E-isomer, which
would be the SR and RS products.
Now, alkenes can undergo halogenation in similar reactions.
First forming an alkene with two halogens, transferred to one another because of the
anti-addition, followed by a second halogenation to form a tetrahalogenated alkane.
Now, when the product of a single halogenation is desired, carefully controlling the amount
of halogen added is all that's required.
So adding just one molar equivalent of halogen will produce that one-two dihaloalkene, almost
exclusively.
And this works because the resulting dihalogenated alkene has two electronegative halogen atoms
attached, withdrawing electron density from the pi bond, making it less nucleophilic,
and therefore much less reactive than the alkyne starting material.
So we don't expect the second halogenation addition to take place until all the starting
alkene has been consumed.
This means that I could, for example, produce trans-2,3-di-chloro-2-butene from 2-butyne
simply by carefully adding exactly one molar equivalent of chlorine to the alkyne starting
material.
In the 1890s, an American chemist named James F. Boyce Sr. developed a method for processing
cottonseed oil into a material of greater viscosity, more suitable for use in soap and
food products.
He discovered that the addition of a small amount of nickel to the mixture facilitated
the addition of hydrogen molecules to form this new product, and it changed the properties
in a favorable way.
Now this work was also picked up by a renowned French chemist named Paul Sabatier.
He refined this process into the catalytic hydrogenation which earned him a Nobel Prize
and today bears his name.
You see what Boyce and Sabatier were after was a process which would convert less saturated,
less expensive, plant oils into molecules more closely resembling animal fats.
This is because animal fats have a higher degree of saturation, making them solids near
room temperature and increasing their shelf life.
Now because animal fats are more expensive, converting a cheaper source, like vegetable
oils, into a similar material was just good business.
Their success in this endeavor led to the production of partially hydrogenated vegetable
oils which we're so accustomed to seeing listed on the back of food packages even today.
The double bonds of hydrocarbons can be saturated using molecular hydrogen at pretty reasonable
temperatures and pressures, achievable even in Sabatier's day.
But there's one important catch to this.
The reaction is painfully slow.
So Boyce and Sabatier realized that the solution to this problem was the use of a catalyst
to weaken the bond in the hydrogen molecules, thereby promoting the reaction without the
need for excessive temperatures.
Fortunately, such catalysts exist.
Unfortunately, these catalysts are very rare and expensive metals like platinum and palladium.
And Sabatier's method uses heterogeneous catalysis, meaning the catalyst itself is
a solid while the reagents are liquid or gas phase.
And even though the metal catalyst is not consumed in the reaction, a massive precious
metal would cost a great deal of money only to have a small exposed surface area onto
which that chemistry can take place.
This potentially prohibitive cost issue is often circumvented by producing a catalyst
not as a pure metal material but as a thin veneer of precious metal adhered to a highly
porous carbon support.
This tremendously increases the amount of surface area which can be generated per gram
of metal, making this process much more cost effective.
So let's take a look at this catalytic hydrogenation in action.
What I have here is a very simple hydrogenation reaction in which I'm going to attach a hydrogen,
which is represented here by the small molecule, to again our very familiar ethene alkene molecule.
And I've indicated that I'll be doing this using a catalyst, which is consisting of platinum
metal adhered to a carbon support.
And when the reaction takes place, of course my product, which I hope to make, is ethane
gas.
So I've depicted my catalyst as simply a bar down here.
Of course it would really be an array of exposed precious metal atoms.
And to that I'm going to add my hydrogen and my alkene.
But just as before when we did our halogenation, I have to turn my alkene so that we can see
it in the reactive orientation.
As it approaches the surface of the catalyst, the hydrogen is first separated into separate
hydrogen atoms.
So we've already succeeded in weakening the bond between the two hydrogens.
My alkene comes in from the side and new bonds are formed to the activated hydrogen atoms
at the catalyst surface.
Once hydrogenation is complete, you can see the molecule detaches itself and moves back
away into either the liquid or gas phase.
Now the catch to this, of course, is we can only add the hydrogens from the same side
of the alkene, meaning that this particular process proceeds as a syn addition.
Syn meaning the same side of the alkene is modified.
So in situations where we have reactions which may produce stereoisomers, meaning when these
carbons here have different substituents, we have a potential for a different kind of
product to form, one which is either a particular diastereomer or a particular enantiomer.
So in the case of asymmetrical alkenes, this means the reaction is diastereoselective.
An example of this is catalytic hydrogenation of E3-4-dimethyl-3-octene.
This reaction produces the RR and SS pair of stereoisomers.
Now the catalytic hydrogenation of the Z-stereoisomer, the same starting material, would lead to
the RS and SR stereoisomers.
So in this case, my choice of starting material is very important.
Now hydrogenation of alkenes is yet another versatile set of reactions.
And this process was developed by Sabatier.
It's quite effective for the complete hydrogenation of an alkyne all the way to an alkane.
But it's difficult, if not impossible, to halt the reaction at the intermediate alkene.
This challenge was of particular interest to a Swiss chemist named Herbert Lindlar.
Lindlar was working for a German pharmaceutical giant Hoffmann-Laroche in 1952 when he published
work on a selective catalytic hydrogenation of alkynes stopping at the alkene stage.
Now what Lindlar did was he took the usual catalyst of the day, platinum and palladium.
But he used a technique known as poisoning, in which he deliberately added non-reactive
material to the catalyst to sort of cut down on its activity towards this particular reaction.
And the result of his effort was a catalyst which is strong enough to promote the addition
of hydrogen to an alkyne, but not strong enough to do so to an alkene.
So you'll notice in this reaction I've added hydrogen to acetylene, but I've also included
Lindlar catalyst rather than a pure veneer of that precious metal that catalyzes the
reaction.
Let's see what happens.
My hydrogen moves to the surface and again is activated.
Now when my alkyne comes in, it reacts with those hydrogens at the surface, which means
that the addition is going to always take place with syn-stereochemistry.
So Lindlar had achieved a syn addition of hydrogen to an alkyne stopping at the alkene stage.
So in the case of forming ethene, that's not very impressive because there really aren't
any stereoisomers to speak up.
But imagine if we were to do this reaction with an internal alkyne rather than a terminal
alkyne or acetylene.
Simplest example of this would be the reaction of hydrogen with 2-butyne, which has its triple
bond internally placed.
When I react this with Lindlar catalyst, I produce a specific stereoisomer of the 2-butene
product.
And the reason for this is, as we've already said, the hydrogen is going to come in and
become activated at the catalyst surface.
From there, it will react with our alkyne molecule, which then detaches from the surface.
And because the Lindlar catalyst is poisoned, it can't go any further.
So as you can see here, my syn addition has created the cis-isomer.
But what if the trans or e-isomer were the intended product of our synthesis?
Lindlar's catalyst would not achieve the correct stereochemistry because the mechanism is inherent
to the reaction that has a syn addition of hydrogen.
So in this case, we have to turn to more drastic methods, like what we call the metal ammonia
reduction technique.
In this method, a strong reducing agent like sodium metal is used to convert the alkyne
into a radical anion.
These anions preferentially form in a trans configuration because of sterics.
So after abstracting a proton from an ammonia molecule, the resulting vinyl radical repeats
this process of reduction and protonation and ultimately leads to a trans product.
So this would be our solution for turning our internal alkynes into trans alkenes.
So let's review what we've learned today.
We've worked our way through the basics of how addition reactions occur.
We saw how pi bonds are traded for more stable sigma bonds at the cost of reduced entropy.
We discussed the mechanism of hydrohalogenation of alkenes and alkynes.
We saw how Markovnikov's rule governs their regiochemistry, predicting that the halogen
will take its place at the more substituted carbon of the alkene starting material.
We also noted that proceeding through a carbocation intermediate makes these kinds of reactions
prone to rearrangements.
We also saw how hydrohalogenation of alkenes leads to alkyl halides and hydrohalogenation
of alkynes can produce vinyl halides or geminal dye halides depending on how much of that
hydrogen halide we've added.
Next, we investigated halogenation reactions in which alkenes react via a cyclic-halonium
intermediate on their way to an anti-addition producing vissinal dye halides.
We also saw how an analogous reaction with alkynes leads to a trans-dihalogenated alkene
or to a tetrahalide in a 1-1-2-2 configuration, meaning that we have two halogens on each
adjacent carbon.
We talked about how Boyce and Sabatier discovered that the addition of certain metal catalysts
to alkenes in the presence of hydrogen gas leads to a sin-hydrogenation of their double
bonds, developing a chemistry which is used to modify oils and fats to produce food additives
to this day.
Of course, this method also works to completely saturate alkynes as well.
We also looked into the methods used to halt hydrogenation of alkynes at the alkene stage.
Specifically, catalytic hydrogenation with Linn-Lars catalysts to form cis-alkenes and
the metal-ammonia reduction reaction, which leads to trans-alkenes.
So with this, we've completed our tour of the three general classes of reactions most
often encountered in organic chemistry, substitution, elimination, and addition.
We managed to do this for the most part using just hydrocarbons and alkyl halides as reaction
substrates, but that's all about to change.
These three key types of reactions are not limited to the small library of molecules
that we've used so far.
Now that we have a command of a few of the most basic mechanisms by which reactions take
place, a vast library of functional groups and motifs containing other atoms awaits.
This time, we'll begin to expand this library by considering the role of oxygen in organic
chemistry.
I'll see you then.
