Welcome to our closing lecture on organic chemistry.
The final lecture of this course is bittersweet for me, but it's also exciting for me to
think about how much you've learned and that you are now ready to take that knowledge
with you out into the world.
We spent 35 lectures exploring the definition of organic chemistry, the theories upon which
it is built, and many examples of how organic chemistry as a science has touched our lives
and steered our history as a species.
It's unlikely that Lavossier and Vuller ever dreamed that simply by challenging historical
ideas that they would help to start 300 years of experimentation, which would ultimately
lead us to where we are today.
At the precipice of understanding the origins of our own existence.
The scientists who followed them carried that understanding forward in ways which have improved
the lives of billions of people on the planet today, and countless more who will come after
them.
So now that we understand and appreciate the contribution of these past researchers,
I think we've earned the right to have a little bit of fun.
Let's turn our attention forward and dream about the future that will be created by the
scientists who stand on the shoulders of these giants who helped us understand the chemistry
carbon-based compounds.
One of the most exciting frontiers in modern organic chemistry is its interface with other
scientific disciplines like biology, engineering, and earth sciences.
So why not start there and ask the question, how might this interface help us create a
better world for ourselves in the coming decades?
If you'll pardon a pun, our understanding of the origins of life continue to evolve.
Even as the scientific community begins to get a handle on just how complex biological
systems can be, like those driving DNA translation or protein structure and function, we still
struggle with the simplest question of all.
How did it all get started?
Even now, evidence of exactly how the first carbon-containing compounds blinked into existence
on earth is scarce.
Stanley Miller gave us some insight into how certain biological materials might form under
the conditions of the primitive earth's atmosphere some three billion years ago.
But there are those who believe that these molecules didn't form on earth at all.
There are those who think that life may have literally fallen to earth from outer space.
In 1969, a huge fireball rocketed across the Australian sky before separating into several
pieces and finally crashing to earth near the town of Merchison, Victoria.
This meteorite strike is unusual in three important ways.
First, it was witnessed so there's no debating its extraterrestrial origins.
Second, it was rather large, delivering more than 100 kilograms of material to the surface
of the earth.
And finally, the most fascinating characteristic of this meteorite is that it appears to have
carried with it a buffet of organic compounds which is hard to believe.
As spectroscopic techniques continue to advance, the Merchison meteorite has been analyzed from
time to time, always with new and interesting results.
In 2010, for example, a group of researchers attempted to extract organic compounds from
freshly broken samples of the Merchison.
Now careful chromatographic separation of the extracts, analyzed by mass spectrometry
and NMR spectroscopy techniques, revealed that the meteorite contains not just a few,
but thousands or even tens of thousands of different small organic molecules all encased
within it.
Of course the implication here is that just like the meteorite which is unquestionably
an authentic space rock, those molecules which were trapped within its matrix must have fallen
from space.
So this brings up new questions.
If the Merchison results are accurate, just how did these compounds get there?
Even more tantalizing evidence of extraterrestrial organics has been collected in recent decades
as organizations like NASA launched sophisticated probes in telescopes like the Spitzer Space
Telescope.
The Spitzer operated in the middle of the first decade of the 21st century and it looked
at interstellar space through infrared eyes, sensing absorptions caused by organic molecular
vibrations occurring tens or even hundreds of thousands of light years away or more.
Perhaps not surprisingly, in light of the Merchison meteorite results, Spitzer indeed
found not only evidence of carbon, but specifically of SP3 hybridized carbon.
A clear absorbance at 2,900 wave numbers was reported when the telescope was pointed
at interstellar space.
That's an absorption corresponding to the CH bond vibrations one would find in a typical
organic compound.
The implication?
That organic carbon does indeed exist in abundance in regions of space which harbor little else.
It would seem that even the void of deep space may harbor the seeds of life.
So the more we search, the more we seem to find evidence that organics can spontaneously
form, not only on Earth, but elsewhere in the universe, potentially seeding the cosmos
with life.
Yet another curiosity which scientists are still trying to address is this.
All life on Earth that we know of uses L, or left-handed, amino acids as the principal
constituent of the proteins of life.
That means that even though we may think of ourselves as being achiral at the macroscopic
level, we are in fact not symmetrical when we look at ourselves through molecular eyes.
For example, the amino acids and proteins making up the skin and muscle in your arms
are all of one-handedness.
So if you could look at your right index finger and your left index finger with atomic resolution,
they would in fact not be reflections of one another.
So at the molecular level, you are chiral.
Yet every reliable source of data on abiologically synthesized organics, from those formed in
Miller's Primitive Earth experiment to the interstellar stowaways on the Merchison meteorite,
suggests that racemic mixtures of these compounds are created in natural processes.
This leads us to two important questions.
First, why L amino acids?
The molecular machinery which our bodies use to create proteins and enzymes we need to live
are chiral themselves, so it makes sense that we should use all of one-handed amino acid
or the other.
So clearly, nature had to make a choice early on.
Left-handed biochemistry or right-handed biochemistry?
But is there any real difference between our biochemical world and its mirror image?
Is there some quantum mechanical effect that we don't understand perfectly which dictated
that choice?
Or was it a cosmic coin toss that led us to be composed of L amino acids instead of D?
This question was effectively answered in the early 1990s when the labs of Stephen Kent
at Scripps Research Institute created a right-handed version of a naturally occurring left-handed
protein, HIV protease.
Kent used modified techniques pioneered by Bruce Merrifield to create a perfect mirror
image of that protein.
He then tested it for activity against mirror images of its normal substrates, finding that
the chemical activity of his right-handed protein was identical in every way to the
left-handed version.
This closed the book on the question of handedness in the chemistry of life.
Racemic sources of material which led to our left-handed biochemistry should be equally
capable of seeding right-handed biochemistry.
So if we ever do make contact with extraterrestrial carbon-based life forms, it would appear that
there is a 50% chance that their biochemistry will be not exactly the same as our own, but
rather a perfect reflection of our own.
But Kent's research opened up a whole new vein of inquiry.
Now that we know that D amino acids can be used to create enzymes with every bit as much
power to promote highly specialized chemistry, researchers are trying to develop new therapeutics
made from those D amino acids.
It may be that some day these mirror images, which previously had no use in biology, or
little use in biology, will find use in the hands of humans who can not only rationally
design them, but produce them in laboratories for use as medicines, chiral catalysts, and
more.
When humans sought to take to the air and fly, birds and their wings were an obvious
inspiration for the design of early aircraft.
In fact, evidence of working bird-shaped gliders may date as far back as ancient Egypt.
Now, scientists call this kind of design strategy one of observing the properties of natural
systems and applying them to engineering, biomimicry.
And we've been doing this for a very, very long time.
And just as the designs of some planes, trains, and boats have been inspired by nature, as
we learn more and more about the biomolecular world, scientists, more and more, turn to
the biological for inspiration in their designs of useful compounds.
This may one day help us to accomplish similar chemistry to the molecules of life, but with
smaller compounds which are more easily obtained and whose properties are more easily adjusted
and tuned than their larger biological counterparts.
We call this practice of imitating the function of biological molecules, biomimetic chemistry.
And it may provide the springboard that we need to create small molecules with the exact
chemical properties that we need to accomplish a number of tasks.
Take the example of oxygen transport and storage.
Our bodies and those of many other animals rely on hemoglobin to bind, transport, and
release oxygen within our bodies so that our cells have the oxidizer that they need to
carry out cellular respiration and give us life-sustaining chemical energy.
Hemoglobin consists of four proteins bound together in a quaternary structure which supports
four organometallic heme molecules.
It's here at the iron atom within the heme that oxygen binds when it is present in great
abundance, like in the air that enters our lungs.
That oxygen is then released in environments which are lower in oxygen concentration like
the tissues of our body where it's most needed.
The elegant balance of binding and releasing oxygen is mediated by the protein itself,
which affects solubility and tunes the chemistry of the heme so that it grabs oxygen with striking
efficiency in the lungs, then transports it through the blood and releases it at just
the right time as well.
So proteins in a way are nature's organic chemists tinkering with the properties of
small molecules and asserting an influence over how they behave.
Well that sounds a lot like something that humans are learning to do for themselves,
doesn't it?
So can we abandon the large protein and substitute the knowledge that we've gained over the
past two centuries to create other molecules which can imitate the properties of hemoglobin?
Researchers at the University of Leeds think so.
They successfully synthesized what they called porphyrin-cord hyperbranched polymers, which
have oxygen binding properties, very similar to hemoglobin, but can be easily created in
a laboratory.
Looking at the structure of a porphyrin-cord hyperbranched polymer, it's easy to see
where the inspiration came from for this compound.
It's also easy to see how someday compounds like this one might offer a non-biological
oxygen carrier for use in medical applications like surgery.
An artificial blood like this would all but eliminate concerns over disease transmission
or incompatible antibodies associated with human blood transfusions.
With available polymer arms which could be modified to achieve almost any solubility,
oxygen binding affinity, or other property that we need, we might even see compounds
like this in use one day, colonizing new planets.
The tenuous Martian atmosphere, for example, has a very small amount of oxygen in it naturally.
Now, solutions of biomimetic oxygen carriers might someday be used to extract that small
amount of oxygen from outside of a structure, pumping it back inside the building where
it's released, essentially creating a building which breathes so that its occupants can too.
But our ability to imitate life goes far beyond creating small mimetic molecules.
Remember that Ken was able to construct not only working copies of HIV protease from L-amino
acids but from D-amino acids as well.
This shows that even large biomolecules can be created abiologically and then used to enhance
or even create biological systems.
Not another exciting advancement was made by scientists at the J. Craig Venter Institute
in 2010.
This is when they reported that they had chemically synthesized a genome of over one million base
pairs then substituted that DNA for the native DNA in a bacteria.
In this proof-of-concept experiment, the researchers made just a few small changes between the natural
DNA of the bacteria and their synthetic form, targeting regions of the genome which were
known to act as structural supports rather than those coding for specific proteins.
Such a simple change was enough that it could be detected in the cells which had accepted
the transplant without compromising the viability of those cells.
So the genetic deck was stacked in favor of success in this experiment.
Still this achievement will no doubt take us to the next level of biomolecular engineering
as it demonstrates clearly and effectively that the molecular machinery of life is modular
and can be transplanted from one cell to another.
This experiment shows it with enough understanding and cautious dedicated effort.
Genetic material and the cellular machinery which uses it can be mixed, matched and altered
to produce any biochemistry that we desire.
Someday we may even create entire cells from nothing more than chemicals on a lab bench
using organic reactions which are available to us today.
Just imagine what these cells might be designed to accomplish.
We could literally synthesize self-replicating microscopic production plants for fixed nitrogen
with nitrogenase activity many fold more powerful than rhizobia.
We could create super red blood cells to enhance the oxygen carrying capacity of blood
used in transfusions.
Imagine vast pools of photosynthetic bacteria of our own design harvesting light and converting
it into biomass or even energy faster and better than any living thing ever has.
All to the benefit of mankind.
The possibilities are truly limitless and the inspiration for it all harkens back to
that day in 1828 when Voller accidentally created urea on his lab bench and realized
that mastering the chemistry of carbon didn't require any mystical vital force but careful
study and application of the scientific method.
I'd also like to challenge you with one of humanity's major environmental concerns.
We spend a lot of time looking at how chemists build upon carbon scaffolds to make organic
compounds with new structures and properties.
And we saw how some of the major entry points for carbon into organic chemistry include
the hydrocarbons isolated from fossil fuels which can be halogenated to make reactive
substrates for substitution and elimination reactions.
We discussed how biological systems can also bring carbon into the organic world.
Plants convert carbon dioxide into biomass which makes its way through the food chain
where it's used by organisms to produce all of the necessary chemicals to exist.
Some of which are extracted from those living systems by opportunistic chemists like Justice
von Liebig.
But what about the exit point for carbon from organic chemistry?
It's a fair question.
It's actually a very good question.
As our activities as humans concentrates carbon in our fuels and biomass, we have to ask
the question, where does that carbon go when we're done with it?
Carbon containing compounds contain a great deal of chemical energy.
And whether we are burning fuels or using foods for respiration, a large amount of the
organic material in the world is destined to become carbon dioxide.
And although it isn't particularly pleasant to think about when humans and other creatures
are done with their biomass for good, decomposition naturally releases much of their carbon as
CO2 as well.
Now that might not sound like a big problem.
After all, carbon dioxide is a gas so it's just carried away by the atmosphere, right?
Well not quite.
We know from our discussions on spectroscopy just how powerful an IR absorber the carbon
oxygen double bond can be because the vibrations of those very polar bonds in the molecule
give it a strong absorption.
Recall also from Sir William Herschel's experiments that when objects absorb infrared
light, they tend to heat up.
So carbon dioxide acts as what we call a greenhouse gas, absorbing radiated heat from
the Earth's surface leading to climate change when it's not properly balanced.
This has led to a global movement to devise ways to store and use carbon dioxide in ways
which prevent its release into the atmosphere.
For example, the U.S. Department of Energy has estimated that 2.4 billion metric tons
of industrially produced CO2 could be stored by injecting it into subsurface structures
like unminable coal seams where it can become adsorbed to the surface of the underground
deposit.
The concern here is that there are other gases already bound to coal in seams like these,
most notably methane.
Obviously, those who advocate this method are betting on irreversible strong binding
of carbon dioxide to subsurface structures like the carbon-rich coal deposits of coal
seams, binding so strong that hopefully it can displace methane.
Now, could such an idea work?
Well, there's a good chance that it would, but it depends on how well each environmental
gas absorbs to the stationary coal phase relative to its tendency to vaporize.
In complex geological systems like these, the overall composition and chemical behavior
of formations can be tricky to predict, so we don't know the best method for sequestering
CO2 until we try and see the results.
Just remember, it's all about those partitioning coefficients.
So organic chemistry may change the world we live in, but it may also play a pivotal role
in getting us off of that world someday very soon.
There are those who estimate that the Earth's current population of seven billion people
would not be naturally sustainable.
That without chemical advancements like the Haber-Bosch process for nitrogen fixation,
global famine would already have ensued.
Yet, the global population continues to expand, pressing ever closer to the nine billion or
so that could be fed using modern technologies.
But what then?
When we've completely exhausted the ability of our planet to provide for us, even with
some assistance from science, what's next?
Well, even if we one day master the chemistry of nitrogen fixation, there will still come
a day when there simply isn't enough land to feed every mouth on the planet.
The natural next step is that we look beyond the Earth for places to live.
We continue to expand our knowledge and carry our species into the reaches of the solar
system and eventually the cosmos.
To do so, at least to get started, will require that we take with us everything and everyone
that a colony might need to survive transport to and establishing that colony on a new celestial
body.
But that leads to a number of logistical questions, not the least of which is how do we get that
much material off of the Earth and into space?
That's a valid question.
See with current rocket technology, it costs thousands or even tens of thousands of dollars
just to get one pound of material into orbit around the Earth.
So step one of colonizing space is to find a cost-effective way to escape the gravity
of Mother Earth.
Now there are many possible approaches to this challenge.
And one very interesting proposal is the construction of a so-called space elevator, which would
consist of a line which reaches from the equator of the Earth to an altitude of about 36,000
kilometers, the altitude at which a geostationary orbit is obtained.
Of course, building a tower more than 40,000 times the height of the Burj Khalifa in Dubai
presents some obvious structural challenges.
It's unlikely that any such structure could support its own weight.
One proposed solution to this problem is to use a structure which is supported not
by compression, but by tension, constructing a cable with a counterweight reaching so far
into space that its center of mass is above 36,000 kilometers, and its overall length
is about 100,000 kilometers, so that it's held taut under its own momentum as it turns
with the Earth.
Now using a cable like this, a mechanical climber could simply move up the cable, taking
its payload of people and supplies to the necessary altitude to escape Earth's gravity
and reach outer space.
Now, estimates are that a device like this, though profoundly expensive to build, once
operating could lower the cost of delivering material into space by more than tenfold.
So it would cost just a few hundred dollars per pound to reach orbit, instead of the thousands
or even tens of thousands of dollars that are currently required.
So in order to construct this modern marvel, a cable about 100,000 kilometers in length
would have to be produced.
Let's think about that for a moment.
That's more than twice the circumference of the Earth, nearly a quarter of the way to
the moon.
But to build a cable that long, which can withstand the tension produced by its orbiting counterweight,
we're going to have to find the lightest, most durable material with the greatest tensile
strength to weight ratio ever developed.
And the front runner for that material is carbon nanotubes.
Under one proposal, nanotubes several meters in length could be woven together into a rope,
creating the longest man-made object in human history and providing us with that cable that
we need to make the space elevator a reality.
Now, this may seem like an insurmountable target, a three meter long nanotube, especially
when you consider that that rivals the length of a completely extended strand of human DNA.
Researchers have reported recently that they've managed to create single nanotubes with lengths
approaching that necessary mark needed to form the proposed cable.
So it would seem that soon the only thing standing in the way of a space elevator will
be our own imagination, and about $20 billion.
If this project ever takes place, it would be a fitting application for these allotropes
of carbon.
The same element which makes up the scaffold of the molecules of life on Earth will also
make up the scaffold of the vehicle which we use to propel that life forward into outer space.
So our daydreaming about the role of organic chemistry in surmounting the challenges faced
by humanity in coming generations is coming to an end.
But just because our time together is up doesn't mean that your time with organic chemistry
has to be over.
If you found the last 36 lectures gratifying, I encourage you to carry your knowledge forward
and use it as a basis on which to learn from other chemists.
You now have all the tools necessary to read and digest current chemical literature created
by researchers in the field, intended for those with an interest in the science of organic
chemistry.
Countless university and public libraries subscribe to such prestigious professional journals
as Science, Nature, and the Journal of the American Chemical Society, as well as more
focused organic chemistry journals like the Journal of Organic Chemistry and Tetrahedron.
I strongly advise you to search out these publications and others like them.
There are a window into the incredible accomplishments being achieved every day by those toiling
in the lab hoping to develop the next great catalyst like Sabatier or find a new way to
isolate vital compounds like Tzvet.
Perhaps they want to mathematically decrypt the kinetics of reactions like Ingold or decipher
the function of a critical biomolecule the way McKinnon did.
And you now have the tools you need to join in on the conversation.
It has been my distinct privilege to help you get started on what I hope will be a lifelong
journey exploring and appreciating the rich and beautiful chemistry which breeds life
into our planet, the chemistry of molecules based on carbon.
Thank you for joining me.
