We've spent some time now learning about the discovery of how electromagnetic waves in
and near the visible spectrum can interact with organic molecules and how we can observe
that interaction in a way which gives us information about the structure of the molecules involved.
We learned how Newton's use of a prism to separate light into its constituent wavelengths
introduced the western world to the idea that visible light was made up of multiple color
components. We saw how the discoveries of Herschel and Ritter demonstrated that there were other
types of light just outside of that visible spectrum as well. We've talked about how all
three of these portions of the spectrum, ultraviolet, visible, and infrared, interact with small
molecules in the tremendous utility that these phenomena have as tools for the identification
of organic compounds. So far we've investigated how to determine the extent of conjugation in
a compound with UV visible spectroscopy, the presence of functional groups using IR spectroscopy,
and the handedness of compounds using polarimetry. But short of comparing the fingerprint region of
IR spectra to those of known standards, we don't really have a way to probe the connectivity
of functional groups within a molecule. So if we're making an entirely new molecule for which
there is no reference spectrum yet in the literature, how are we going to confirm its identity?
In this lecture, we will move on to yet another region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
To get our answer, we're going all the way to the long wavelength end of the spectrum
beyond infrared, past microwaves, all the way to the radio portion of the spectrum.
But before we get to our radio waves today, we'll need to try to better understand a property of
atoms that we haven't really discussed and which we usually think of as more within the realm of
physics than organic chemistry. That property is magnetism. Now the magnetic properties of nuclei
were not well understood by Newton, Ritter and Herschel, and they went largely unaddressed
during the development of optical spectroscopy techniques in the 1800s.
But in the early 1900s, that all changed, in large part due to the efforts of Isidor Rebi,
an American physicist who was credited with having the revelation that atoms
have certain magnetic properties which can be used to discern them from one another in a given molecule.
So, to get started today, let's take one more step back and consider magnetism in general.
But before we get to our radio frequency radiation, I'd like to show you this.
It's a compass. It's a device with which most of us, especially navigators, pilots, hikers, are familiar.
A small magnetized needle is mounted on an axis which allows it to turn so that it can align itself
with whatever sort of magnetic field it's in. Of course, in the case of my compass needle,
this field is generated by the Earth's rotating inner core. Now physicists have several different units
used to measure the intensity of a magnetic field, one of which is Tesla, named for the famous and
somewhat eccentric physicist, Nikola Tesla. At its surface, the Earth's magnetic field measures
about 50 milliTesla. And here, close to Washington, D.C., this weak but ever present field
points about 11 degrees to the west of true north. So, when I place this compass within the field,
the needle aligns itself with that field, giving me an indication of its direction.
So, let's assume for a moment that I could somehow remove the influence of the Earth's
magnetic field. Now, I can't remove the Earth's magnetic field because I can't stop the core from
spinning. But what I can do is use these rare Earth magnets to pull this needle out of alignment.
Now, if there were no magnetic field, I would expect that any arrangement whatsoever of this
needle in space would be of equal energy. So, any alignment is possible. But as soon as I remove
my rare Earth magnet and allow the Earth's magnetic field to take over once again,
this guy back out of alignment, snaps right back. So, as soon as I place my compass back in the field,
the energy of the aligned state becomes lower in energy than any of the other misaligned states,
causing the needle to reliably and predictably take on that lower energy orientation.
Now, the reason I'm showing you this rather mundane little magnetic tool is that it's a
very good analogy for the behavior of certain atomic nuclei. Atomic nuclei have a property
that physicists call magnetic spin. I specifically mentioned physicists here because I refuse to
lay the blame for this one on chemists. Spin, you see, is a very unfortunate choice of terminology,
as it doesn't actually refer to a rate of rotation as one might assume from classical mechanics.
It's a common point of confusion in the study of NMR, so let's be sure we clear that up right away.
Now, for our discussion, it'll suffice to say this. Certain atomic nuclei have a spin quantum number of one-half,
which is just a fancy way of saying that there are two possible magnetic states.
Such nuclei contain what is known as a magnetic dipole or a magnetization which can behave
much like an atom-sized bar magnet or compass needle.
Finally, those neutrons that I encouraged you to overlook way back at the beginning of the
course are about to become relevant. This is because isotopes, or atoms of the same element,
with different numbers of neutrons, have different magnetic properties, and nearly every element
has at least one isotope, which is spin one-half. This includes protons, carbon-13, nitrogen-15,
and fluorine-19. But for this lecture, we're going to confine ourselves to protons,
with the caveat that the same magnetic tricks I'm about to show you can be pulled with at
least one isotope of practically every commonly encountered element.
So, let's take a look at a hydrogen nucleus. So, the magnetic dipole of certain atomic nuclei
behaves in much the same way as our compass needle did, randomly orienting itself in the
absence of an external magnetic field. But as soon as a magnetic field is applied,
which we represent as these lines, specific orientations of the nuclear dipole become more stable.
Now, where the analogy deviates from our macroscopic example of our compass and needle
is that spin one-half atomic nuclei can align their dipoles either parallel to
or anti-parallel to a magnetic field in which they reside, leading to a distribution of those
two states in the population. But the energies of the parallel state, often called the alpha spin
state and the anti-parallel alignment, sometimes called the beta spin state, differ by an amount
which can be calculated and is referred to as the Zeeman splitting energy.
The Zeeman splitting energy is a function of the intensity of the external magnetic field
and an intrinsic property of the nucleus called its gyromagnetic ratio. Now, by intrinsic, I mean
that, for example, all protons in the universe have the exact same gyromagnetic ratio. So, for a
nucleus of a given type, the stronger the external magnetic field, the greater the energy difference
between the alpha and beta spin states will be. Now, on our way to understanding how NMR works
in laboratories of the 21st century, we first have to make a pit stop in the 1940s and 50s
when the science was still being developed by rabie and his contemporaries. This historical
context is going to help us to better understand the more complex instruments of today. So, let's
say that we have a collection of protons in a fairly strong external magnetic field. We expect
that these protons will arrange themselves in a collection of alpha and beta spin states,
with just a very slight excess in the lower energy alpha state. Let's say that we placed
our protons in a 1.4 Tesla magnetic field. That's a field about 28,000 times as strong
as the Earth's. Powerful, but attainable with a suitable electromagnet. Based on the gyromagnetic
ratio of a proton, 42.577 MHz per Tesla, I can calculate the Zaman splitting energy difference
between those two states. Since the proton is the most frequently used nucleus in NMR experiments,
we report field strengths in Tesla or rarely in Tesla. More often, we actually use the resonance
frequency of a proton in that field. For example, our 1.4 Tesla magnet should bring a proton into
resonance with a radiation of 60 MHz in frequency. So, you'll notice that most modern spectrometers
have a frequency splashed across the side in large fonts. This is the frequency that's indicated
there. It's a photon of that specific frequency, one with a wavelength of about five meters,
which carries just the right amount of energy to cause a proton in the alpha spin state
to flip into the beta spin state, absorbing the photon in the process.
So, early spectrometers attempting to take advantage of this phenomenon
consisted of a powerful electromagnet, a radio frequency transmitter, and a radio frequency
receiver. A sample of organic material is placed into the magnetic field and irradiated with a
constant wave of a specific radio frequency. In keeping with our example, that would be 60 MHz,
and this is how continuous wave NMR gets its name.
The current to the electromagnet is slowly increased as the exiting radio wave is monitored
at the receiver. In our very simple example, at one very specific field strength, the radio
wave will be absorbed in the spin state transition from alpha to beta, manifesting itself as a
reduced radio wave intensity at the receiver. So, this is the basic design of a continuous wave
NMR spectrometer. So, if you've been following so far, you probably have at least one very important
question. If all protons have exactly the same gyromagnetic ratio and the field in the NMR experiment
is perfectly uniform, how is it that this technology is good for anything other than simply
detecting the presence of protons? How can it possibly distinguish one proton on a molecule from
another? The answer to this very important question lies in a different term in the Ziemann splitting
equation. It's not the gyromagnetic ratio which differs from one proton to the next,
but rather the exact strength of the external field at a given nucleus.
You see, we started with the very unrealistic example of a collection of isolated protons
with no other atoms or even electrons present in the system. The obvious difference between
this model system and the ones which a chemist might want to study is that there are electron
clouds and atoms of other kinds bonded to the protons that we want to analyze.
And the real key to understanding how NMR gives us information lies in another phenomenon,
magnetic shielding by electrons. You see, I told a little white lie back there, at least a lie of
omission. I already told you the Ziemann splitting is a function of gyromagnetic ratio and the
external field strength, but what I left out was the fact that electron clouds have this
interesting ability to attenuate or weaken the external field ever so slightly. Now we can think
of this as a new term in the Ziemann equation in which I account for a small reduction in field
strength due to the shielding of the electron cloud at that particular nucleus. Let's take a
look at some examples to see if we can drive this point home. We're going to look at some hypothetical
NMR spectra for four different compounds, methane, chloromethane, dichloromethane, and chloroform.
So essentially what I've done here is started from methane and then slowly added one chlorine atom
at a time to pick it here in green until I reach the point where I have three chlorines attached.
So let's start by thinking about methane and its electron cloud. Now the electron cloud in a
methane molecule is very symmetrical, isn't it? There are no particularly electronegative
elements, the carbon-hydrogen bonds are essentially non-polar, and so there really is no distortion
in this electron cloud. That means that if I plot its absorption versus the applied field strength
in a continuous wave NMR spectrometer, I expect that it will take a fairly high field to overcome
the shielding that these protons are experiencing. But if I move along to say chloromethane where
I've replaced one of those hydrogens with a more electronegative chlorine atom, there's now a dipole
within this molecule and it's pulling electrons toward the chlorine and therefore away from the
remaining hydrogens. So its electron cloud may look more like this with a bit of a distortion
because that chlorine is pulling some of it more towards itself. So with reduced shielding,
I expect that I need a lower applied field strength to create resonance, and indeed that's what I see.
And this trend continues to dichloromethane which has two dipoles and therefore an electron cloud
which is even more deshielded at those protons. And of course it's in a NMR spectrum would reflect
that in an even weaker applied field necessary for resonance. And finally chloroform where I have
three of these dipoles has got a very very deshielded proton which will resonate at an even lower
applied field. Because of this lower applied fields causing resonances at the down here at the left
hand side of the spectrum, we refer to this side of the spectrum as down field whereas we refer to
the higher field portion of the spectrum sometimes as up field. So a more shielded hydrogen like
those in methane resonates up field, a more deshielded hydrogen like those in chloroform
will resonate down field. So the density of the electron cloud at a particular nucleus
can cause its peak to shift within the NMR spectrum. So we call this phenomenon chemical shift.
So we've established that protons in different chemical environments will resonate at distinct
applied fields because of the effects like shielding. But what happens when a researcher in a lab
across the country or across the globe tries to reproduce my experiment? What happens if
his or her spectrometer produces a field strength or radio wave frequency different than mine?
Well of course all shifts of all the protons will be different making comparisons somewhat difficult.
So we need a method of reporting data which can be easily translated from one spectrometer
to the next. We need to normalize the resonance frequencies to account for different applied
field strengths. We start this process by agreeing to a reference standard. In the case of proton NMR
we use a compound called tetramethylsilane. We use this compound because the very low
electronegativity of silicon pushes electrons toward the methyl groups producing a strong
consistent resonance frequency which is so far up field that it rarely interferes with the signals
of interest. So the differences in field needed to produce resonance in the protons of most
organic molecules is just a small fraction of 1% of the total field strength. So to make them
numbers more manageable we report chemical shift in parts per million from the absolute
resonance frequency of that reference compound TMS or tetramethylsilane.
So a proton resonating in a field which is 99.9999% of the strength needed to bring TMS
into resonance is said to be resonating at 1.0 ppm chemical shift. A proton at 99.9998% of the
field strength of TMS would be at 2.0 ppm chemical shift and so on.
Now treating the x-axis of my spectrum in this way not only gives me easier numbers to work with
but allows me to compare data collected on one instrument with data collected on another instrument
even if it uses a different magnetic field strength. So parts per million has become the
standard unit for NMR spectroscopy. So we've considered the behavior of a hypothetical collection
of protons in a magnetic field. We then graduated to real albeit very simple organic compounds like
methane and its halogenated derivatives all of which have only one type of proton in them.
But what happens when a compound has more than one kind of proton? How would we expect a continuous
wave NMR spectrum to look for a compound like that? Let's answer that question with an example.
Let's take a look at ethyl chloride or chloroethane.
Now chloroethane has two chemically distinct protons. These I've highlighted in red are adjacent
to the chlorine atom and of course there are three others that are farther away.
Now if I locate the resonance frequency for these two protons
I notice something very interesting has taken place. It's not a single peak.
Even though these are identical and should produce a single absorption
I actually see a peak which has four distinct lobes. Now the origin of these lobes is the
interaction of these two protons with their neighbors. See every proton remember is a small
bar magnet and that means that whether they're aligned parallel to or anti-parallel to the applied
magnetic field will cause them to interact differently with the adjacent protons. So if I
consider the effect of these protons which I've highlighted in blue they can interact with the
hydrogens of interest by being all spin up. There are actually three different ways that I can combine
them with two spins up and one spin down and of course there will also be three potential
ways to combine them with two spins down and one spin up. And the final permutation that's
possible with three is to have all spin down. So in the case where all of the neighbors are spin up
they add just a little bit of magnetic field to what's experienced by
those causing the signal and that means it requires just a little bit less of an applied
magnetic field to cause resonance. That's why what should be in theory a single signal is
actually split into four. So these are the source of that multiplicity. Similarly I can look at the
resonance frequency of these three hydrogens and say they must be coupled to or interacting with
my red hydrogens. Now with two hydrogens interacting I have the possibility of having
them both spin up, two possibilities in which I have one up, one down,
and my final possibility in which they're both spin down. So in this case my blue hydrogens
should create a resonance with three lobes. So we refer to this phenomenon as magnetic coupling
and the resulting shape of the peaks as multiplets.
And they follow a rule known as the n plus one rule which simply states that we have n plus
one lobes per multiplet where n is the number of coupled hydrogens. So my red hydrogens are
coupled to three neighbors creating a peak with four lobes. My blue hydrogens are coupled to two
neighbors creating a peak with three lobes. In most simple situations where we're dealing with
saturated compounds with free rotation this rule holds pretty well.
So let's take a look at some multiplet features that we may see in an MR specter as we go forward.
Of course the simplest where n equals one we call a doublet. When there are two couple partners
we get what we call a triplet. Three produces a quartet and so on with four making a quintet
and five making a sextet and so on. Now in many cases they become so complex around this point
that we stop referring to them by their individual names and simply refer to them collectively as
multiplets. Now the intensity of the lobes within the multiplet is also useful information
so we'd like to be able to predict that as well and we can. For example a doublet is always one
to one whereas a triplet is one to two to one and a quartet one to three to three to one
and the pattern continues. Remember this is because of all the different permutations
of alpha and beta spin states for the coupling partners. Now what's really great is if you
forget this pattern you can easily recreate it using a geometric mnemonic. That geometric mnemonic
is known as Pascal's Triangle so we can simply create a series in which we add adjacent numbers
as we go down so one plus two equals three for example here three plus three equals six etc
and Pascal's Triangle allows us to predict the multiplicity in any instance where we have multiple
coupling partners in simple situations like these. So we're now ready to get just a small
taste of the power NMR has to reveal structural information. We're going to begin with a very
simple example but one which clearly shows how we can gather structural information which would
not be available to us from the UV viz, IR or polarimetry experiments that we have covered so far.
We're going to do it using a relatively simple molecule or set of molecules and that is the
structural isomers of chloropropane. So let's construct some hypothetical NMR spectra for the
two different isomers of chloropropane. We'll start with two chloropropane. So here I have my
chlorine attached at the central atom and because of this I'm going to have a spectrum which has
two different resonances. Now it's worth mentioning here I've exaggerated the multiplicities a little
bit I've spaced them out a little bit wider than you might see them in an actual spectrum
so that they're easy for us to see but their position within the spectrum is accurate.
So we see that there are two different kinds of protons in this two chloropropane. First there are
the six methyl protons which are all exactly the same as one another. Now because they're chemically
identical to one another they don't couple to each other but they do have one coupling partner
in this proton right here in the center of the molecule and it has its own resonance
which is split by its six non-equivalent neighbors. So just as we would expect from our previous
discussions on multiplicity we have a very large doublet which corresponds to these six
hydrogens highlighted in blue and a relatively small multiplet produced by this single hydrogen
which is split by many coupling partners. Now if we take a closer look we can see the multiplicity
as exactly as we would predict using Pascal's triangle and that this is actually a one two three
four five six and plus one right this is a septet. So our septet at 3.7 parts per million
tells us we have a proton with many coupling partners very close to an electron withdrawing group
and our doublet at 1.1 parts per million tells us that we have some protons which have a single
coupling partner and that those protons are farther away from the electron withdrawing group
because they resonate upfield. So how can we use this spectrum in comparison to say one chloropropane
and distinguish between these two compounds? Let's take a look at one chloropropane right now.
So when I put my chlorine at the end of the molecule rather than in the center it has very
important and profound effect on the number of resonances that I see. My spectrum is a little
bit more complicated now isn't it? That's because by placing the chlorine at the end I've created
three distinct chemical environments for the protons in the molecule. Those that are directly on the
carbon bearing the chlorine, those one bond away, and those that are two bonds away. So I expect to
see three distinct resonances which I do but not only that their multiplicities are different
than those in my previous example. So in this case I have a triplet that is way upfield
which tells me I've got some hydrogens that are very far away from any electron withdrawing groups
and have two non-equivalent neighbors to which they are magnetically coupled.
I also have a little bit more complicated multiplet here. This one would be called a
sextet and that tells me that I've got some protons which are a little bit closer to the
electron withdrawing group and are coupled to five distinct partners. One, two, three, four, five.
Finally I have another triplet which is farther downfield telling me that I must have
some protons that are very close to the electron withdrawing chlorine and are coupled to two partners
which is a perfect description of these two protons highlighted in red,
coupled to their neighbors in blue. So this spectrum having a triplet at 0.8,
a sextet at 1.6 and another triplet at 3.3 allows me to very clearly and unambiguously assign
that it's one chloropropane. So let's review the material from this lecture. We started by
considering a property of atomic nuclei known as spin and how certain isotopes of certain atoms
have a spin of one half, giving them two possible spin states when an external magnetic field is
applied. There's the low energy parallel state called alpha and the high energy anti-parallel
state called beta. We discussed how the energy difference between these states known as the
Zeeman splitting corresponds to the radiofrequency region of the electromagnetic spectrum and is
proportional to the strength of the magnetic field with which the nuclei are aligning themselves.
We took a look at the design of early spectrometers in which a continuous radio frequency wave is
shined on a sample as the strength of an applied field is varied until resonance is achieved,
resulting in an absorption of the radio wave. We then looked at how the shielding and induced
fields provided by electrons can cause the magnetic field at protons within a molecule to be slightly
different, leading us to the calculations of chemical shift. Finally, we discussed the phenomenon
of magnetic spin-spin coupling in which non-equivalent nuclei which are three bonds away from one
another can share magnetization splitting resonances into a set of lobes called a multiplet.
Next time, we'll take our discussion into the new millennium and look at what is known as PULST or
Fourier Transform NMR. We'll also take a brief look at a few other techniques used to characterize
molecules, specifically x-ray crystallography and mass spectrometry. I'll see you for that discussion
next time.
