In 1815, one of the largest volcanic eruptions in human history took place at Mount Tambora
in Indonesia.
This colossal volcanic eruption injected an unfathomable amount of volcanic ash and debris
into the atmosphere, blocking out a significant fraction of the sunlight reaching the Earth's
surface.
This sent parts of the world into a chill from which they did not awaken until the following
year.
In the middle of the year of 1816, this cloud drifted over Western Europe, leading to what
is sometimes referred to as the year without a summer, which brought a devastating famine.
The result of this was a sustenance crisis, the likes of which the Western world has not
seen in the two hundred years since.
Particularly hard hit in this crisis was the nation of Germany, where food riots, demonstrations
and looting were commonplace that year.
One can only imagine how suddenly an incomprehensibly difficult life must have become for the people
of Europe as this crisis played itself out.
One of those people was a 13-year-old boy by the name of Justice Liebig.
Many historians believe that his traumatic event taking place at such a formative age
so shook this young man's faith in Mother Nature to provide that he dedicated his life
later to researching agricultural chemistry.
His motivations aside, it's undeniable that Liebig's contributions to the field of chemistry
in the decades following the year without a summer opened up a whole new world of chemicals
to study, specifically those chemicals involved in the biology of plants.
Liebig earned his doctorate in 1822 at the University of Erlangen in Bavaria.
After that, in his laboratory in Gießen, Germany and later Munich, Liebig spent much of his
career characterizing and synthesizing a broad range of biologically relevant compounds from
plants.
So prolific was his work that he is often cited as the father of agricultural chemistry,
a well-deserved acknowledgement.
Today, we will swing a pretty wide turn in our study of organic chemistry.
We are going to move from the realm of the harsh reaction conditions and unfamiliar materials
of our synthesis lectures into a more biologically oriented look at organic chemistry.
And we're going to start with one of the classes of compounds that Liebig himself studied.
Now, from the sweet ingredient of sodas like this sugar to the fibrous particles making
up this wood to the tough shell of crabs and lobsters, all the members of this extraordinarily
diverse family of materials have one thing in common.
They're all made up of the same general class for organic compounds, carbohydrates.
In modern culture, we're trained to think of carbohydrates as not much more than a dietary
source of calories, but we're about to see that carbohydrates make up not only small
molecules of caloric value, but also other familiar materials like clothing, building
materials, joint supplements, and even body armor.
In short, we will take a look at these and other biologically important materials crafted
from carbohydrates from the perspective of an organic chemist.
Now, before we break into the exciting and complex world of materials fashioned from
carbohydrates, let's begin by defining a carbohydrate.
This term is sometimes confused by students with the similar sounding hydrocarbons that
we encountered earlier in our course.
Now, the distinction here is that the hydro of hydrocarbons refers to just hydrogen, while
the hydrocarbohydrates refers not just to hydrogen, but to water, which includes one
half molar equivalent of oxygen.
So as I mentioned before, carbohydrate refers to a compound composed of carbon and water
in equal parts.
So they'll have a generic formula of CNH2ON.
Now we've come pretty close to carbohydrates before with some of the compounds that we've
looked at previously.
Take the example of glycerol.
Now glycerol's formula is C3H8O3.
So it's got a little bit too much hydrogen in the formula to meet our requirements to
be classified as a carbohydrate.
But I can modify my glycerol structure slightly to make a carbohydrate.
So let's bring up two copies of glycerol here and modify them to create a carbohydrate.
I've got to get rid of two hydrogens.
So let's start by removing two hydrogens from the end of my glycerol molecule.
When I do this, I can insert a carbon-oxygen double bond creating C3H6O3, a carbohydrate.
But I can also remove two hydrogens from the center.
If I remove two hydrogens from an interior motif here, I get C3H6O3, also a carbohydrate.
But I've changed the names to glyceraldehyde and glycerone in my two structures.
Glyceraldehyde because the carbonyl is a terminal position like it would be in an aldehyde.
Glycerone because the carbonyl isn't an interior carbon just as it would be if these groups
were aliphatic and I were dealing with a ketone.
So what I've done here is created three different classes of compounds.
Glycerol would be considered a sugar alcohol, whereas my glyceraldehyde and glycerone are
sugars which we call individually aldoses and ketoses, referring to whether the carbonyl
is internal or external.
Now I've mentioned Alexander Butlerov before, most notably as the mentor of two of the most
revered and mutually repulsed chemists of the 19th century, Markovnikov and Zetsev.
And just as he's contributed to many other fields, the history of carbohydrate chemistry
would not be the same without him.
In 1861 Butlerov published a paper entitled, Formation of a Sugar-like Substance, in which
he detailed a synthesis using formaldehyde and a base to form what he believed to be
simple sugars.
He named his new substance Formos for the formaldehyde starting material he used and
the class of compounds which he believed he created, sugars.
In a sense Butlerov was right, but he created not just one sugar, but a mixture of sugars
which interconverted through a series of aldol reactions, forming a concoction of carbohydrates.
Now in Butlerov's day, a quick taste would be all it took to make his observations publication
worthy.
Today of course we cringe at the idea of tasting anything prepared in the lab, and we require
a bit more detailed analysis to identify the structures of the compounds that we make.
Butlerov was unable to surmise that there are many, many carbohydrates which can be produced
and isolated from one another, using techniques more modern to the science of organic chemistry.
These carbohydrates are broadly classified by the number of sugar molecules which we
combine to make them up.
See an individual simple sugar molecule can be connected to another one, in several ways
which produce chains of varying lengths and geometries.
And these larger structures, built of simple sugars, are still referred to as carbohydrates,
but we call them complex carbohydrates, and these are classified based on their lengths
and geometries.
But we're getting ahead of ourselves.
Let's step back and consider the most fundamental of carbohydrates first.
There are those which cannot be hydrolyzed into simpler carbohydrates, and those are
the ones we want to deal with now.
We call these kinds of sugars monosaccharides.
When two such units are joined together in a condensation reaction, we get a disaccharide.
And finally we have polysaccharides, which can have anywhere from just a few to literally
thousands of condensed monosaccharide units.
So let's start at the beginning, the simplest class of carbohydrates, monosaccharides.
As I mentioned before, we break down these simple sugars into two major classes, aldoses
and ketoses.
I've prepared the structures of four different aldoses for you here, so we can see their
structural similarities and differences.
Now the striking structural similarity here, of course, is that we have an aldehyde carbonyl.
So we call this molecule an aldotryose.
Aldo indicating that we have a carbonyl at the end of the chain, triose indicating that
there are three carbons in the chain.
So similarly, we would call this one aldotetrose, aldo for a terminal carbonyl, tetrose for
four carbons in the chain, and the trend continues through aldopentose and aldohexoses and beyond.
Now we use a very similar naming system for ketoses, that is when the carbonyl bond is
interior.
For example, this molecule would be a keto because the carbonyl bond is internal and
a triose because there are three carbons, so I have a keto triose.
My next example would be a keto, tetrose, and so on through the remainder, a keto pentose
and a keto hexose.
But defining the number of carbons in the chain and the location of the carbonyl bond
in a simple sugar isn't enough to let us unambiguously identify carbohydrates.
You see, all along a chain of hexoses, pentoses, tetroses, and even trios, there are one or
more chiral centers.
Now, particularly in the case of longer monosaccharides like hexoses, chirality can generate a large
number of potential stereoisomers.
Now that's why I drew my sample molecules in the previous slides in a fissure projection.
Remember a fissure projection is created by drawing a compound so that all of the horizontally
depicted bonds are coming out of the plane and all the vertical ones are falling back
behind the plane.
Now Fissure won his Nobel Prize in part for his characterization of the structure of glucose.
And a large part of his technique for this was to use his systematic form of projection
which made all of the stereochemical relationships in these complex molecules evident.
So let's begin with the simplest of all carbohydrates, the triose glyceraldehyde.
You can see clearly that glyceraldehyde has only one chiral center, so this will be a
relatively easy puzzle to solve.
As a general rule, we draw monosaccharides in a fissure projection with the terminal
carbonyl at the top and then going downward.
So we can then number the carbons of the chain from top to bottom to facilitate the discussion.
Now notice that only C2 of glyceraldehyde is chiral.
So I can draw two enantiomers, one of which was named plus glyceraldehyde and the other
minus glyceraldehyde.
Now remember, this was a long time before the con-engled pre-log rules had been proposed
and Fissure had only physical properties of saccharides to go on for identifying their
stereochemistry.
So he designated glyceraldehydes as plus and minus based on their ability to rotate a special
kind of light called plain polarized light.
We're going to discuss this phenomenon in detail during our spectroscopy lectures.
But for now, let's just say that the plus and minus glyceraldehyde designations stand
for clockwise and counterclockwise rotation of that light.
Now if I start with glyceraldehyde and build larger monosaccharides by adding new interior
carbons to the chain, I'll call my construct a D sugar.
If instead I start with a minus glyceraldehyde, I'll have to call that construct an L sugar.
The D and L designations are again based on the molecules interaction with light.
D for clockwise from dextra and L for counterclockwise from livra.
For example, I can create D erythros by inserting one new carbon into the chain of D glyceraldehyde.
I can also make a molecule of D threose in the same way by changing the chirality of
my newly inserted chiral center.
So not surprisingly, the introduction of a second chiral center has led to the possibility
of diastereomers for my aldotetroses.
Of course, I could instead have an L configuration for the bottom chiral carbon of my fissure
projection leading to the other two possible stereochemistries, L-aldotetroses, each a
mirror image of one of the D-aldoteroses.
Now this interesting set of stereoisomers in the fissure projection combined to produce
a new relationship in stereochemistry known as erythro and threoenantiomers.
When aligned in a fissure projection orientation, if similar groups are on the same side as
they are in erythros, then we use a prefix erythro to name that enantiomer.
Conversely, if groups of interest are at opposition, we use the threo designation.
As the size of the monosaccharide grows, so do the number of possible stereoisomers.
By the time we reach hexoses, there are eight stereoisomers possible for D-aldotetroses
and four for D-ketohexoses.
Things get out of hand pretty quickly here.
Now, fortunately, there are just a handful of these which tend to make appearances in
natural systems.
And two of the most frequent are the aldotetroses known as glucose and the ketothexose known
as fructose.
For simplicity's sake, we'll be using just these two monosaccharides as examples as we
go forward in this lecture.
But keep in mind that the chemistry we're about to see can easily be applied to any of
the dozens of small saccharides that can be created with just a few carbons in the chain.
So far, I've drawn all the carbohydrates under investigation today as linear compounds.
But you may recall from our lecture on carbonyl compounds that a carbonyl activated by acid
in the presence of an alcohol forms a motif called a hemiacetal.
Well, in the case of monosaccharides, we have both a carbonyl and an alcohol available to
participate in this kind of chemistry intramolecularly.
When this reaction takes place between the carbonyl of a carbohydrate and one of its
own hydroxyl groups, a relatively stable ring of five or six atoms can sometimes form.
We call these cyclic sugars furanose in the case of a five-membered ring and pyranose
in the case of a six-membered ring.
Each of these is named for the cyclic ether which makes up their backbone.
The result of this is an equilibrium interconversion between the acyclic, aldose, or ketose form
and the cyclic, furanose, or pyranose form.
So let's take a look again at glucose and aldohexose with a fissure projection which
looks like this.
Now we see yet another reason why fissure projections are so useful.
Since all of the carbon-carbon bonds are already aligned so that they curve in on each other,
the cis-trans relationships of groups within the cyclic form are very easy to determine
from this projection.
I simply turn my fissure projection on its side to get a better look at the forming ring.
For example, hydroxyls which are erythro to one another in the aldohexose will be cis
to one another in the resulting pyranose.
If I complete the cyclization in this fictitious orientation, I get what's commonly known as
a Hayworth projection with a planar six-membered ring, which we all know can't exist, yet
We do this anyway sometimes because it so clearly shows the cis-trans relationships in
the cyclic form of the sugar.
Now once the ring is placed into a proper chair conformation, we see that there's still
one stereochemical consideration left.
Since the carbonyl is planar, the attack on that motif during cyclization can take place
from either face, meaning that there are really two different enantiomers of any pyranose
or pyranose sugar, which we sometimes call animers, and we designate these as alpha and
beta animers.
In the case of D-leucopyranose, all of the existing hydroxyl groups can be placed in
the equatorial position simultaneously, so it's not much of a wonder why this sugar
likes to exist as a pyranose ring, right?
If the newly formed hydroxyl is in the axial position, we call this an alpha-anomer.
If the new group is instead in the equatorial conformation, we have the beta-anomer.
By convention, we assign the designation of C1 for the terminal carbon at the closest
to the carbonyl end of the uncyclized carbohydrate and number each carbon from there sequentially.
So the anomeric C1, gluco-pyranose, is a crucial site for modification in both the lab and
in nature.
This inspection of gluco-pyranose reveals that the C1 is the only carbon bonded to
a pair of electron withdrawing oxygen atoms.
So it's the most electrophilic and most likely to participate in substitution reactions,
like this very simple reaction between alpha, D, gluco-pyranose, and acidified methanol.
This reaction generates an equilibrium mixture of both the alpha and beta-functionalized
monosaccharide.
When the C1 is modified this way, we call the product a glycoside, and the newly added
group an eglycone.
So let's take a look at a glycoside that has some historical relevance.
This is a molecule called salicin, and salicin is a glycoside with anti-inflammatory properties,
and it's also present in the bark of willow trees.
Recent Greeks knew that chewing on the bark of a willow tree gave pain relief and alleviated
headaches and joint problems.
What they didn't know was that what they were doing while chewing the bark was extracting
this particular compound, salicin.
Now salicin consists of a gluco-pyranose, which is bonded to a hydroxybenzyl alcohol, a glycon.
Once this compound has been ingested, the water in your bloodstream and the enzymes
in your blood go at breaking this down through a hydrolysis reaction.
It takes a water molecule to break that link, separating the gluco-pyranose from the hydroxybenzyl
alcohol.
Now at this point, the hydroxybenzyl alcohol is oxidized by other enzymes in your body
in preparation for removing it, and in doing so it creates salicylic acid.
This same compound into which aspirin degrades to give joint pain relief, headache relief,
and other beneficial properties as well.
Now all of this amazing and rich chemistry is done with a few monosaccharides and an
endless library of glycones.
But I believe that you were promised more.
I still owe you an explanation of disaccharides and polysaccharides, so let's get started
on those.
Our last topic was a perfect lead-in to disaccharides.
We looked at how glycosidic linkages conform to almost anything with an amine or alcohol
group on it, really anything that's nucleophilic.
And if you were really on top of your gain, you might have wondered if all those other
alcohol groups on the sugar might make it possible for one sugar molecule to bond to
another using the same motif.
Now if you had that thought, give yourself a gold star, you are spot on.
Although theoretically it's possible for any hydroxyl of one monosaccharide to form
a glycosidic linkage with another, there are three arrangements which we principally
see in nature.
And we distinguish these linkages by numbering the monosaccharide, acting as the aglycone
with prime numbers.
So check this out.
Take the system 1, 1 prime, 1, 4 prime, and 1, 6 prime.
These are the linkages that we most often see in nature, meaning that the C1 will link
to a different oxygen from one of the carbons in the other saccharide.
Now a familiar disaccharide with this 1, 4 prime linkage is maltose.
Maltose is formed by the glycosidic linkage of two glucose units through an alpha-anomer.
Now here one glucose acts as the glycoside, bonding through its C1, and the other acts
as the aglycone, bonding through its C4 prime.
Notice that this leaves the C1 prime to interconvert between enantiomers through an equilibrium
process, so this disaccharide can still open and close in at least one of its rings.
Maltose is most familiar as the starting material for beer, made by the hydrolysis of starches
from grains in the first part of the brewing process.
Much of the maltose is consumed by the yeast, which are used to brew the beer, but a small
amount is retained in the beverage.
So the next time you have a beer with your friends, take a sip and pronounce.
That has some lovely 4-0-alpha-D-glucoparanosyl-D-glucopyrinose notes.
You may wind up drinking alone after that, but at least you are telling the truth.
Now the 1, 6 prime linkages are less common, but they do exist in a few disaccharides.
They're actually more relevant to polysaccharides, as we'll soon see.
One example of this type of linkage in a disaccharide is Gentio bios, a 1, 6 prime disaccharide
between two glucose units.
Now by connecting to the aglycone at its 6 prime carbon, which is not part of the pyranose
ring, additional conformational flexibility is introduced, making a nice building block
for branched polysaccharides.
Now a prime example of a 1, 1 prime linkage is the familiar sweetening agent sucrose.
Sucrose consists of a glucose and a fructose unit linked by a bridging oxygen through one
another's anomeric carbons.
So in this unusual case, both sugars are acting as glycosides for themselves and as aglycones
for their bonding partner.
Since both anomeric carbons are occupied by the glycosidic linkage, sucrose has no free
anomeric carbon to open back up in equilibrium with the cyclic form.
Now this is important because sugars are much more prone to oxidative degradation when in
their acyclic forms.
So this makes sucrose much slower to oxidize than other disaccharides and therefore a popular
choice for use in preserves.
Polysaccharides, as you might expect from the name, are simply longer chains of sugars
in which most of them are acting as both glycosides and as aglycones, perpetuating a polymer built
from monosaccharide units.
Many materials with which we're familiar are made from polysaccharides.
For example, cellulose in the cotton fibers in these cotton balls.
It's made up almost exclusively of D-glucose units attached by beta 1, 4 prime glycosidic
bonds.
That same material makes up about one half of the mass of dry wood.
Cellulose combines into closely packed fibrils which interact with one another by hydrogen
bonding, forming a strong, tough, insoluble material.
Now cotton balls and lumber don't seem terribly appetizing to me as a human, but certain animal
species, most notably cows and termites, have symbiotic bacteria living in their digestive
tract which help them to break down the cellulose in those materials and use them as a food
source.
Now by contrast, switching the beta linkage to an alpha linkage gives us amylose, a starch
which curves on itself into a helix.
It can be digested and used as a source of nutrition for higher order animals, even those
without bacterial help or for stomachs to help break it down.
Now if we take amylose and branch it out every 30 subunits or so by cross-linking another
chain at a 6 prime position, we get amylopectin, a water-soluble thickening agent used in cooking
applications.
More extensive branching of the same kind leads to glycogen, one of the human body's
primary energy stores.
If you have enough glycogen stored up in your muscles, you're just a hydrolysis reaction
away from additional glucose molecules for use as energy to help you run that marathon
or finish that work day.
As a final example of polysaccharides, let's take a look at the remarkable armor which
protects insects and arthropods from cicadas to crabs.
You might find it hard to believe that the same class of materials that's used to sweeten
soft drinks can also make up armor which protects sea creatures and insects from predators,
but it does.
Chitin, the material from which this tough exoskeleton is made, is a polymer of a glucose
derivative called n-acetylglucosamine, and acetylglucosamine is a pyranose form of glucose
with an amide-functional group substituted here at the C2 position of the ring.
Now, polymerize this molecule through beta 1,4 prime glycosidic bonds and you have chitin,
a material so tough that once formed it can't grow with the animal.
This is why crabs and some insects periodically molt, shedding their chitin armor and producing
a whole new, slightly larger suit of armor once the old one's been shuffled off.
But the secret to chitin's strength is not only in the glycosidic linkages, but also
in the amide-functionality added to that sugar ring.
Now you can see here that when multiple strands of chitin are aligned, the aminitrogen and
carbonyl from one chitin can hydrogen bond to others on a separate strand.
This H bond network contributes to the remarkable strength of chitin which protects against
predation.
It's also the reason that crustaceans and insects have to molt, shedding their old exoskeletons
during periods of concerted growth during which a new exoskeleton is formed.
The toughening provided by this hydrogen bonding network can simply be turned off again by
modifying the amin group of glucosamine yet again.
In the body, our joint cartilage is made up partially of glucosamino glycans which are
long polysaccharides consisting of alternating acetyl glucosamine and another modified sugar
called uronic acid.
As opposed to tough and flexible chitin, glucosamino glycans like this one are springy
and lubricating because the hydrogen bonding network is disrupted by the acetyl motif which
allows one chain to slide along the other more easily.
This is the reason that many believers religiously take doses of glucosamine in the hopes of limiting
cartilage loss associated with arthritis.
So let's sum up for the day.
Today we discussed carbohydrates, a broad and diverse class of compounds with the chemical
formula CNH2ON.
We took a look at Fischer projections of the two main classes of simple carbohydrates,
those being aldoses and ketoses, which differ by the location of their carbonyl motif.
We then discussed the stereochemistry of simple carbohydrates and the concept of erythro and
threoenantiomers.
After that, we discussed the cyclization of simple sugars by reacting a hydroxyl with
the carbonyl in an intramolecular reaction to form a hemiacetal and how the most common
of these are five-membered furanose and six-membered puranose rings.
We also recognized that the hemiacetal carbon can have two distinct stereochemistries leading
us to label it an anomeric carbon.
We looked at how these cyclic sugars can react through their anomeric carbon to form
alpha and beta glycosidic linkages to new groups called aglaicones.
When the aglaicone is another sugar itself, we form a disaccharide, like maltose from
beer or sucrose in fruit preserves.
We discussed the 1,4' 1,6' and 1,1' glycosidic linkages and how the 1,4' linkage is well
suited to formation of long polymer strands.
The 1,6' linkage imparts branching to such polymers and the 1,1' linkage in sucrose prohibits
its two sugar units from opening and oxidizing, making it a perfect choice for food applications
because of its resistance to oxidation.
Finally, we considered polysaccharides of glucopyrinose, including cellulose, which has
beta glycosidic linkages giving it tensile strength, in contrast to amylose and amylopectin,
which have alpha glycosidic linkages endowing them with a higher solubility and making them
more digestible for humans.
We also saw how some animals like arthropods and insects chemically modify the glucoside
subunits of cellulose to form even more powerful sets of interstrand hydrogen bonds, which
endow their exoskeletons with formidable physical properties.
Next time, we're going to take a look at a very special aldo pentose, ribose, and how
it acts as the central piece of one of nature's most awesome molecular creations, DNA.
I'll see you then.
