Last time we started considering how spectroscopists use light as a means of probing the structure
and behavior of molecular systems.
Specifically, we took a look at the ultraviolet and visible regions of the electromagnetic
spectrum and how radiation of this energy is perfectly suited to excite electrons from
one molecular orbital to another, giving us a way to probe the energetics of these kinds
of systems.
Today, we're going to take a look at the red end of the visible spectrum and what lies
beyond that.
Just like UV light, infrared light from the sun is constantly bombarding us.
Like UV light, though, infrared light isn't associated with any particularly dangerous
health effects.
Infrared is still a very interesting part of the electromagnetic spectrum, though.
Objects at or near room temperature naturally emit this wavelength of light, and that includes
you.
Believe it or not, you glow in the dark.
The catch is that you glow in the dark at too long of a wavelength to be detected by
the human eye.
Now, scientists like those at NASA have developed cameras and telescopes capable of detecting
the infrared emissions of both small objects here on Earth and of celestial bodies on the
other side of the known universe, creating false color images like these in which the
detected infrared light has been shown as different colors.
But infrared light isn't just radiated.
Like all other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, it can also be absorbed.
And just as a warm object cools by radiating energy as I are light, so can an object be
warmed by absorbing it.
Now, last time I made it sound like Ritter was stricken with a divine inspiration to
look outside the blue end of the visible spectrum.
But in fact, his experiment was almost certainly inspired by one conducted earlier that year
by another English scientist, Sir William Herschel.
Herschel was a prolific astronomer, a composer and a mathematician, a true Renaissance man.
And he was the one who made a truly inspired discovery when he asked a simple question,
which color of light is most effective at heating a surface when shined on it?
To answer this question, he used a prism to diffract sunlight into a spectrum and placed
thermometers with blackened bulbs at regular intervals within that spectrum.
So let's bring up this IR spectrum, or visible spectrum, with infrared just outside of it.
So Herschel saw that the temperature indicated by his thermometers increased across the spectrum,
from blue to red.
And knowing what we do about the amount of energy contained in photons of different wavelengths,
it might seem a little bit counterintuitive at first.
But Herschel essentially proved that red light is absorbed more efficiently by objects that
are near room temperature.
But the pertinent result of Herschel's experiment wasn't the trend he saw in the visible spectrum.
His real breakthrough came when he wondered if the trend continued beyond the spectrum
that he could see.
And sure enough, when he placed another thermometer just beyond the red portion of the spectrum,
it read an even higher temperature than the one in the red light.
Clearly, there was some form of light beyond the red portion of the spectrum, prompting
him to call his new discovery, infrared light.
Today we're going to take a look at how modern scientists use Herschel's discovery to probe
the structures of organic compounds and make new discoveries today more than 200 years
after its initial discovery.
Modern spectroscopy in the infrared region is conducted using instruments very similar
to those used for the UV visible.
The simplest of these will follow the same format, starting with a light source, but
in this case a light source which emits powerful infrared light.
That light will again go through a monochromator which will selectively direct one wavelength
at a time through a beam splitter.
The beam splitter will split the beam into two, giving us two different beams of infrared
light, one traversing a reference cell, one traversing a sample cell which is exactly
the same but contains one additive and that's the molecules that we want to analyze.
As the beams exit, their intensities are measured by two detectors and compared.
Now there are much more sophisticated apparatus, but this is the simplest way to conduct and
therefore to understand infrared.
Okay, so now that we know how scientists shine infrared light on samples and measure which
wavelengths of light are absorbed, but we still need to try to understand exactly why
anyone would want to do such a thing.
Now to explain this, I want to show you a molecule called fluorinone on the big screen
here using my ChemDraw Chem3D software.
Now we're used to seeing molecules in this kind of configuration when we see them in
textbooks and papers.
Notice that all of the bond lengths and angles are identical and ideal.
The molecule appears perfectly planar.
Every bond in my benzene rings is exactly 120 degrees.
Everything looks exactly as it should, right?
But do molecules really look like this?
Do they really act like this?
Are they rigid, unmoving, and symmetrical?
No, of course not.
This representation is done using average bond angles and average bond lengths of a dynamic
set of bonds.
They really look more like this.
What's running right now is a dynamic simulation which approximates the random motions of each
atom within a molecule.
The bonds between and among those atoms are stretching, bending and twisting in many different
ways.
Just put more simply, bonds vibrate.
They don't all vibrate in the same way either.
Notice that the carbon-oxygen bond is oscillating very slowly compared to some of those carbon-hydrogen
bonds.
If you watch for a while, you can see not only individual bonds stretching and compressing,
but other sets of bonds are opening and closing like scissors and even twisting.
This is really evident when I turn the molecule to look at it edge-on.
Instead of being perfectly flat and planar, you'll notice that some of the vibrations
cause the molecule to flex and twist in and out of the plane that we usually use to represent
it.
Let me stop my simulation now and bring my molecule back to its idealized state.
So we're used to seeing the molecules drawn in this way, but to the eyes of a seasoned
chemist, it's apparent that they really aren't like this.
When it comes to actually modeling how molecules behave, we have to learn how to think of a
picture like this in terms of that animation that we saw previously.
In order to understand infrared spectroscopy, we need to begin to think of molecules in
terms of that dynamic model that I just showed you, rather than the rigid, idealized structures
that are so often depicted.
So let's begin breaking this down by looking at a set of much simpler molecules and how
they behave.
First, let's consider carbon monoxide, two atoms joined by a triple bond.
Now with only two atoms, there's only one possible bond vibration which can take place,
a stretching between the atoms.
But what if we move on to carbon dioxide, a molecule with three atoms?
Well, now we can conceive of vibrations involving a symmetrical stretch, an asymmetrical stretch,
a symmetrical bend, and an asymmetrical bend.
So there are actually four different ways in which a CO2 molecule can vibrate.
If we continue adding atoms, we find that the total number of these vibrations, which
we call vibrational modes, is equal to 3n minus 5, where n is the number of atoms in
a linear molecule, or 3n minus 6 for nonlinear molecules.
So this means that for a compound as simple as methane, we expect to find nine different
types of vibrations going on within that molecule.
Carbon has 24, and even more complex molecules like fluorinone have dozens or even hundreds
of vibrational modes, each with their own distinct frequency.
So we've now covered how IR spectroscopy is conducted, and the vibration of bonds and
sets of bonds in organic molecules.
And I'm sure by now you're wondering, what is it that brings these two apparently disparate
concepts together?
The answer is this.
Many bond vibrational frequencies are the same as those of infrared light.
And just as electronic transitions could be promoted by just the right photon in a UV
visible experiment, so can transitions in the vibrations of a molecule be introduced
by just the right infrared photon.
When a bond vibrating in a particular frequency encounters a photon of identical frequency,
that photon can be absorbed, increasing the amplitude of the associated vibration in
the process.
This is the absorption which is measured by the spectrophotometer.
Now the frequencies which correspond to the vibrations of bonds in organic molecules
are on the order of billions of cycles per second, or billions of hertz, much faster
than the model I showed you.
This produces some pretty unwieldy numbers for frequency, of course.
So in IR spectroscopy, we instead use a unit called wave numbers.
A wave number is simply the reciprocal of a photon's wavelength in centimeters.
For example, light with a wavelength of 5 microns, or .0005 centimeters, which is a
typical IR wavelength, will have a wave number of 2000, 2000 reciprocal centimeters.
Of course, as you might imagine, we have a pretty good idea of the vibrational frequencies
of different types of bonds near room temperatures.
It's actually easier to predict than you might think.
You simply have to think of atoms and bonds as though they were weights and springs.
Let me demonstrate this for you.
If I connect a set of light weights by a fairly stiff spring and give it some energy, the
vibrational frequency is expected to be fairly high.
And this is because the light weights have only a small amount of momentum which is easily
overcome by the strong spring in order to reverse the masses direction.
Of course, right now we have nothing to compare this to, so let's make a change and connect
a heavier weight to the same kind of spring.
You see that the spring needs more time to overcome the greater momentum of the larger
weight, causing the frequency of the oscillation to be lower.
I can also alter the frequency by adjusting the stiffness of the spring.
For example, connecting similar weights to a stronger spring means that the spring can
overcome the momentum of those weights more easily and reverse the motion of the mass
more quickly.
So we've increased the vibrational frequency in this case.
So larger masses and weaker springs lead to slower vibrations.
If we translate this phenomenon from the macroscopic example of weights and springs to the molecular
level, atoms would be our weights and the chemical bonds between them would be our springs.
We would say that larger atoms and weaker bonds lead to slower vibrations.
In other words, a C-H bond should vibrate faster than a carbonyl bond, which should
vibrate faster than a carbon-oxygen ether bond.
In fact, this is exactly what we see in IR spectroscopy.
Now there's one more catch to the science of IR spectroscopy.
It's known as the IR Selection Rule.
Now the IR Selection Rule states simply this, that a vibrating bond or set of bonds can only
absorb a photon of the same frequency if that vibration causes a change in the dipole of
the molecule.
No dipole change means no absorption.
Strong dipole change means a strong absorption.
So it should come as no surprise that functional groups which usually have strong dipoles in
their bonds are often powerful IR absorbers, while less reactive bonds like alkyl C-H bonds
tend to absorb very weakly or sometimes not even at all.
Now you've probably noticed that most functional groups contain good strong polar bonds to
at least one hydrogen or double and triple bonds among larger atoms, sometimes both.
So the signatures associated with the most common functional groups in infrared are typically
found at higher frequency regions of the spectrum, whereas the vibrations within the skeleton
tend to have absorptions in the lower frequency region of the spectrum on the other side.
The few but distinct absorptions caused by functional groups leads us to define the higher
frequency region of the IR spectrum as the functional group region, because it's often
where we find the information we need to catalog which functional groups are present in the
sample and which are not.
What this region tells us very little about the carbon-carbon bonds within the scaffold
of the molecule, which is usually fairly large with many complex vibrational modes.
Too many to consider individually, but these types of molecular vibrations tend to have
lower frequency IR absorptions, so we've labeled that region of the spectrum, the fingerprint
region, for the fact that its complexity makes it difficult to interpret but unique to each
molecule which generates it.
So, let's take a look at a few IR spectra and see if we can make sense of the information
that they contain, starting with the functional group region of some common hydrocarbons.
Let's take a look at three different hydrocarbons with which we're very familiar.
The saturated hydrocarbon pentane, one pentene, a terminal alkyne, and one pentine, a terminal
alkyne.
So these molecules are all very similar to one another structurally with one distinct
difference, that difference being that the degree of saturation or unsaturation is changing.
So let's begin by taking a look at the infrared spectrum of pentane.
Now we've taken these spectra from a database called the AIST database.
They're available online free of charge, so if you'd like to check them out for yourself,
be sure that you find the URL and have a look.
It's a very, very broad database with lots of really good data to see, certainly more
than I'm going to show you today.
So let's start with pentane again.
Here's my structure.
It's a simple hydrocarbon consisting only of carbon-carbon single bonds and carbon-hydrogen
single bonds, so I expect to see primarily evidence of those kinds of bonds in the molecule.
Now looking at the functional group region, which is over here on the left-hand side at
my higher frequencies and therefore higher wave numbers, I see that there's a very strong
absorbance at about 2900 wave numbers, and this is a classic signature for an SP3 hybridized
carbon-hydrogen bond.
The rest of this is the fingerprint of the molecule, which corresponds to the backbone
atoms and their particular vibrations.
So this is a very simple infrared spectrum of a very simple hydrocarbon and a great place
to start.
When I move to one pentane, I'm going to introduce a few changes to the molecule, most notably
the hybridization of two of the carbon atoms which bear CH bonds.
By changing their hybridization state from an SP3 to an SP2, I'm going to increase the
S character of those bonds, and that means that I'm going to make them a little bit tighter,
a little bit tougher, and that means their frequency should increase ever so slightly.
So let's keep our eyes on the functional group region as I switch my spectrum over from
pentane to one pentane.
Here it is, a classic signature of an SP2 CH bond.
I now have an absorption not only at 2900 wave numbers corresponding to my SP3 hybridized
carbon-hydrogen bonds, but I also have a new absorption, which is taking place at about
3100 wave numbers.
Now remember, my axis here is transmittance, so my peaks are actually valleys.
So the lower the spectrum goes, the stronger the absorption is.
Okay, so let's move on to one pentane after we think for just a moment about what kind
of change we expect to see in the functional group region.
I'm going to be changing the hybridization state of at least two of my atoms here.
These two are going to go from SP2 to SP3.
Excuse me, they're going to go from SP2 to SP, and that means they'll have even more
S-character.
And having even more S-character means I expect to see, that's right, an infrared absorption
at an even higher frequency.
So let's make that change now.
Sure enough, here is my absorption at about 3300 wave numbers, a perfect signature for
an SP-hybridized carbon-hydrogen bond, just like the one I have in one pentane.
But remember, we talked about the importance of polarity and how IR is a great tool for
probing the structures and presence of functional groups.
So let's put some more functional groups in and see what happens to our IR spectra.
Let's compare one pentanol to pentanoic acid.
Both compounds, which we know, have very polar CO and OH bonds.
Well, the IR spectrum of one pentanol has a very clear signature for an OH.
It's this large, broad peak here.
Now the peak is fairly broad because OHs have a tendency to hydrogen bond to one another
and exchange back and forth between and among molecules.
And so this broadens their peaks out a little bit because their chemical environments can
change as the experiment progresses.
Nonetheless, I can see it very clearly here.
And on top of that peak, I can also see my SP3 carbon hydrogens.
So what I have here is a very obvious functional group region for an aliphatic alcohol.
Now if I make a slight change here and oxidize my one pentanol down to pentanoic acid, let's see what happens.
Okay, two changes that we can point to directly.
The first of which is that the OH peak has gotten broader,
and also that this very large absorbance has come into my spectrum at around 1700 wave numbers.
So we can easily explain this broadness here by, again, the exchange of my OH bond from the pentanoic acid,
not the bond itself, mind you, but the hydrogen being exchanged.
But what's causing the really, really powerful absorbance here at 1700 at a lower frequency?
That's the presence of a carbonyl.
Heavier carbon and oxygen atoms lead to lower frequency vibrations in that particular bond.
So once again, my functional group region has given me a very clear signal here.
I have an aliphatic organic acid.
Let's continue and do a few more functional groups.
How about the IR of ketones and esters, some more carbonyl-containing compounds?
Now we should be able to use what we know so far to get a rough idea of what these will look like.
Two pentanone is a very clean IR spectrum here.
Obviously aliphatic because we have strong absorptions here at about 2900.
Now the strong absorption isn't because the carbon-hydrogen bond is very polar actually.
The strong absorption is because there are so many of those bonds in the molecule.
But in addition to that, I have my carbonyl absorbing at about 1700 wave numbers.
So this is a very obvious functional group region for an aliphatic ketone.
It shares some of its features in common with my organic acids,
but it's missing the critical OH signal which would tell me it's an acid.
So you need to think in terms of not only what's present in your spectrum when you're doing an analysis,
but also what's not there.
The absence of peaks can be just as informative as the presence.
Now let's move on to butyl acetate, an ester compound.
Very similar, isn't it, to two pentanone, sp3CHs, and my carbonyl.
But there's another very strong absorbance which is working its way down into the fingerprint region.
But it's so strong that I can easily pick it out.
It's right here.
And this is one of the absorbances which is commonly caused by the presence of a carbon-oxygen single bond.
Remember double bonds are stronger so they create a higher frequency vibration.
Carbon-oxygen single bonds would be weaker but have the same sized atoms.
Therefore we see a lower frequency vibration.
One last look at the fingerprint region.
Let's take a look at the IR of amines, amines.
I'm going to compare a primary, secondary, and tertiary amine here.
First let's look at the primary amine, pentalamine.
Again, easily seen as an aliphatic.
And we also have two absorptions that are slightly higher in frequency than my aliphatic sp3CHs.
And those aren't from an alkyne proton.
Those are from the NH protons here.
This is from an asymmetric stretch and symmetric stretch mode.
In other words, it's the interpretive dance portion of the course now.
In other words, if you think of my head as a nitrogen atom and my hands as being the hydrogens,
there are two vibrational modes there because two hydrogen atoms means they can vibrate symmetrically
or asymmetrically relative to the nitrogen.
Hence two peaks in the NH region of my spectrum.
But what if instead I have a secondary amine like N-methylbutylamine?
Well let's watch the spectrum change.
A lot of similarity there in the functional group region but one very crucial change.
There is only one absorbance now in the NH region of the spectrum.
So this tells me that there's only a single NH and therefore only a single vibrational mode,
only a single stretching mode, which can appear.
And the trend continues.
If I move on to a tertiary amine like ethyl diisopropylamine, let's take a look at the spectrum.
Again, the functional group region looks very similar to the others,
except that there are now no NH stretches to be found whatsoever.
So we can not only detect the presence of amines, but we can detect whether they're primary, secondary, or tertiary,
simply using the functional group region of the spectrum.
So the high frequency region of the IR spectrum tells us about the presence or absence of functional groups.
But what about that lower frequency region?
If it's so complex that it defies dissection, why do we bother to collect that information?
Well, we call the low frequency region of the spectrum the fingerprint region,
because just like fingerprints, the complex set of vibrations within the skeleton of a molecule
give it a complex pattern in this region, which is unique to that particular molecule.
So just as a fingerprint can be compared to a reference to identify its owner,
so can the fingerprint region of an IR spectrum be compared to a standard to identify a molecule.
Let's work through a quick example here to see if I can illustrate my point.
I'm going to show you the IR spectra of four different aliphatic esters.
Butylacetate, isobutylacetate, secbutylacetate, and tbutylacetate.
All of these have the same molecular formula, and they all have the same kinds of bonds,
carbon-carbon singles, carbon-hydrogen singles, carbonyls, and carbon-oxygen singles.
So when we look at the functional group region of these molecules and try to tell them apart,
we're going to be a little disappointed.
Let's start with butylacetate.
We can break down the spectrum very easily.
2,900 wave numbers means it's aliphatic, lots of carbon-hydrogen bonds with sp3 carbons,
clear presence of a carbonyl, and also the clear presence of a CO single bond.
But what about all these other little absorptions in here?
Are they really useless?
No, they're not.
Because when I switch my spectrum from butylacetate to isobutylacetate,
I want you to keep your eye on the functional group region the first time.
Hardly anything has changed.
So looking at this from a functional group region perspective, the two spectra appear almost identical.
Let me go back again to butylacetate.
All the same maxima, all the same peaks, and essentially the same frequencies.
So could we tell them apart from one another?
And the answer, of course, is yes, as long as I have a reference spectrum.
If I know the specific pattern that occurs in the functional group region,
take a look at this now as I change the fingerprint region, excuse me.
Take a look at the fingerprint region as I switch the spectrum back to isobutylacetate once more.
We see some specific changes now.
If I switch to secbutylacetate, even greater difference, moving over to tbutylacetate, even more variability.
So even though I can't dissect every peak there and break them all down into their individual vibrational modes,
in the case of the fingerprint region of the spectrum, I don't have to,
because I can always go to a data library just like the AIST and compare it to the data that I see when I run my experiment.
So let's summarize what we've learned about FTIR spectroscopy today.
We talked about what lies beyond the red portion of the visible spectrum,
a form of radiation with lower energy than red light, earning it the name InfraRed.
We took a brief look at the layout of a very basic IR spectrophotometer,
and how, just like UV visible spectrophotometers, they split and compare light beams
which pass through reference cells and sample cells to determine the transmittance of a sample.
We looked at molecular structures in a new light as well,
not as a rigid construct of ideal bond lengths and angles,
but as a dynamic, vibrating framework with many degrees of freedom for its atoms to move,
and therefore its bonds to stretch and bend.
We covered how these vibrations tend to have frequencies corresponding to those of InfraRed photons,
and these photons can be absorbed when they encounter a bond vibrating at that frequency,
as long as the vibration causes a change in the overall dipole of the molecule.
We discussed factors affecting the rates of vibrations in both macroscopic systems and in bonds.
How lighter atoms joined by tighter bonds lead to higher vibrational frequencies.
Of course, this means that hydrogen-containing bonds, as well as double and triple bonds to larger atoms,
tend to appear at the higher frequency end of the IR spectrum, called the functional group region,
while vibrations in the carbon scaffold contribute more to the complex,
but equally useful, fingerprint region in the lower frequencies.
Next time, we'll turn our attention to a phenomenon different from absorbance,
a new form of interaction between light and matter, called optical rotation.
I'll see you then.
