Today, I'm going to show you how to do the impossible.
Okay, it's a little bit dramatic, but not entirely inaccurate.
Now, what would you say if I told you that I know how to deprotonate an alkane?
Now, remember, the hydrogens of an aliphatic alkane, like the hydrogens in a molecule of ethane,
for example, are the single weakest acids of any compound that we've studied to date,
with a pKa of somewhere around 60. Now, that's literally trillions of times
less acidic than alkenes, which are themselves trillions of times less acidic than alkynes,
which are an extraordinarily weak acid in their own right.
But if we could deprotonate an alkane, just imagine what a powerful nucleophile the resulting
carb anion would be. It's a tempting target, isn't it? But how do we do it?
So, if we were to have a go at creating such a motif using proton transfer,
we would need a base whose conjugate acid has a pKa of at least 60.
But what would such a base be? Right, the only option would be deprotonated alkane,
so we're right back at our original problem. Okay, you've got me here. This is a little
bit of a trick question. It really is just about impossible to deprotonate an alkane under any
kind of sensible laboratory conditions. But there is a class of compounds which can be made
to act like carb anions. In order to do this, we have to abandon the safety and simplicity
of the first few rows of the periodic table. We have to use a remarkable marriage between
the usual suspects of organic chemistry like carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen,
and a newcomer to our discussion, metals. Today we're going to investigate a small slice
of a field known as organometallic chemistry.
Now, before I continue, I need to advise you that we're only going to look at a very small set
of organometallic compounds and reactions. Organometallic chemistry is used in a wide
variety of applications, as we'll soon see, and it's a science worthy of its own graduate level
course when considered in its entirety. Organometallic chemistry as a proper science
got its start in a familiar place, the lab of Alexander Butlarov at the University of Kazan
in 1800s Russia. Butlarov had noticed that dialkyl zinc reagents, or chemicals containing
two organic alkyl groups bonded directly to a zinc atom through their carbons, could be used
to produce alcohols from ketones by transferring their alkyl group to the carbonyl carbon of the
ketone. No doubt excited about the prospect of developing a new method for the formation of
carbon-carbon bonds, Butlarov passed this project on to his protege, Alexander Zetsiv.
Zetsiv was able to apply his chemistry to several new substrates, but always with limited success.
These zinc-based reagents proved to be unpredictable and difficult to work with,
and as the Sun set on Zetsiv's career, he seemed no closer to developing reliable methods or rules
for their use in synthesis. It would appear that this particular line of research was destined for obscurity.
Then, in 1900, a young French graduate student, by the name of Victor Grignard, blew the lid off
of organometallic chemistry when he devised a powerful, versatile, and adaptable organometallic
reagent for use in the reliable production of carbon-carbon bonds, which had eluded Butlarov and Zetsiv.
Grignard's story is truly inspirational for anyone struggling with their schooling.
He took a long and winding road through his college education, and after starting as a secondary
education student, he failed to pass a standardized math examination, which landed him in the military
for a short time. When he returned from his service, he managed to move ahead with his education,
ultimately finding himself working in the lab of Philippe Barbier at the University of Lyon
in France in the late 1890s. It was there, in Barbier's lab at Lyon, conducting experiments
for his doctoral dissertation that Grignard acted on a hunch. Replacing the zinc from the only widely
known class of organometallics of the day with what he believed would be more reactive magnesium.
One of his first reactions was the combination of isoamyl bromide with magnesium followed by
carbon dioxide. And the reaction produced what Grignard himself described as, quoting here,
a colorless liquid distinctly of acidic character with an odor of perspiration and at the same time
of butter. So it sounds like Grignard was really suffering for his science, having chosen a reaction
which produces a fragrance reminiscent of sweaty butter. Nonetheless, I'm sure he was glad that
he did, since his work not only earned him his doctorate, but one half of the Nobel Prize,
12 years later. His co-recipient was his countryman Sabatier for his metal-catalyzed hydrogen
addition reactions. So let's take a look at a Grignard reaction. In fact, one of the original
Grignard reactions conducted by Victor Grignard himself. Now this is a bit of an oversimplification,
but it all holds true what's going on. Victor Grignard started with the reagent isoamyl bromide,
which is an alkyl halide. To this he added magnesium. So when mixed with magnesium,
isoamyl bromide creates this new compound where the magnesium has been inserted between the carbon
and bromine atoms. So the consequence of this is we've placed our metal next to a carbon.
Now here's where organometallic chemistry really starts to differ from what we're used to seeing.
Magnesium has a very low electronegativity, and because of that it creates a very strong dipole
with the negative end pointed towards the carbon. So this very high electron density near the carbon
to which the magnesium is bonded makes it act more like a carbanion. So we can think of it as
being this even though we know that this species is very difficult to generate. So Grignard mixed
this Grignard reagent which acts like a carbanion with carbon dioxide, which has a very electrophilic
carbon, the only carbon in the molecule of course. So when we combine a very powerful
nucleophile which acts like a carbanion with a very good electrophile such as carbon dioxide,
we should all be well aware of what's going to happen next.
Nucleophilic attack creates a new carbon-carbon bond and acidifying gives us our final product,
isocoproic acid or isoamyl acid. Of course when Grignard made it, his reagent was not a carbanion
but an alkyl magnesium bromide reagent, which means that we also have to account for the magnesium
in the bromine. Now what happens to them during the nucleophilic attack is a bit complicated
and case specific, but at the end of the reaction the byproduct is magnesium hydroxy bromide.
So here we can see one of the driving forces behind the Grignard reaction.
Notice that what started as a neutral magnesium atom is now a magnesium 2 plus ion with a full
octet. So powerful is the desire for magnesium to have that octet that it can be used to drive
carbon-carbon bond formation. Grignard continued his research and discovered
that his new nucleophile could be used reliably to produce acids from carbon dioxide, secondary
alcohols from aldehydes and also tertiary alcohols from ketones. In fact, Grignard's are extremely
versatile offering not only ways to make alcohols and acids but also aldehydes from amides.
Tertiary alcohols from esters and many, many other reactions. It seems that when Grignard
reagents are involved it's pretty much open season on anything with the carbonyl group.
But there is much more to the Grignard reaction. Easy though it is to run there are certain
special considerations which must be taken to ensure its success, two in particular.
First, the Grignard reagent itself is only stable in ether solvents like diethyl ether
or tetrahydrofuran. Second, the reaction mixture has to be kept extraordinarily
free of protic solvents including water. So let's consider each of these two restraints individually
then collectively. One of the great limitations of Grignard reactions
is that alkyl magnesium halide reagents can only form in ether solvents. But why is this?
The answer lies in the ability of solvents to coordinate metals. Now what I mean by this is
that the solvent must have oxygen atoms with lone pairs which can stabilize the Grignard by
donating electrons to form a stabilizing metal oxygen interaction and solution.
That alkyl magnesium halide motif is so polar that it needs a solvent which will be able to
arrange its dipole beneficially to interact with the positive charge density at the magnesium.
For this purpose ether solvents are just the ticket.
Non-polar solvents like hexanes or benzene are not capable of forming these kinds of stabilizing
interactions so they are clearly out as a solvent.
So Grignard reagents are polar. They're really polar. We get that. So why can't we use more
polar solvents like ethanol to dissolve them for reactions? Certainly ethanol has enough
polar oomph to get this reagent to form and solution right? Well it does but with one
devastating caveat. Unlike ether, ethanol is protic and has a pKa of about 17.
Remember, Grignards react like carbanions whose conjugate acid has a pKa of about 60.
So a Grignard reagent might form an ethanol for just a split second before reacting with that
ethanol to form ethoxide and a hydrocarbon. Clearly this is not a good way to make a Grignard.
Now ethers like diethyl ether and tetrahydrofuran are special because they strike a balance between
their ability to solvate a Grignard with their inability to react with it. And this is why they
have been the preferred solvent for this sort of reaction from 1900 right up until today.
But using ether and THF tetrahydrofuran isn't enough because these solvents are slightly
polar. So ether can dissolve a small bit of water itself. In fact when left opened a bottle of ether
will absorb about 1.5% of its own mass in water from the atmosphere. So a bottle of ether left
open by a careless colleague or even simply one which has been opened and closed enough times
to allow a small amount of air into it can contain enough water to effectively ruin a Grignard synthesis.
Our solution to this is to use ether which has been chemically dried before use. And we accomplish
this through the use of inorganic drying agents like magnesium sulfate or a special kind of
material called molecular sieves which act like little mineral sponges absorbing the water from
the ether and trapping it as a solid complex which we can simply filter or decant to separate.
Grignard reagents are an incredibly versatile tool for attaching new carbons to electrophiles so
let's take a moment and summarize just a few of the tools in the Grignard toolbox and their limitations.
First, Grignards are made using alkyl halide and magnesium metal mixed in an ethereal solvent.
But they're not limited to aliphatic R-groups. Commonly used Grignards include unsaturated
groups also like allyl magnesium bromide and phenyl magnesium bromide.
Grignard reagents provide a way to access the kind of reactivity we would expect to get from an
aliphatic carbanion without the fuss of having to deprotonate one of the least acidic hydrogens
known to man, the alkane CH bond. Grignards can be reacted with carbon dioxide to form organic
acids with aldehydes to form secondary alcohols and with ketones to form tertiary alcohols.
They can attack secondary imines to form secondary amides with varying degrees of branching.
Carbonyl compounds with leaving groups like acid chlorides attached to the carbon can undergo
multiple attacks by Grignard reagents resulting in the addition of two alkyl groups giving us an
alternate route to make secondary or tertiary alcohols.
Okay, so far today we've discussed the use of metals to activate hydrocarbons and turn them
into nucleophiles. Of course, organometallic chemistry is far more varied and complex as
subject than just this small window on the science would appear to imply. Organometallics have found
their first few applications in the world of organic synthesis, but their real potential
cannot be appreciated until we take a look at another one of their uses, catalysis.
The use of organometallics harkens back to our old friend Sabatier, who developed a technique
for hydrogenating fats using platinum metal and who incidentally shared the Nobel Prize with
Victor Grainier. In modern laboratories, the reduction of alkenes to alkanes is still a widely
used technique, but the heterogeneous nature of Sabatier's method leaves a lot to be desired.
Hydrogenating double bonds at the surface of a solid catalyst may work well on industrial scales,
but in the laboratory a reaction which takes place in solution is far more desirable.
If we had access to a homogeneous catalyst, one which could be dissolved in organic
solvents along with substrates, we could run reactions much more efficiently and cleanly in
the lab, wasting less reagents and amplifying our yields. But the problem with this is that metals
themselves are not generally soluble in the kinds of solvents that one would use to dissolve an alkene.
But in 1966, a British chemist by the name of Jeffrey Wilkinson published a paper outlining
a way to solubilize a large transition metal like rhodium by bonding it to organic molecules,
which we call ligands. These ligands are specially designed to be strong Lewis bases,
which donate stabilizing electron pairs to the metal ion, forming a complex which gives it
the solubility characteristics of the ligands while retaining the catalytic activities of the metal.
Wilkinson's work is generally regarded as the seminal work in the field of organometallic chemistry.
His discoveries in this field launched an age of investigation into metal ligand interactions
that continues to this day and labs around the world. Wilkinson's work has inspired the creation
of some really exciting and exotic looking complexes. You'll see extensions of his work
in such life-changing compounds as contrast reagents used for MRI imaging.
The magnetic properties of many large metals make them useful as tools to enhance the sensitivity of
MRI imaging machines. But the problem is that most heavy metals are highly toxic by themselves
or don't accumulate in the necessary tissues for them to be useful. The gadolinium ion is one perfect example of this.
Now, when gadolinium is in its plus-3 state, it's a powerful atomic-sized magnet and its presence
is easily detected by such complex magnetic instruments as the MRI you may see in a hospital.
Unfortunately, the gadolinium itself is very toxic and doesn't accumulate well where we need it.
So, one solution to this problem is to complex metal ions with organic ligands which render them far less toxic
and also can cause them to selectively accumulate in areas of interest in the body, assisting in the imaging process.
A classic example of this is the complex of gadolinium-3, which is marketed under the trade name Dotarim.
Now, gadolinium itself is an f-block metal, and its 3-plus ion contains 7 electrons filling its f-subshell,
or its outermost subshell. Now, electrons like their space, so those 7 outermost electrons in the f-block
or in the f orbitals of gadolinium are unpaired, and this gives it a tremendously powerful magnetization.
So, this tiny little ion of gadolinium is producing an extremely powerful magnetic field, but only at atomic distances.
Now, Dotarim is an ingenious way to exploit the magnetic properties of gadolinium ions like this
without dealing with toxicity issues and solubility problems.
Now, this is accomplished using a complex organic ligand which looks like this.
Now, we call molecules with large rings of many atoms like this one, macrocycles.
And the key to Dotarim's safety and efficacy is not only this macrocyclic ligand which sits on top of the metal,
but it allows it to attach its carboxylates around the edges.
So, these nitrogens and carboxylates contain lone perelectrons and regions of dense negative charge,
which coordinate to the gadolinium-3 ion.
So, this forms a cage around the ion, preventing it from reacting with anything as it circulates in your bloodstream.
And the ligands also have the effect of changing the solubility characteristics of the complex,
presenting an organic phase instead of an ionic phase.
And this helps the Dotarim accumulate in tumor cells.
Now, the final piece of the puzzle is this last little bit of space on the bottom,
which is complexed to the oxygen of a water molecule.
So, we place our water molecule under there. You can see how close it is to the protected gadolinium ion.
The proximity of the water molecule to that gadolinium-3 makes it very easy to detect using an MRI machine.
And physicians can then use MRI techniques to look for the magnetic effects of the gadolinium-3 on the water molecule inside the patient,
thereby helping them locate an image problem areas.
Now, not to be outdone by modern chemists. Nature herself has also devised ways to use organic molecules,
which help not just humans, but all other known species to get the benefits of the chemistry of metals while coping with their inherent toxicities.
So, let's take a look at a subunit of the structure of human hemoglobin. It's a pretty big molecule, isn't it?
But if I remove all the protein atoms, we see that leftover is a large cyclic ligand known as a porphyrin.
And this porphyrin coordinates an iron atom in the center from four planar positions.
This metal ligand complex is commonly called heme, and is the namesake of the oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin.
Now, free iron is toxic in the blood, but it's the coordination of these four nitrogen atoms,
and also two histidines, which come in from the protein itself,
which give this molecule its life-sustaining ability to bind, transport, and release oxygen in the body without being toxic to us.
Now, the heme ligand not only plays a role in oxygen-carrying ability of hemoglobin,
but its highly conjugated structure also makes it highly colored.
Now, with the iron in place, rather, the heme takes on a familiar deep red color that we associate with oxygenated blood.
But when physical trauma causes cells in the body to rupture and die,
the exposed heme from their hemoglobin has to be cleaned up.
And this is done by enzymes which first break open the ligand,
and this breaking of the ring forms a new compound known as biliverdin.
It's a dark green-colored compound.
The biliverdin is then further reduced into a compound known as bilirubin, which is yellow in color.
And this is the process of cleaning up a porphyrin ligand,
and it's also what we commonly associate with the process of bruising.
So the colors that you see underneath the skin are actually the free heme from the traumatized cells being cleaned up by your own body.
But nature's gone far beyond just using iron ions and porphyrin ligands to get jobs done.
Another great example is hemocyanin.
Now, rather than hemoglobin, hemocyanin still transports oxygen.
It does this in crustaceans, crabs, and lobsters, those sorts of animals.
But it does so using two copper ions, coordinated directly to a protein matrix,
which gives these lobsters, crabs, and other marine animals a very different blood chemistry than mammals.
So in this case, the protein itself is acting as the ligand for the copper ions, which carry oxygen.
Let's look at one more example.
Vitamin B12.
Now, vitamin B12 includes a compound called cobalamin.
And as the name implies, cobalamin has a cobalt ion complex in its center.
Now, this vitamin is used in the body to conduct essential functions including synthesis of folic acid.
And again, it's all dependent on having the ligand in place to coordinate that metal.
So nature one ups the organic chemists once again.
Having devised ligands far more complex than those of Wilkinson's catalysts, or even Doderem.
And they're capable of conducting much more powerful, directed chemistry.
But why stop at one metal?
One other of nature's chemists who continues to embarrass us all is the nitrogen-fixing rhizobia bacteria,
which live in the root nodules of legumes like soy.
The molecule that they produce, which allows them to fix nitrogen, is a protein called nitrogenase.
And it contains not just one metal ion, but multiple clusters of them in complex with sulfur atoms.
Scientists have discovered and characterized two different forms of nitrogenase,
both of which rely on iron defunction, one of them exclusively, and another one in concert with molybdenum.
Now, even though these metalloprotein structures have been well known for decades,
their ability to accomplish the same reaction at room temperature and pressures
that Haber could only accomplish at extremely high pressures and temperatures remains unexplained even today.
And when someone finally unlocks the secret to the chemistry of these large, powerful organometallic molecules,
the impact it will have on the world food supply is likely to be as great as cold fusion would be for the power industry.
So today we started with one of Butler-Ophe's projects in the 1800s.
We took a look at how he and Zetzev conducted some of the very first organometallic experiments.
Then we spent some time covering the reaction developed by Victor Grignard in 1900, which bears his name,
and won him the Nobel Prize, and also breathed new life into the floundering science of organometallic chemistry.
We talked about how his alkyl magnesium halides had the properties of carbon ions,
including strong nucleophilic character and extreme basicity.
We covered how this nucleophilic character makes no carbonyl safe in the presence of a Grignard,
leading to a large library of potential substrates which can be used in conjunction with them.
We saw how Jeffrey Wilkinson is usually regarded as the father of modern organometallic chemistry,
having devised a method to get rhodium and platinum of Sabatier's heterogeneous catalysts into solution,
making them more effective homogeneous catalysts.
We then advanced on Wilkinson's ideas and took them into the biological realm,
seeing how compounds like dota-rem get highly magnetic, but extremely toxic,
gadolinium ions safely into the bloodstream of cancer patients, where they can help to detect tumors.
Finally, we indulged Mother Nature a bit more and took a look at some pretty representations
of metal-containing proteins like hemoglobin and hemocyanins, mitrogenases, and some vitamins.
All of which carry out spectacularly focused chemistry in one way or another,
helping to sustain the lives of those creatures that use them.
We've come a long way.
From the simplest of all organic compounds, methane, to organometallics the size of nitrogenase,
we've nearly run the gamut of molecular size.
But there is one more class of organic compound to consider.
The undisputed king of molecular size, polymers.
And they're the last class of organic compounds on our list.
Next time, we're going to take a look at some world-changing polymers,
how they were discovered, how they're made,
and how their size and modular composition make them an extremely versatile class of compounds.
I'll see you then.
