In our journey through introductory organic chemistry, we've spent a great deal of time
looking at ways to prepare organic compounds from one another, as well as ways to characterize
the starting materials and products of the reactions that we have undertaken.
So we've left one very important question yet unanswered.
You see, it's very rare that any organic synthesis runs cleanly to absolute completion,
producing no byproducts and leaving no starting materials behind.
It's even rarer that we find organic materials in highly purified forms in natural sources.
So knowing this, we have to ask ourselves the question, how do we purify organic materials
sufficiently to study the molecules which make it up, or for that matter to use as food
additives, medicines, or other applications which require very high levels of purity?
In this segment of the course, we will investigate a few staple techniques used for isolation
of organics in modern laboratory and manufacturing settings.
Today in particular, we'll be interested in taking a look at two very important and
widely used techniques, one for purification and the other to determine purities.
And both of them rely on the tendency of organic molecules to form highly-ordered crystals.
To find one of the first examples of mass-scale organic purification will take us to India
in the 5th century BC.
Now evidence shows that it was just around this time that the people of India began harvesting
a wild reed which, when they chewed on it, became sweet-tasting and pleasant.
This commodity quickly caught on in other regions of Asia and Europe.
The Greek physician Diascorides wrote of it in the 1st century AD and records from the
Tang dynasty confirmed that it was being cultivated in China as early as 600 AD.
But the real turning point in the global spread of this product took place in the 3rd century
AD.
During this time, most of what is now Northern India was ruled by the Gupta dynasty.
The Gupta dynasty is famous for its deep and altruistic value of cultural development.
And economically beneficial cultural benefit, well, that was that much better.
So it was during this golden age of Indian culture that techniques were developed to
extract the juice from these reeds, then allow it to form crystals by drying it slowly in
the sun.
These crystals, it turns out, retained the sweet flavor of the reeds, yet spoiled far
more slowly in their new crystalline form.
Okay, by now you probably have put two and two together and figured out that I'm talking
about crystalline sugar sucrose.
It's extracted from sugarcane as a solution and then crystallized to create a more viable
product.
Now what you may not have known, though, is that by developing this process, the people
of the Gupta kingdom were unwittingly performing what may have been mankind's first ever
recrystallization experiment.
So how is it that crystalline sucrose was stumbled onto so early in human history?
After all, when most of us think about crystals, we think about very rare, expensive, and difficult
to acquire materials.
Well, it turns out that it is really not so surprising at all that crystalline organics
might be some of the very first organic compounds isolated by man.
The reason for this is hidden in the Gibbs free energy of crystals.
Now, crystals are highly ordered, they're very ordered repeating arrangements of atoms
or molecules.
But organic molecules can also achieve this highly repeating patterns in the solid state.
When they do so, the intermolecular attractions between and among the molecules become stronger
and the free energy of the system naturally decreases.
Since lower energy states are favored in nature, it stands to reason that highly ordered materials
can form if the energetic benefit of their interactions exceeds the entropic penalty
of assuming a highly ordered state.
So let's take a look at a crystal structure forming and see if we can get our heads wrapped
around this idea a little bit more of what makes pure crystalline materials relatively
easy to come by.
Let's start with a compound called benzomide.
Now, benzomide has a fairly simple crystalline structure.
It starts off with a pattern of repeating molecules in one of two orientations as I've
shown them here.
You notice the benzene ring and the amide groups pointing either one way or the other
in each of the molecules within what would be the surface of a growing crystal.
So here's my surface.
Now, as a cartoon, I'm going to just grow my crystal by dropping in the molecules.
We'll be talking very soon about how to practically accomplish this.
But for now, let's just put our crystal together.
So let me drop in a few more benzomide molecules in the proper orientation.
Okay, now that repeating structure should be even more clear to you.
It's very obvious that there are certain regions of the crystal where molecules are oriented
in specific directions in an array that arranges them relative to one another in a very, very
tight repeating pattern.
This pattern creates a network of intermolecular attractions, including hydrogen bonds.
Now, if I highlight them in the crystal here that I've created, it's very easy to see the
repeating patterns.
In addition to the stabilizing hydrogen bonds, there are dispersion forces, which we would
also call London dispersion forces or van der Waals attractions.
And this takes place where the pi systems of the benzene rings stack against one another,
very similarly to the way that purine and pyrimidine bases do in DNA in the double helix.
So there's an array of very carefully crafted intermolecular forces holding this crystal
together.
So this optimized set of intermolecular attractions leads to a very strongly held together, very
stable crystal of this particular organic material.
But what if I introduce something else?
What if my sample is not absolutely pure?
What kind of effect will that have on the energy of this crystal?
Let's do that experiment right now.
Let's rebuild our crystal of Benzemeib first.
But this time I'm going to insert a few impurities.
So again, here's my beautiful repeating pattern of my organic compounds aligned perfectly,
so I have beautiful set of hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces all holding that
crystal together.
Now I'm going to take these four molecules and make one very subtle change to them.
I'm going to change them from Benzemeib to Benzaldehyde, taking away the NH2 group.
Now look what happens when I do that.
I have removed the ability of these molecules to form the hydrogen bonds which stabilize
the crystal in this very specific localized position.
So all of these hydrogen bonds that I've colored in red no longer can be formed.
So by including just a few molecules of Benzaldehyde in my pure crystal or otherwise pure crystal
of Benzemeib, I have decreased the overall strength of the intermolecular forces holding
them together.
So the fact that I'm missing these intermolecular attractions means that the free energy of
my crystal is higher.
In other words, it's less stable, it's a weaker crystal, and it's easier to disassemble.
So if we can make crystals grow very slowly, under conditions favoring the most stable crystal
formation with all the strongest intermolecular attractions possible, we should be able to
produce crystals of very high purity.
And this is a good thing because we rarely find compounds like sucrose all alone in nature.
In biologically sourced solutions like cane juice, they can be up to 20% sucrose, but
we find smaller concentrations of all of its subunits like glucose and fructose, as well
as small amounts of many other biological molecules.
In the days of the Gupta dynasty, this was not likely to be a concern to them.
Good solidified or crystallized sugar was enough to get the job done.
But today's chemists and chefs for that matter find need for highly purified sucrose so that
we can use it under more controlled conditions demanded by the state of the art.
So early sugar was most likely produced by evaporating water from cane juice as rapidly
as possible.
If however, the solution expelled from sugar cane is slowly allowed to concentrate past
the point of saturation, meaning the sugars contained therein will be compelled to take
on a solid form or precipitate from the solution.
Well, if we produce a concentrated solution of organic molecules like sucrose, then somehow
induce that system to become super saturated, meaning that it has more dissolved sucrose
than it normally could hold.
We expect the growing crystals of sucrose to exclude the other contaminant solutes
in order to achieve optimal intermolecular attractions.
To better understand the process of crystallization, let's take a look at a compound called phthalic
acid.
I have a sample of phthalic acid here on the bench.
I also have a beaker of water, which I can use to dissolve the phthalic acid.
Now phthalic acid has a solubility of about 18 grams per milliliter in boiling water,
extremely high.
But it's only about 0.6 per milliliter in cold water.
So if my phthalic acid isn't quite pure, its crystals aren't as stable as they could
possibly be.
But how are they going to get to that more purified, more stable state?
Clearly, the molecules in my crystals are not going to spontaneously rearrange in the
solid phase, expelling any contaminants that might be in them, at least not in my lifetime.
And this camera crew, they're paid by the hour.
So let's see if we can speed it up a little bit, okay?
So what we need to do is disassemble these crystals at the molecular level, separating
them all in such a way that the phthalic acid molecules get a second chance to order
themselves in a more stable state.
And of course, one way to accomplish this separation is to dissolve the crystals, separating
them all within a solvent.
So I've set myself up to do this task right here.
What I have is a beaker containing phthalic acid that's been purchased, which is about
98% pure, a smaller beaker, which I'm not going to touch.
This is phthalic acid, which I have contaminated with a red organic molecule, so that we can
see that contaminant as it behaves in the system that we're about to subject it to.
And the larger beaker here is what I'm actually going to be purifying.
And in order to purify this, I'm going to use nothing more than water and some heat.
Now this water is already hot, so let me get my safety glasses on just in case.
I'm going to turn my hot plate back on, which is also a magnetic stir plate.
It contains a magnetic element underneath of the surface of the ceramic hot plate, which
I can use to articulate this little magnetic spin bar inside.
So this allows me to more thoroughly heat my solvent more rapidly.
So while that's going, I'm going to put on some gloves.
And hopefully, they'll stay in one piece while I put them on.
So these are disposable latex gloves, they're really just designed to protect my hands from
the chemicals I'm dealing with, even though they're fairly safe as organic compounds go.
So very soon my water will be boiling.
I've preheated it to accelerate this process so that we can see what goes on.
But what I'm going to do as soon as this gets warm enough is add my water to this beaker
containing phthalic acid and a little bit of the red organic contaminant to see if we
can get rid of it by disassembling it at the molecular level through dissolution and then
encouraging it to crystallize, but very slowly.
And since this is a very hot flask of water, I'm going to put a glove over my hand to protect
it from the heat as well as the chemicals.
And let's get started with the dissolution process.
Again, this is fairly hot water, but you could clearly see that it wasn't completely boiling.
So it's going to require a little bit more help to get it to thoroughly dissolve.
And in order to do this, I've given myself an extra spin bar, which I'll add to the beaker
now.
And I'm going to return everything to my hot plate.
So we can see that the spin bar is moving because the powder is flowing, and now we need
to give it some time to heat up.
Now in this case I'm heating my recrystallization solution on a hot plate.
Now the surface of the hot plate can reach temperatures well in excess of 300 degrees
centigrade, which is hot enough to cause many organic solvents to catch fire spontaneously
in air.
So the only reason that I'm heating this particular solution the way that I am now is because
the solvent that I'm using is water, which is not flammable.
Water is essentially hydrogen that's already been burned, so it's not possible to burn
it any further.
In a future lecture, we'll actually take a look at some ways that we do heat organic
solvents in safer ways than what I'm doing here, again if this were in fact an organic
material.
So we've finished boiling our solution of phthalic acid.
Now as you can see, I'm so saturated that I'm already starting to get a little bit forming
on the top of my solution.
And also you can see that I've had to add a little bit more water as the boiling process
went on to be sure that I got the vast majority of my compound dissolved.
So now we have to wait and allow slow cooling to take hold.
The reason that slow cooling needs to take place is that we want to give all of the phthalic
acid molecules in solution ample time to find those perfect orientations as they come in
and become part of the growing crystal.
If we do this, any other molecule that tries to get involved with that crystal will not
adhere as strongly as phthalic acid and can simply be excluded as the crystal grows.
So if my original solution was made correctly and I have thoroughly separated molecules
of phthalic acid and impurity, I should have only phthalic acid growing back in its crystals
leaving the impurity behind in solution.
But that's going to take a little bit of time because this has to cool all the way from
100 degrees centigrade down to around room temperature where the solubility of phthalic
acid is somewhere around one-thirtieth that of the total solubility of phthalic acid in
boiling water.
So as my solution cooled slowly, the solubility of the phthalic acid drops dramatically.
So that particular compound now has nowhere else to go but out of solution.
The key here is that I allow the process to happen very slowly.
So I guess it's a good thing I like to talk.
Now by cooling slowly, I've avoided trapping of impurity molecules in those growing crystals
and at the completion of my recrystallization, I have very large, well-formed, pure phthalic
acid crystals that can simply be removed from solution by a technique like filtration.
So if I light my sample a little bit, you can probably see in the front and the bottom
there, I've got some very large, very well-formed crystals and I'm going to try to retrieve
those now, not using filtration but instead using a simpler technique to separate liquids
from solids known as decanting.
Decanting is actually quite simple.
I'm just going to try to pour the liquid out from this beaker while leaving as much
of the solid behind as possible.
It just takes a steady hand and a little bit of patience to remove that liquid.
There we go.
And as I begin to remove the liquid, it should become clear how pure these crystals really
are.
They're not only large and well-formed but safe for just a little bit of the solution
that they crystallized from, which is sometimes called the mother liqueur, there's really
not a lot of red to speak of.
So the impurity is now in solution, which I have separated from the majority of my crystals,
few of which I'm going to dig out now, so that we can take a look at the difference
in size and shape in comparison to what we started with.
So here are just a few of the crystals that formed.
And when we compare them to not only the sample that we started with that was impure, we can
clearly see that the color is a lot more white, but the crystals are even larger than the
material that I started with before it was even fouled by this red compound.
So large crystals of the proper color tell me that I have at least in part successfully
purified what was an otherwise impure sample.
So washing these with a little bit of cold water will probably get a crystal that's almost
as white and pure as the one that we started with before we ever added any dye at all.
This is the power of recrystallization.
So pure crystals tend to be more stable than their impure counterparts.
Now we've already looked at how this can be used to purify a compound by crystallizing
it from a solution, but we can exploit this phenomenon in a completely different way by
observing the melting behavior of a sample to help us identify it and also assess its
purity.
So let's take a look at that right now.
I'm going to bring back a crystal that we've looked at once already.
That's the Benzamine crystal.
And again I'm going to build this beautiful network of intermolecular attractive forces
holding it all together, the hydrogen bonds, the van der Waals forces.
Now because there's so many forces holding it together, it's very difficult to take
the crystal apart, not only by dissolution, but also by melting, which involves heating.
So if I give these molecules a little bit of kinetic energy by adding some heat, let's
take a look at what happens.
Well they have a little bit of kinetic energy now, they want to be free to move, but they
don't want to move badly enough because there are too many forces holding them all together.
But if I continue to add energy in the form of heat, I eventually reach a point at which
there's enough kinetic energy contained in those molecules that they no longer can be
held together by those forces within the crystal, and melting takes place.
But if there's an impurity present, just as there was last time in our example, where
we had Benzamide with a little bit of Benzaldehyde contained inside, well remember, we had to
sacrifice these specific intermolecular forces, meaning that overall there's less holding
that crystal together.
What this means from a bulk perspective is, as I heat up a crystal that has impurities
and imperfections, like those missing intermolecular attractions, my weaker crystal should melt
more easily.
And indeed, in my example here, I add a little bit of heat, and that's all the kinetic energy
it takes to get my molecules moving enough to overcome whatever forces are remaining
holding it together.
So just as dissolution involves liberating individual molecules from one another by
salvation, so melting liberates them by heating them until they have sufficient kinetic energy
to overcome those forces holding them together.
With this in mind, the logic behind using melting to assess purity should become clear,
that more purified crystals have greater forces holding them together, meaning they require
more energy to melt.
In other words, as purity increases, so does the melting point.
This concept is clearly illustrated using a hypothetical phase diagram for a binary system.
Now in order to construct this kind of phase diagram, we first take the phase diagram for
a pure substance, which we could just call substance A.
So here I've drawn one for you with all the phase transitions that we recognize from an
introductory chemistry course, including boundaries for melting and freezing, boiling and condensing,
and of course sublimation and deposition.
But this diagram only applies to a pure substance.
So to create a binary phase diagram, we settle on a constant pressure, like one atmosphere,
the pressure in most laboratories.
And at that pressure, we project the diagram along a third axis of composition.
When we do this for two hypothetical solids, which in this example we could call A and
B, focusing on that melting transition, the result looks something like this.
So here's my phase diagram for a binary system at a given pressure.
Notice that my horizontal axis is now mole percentage, meaning that on the left-hand
side I'm dealing with pure, in this case green squares, and on the right-hand side pure,
whatever this molecule may be, we've called it red triangles for illustration purposes.
But there's some very interesting features to this phase diagram that you don't see in
the phase diagram for a pure substance.
So let's wipe this clean and rebuild the phase diagram piece by piece, investigating the
effects of mixing one compound into another.
Let's start with this compound over here, my green squares, when it's absolutely pure.
Now I know that when it's absolutely pure, its melting point should be a single temperature.
There is only one temperature at which a pure substance can coexist with itself in liquid
and solid forms.
So if I were to heat a sample of this compound, I expect it to be solid up to its melting
point, after which I expect it to transition into a liquid and I can continue heating.
But look what happens as I introduce a little bit of my other compound, in this case as
an impurity.
Well, two very interesting things happen.
First is that the phase boundaries move downward, and the second is that there are actually
two of them, not a single phase boundary anymore.
So what this means is that if I were to heat up a solid of a composition, let's say somewhere
in this region where I have mostly my green squares, but a little bit of my red triangles,
take a look at what happens.
I pass through another range of my diagram.
It actually takes a range of temperatures to melt, not only that, but both of them are
lower than the original melting point of my green square compound.
We call this phenomenon melting point depression, and it occurs because one compound is acting
as an impurity in the other, disrupting the forces holding the crystal lattice together.
And the broadening that takes place in the melting transition is known as incongruent
melting, which is an effect of having one compound moving into the liquid phase faster
than the other as melting takes place, thereby changing the composition of the solid as well.
So there's a range of compositions which can coexist and liquid solid forms for mixtures.
But then we reach an interesting point in the diagram.
It comes back to a confluence at a point somewhere in the middle of the phase diagram, though
not necessarily directly in the middle of the way I've drawn it here.
This is known as the eutectic point, eutectic meaning easy melting essentially.
And once we cross that eutectic point, which by the way is the only composition at which
a single melting temperature exists, we start to see the transition temperatures go back
up, until eventually they reach a confluence again at pure compound B, or in my case red
triangles.
So what's going on here?
Well, what's going on here is we've reached a point where we can start to think of it
as green squares are now the impurity in my red triangles.
And so my melting point goes back upward as my sample becomes purer and purer in the
other compound.
So I simply create a sort of a reflection, although the absolute temperatures and widths
of these transitions are not necessarily the same on both sides.
But these features are very consistent in well-behaved binary systems.
Finally, of course, we reach the point where we have our melting point for our pure red
compound, and again we have a single transition temperature.
So why do we need to understand that kind of complex phase behavior?
Well, because it gives us a useful tool to confirm the identity and purity of a compound.
We use a device commonly referred to as a melt-temp apparatus, which consists of a heating
block with a temperature control and a viewing window.
Now if I load a sample of my original crude sathalic acid in one of my recrystallized
material, I can confirm that the melting point of the purified material should be higher.
Not only that, but if I were to make a third sample consisting of my purified thalic acid
ground thoroughly with a small amount of a standard, that would allow me to confirm its
identity since adding anything but the same compound to itself should reduce the sample's
melting point.
If my sample were anything but thalic acid, the melting point of the mixture with standardized
thalic acid should be depressed.
We call this simple technique a mixed melting point analysis, and it's a very commonly used
quick check for purity and identity when synthesizing compounds in a lab.
So today we started to think beyond simply making and characterizing a product to the
question of how we might purify one.
We discussed the effect of the presence of impurities on organic crystalline solids and
how they tend to reduce the favorable intermolecular forces holding the crystal together, creating
a crystal which is less stable.
We took a look at how this observation can be used to devise a way to purify such materials
by dissolving a sample to solve and separate all the constituent molecules, then cooling
or concentrating the solution very slowly to promote formation of the most stable, pure
crystal.
We discussed the process of melting an organic crystalline solid and how the inclusion of
different molecules usually results in not only a depressive melting point, but also in
a broadening of the melting transition resulting from a phenomenon called incongruent melting.
Finally, we talked a bit about how we can use the phase behavior of such solids as a
means of probing their purity and identity using a mixed melting point analysis.
Next time, we're going to turn our attention to another familiar phase transition, boiling.
We'll explore how phase behavior of more volatile organics can also be used to purify
and identify them.
I'll see you for that discussion next time.
