In the 1700s and early 1800s, the science of organic chemistry had not yet been conceived.
But the industrial revolution was in full swing.
And to put all the new tools and technologies born of this age to best use required activities
take place indoors and at night.
This of course led to an increasing demand for sources of artificial light.
During this time, the preferred lamp fuels were oils sourced from whales.
Whale oil was obtainable through commercial whaling, and it burned brightly if not totally
cleanly.
Being a complex, biologically sourced material, the refinement of whale oils into usable fuels
was always a bit of a roll of a dice.
Some samples burned a bit more or less brightly than others, and with varying degrees of that
unpleasant odor.
So not the most desirable traits in a chemical product, but it was the best available option
in its day.
The cleanest and brightest burning of these oils was that from the nose of the sperm whale.
And this material fetched the equivalent of 200 modern US dollars per gallon at its peak
value in the mid-1800s.
This made commercial whaling a very attractive enterprise.
Whaling operations worldwide were growing dramatically during this time.
And probably without a true appreciation for the damage they were doing, whalers around
the world were aggressively hunting these majestic creatures to the brink of extinction.
By the late 1840s, dwindling populations forced whalers to chase smaller and smaller sperm
whales into more and more remote locations in a futile attempt to prolong this profitable
business.
The sperm whale species may very well have been hunted to extinction at this time.
But just before this happened, they were bailed out by an unlikely group of saviors, a geologist,
a retired railroad conductor, and an American entrepreneur.
See, in 1849, Dr. Abraham Gessner, a Canadian geologist, devised a method for the extraction
of a new liquid fuel from coal and oil shale that he dug from the ground.
His product consisted of compounds called hydrocarbons, which consist of just two elements, hydrogen
and carbon, but bonded together in various ways.
Now, these compounds are fundamentally different from those in whale oil, yet when burned they
have properties that are remarkably similar.
And his new discovery he dubbed kerosene.
This kerosene outperformed even the purest sperm whale oil in the light and heat that
it could produce, as well as its shelf life.
So the result was inevitable.
Demand for kerosene rose through the 1850s and 60s, and demand for sperm whale oil simultaneously
plummeted.
Without a vast army of whaling ships perpetually thinning their numbers, the sperm whale species
began to recover.
Then, in 1865, Edwin Drake, an American railroad conductor who had been forced into early retirement
by an illness, struck another blow to the commercial whale oil industry when he discovered
a massive underground supply of an oily substance in the fields of Pennsylvania.
Just like Gessner's coal and oil shale, this new substance, called petroleum, literally
meaning oil of rocks, contains a vast assortment of hydrocarbons, including the compounds needed
to produce kerosene.
The difference was the remarkable size of this deposit.
With a new, massive source of raw material needed to produce kerosene, the future was
looking bright for sperm whales.
And the third and final nail in the coffin of the whale lamp oil industry was delivered
by legendary American entrepreneur John D. Rockefeller.
Sensing the opportunity provided by a virtually limitless supply of raw material discovered
by Drake to produce a superior product, the one discovered by Gessner.
Rockefeller pounced on this situation and entered that oil business in 1870.
Now, Rockefeller is famous, or infamous, for some of his business tactics.
But whether you love him or hate him, he had an undeniable talent for marketing.
And in a very savvy business move, Rockefeller played on the superior consistency of his
product by naming his company Standard Oil.
Essentially, promising his customers safer and more consistent performance from his kerosene
compared to the alternative products of the day, like whale oil.
Kerosene was now king, and the sperm whales weren't complaining.
So this is the story of how a geologist, train conductor, and a businessman unwittingly joined
forces to save one of the most precious animal species that the world has ever known.
And they did it using organic compounds called hydrocarbons.
One class of hydrocarbons is alkanes, the topic of today's lecture.
So what was it about this new kerosene fuel which made it so superior to the oil from
the nose of a sperm whale?
Well, one reason is that petroleum consists mainly of a class of hydrocarbons.
And what makes hydrocarbons so special is that there is a vast, complex library of molecules
making the class up, yet the fundamental rules governing their behavior are very simple
and very few.
Now, this makes hydrocarbons easier to refine into blends of compounds with exactly the
chemical and physical properties that we want for a given application.
Many commonly used modern materials, including natural gas, propane, gasoline and kerosene,
and even major components of modern lubricants and asphalt used to make roads are all produced
by the isolation of specific groups of hydrocarbons from petroleum.
So let's begin our journey to understanding the chemistry of hydrocarbons by taking a look
at the simplest class of hydrocarbons called alkanes.
So now that we're familiar with at least a few reasons why hydrocarbons are historically
and commercially important compounds, let's turn our attention to their chemistry.
So here are the four simplest normal alkanes as we call them.
Alkanes are defined as hydrocarbons which contain only sp3 hybridized carbon atoms.
So to create these kinds of molecules, I'm going to use carbon and hydrogen, the simplest
combination of which is methane, natural gas.
This has a molecular formula of CH4.
Next on my list would be two carbons.
And to saturate this completely with hydrogens, I need a C2H6 molecular formula.
Continuing on to another familiar compound, propane, I have C3H8.
And butane, the type that you might find in a typical cigarette lighter, is C4H10.
So all of these alkanes have the exact same generic formula, CNH2N plus 2.
The 2N being because there are two hydrogens on every interior carbon, and the plus 2 because
the terminal carbons must have three hydrogens.
Now after the first four linear alkanes were discovered, chemists seem to have come to
their senses and settled on a more systematic naming system.
Again, the first four are based upon historical notes.
But after this, we reach a metric style prefix system, where we attach them to the front
of the name, ending the name with the suffix, AIN.
So here are my methane, propane, and butane again, followed by my more systematic names,
pentane, hexane, heptane, octane, nonane, and decane.
And the list continues in this fashion until we run out of carbons to look at.
One can imagine how dull the science of hydrocarbons might actually be if there were only one type
of hydrocarbon that existed for every number of carbons.
And limiting ourselves to ever-lengthening straight chains like I did in the last slide
only provides one distinct hydrocarbon for each molecular formula.
Fortunately, this is only the case for the first three, methane, ethane, and propane.
When we reach four carbons, new connectivities become possible, and the number of possibilities
quickly grows as we add more carbons.
Let's take a look.
In the case of four carbons, I can draw two different carbon chains onto which I can build
my alkane, one perfectly straight and one slightly branched.
When I increase my carbon to five, I find that there are three potential isomers.
Moving on to six, I have a total of five possible isomers, and introducing a seventh carbon
leads me to nine possible isomers.
So you can see here that the number of potential isomers is growing very rapidly as I add additional
carbons.
This trend continues.
In fact, this trend continues very, very rapidly.
You'll notice here that if I increase the number of carbons beyond seven, I reach eight
carbons.
This is a very familiar compound for us, octane, which has seventeen potential arrangements
of the carbon atoms.
If I continue much farther, I have to rescale my plot because there are so many possibilities
for the next addition that all the others appear to be just little bumps in my diagram.
Finally, I reach a compound, the composition of the kerosene that we talked about earlier
with 10,000 or more potential combinations.
And if we go just a little bit farther to 21 carbons, we have almost one million different
ways to connect those 21 carbons together.
Take the sum of all the possibilities, and every alkane from one carbon to 21 carbons,
you can make more than one and one half million different combinations.
Okay, so I hope I have your attention now.
Alkanine chemistry and the structures that they comprise may be simple at their most
basic levels, but the complexity builds rapidly with the addition of more and more carbons.
So now that we've developed an appreciation for how complex those structures of alkanes
can be, I think that we can all agree that a system of nomenclature is in order so that
we can unambiguously define which structure or structures we're talking about.
Now, much like the base names of linear alkanes, some of the simpler branched alkanes have
common names as well.
For example, there are two isomers of butane.
We have the now familiar linear or normal isomer, which we simply call butane, but
we also have the branched version, which is called isobutane.
We call it this because iso is the prefix for similar, so because they have similar
molecular formulas, they have similar names.
Let's take another example and look at pentane.
There are three isomers of pentane, again the normal, one with the single carbon branched,
which we call isopentane, and another one called neopentane.
Now, using common names for isomers of butane and pentane seems like a pretty good idea.
There are, after all, just a few extra structural isomers to consider for each.
But a quick look back at the sheer number of possibilities that form as alkanes grow
larger reminds us just how unwieldy a system like that would be.
I know I don't want to have to memorize one and a half million possible names for a chemistry
exam, and I'm pretty sure that you wouldn't either.
Enter the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, commonly referred to as
IUPAC.
IUPAC is a professional standards agency, which makes recommendation on the standardization
of all things chemistry, including nomenclature.
So, IUPAC has come up with a method of nomenclature, which is highly systematized, and so it doesn't
require that we memorize millions of names, but rather just a few simple, important rules.
So let's take a stab at giving an IUPAC name to this molecule, isopentane, which we've
already seen.
Now, the first rule that we're going to do is find the longest continuous carbon chain
within this molecule, and the way that I've arranged it is not that hard to find.
We have a four carbon continuous chain running through this hydrocarbon.
Now, I could just as easily as drawn have chosen my four carbon chain in this way, but
as we'll see by the end of this slide, the name will actually be unaffected by my choice.
So I'm going to go back to having my basic hydrocarbon chain all the way across the screen
left to right.
So I'm going to call this a butane, even though it's got five carbons total.
And that's because I'm going to give a name to the branched portion of the molecule as
well, and I'm going to use the standard prefixes from my previous slide on naming hydrocarbons.
So a branch which contains one carbon is called a methyl.
Next I need to tell my viewer exactly where that methyl group is on the molecule.
So I have to number the parent chain sequentially from one end to the other in a way that gives
the lowest possible number to the substituents.
In this case, I have two options.
I can name it or number it from left to right, or I can number it from right to left.
Now, in this numbering system, you see that I have a two for the methyl group using my
first choice and a three as the position of the methyl group as my second choice.
So I'm going to go with my instincts here and take my first choice, giving the methyl
group the lowest possible address on this molecule.
Now that I've done all of this, I'm ready to construct a name for this compound.
And I do this by naming my substituents alphabetically, including their address.
If there's more than one, I'll use dye, tri, or tetra to indicate that.
Their numerical address will go at the front of the name, and ultimately I will end with
the name of the parent compound, which I determined at the beginning of the exercise.
So this molecule would be called two-methyl butane.
Now let's apply these rules to a more sophisticated molecule.
Let's try this one out in for size.
We're going to follow the same set of rules as we did previously.
We find that we have a six-membered carbon chain, which contains an ethyl group because
of the two carbons, one, two, and a methyl group, which has a single carbon.
Now I have to number my parent chain in such a way that these two substituents get the
lowest possible numbers.
And I achieve this by starting at the right and working my way to the left, giving me
two, four, as opposed to the alternate direction, which would give me a three, five.
Now I'm ready to construct my name, being sure that I list my substituents alphabetically.
So even though ethyl has a higher number, it appears first in the name.
This is four ethyl, two-methyl hexane.
Let me challenge you with one more.
How about this one?
In step one, we're going to find the longest continuous carbon chain, which looks like
this, right?
It's a hexane, isn't it?
Dramatic pause.
No, it's not, is it?
Remember, these molecules have got saturated sp3 hybridized carbons, whose bonds can rotate.
So I'm not restricted to choosing the longest carbon chain that runs left to right.
I need the longest carbon chain overall, which is actually seven carbons in length.
Once I've determined that, I'll take an inventory of all my substituents, in this case four
methyl groups.
I'll come up with my numbering system, which gives them the lowest address on that parent
hydrocarbon, and then construct my name, two, three, four, five, tetramethyl heptane.
So what is it about kerosene and other petroleum products that make them so versatile?
It allowed Rockefeller to produce such a consistent product.
The answer to this question lies in the effect that size and structural isomerism have on
the properties of alkanes, like their volatility, heats of combustion, viscosity, and others.
Alkanes don't have polar bonds, which can affect the attractive forces between them.
See, they only have their electron clouds, which are soft and polarizable.
What that means is that the electrons in the cloud around the molecule have a lot of motion,
and as they move, intermittent charges can build up.
So we call these intermittent charges intermittent dipoles.
As one forms in one molecule, it has a tendency to induce a second intermittent dipole in
a neighboring molecule, provided they're close enough.
These two intermittent dipoles cause the compounds to attract one another very slightly, resulting
in higher boiling points and increased viscosity.
Now we call this type of attractive force London dispersion forces.
So one can imagine that longer alkanes with larger electron clouds can produce stronger
dispersion forces than their shorter counterparts, and this is clearly manifested in the phase
behavior of hydrocarbons.
See smaller chains make up methane, ethane, propane, and butane, which we easily recognized
as gases at typical pressures and temperatures.
While pentane, hexane, heptane, and of course octane, we all know to be liquids.
Now chemists use the term volatility to describe the tendency of a compound of vaporize.
So we would say that methane is a more volatile compound than pentane, or that octane is less
volatile than propane.
But this term shouldn't be confused with the more colloquial meaning of volatility,
which is taken to be unstable, unpredictable, or explosive.
In organic chemistry, it's actually possible for a compound to be very stable as well as
very volatile.
But the trend in volatility doesn't stop where we left off.
The boiling points of each hydrocarbon I just mentioned systematically increases as the
chains lengthen and the dispersion forces increase, attracting similar molecules to
one another.
But branching also has a predictable effect on physical properties.
As hydrocarbons of the same mass become increasingly branched, they boil at ever lower and lower
temperatures.
And this is a reflection of the reduced surface area contact possible between those branched
molecules.
And just take a look back at butane and isobutane, and you can easily see why isobutane is added
to camping cookstove fuel to prevent it from freezing when pressurized on cold nights.
In fact, isobutane has a boiling point that's about 10 degrees centigrade lower than that
of n-butane.
And this effect is actually more pronounced when we compare n-pentane to its highly branched
isomer, neopentane.
The difference in boiling points there is about 25 degrees centigrade.
Now, alkanes are not terribly reactive from the organic chemistry standpoint.
Their lack of polarity leads to structures which don't tend to participate in most reactions,
but it does give them the ability to dissolve a wide array of more reactive compounds.
For this reason, liquid phase alkanes are commonly used in the organic chemistry lab
as solvents.
Pentane and hexane, for example, are staple materials found in almost every organic chemistry
lab.
But among the reactions which can be undertaken with alkanes is, of course, combustion with
oxygen, which leads to a mixture of carbon dioxide and water in an irreversible process.
And this is one of the processes that we rely on to power engines, provide heat, and give
us light.
But chemists rely on combustion for a different purpose.
We can use it as a means of comparing the stability of similar compounds, and this type
of experiment is called calorimetry.
When calorimetry, a device known as a calorimeter, is a sealed system which is charged with a
known amount of a given compound and enough oxygen to completely combust it.
If the combusted materials produce the same products, in the case of hydrocarbons, this
would be CO2 and water, then any difference in the heat released must be a result of differences
in the stability of the starting material.
Before heat released means a less stable compound was combusted.
So let's start by comparing some straight chain or normal alkanes, like octane, one
of the principal components of motor fuels like gasoline.
Let's compare its stability to heptane, yet another component of gasoline that most of
us would put in our cars.
When identical molar amounts of octane and heptane are combusted in a calorimeter, the
temperature of the calorimeter increases just slightly more for the octane sample.
So you might be tempted to conclude that higher octane motor fuels have more energy,
but you'd be wrong.
You see, we have to account for the fact that heptane is a smaller molecule, which contains
only seven carbon atoms compared to octane's eight carbon scaffold.
In fact, when we normalize the heat released to the number of carbon atoms present, or
in an even more practical way, by the volume of liquid fuel, the energy released by the
combustion of these normal alkanes is essentially identical.
But branching is another story.
See, instead of simply extending normal alkanes, perpetually adding CH2 after CH2 group, branching
introduces a differing inventory of bonds.
Increased branching means that we're introducing more of those stable carbon-carbon bonds that
we talked about back in lecture one.
Moreover, we're doing it without adding extra atoms.
So combustion, for example, of butane versus isobutane in a calorimeter should result in
a greater temperature change for the calorimeter containing in butane.
So if you had any doubt about why that isobutane is in your cookstove fuel, it's definitely
to keep it from freezing.
Your isobutane blended cookstove fuel actually contains just slightly less energy than a
pure and butane cookstove wood.
But that's the trade-off for fuel that vaporizes better in the cold.
Now the differences in these heats of combustion for structural isomers are actually quite
small.
The difference in the heat of combustion between octane and iso-octane, for example, is only
about 1% of the total energy released by each of these molecules.
So this very small difference is actually fortuitous from an engineering and fuel-blending
perspective, because mixing various hydrocarbons isn't really done to alter the energy content
of a fuel, but rather to alter other properties of the fuel without worrying too much about
changing the amount of energy it can provide.
Hydrocarbon fuels are actually blended not to adjust the amount of energy they contain,
but rather to adjust the conditions under which they release that energy.
The octane ratings are meant to communicate how resistant a fuel blend is to detonating
under heat and pressure without the aid of a spark.
Now since gasoline engines are designed to detonate fuel using a spark plug at a specific
time in the engine cycle, it would be potentially damaging to use a fuel which would detonate
prematurely under the heat and pressure conditions inside the cylinder.
So engines which run on higher compression rates require fuels which are more resistant
to detonation under that pressure.
So this is why more branched hydrocarbons are blended into them.
If a fuel blend has a detonation resistance equal to that of pure iso-octane, it's given
an octane rating of 100.
If it's equal to that of pure N-heptane, it receives a rating of zero.
Of course combustion is a rather inelegant type of reaction, obliterating all the carbon-carbon
bonds in alkanes and eradicating those complex scaffolds which make organic compounds so
versatile and useful.
But our ultimate starting point for organic chemistry, alkanes, are fairly unreactive
molecules.
Fortunately, there is a way to introduce a more reactive motif to alkanes without completely
smashing the carbon framework to bits.
So let's stop thinking like automotive engineers, start thinking like synthetic organic chemists.
With such a large supply of varied hydrocarbons available, they make an attractive entry point
to organic synthesis for many different carbon scaffolds.
Despite their relatively low reactivity, alkanes are frequently used for this purpose in labs
and chemical plants around the world.
Now one of the most important uses from synthetic organic chemistry standpoint is as a starting
material used in the synthesis of a set of compounds called alkyl halides.
Because carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds are so stable, we have to use an unusual
trick to get them to react.
We have to present them with a highly reactive atom of a halogen, like fluorine, chlorine,
iodine, or bromine.
For my example today I'm going to use chlorine and the simplest of all hydrocarbons, methane.
So the mechanism for this reaction begins with the activation of a halogen molecule by a photon
of a very specific wavelength.
It's usually somewhere in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum.
We usually represent this kind of activation in a reaction scheme with the characters H
nu, which are actually variables representing Planck's constant and frequency, which when
multiplied together yield the amount of energy in a particular photon.
So I'll be using this notation to show any light-activated reactions that we consider.
Now when a halogen molecule like chlorine absorbs this photon, the bond between the
two halogen atoms breaks, sending one bonding electron to each atom.
And we call this sort of bond-breaking homolytic, because the bond breaks symmetrically.
This is also called the initiation step of the reaction.
So the result of the process is two halogen atoms, each of which contains an unpaired electron.
Now species with unpaired electrons are referred to as radicals.
In our example, these two chlorine radicals only have seven valence electrons, and they
want desperately to fill that octet.
Now one chlorine radical accomplishes this by removing a hydrogen from the alkyl halide
generating a new alkyl radical.
So now our alkyl radical has a carbon with an incomplete octet.
But if it finds a second halogen molecule to react with, it can satisfy that alkyl
radical, generating a new chlorine radical which can continue the reaction.
This phase of the reaction is called propagation.
And during propagation, new product is forming, but new chlorine radicals are also forming,
carrying on a chain reaction.
Finally at some point, the chain reaction terminates when two alkyl radicals react in
a homogenic bond formation, homogenic meaning forming equally from both sides.
So just like homolytic bond breaking sends two bonding electrons in separate ways, so
homogenic bond formation takes place when the new bond forms from two electrons, one
from each bonding partner.
So at the end of this reaction, we've reacted an alkane with chlorine by a photoactivated
reaction to form hydrochloric acid and then alkyl halide, and also a small amount of determination
product.
Now this is a very distinctive reaction, not only because it's a photoactivated radical
reaction, but because it's a chain reaction.
So we turn to this technique to modify alkanes because their remarkable stability requires
this kind of extreme measure.
So you might take a look at our radical halogenation reaction and ask yourself, what happens when
there are multiple carbons in the hydrocarbons starting material?
After all, methane only has one carbon which can react, but what about propane, or even
larger hydrocarbons?
These larger hydrocarbons contain chemically distinct carbons, which we call primary, secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary based upon whether they're connected to one, two, three, or four
other carbons respectively.
That's a valid question, and the answer to the question is that the halogenation will
always occur preferentially at the most substituted carbon possible.
The obvious exception here is quaternary carbons because they don't have a bonded hydrogen
which is required for the reaction to take place.
But in our example, propane has a primary and secondary radical which can form, and
even though there are two potential carbons onto which a radical could form as a primary
and only one which could become secondary, we still get the chlorine atom in greatest
abundance on that secondary carbon.
Now to understand why this happens, we need to invoke a phenomenon called hyperconjugation.
So to do this, I'm going to bring up an ethyl radical.
Now I've chosen an ethyl radical because it's the simplest example of this phenomenon.
And when we look at our ethyl radical, what you'll notice is that on one side we have
our single electron, which makes it a radical, in a p-atomic orbital.
But what you'll also notice is that in the adjacent carbon, there's a carbon-hydrogen
bond which I have aligned with that p-atomic orbital.
And when this type of alignment occurs, it allows an electron to very transiently jump
from that bond over to the carbon which is missing an electron, essentially giving it
a little bit of satisfaction that it has an octet for just a split instant in time.
And if you expand this process to occur when there is not just one carbon next to our radical,
but two or three, you can begin to see how the addition of these extra carbons and the
bonds that they have to other substituents can increase the stability of our radical
through hyperconjugation, which sort of fools the radical into thinking that it's got a
full octet, even if just for an instant.
So as we look back now at Rockefeller's standard oil operation, it becomes clear to us exactly
what gave his product that trademark consistency.
While his competitors were selling animal products or are less refined, more unpredictable
mixtures of fuels, causing their customers to wonder whether the next can of fuel would
be the one which burns a little bit too vigorously and sets their roof on fire, Rockefeller's
customers could rest assured that they would receive the same mixture of branched and linear
alkanes of the proper lengths to give them just the right physical and chemical properties
for their intended purpose.
So today we've discussed the basic molecular formula of alkanes, that all hydrocarbons
of this class consist entirely of hydrogen and sp3 hybridized carbon, and that they
have a molecular formula of CnH2n plus 2.
We also touched on the concept of structural isomerism and demonstrated how the ability
of carbon to form these highly branched chains leads to millions of realistic possible alkanes
structures with just a few carbon atoms.
We also took a brief look at how chemists have come to name alkanes and their structural
isomers in a way in which the IUPAC convention allows us to unambiguously name millions of
complex alkanes with just a few simple rules.
We've also discussed how structure affects physical properties of alkanes, most notably
how increasing size and decreasing branching lead to lower volatility and increased viscosities.
We also visited a few chemical reactions involving alkanes, including combustion in
oxygen, which destroys the carbon chain, and free radical halogenation, which can produce
new organic compounds called alkyl halides while leaving the hydrocarbon chain intact.
We were also introduced to the phenomenon of hyperconjugation, which helps us to explain
why radical halogenations tend to occur at more substituted carbons on the hydrocarbon.
And finally, we took a look at how a Canadian geologist, a powerful American business magnate,
and a retired railroad engineer all got together in the mid-19th century and used diverse alkan
components to forever change the commercial, economic, environmental landscape of America
and the world.
And to say the sperm whale species is a bonus.
But our story of the geometric complexity of hydrocarbons is far from over.
In our next lecture, we'll investigate the structural and chemical implications of wrapping
our carbon chains into loops, forming what are sometimes called cycloalkanes.
I'll see you then.
