Previously, we defined a chemical bond as an energetically beneficial interaction between
two atoms, which requires them to maintain a certain distance from one another in space.
Now, we learned that there are two general types of these bonds, ionic and covalent.
So, molecules are defined as distinct groups of atoms joined by those chemical bonds.
And as we've already seen, a multitude of different atoms can be combined by just a few different types of bonds
to produce a vast and rich library of chemical compounds, all of which are distinct from one another.
So, we're now beginning to appreciate the ties between geometric complexity and the richness of the science of organic chemistry.
So, as scientists, how do we communicate to one another these structures and the changes that they can undergo?
The most brilliant scientist in the world would be virtually useless unless he or she were able to communicate ideas and findings effectively.
And in many cases, such effective communication requires that we help others understand the geometric relationships of bonds and atoms.
This lecture is dedicated to that tenet.
And we often model molecules as connected spheres in which atoms are represented by the spheres and sticks tell us where the bonds are that connect these atoms.
Now, these models have been given the rather uncreative name, ball and stick models.
By far the most popular color choices for those cartoon-like representations are those pioneered by Robert Corey, Linus Pauling, and Walter Colton.
We call this system the CPK color scheme.
In this scheme, hydrogen atoms are white, carbon atoms are shown in black or gray, oxygen is red, and nitrogen is blue.
And the CPK system recommends color choices for many other common atoms, which I'll point out as we encounter them one by one.
So, over here at the table I have a few examples of some model kits.
And I've used them to create a representation of a caffeine molecule, the likes of which you might find in a cup of coffee or in the bloodstream of a professor giving an important lecture.
Now, even to the novice it should be clear there's a complex connectivity of atoms, which needs to be understood if we're going to have a discussion about the properties of this molecule.
Now, this molecule is called a Darling model kit made by Molecular Visions.
And in this particular model, my hydrogen atoms are all modeled as white spheres.
But unlike what you're probably used to seeing when you see these kinds of things in representations on televisions and in computers,
is that the central atoms here, which are making up my scaffold, are represented by unions of bonds instead of spheres.
So anytime a black union is present, this is a carbon.
Anytime a red union is present, this represents an oxygen.
And anytime a blue union is present, this represents a nitrogen.
And this isn't the only type of model kit that is commonly used.
You may also see model kits much like these.
This is the type that a college student would most likely carry with them in their backpack.
And if I hold them in a similar alignment, you can clearly see the similarities among the connectivities.
But in this case, all of the atoms are represented by spheres, whereas in this kit, they're represented in a different way.
Now, the problem, of course, is that building models isn't always practical.
We often need to quickly depict the structure of a molecule using little more than pen and paper or a two-dimensional computer screen.
And when chemists endeavor to draw molecules for one another, they have to convey three critical types of information.
First, the identity of the atoms.
Second, the connectivity of those atoms.
And finally, the geometry of that connectivity, which makes up the molecule.
As we proceed through the course, we'll see many examples in which this information is crucial to our discussion.
For now, however, let's just focus on the how of drawing molecules and trust that the why will become clear as we move forward.
So let's begin our investigation by concerning ourselves only with the first of those three parameters, the identity of the atoms making up a compound.
See, testing techniques used by early chemists like Lavoisier could only elucidate the ratio and identity of elements in a compound rather than their absolute amounts.
So in the days of Lavoisier, one of the only available ways to represent a compound is what's known as its empirical formula.
The empirical formula gives us all the information which was available to those early researchers, the identity and ratio of each element in the compound.
So let's take a look at some molecules and see if we can determine their empirical formulas.
I'm going to start with some relatively simple organic compounds of a class known as hydrocarbons.
We'll look at ethene, butylethylene and tetramethylethylene.
Now, these three molecules all contain carbon atoms indicated in gray and hydrogen atoms indicated around the outsides of the molecules here indicated in white.
So in order to construct my empirical formula, I'm first going to take an inventory of all the atoms in each of the compounds.
For example, my ethene molecule has two carbons, four hydrogens.
My butylethylene molecule has six carbons, twelve hydrogens.
And my tetramethylethylene molecule also consists of six carbons and twelve hydrogens.
So my empirical formula is based strictly upon the ratio of these two elements, two to four, six to twelve, six to twelve.
And using simplest whole number ratios, I determine the empirical formula for these compounds is CH2 in all three cases.
So clearly we need a higher level of detail if we're going to distinguish among this particular set of hydrocarbons.
And to do this, we move on to our second representation, which is known as the molecular formula.
The molecular formula of ethylene is based upon the total number of atoms, in this case two carbons, four hydrogens.
So I use a subscripted two and four to indicate the total quantity of each atom.
So we're not using a simple whole number ratio anymore, now we're using the exact number.
When I do the same exercise for the atoms in butylethylene, I find that it has six carbons and twelve hydrogens or C6H12.
So this new layer of complexity allows me to distinguish between ethene and butylethylene.
But the molecular formula is not enough to help me tell my butylethylene apart from tetramethylethylene,
because they contain not only the same ratio of atoms, but the same number of atoms, absolutely.
Now let's try to imagine the situation here.
We've got molecular formulas that are the same for two different compounds.
So our upgrade to the molecular formula solved the ambiguity between ethene and butylethylene,
but not between butylethylene and a similar but distinct chemical cousin, tetramethylethylene.
Now we can clearly see that even though they have the same number of atoms, that they are arranged and connected differently.
So we've arrived in a situation where our second parameter has become important, connectivity of those atoms.
Each compound here consists of six carbon atoms and twelve hydrogen atoms.
But we can clearly see that the double bond here is located in a different position,
and that the carbon atoms within the scaffold are connected differently.
So how are we going to solve this problem?
Well we have to go to another type of representation.
And this type of representation is known as the condensed structural formula.
Now a condensed structural formula, rather than relying only on the inventory of atoms,
gives us information about the bond connectivity within the scaffold.
So take the example of ethene.
To write a condensed structural formula, I'm going to write the first carbon in the molecule,
and all of its bonded substituents, in this case two hydrogens.
Next to that I'll write the next carbon in line, also connected to two hydrogens.
The condensed structural formula for ethene is CH2-CH2.
Moving on to my butylethylene molecule.
I have CH2-CH-CH2-CH2-CH2, and finally CH3.
Now let's see if our condensed structural formula can actually help us tell the difference
between the butylethylene and the tetramethylethylene.
I can start by creating a name for tetramethylethylene using a methyl group, CH3.
But there's a second CH3, which is connected to the same atom.
So to solve this problem, I place a parenthesis around my CH3 and a subscripted 2.
This tells my viewer that I have two CH3 groups connected to a single carbon,
which I can represent with the letter C.
I move on to my next carbon, which is connected to a CH3, actually connected to two CH3s,
so I have to place, again, parenthetical subscripted 2.
So this formula allows me to distinguish between the two of the larger hydrocarbons,
because I've included information about how their bonds are arranged geometrically.
You can probably imagine how the use of structural formulas, like the ones we just saw,
can quickly turn into what chemists like to call alphabet soup.
A page so crowded with letters, numbers, and lines that we have very little hope
of trying to make the point that we'd like to make.
So when this is the case, we sometimes turn to what are known as line angle formulas.
In this shorthand method of drawing, the terminus or angle in any line is understood to be a carbon atom.
All other atoms are expressly written in with the exception of hydrogen atoms.
When those hydrogen atoms are bonded to carbons, we leave them out.
It's just understood that they're there.
So it's understood when a carbon atom appears to be missing bonds to complete its octet,
there must be hydrogens connected to those carbons.
So our two example molecules, butylethylene and tetramethylethylene,
would have line angle structures which look like this.
So a trained chemist can scribble down just a few lines which look like these,
and any other trained chemist can quickly decipher the shorthand and reconstruct the expanded formula.
So far today, we've been looking at a class of compounds known as hydrocarbons,
which contain only hydrogen and carbon, and therefore will have no letters at all in their line angle formula.
And although carbon and hydrogen atoms will almost always be present in organic compounds,
there are frequently other visitors from the first three rows of the periodic table.
Oxygen, nitrogen, halogens like chlorine, and many others will appear in many of the molecules which we'll consider in the course.
And in organic chemistry, we call any atom other than carbon and hydrogen a heteroatom.
So heteroatoms are very special because they tend to be the location of polar covalent bonds,
which are often the sites of reactions.
All heteroatoms and any hydrogen atoms attached directly to them are written out explicitly in the line angle formula.
Let's take a look at some examples.
Here are three compounds that you're probably familiar with.
Diethyl ether, which was the first medical anesthetic ever used.
Acetone, which is the active ingredient in nail polish remover.
And isopropanol, which you would find in rubbing alcohol solution.
To draw the line angle formula for ether, I have to include the oxygen atom to let my viewer know that this apex is not a carbon.
So anytime a heteroatom is present, it has to be written out.
The acetone from nail polish remover does not have, well it does have a heteroatom, but it also has a double bond.
That double bond to the oxygen can be critical.
So it's important when I draw my line angle formula that I also include a depiction of this bond using two lines instead of one.
Finally we have isopropanol, which you can see from this drawing has a hydrogen attached to a heteroatom.
And that hydrogen is very likely to have very interesting chemistry, so we want to be sure that it's represented in our formula.
So when I draw the line angle formula for my isopropanol, I include that hydrogen.
Even though I don't include the hydrogens attached to the carbon.
So far we've explored some of the ways in which chemists use molecular formulas to demonstrate relative and absolute amounts of atoms in a molecule.
As well as how structural formula depict how those atoms are connected.
Yet one critical and comparatively challenging parameter is yet unaddressed.
The arrangement of these atoms in three dimensions.
And this is the topic that I'd like to spend the rest of our time on today.
So we've already seen how it is that the complex three-dimensional frameworks provided by carbon can make organic compounds so diverse and useful.
But this three-dimensional complexity comes with a cost.
How do we effectively communicate three-dimensional structures on a two-dimensional screen or page?
Well one way that we do this is using software.
Okay now here's a molecule drawn in a program called ChemDraw.
I'll be using this program from time to time to show you molecular structures in ways that a model kit simply can't accomplish.
Now here I've drawn a molecule of caffeine just like the ones in my models.
But modern computing technology has allowed me to create a sophisticated interactive rendering which does a pretty good job of depicting depth molecular representations.
Using the software I can not only draw the molecule but I can rotate it, align certain bonds so that we can see them in different ways,
and study the angles and distances and symmetry within the molecule.
But you notice that I had constructed this model before opening the software.
So just like its real-world counterpart it takes time to create a complex construct like this even with the benefit of the software.
You're not going to catch me trying to create an image like this on the fly during an office visit from a student.
Instead chemists often quickly construct images to convey three-dimensional arrangements relying on a trick which is inspired by a rather unlikely group of colleagues, cartographers.
Now most early maps were straightforward, simple to construct due to the misconception that the Earth was flat.
So creating an accurate copy of a perfectly flat surface on a flat page really isn't that difficult.
All you have to do is place light directly behind that object projected onto the flat surface.
The result should be an image which preserves all of the relationships, relative sizes of the land masses perfectly into scale.
But about 500 years ago it started to become obvious that the Earth is not flat but round, meaning that it has a third dimension to it.
And that has to be considered during mapping.
So mapping a globe proves to be a lot more complicated because the three-dimensional curvature of the object will affect the appearance of the two-dimensional representation.
In cartography this problem is solved by the projection of some or all of the globe onto a 2D surface in various ways.
For example, most of us have seen a world map in the shape of a rectangle.
This type of map, commonly called a Mercator projection, is produced by shining a light from the center of the globe outward onto the interior surface of a cylinder.
That cylinder is then unrolled.
The result of this is a projection which accurately depicts distances from north to south but drastically distorts distances from east to west, especially in the polar regions.
Another technique is called a Lambert projection, in which the surface of the projection is a cone rather than a cylinder.
This projection is a favorite with aviators because the distances between points on the projection closely approximate actual distances between those points on the surface of the globe that they represent.
I could go on and on showing example after example of mapping techniques and how each one is meant to preserve a certain property to scale at the cost of distorting others.
But this isn't a course in cartography, it's a course in chemistry.
So while it may seem a stretch for me to relate the field of cartography to that of organic chemistry,
chemists in fact have devised very similar schemes to project 3D objects of interest onto 2D surfaces.
The only difference is that we're not concerned with globes, we're concerned with molecules.
Today I'm going to discuss four ways in which we try to show the relative positions of atoms.
In all cases we do this by projecting a three-dimensional molecule onto a two-dimensional surface.
And just as there are many schemes for the projection of global maps onto a flat surface, there are many techniques used to project a molecule,
and each of these preserves certain relationships which might be of interest to us.
The four techniques we're going to look at today are the perspective formula, Newman projections, Fisher projections, and stereo images.
And I'll introduce several additional specialized methods in individual lectures as we go forward,
but these four are by far the most commonly employed of these techniques, particularly at the introductory level.
As I mentioned, each technique is best suited to showing us something different,
and so they tend to be used in varying situations and on different types of molecules.
We'll cover all this in due time, but to keep things consistent in this lecture,
we'll be taking a look at four of these methods using a single molecule with a fairly simple geometry, butane.
So let's suppose that I want to draw this molecule of butane for you in this orientation.
Now, the way that I've drawn it, we can easily draw a line angle formula to let the reader know that we're dealing with a hydrocarbon which has four total carbonson.
But if you look at the hydrogens placed around this butane molecule, you'll notice something, that they're in distinct positions from one another.
There are certain atoms that come out above the plane of the monitor, I've colored those in red.
There are some which fall back behind the plane of the monitor, I've colored those in green.
And there are actually two hydrogens here which share the same plane as the carbons in this orientation, and I've colored those in yellow.
So we need a system which will allow us to unambiguously identify which of these hydrogens we're talking about when we have a discussion about this molecule.
The way that we accomplish this is to draw bonds to those atoms above the plane using a solid wedge, like this.
Those falling behind the plane, we draw with a dashed wedge.
And those two hydrogens which share the same plane will be given a straight line just like any other atom would be.
So in this way I can clearly and accurately depict individual hydrogens and not leave it up to chance whether I'm talking about this one or this one.
It will be clear from this type of representation.
Now although perspective formulas are very useful for conveying the arrangements of atoms in small molecules, they can become unwieldy when larger chains of atoms are involved.
So in 1891, Herman and Will Fisher was dealing with just such a problem when he was researching carbohydrates.
Carbohydrates commonly consist of carbon chains numbering anywhere from three to six atoms in length, but they can grow even longer.
And with so many atoms in a chain, perspective drawings can sometimes become difficult to interpret.
So Fisher devised an alternate method for showing these arrangements in the longer chains he was dealing with.
In Fisher's scheme, each atom in the molecule projects with the chain oriented up and down on the page in such a way that the chain itself is falling behind the page.
Now when this is done, the two groups not in the chain have bonds which appear horizontal but are located above the page.
So projecting this arrangement onto a 2D surface casts the shadow of the molecule in which all of the vertical bonds are pointing back behind the page and all horizontal bonds are pointing out above the page.
Again, just as with the perspective formula, we can now point to a specific hydrogen in our butane molecule without confusing it for another connected to the same atom.
Our third method of projection, we owe to Melvin Spencer Newman, who was an American organic chemist working at Ohio State University in the middle of the 20th century.
Now Newman's famous for his prolific career synthesizing and characterizing hydrocarbons, but arguably his most useful contribution to the science is the tool he created which bears his name, the Newman projection.
In some cases, not only is the connectivity of atoms crucial, but the rotational state of the bonds in a molecule can affect its reactivity.
And certain reactions require that substituents on adjacent atoms be aligned in certain ways.
Okay, so you can take for example this molecule here called chloroethane. It's a fairly simple molecule.
And as you can see, the carbon atoms here are joined by a single bond. So I can rotate this bond freely.
Now I've used a green atom here to represent the chlorine on the molecule and white atoms to represent hydrogens. This is the CPK convention.
Now when we get to our lecture on elimination reactions, what we'll see is that we can convert this chloroethane molecule into a molecule of the plant hormone, ethene, which we saw earlier.
But the reaction only happens when the chlorine atom and an adjacent hydrogen are arranged like this, opposite to one another. It's kind of hard to see, isn't it?
But Newman's genius was this. He rotated the molecule in such a way that he was siding along that carbon-carbon bond which can rotate.
So now, if I hold this in a way that you can see easily, my chlorine atom and my adjacent hydrogen atom are at opposition, as opposed to, for example, having them eclipsing one another like this.
Because these two different rotomeric states or rotational conformations can react differently, we need to have a method to describe them to one another.
So we define that sort of angle between substituent bonds on adjacent carbons as dihedral angles. And as the carbon-carbon bond rotates, those dihedral angles change.
So we call those different states rotomers of one another. And Newman's problem was that while perspective formulas and Fisher projections were both effective methods of communicating the arrangement of atoms about tetrahedral centers,
neither one was particularly useful for clearly and concisely depicting a specific dihedral bond angle.
So in order to show you the dihedral angles in my molecule better, I turned the model so that the camera sided along the interior carbon-carbon bond.
And this is exactly what Newman projections do on paper.
The closer or proximal atom is drawn as a circle, and its bonded substituents are depicted with lines that go all the way to the center.
The farther or distal atom is obscured by the closer one, and its three bonded substituents are depicted with lines which end at the perimeter of the proximal atom, as though they were being eclipsed behind it.
So the other three groups bonded at the proximal atom are connected by lines running all the way to the center, and that helps us to tell which of those substituents are in front and which are in back.
Now in this way, any rotational state for the chosen bond can be very easily and very accurately shown on paper.
Again, I can draw chloroethane in its reactive state with a hydrogen at a 180-degree dihedral angle to chlorine.
We call this arrangement one in which all the dihedral angles are such that the substituents are as far apart as possible a staggered conformer.
But a simple 60-degree twist of the central carbon-carbon bond puts chloroethane in its unreactive state, with the hydrogen atoms of the proximal carbon eclipsing the substituents of the distal carbon.
We call this conformation eclipsed.
So the set of relationships becomes even more complex when we add a second chlorine to the molecule, forming what we call ethylene dichloride.
Now the large chlorine atoms can be in one of four positions. They can eclipse one another, they can eclipse hydrogens, they can be staggered adjacent to one another, or they can be staggered as far apart as possible.
So in order to distinguish these last two staggered conformations, we call them gauche and anti-confirmations, respectively.
Now one of the greatest fads of the 1990s was what we popularly refer to as magic eye posters.
And most of us no doubt have recollections of standing in front of one of these at our local shopping mall or vacation destination gift shop,
trying to decipher that hidden 3D image buried within the seemingly simple pattern.
The trick, of course, is to focus your eyes on a point far beyond the picture in the distance.
And when this is done, the viewer standing at the requisite distance sees a three-dimensional image leap off of the page.
Now this neat trick used to create novelties to hang on your wall can also be used to place any three-dimensional drawing we want onto a two-dimensional page.
Magic eye posters work because what appears to be only one complex pattern in fact contains two adjacent patterns,
one intended for your left eye and the other intended for your right eye.
Now focusing on a distant point causes your eyes to see separate images which convey slightly different perspectives and simulate a phenomenon that we call parallax.
When your left eye and your right eye see slightly different images, your brain combines those images and interprets them to create depth.
Okay, so I'm going to use ChemDraw here to generate two separate images of butane, one for each eye.
And if you stand at about arms length from the screen, what you should see is these two images coming together in concert to create a three-dimensional image.
But before I do that, take a look at this. If I rotate these molecules just so, as you can see, that let's say those two hydrogens on top,
on my right hand image are almost touching, but on the left hand image you can see the gap is slightly larger.
So this is because of a very subtle rotation of the molecule. The left hand side is rotated just a degree or two more than the right hand side.
So when my eyes look at this image in the proper orientation, my right eye sees this one, my left eye sees this one, and my brain thinks I see depth.
So I would advise you at this point to stop and take a look at this image, staring through the center out the back of the screen to a point in the distance.
And hopefully what you'll see is the two images will coalesce.
And after I've given you a moment to get the image fixed, I can start it rotating for you.
Okay, so now that you've gotten some practice at getting a fixed image, try the rotating image.
If you look closely, you'll see the depth that is portrayed by the rotating images of butane here.
So today we investigated the challenge of providing a reader with the right structural information about molecules.
We looked at how an empirical formula gives us the identity and ratio of elements in a compound,
and how the molecular formula expands upon this by providing the absolute number of atoms in each molecule of a compound.
We discussed methods for conveying not just the identity and ratio, but the connectivity of atoms in a compound, including condensed and expanded structural formulas.
We also took a look at a shorthand method of drawing that is known as line angle drawing.
Finally, we tackled the challenge of conveying three-dimensional positions of atoms using two-dimensional media.
We looked at how perspective formulas use solid and dashed wedges to show positions above and below the plane of a page or screen,
and how Fisher projections use the horizontal and vertical orientation of the bond on the page to convey the positions of atoms in those molecules.
And we also saw how Newman projections allow us to draw very specific rotomers with the dihedral angles clearly and precisely depicted.
We also saw how stereo images can be used to show a molecule from any vantage point we choose by physically separating the left and right eye images
and then looking at that image in a way which fools our brains into putting them back together to produce the perception of depth.
All of these techniques, and many more, are widely used to help researchers communicate effectively, predicting and explaining the properties of new compounds.
And now that we have a sound understanding of each method, we'll begin using all of these techniques to communicate about molecular structure as we progress through the course.
Next time, we'll put our understanding of molecular drawing to good use as we learn not just how to depict molecules as they might exist at a point in time,
but to show how they change as time passes. See you then.
