So far, we've explored the structure of the atom and how it leads to chemical bonding between atoms.
We've looked at how those chemical bonds lead to molecular structures and some of the tools chemists use
to communicate changes in those structures through time.
Now, it may seem daunting when you consider the sheer number of possible structures and how they all might interact with one another.
But many reactions follow similar pathways, and generally they obey similar rules.
So chemists group reactions into just a few fundamental classes.
And probably the simplest of all these reactions is the proton transfer reaction,
in which an acid in a base exchange one simple hydrogen nucleus.
Now, I can practically guarantee that you did some acid-base chemistry at some point today.
Did you maybe take an an acid after a spicy meal? That was acid-base chemistry.
Maybe you noticed some marble statues outside were looking a bit weathered.
You were observing acid-base chemistry.
Or maybe you put a little lemon juice on your seafood to cut down that fishy smell.
Congratulations, you're a chemist who just performed an acid-base reaction.
Now, many of us are familiar with some of the more fundamental properties of acids.
For example, they tend to dissolve metals, cause color changes in certain substances,
and may have very accurate odors or sour tastes.
Now, the Greeks actually grouped sour tasting substances into a class of compounds called oxen.
And that sentiment is still evident today, as the Latin word for vinegar, acetum,
serves as the basis for the modern English word, acid.
So the chemical name for vinegar, acetic acid, literally translates to acetic acid.
And people think scientists don't have a sense of humor.
Now, granted, the name is a bit strange, but it's a fitting tribute to how influential
that simple little molecule has been in human history.
But what exactly makes something an acid?
Is there a certain molecular feature which endows acids with their properties?
Now, the property of acidity was originally associated with sourness in the taste of materials,
but that's an empirical observation.
Surely there must be some structural motif, which all acids share in common,
and which endows them with the properties observed by the ancient Greeks.
It was our friend Antoine Lavoisier, who turned his attention to this question in the 18th century,
still using the traditional definition of anything sour tasting.
But he also theorized that there was some material, some essence of acidity,
which was common to all compounds of this class.
Unfortunately, Lavoisier mistakenly theorized that it was the element oxygen which did this.
In fact, this is how oxygen got its name from the Greek root oxy, meaning sharp or sour.
Of course, we now know that Lavoisier was on the right track with assigning acidity to a specific element.
He was just unfortunate enough to guess the wrong one.
Acidity is, in fact, a property granted not by the presence of oxygen, but by the presence of hydrogen.
Now, not just any hydrogen will do, though.
Hydrogens have to be removed as H plus ions, so there needs to be a specific type of chemical bond which allows us to do this.
And, of course, hydrogen ions are essentially protons, so I'm going to use those terms interchangeably today.
You may also be familiar with the term base.
In chemistry, bases are the alter ego to acids.
The presence of bases lowers the concentration of hydrogen ions.
And in all of our examples at the beginning of this lecture, acids were transferring their acidic protons to another base.
The hydrochloric acid in your stomach was reacting with a basic antacid.
The carbonic acid in rainwater was reacting with a basic limestone.
And the citric acid in lemon juice was reacting with the bases in the seafood.
Sometimes, the transfer of protons from one molecule to another happens with desirable results, and sometimes with undesirable results, but always with powerful results.
The transfer of protons from acids to bases is by far the most common and arguably the most influential reaction in all of organic chemistry.
So let's start our discussion about acids and bases by defining exactly what they are from a chemical perspective.
There are three ways in which chemists categorize acids and bases.
Irenius, Bronsted-Lowry, and Lewis systems.
Now, each of these is named for the chemists who first proposed the system.
And each was devised to be most useful in a specific situation.
Irenius acids increase the concentration of protons when added to water.
And Irenius bases increase the concentration of hydroxide ions when added to water.
In the Bronsted-Lowry system, acids are still defined as proton donors, but bases are instead defined as proton acceptors.
Finally, Lewis acids are those species which can easily accept an electron pair to form a new bond, while Lewis bases donate electron pairs to those bonds.
This may seem a little bit odd since the process I just described can take place without a proton being involved,
but this definition allows us to extend acid-base categorization beyond solutions in water, bringing it into solvents more commonly used by the organic chemists.
So we will revisit Lewis acid-base theory in many of our coming lectures, but for today we're going to focus on the Bronsted-Lowry definition.
So now that we've made the decision to continue our discussion today using Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases, that is, acids donating protons and bases accepting them,
we can turn our attention to modeling reactions involving this transfer more closely.
Now proton transfer reactions are usually very fast, reaching equilibrium long before other reactions can occur.
There are of course exceptions to this rule, but in general we can expect that a system will reach its most stable protonation state long before any other reactions can occur.
Just like the reaction between your lemon juice and your fish is finished before you even begin enjoying your meal.
Now the proton transfer reaction is in equilibrium. It's a state of dynamic interconversion between or among products and reactants.
In some cases, just a small amount of products coexist with reagents at equilibrium, and in others the roles may be reversed,
with a sample consisting of nearly all products and just a small amount of reactants.
The extent to which this equilibrium lies in favor of products and reactants is dependent on the strengths of the acids appearing in the equation.
So let's take a look at one of these reactions now.
No, the slide is not laughing at you.
HA is actually how organic chemists write a generic Bronsted-Lowry acid when it's really not too important to us what the rest of the molecule is comprised of.
So for the moment I'm going to use this designation.
So acids HA we expect will dissociate into a proton and whatever's left over, in this case a minus, and we call a minus a conjugate base.
So my proton dissociation reaction has taken place here now, and I have my acidic hydrogen and I also have what we call the conjugate base.
Now just like our Haber-Bosch process, we can model the dissociation of an acid as an equilibrium, and when we do this we can calculate an equilibrium constant.
So the equilibrium constant for this process is calculated as the concentration of protons times the concentration of conjugate base divided by the concentration of the conjugate acid.
Now we give it a special subscript here, A, and really this is calculated just like any other KEQ, but we give it the subscript A so that the reader knows that we're talking about this specific type of chemical reaction.
But the catch is that KA values can be very, very large or very, very small, and the numbers can become somewhat unwieldy.
So we often report on the strength of an acid using something called the pKa.
Now the pKa is simply the negative logarithm of KA itself.
So by doing this we've changed our number not only in magnitude, but we've also flipped the relationship over, whereas KA gets larger as the proton concentration increases, meaning a stronger acid,
the pKa actually gets smaller as proton concentration increases, meaning that a smaller pKa is equal to a stronger acid.
So using this system, a KA of 0.1 becomes a pKa of 1, while a KA of 0.01 becomes a pKa of 2, and a KA of 0.001 becomes 3, and so on.
These are much more manageable numbers.
Now pKa values are a valuable means of quickly comparing acid strengths.
For example, if I were to show you the pKa values for a few acids with which you're likely to be familiar, I can quickly scan that list, and I can say that mole for mole,
vinegar is about 100 billion times more acidic than ethanol.
Because their pKa values differ by 11, so their dissociation constants differ by a factor of 10 to the 11th.
Hydrochloric acid has a pKa of about negative 6, making it 100 billion times more acidic than vinegar.
So you can see how massive the scale of acidity can be, and we use pKa to navigate it more quickly.
But this is only half of the picture.
If proton transfer occurs between an acid and a base, we certainly have to consider the properties of the base partner, right?
So let's take a look at an example.
If we're interested in determining the extent to which a proton transfer reaction like this one would take place,
it's easier for us to think about if we break it down into two different acid dissociation reactions.
This would be the reaction between our acid and its conjugate base, and our reactant base and its conjugate acid.
So when I break my equation down into these two sub-equations, it's a little bit easier for me to see.
First I have the acid dissociation of Ha. That equilibrium constant is defined as Ka.
The second part of my reaction I can model as the acid association of this acid here, Ha prime.
So the equilibrium constant for the reaction as I've written it is the reciprocal of Ka for this particular acid.
So why would I want to break this down this way?
Well, the reason is I can calculate Keq for a total process using the product of the equilibrium constants for all of the processes which add up to create it.
In other words, the equilibrium constant for my proton transfer reaction is simply equal to Ka for the dissociating acid divided by Ka for the newly formed conjugate acid.
And in this way I can determine whether my equilibrium will shift to the right or the left or somewhere in between.
Remember that example about using lemon juice to cut down on the fishy smell?
Well, this is the proton transfer reaction that goes on.
The principal acid component of lemon juice is citric acid.
And the basic compounds in fish that give them that characteristic smell is called methylamine.
Now this is just one of many compounds, but they're all of a similar ilk.
And what goes on during this reaction is a proton is transferred from citric acid creating its conjugate base to the methylamine creating its conjugate acid.
So citric acid and methylamine react to form dihydrogen citrate and methyl ammonium.
So we want to move that acidic proton from one side to the other, but we don't know the extent to which it will occur just yet.
To do this, to determine how far it will go, we can take a look at the conjugate acid and conjugate base for the reactants,
and we find out that the conjugate acid in this particular pair has a pKa of 3.2.
If we turn our attention to the base, methylamine, and look at its conjugate acid, methyl ammonium,
we discover that the acid in this particular set has a pKa of 10.6.
So if we want to know exactly how far this equilibrium will shift, we want to answer that question,
to what extent will the reaction take place, we can simply compare the pKa values of citric acid to methyl ammonium.
So here I've done it as a keq, but remember the pKa's are here in the exponents.
So using this equation, I've determined that the equilibrium constant for this reaction is about 10 to the 7.4 power.
That's 50 million.
So let's think about what that means for the reaction.
That means that the equilibrium which will be established between equal amounts of citric acid and methylamine
will favor the products by about 50 million times.
So for every one of those smelly methylamines that remains in your meal, 50 million of them will have been neutralized.
That's pretty impressive.
Now so far we've managed to demonstrate how one can compare acid strengths and predict the outcome of a proton transfer reaction
using acid dissociation constants or pKa values.
Now these two parameters are a reflection of acid strength.
But what exactly is it that makes an acid strong or weak?
Can we predict these properties or are we at the mercy of empirical scientific observation to determine those values?
Well the answer to the question lies somewhere in between the extremes.
Careful consideration of a compound structure allows us to estimate its acidity
or make an assertion about the relative acidities of two compounds,
though not necessarily to predict their exact pKa values.
And since the loss of a proton by an acid always produces its conjugate base,
one way to predict acidity is to simply assess the stability of the conjugate base which forms.
More stable conjugate base means a stronger acid with a higher kA and a lower pKa.
In general there are two major factors which combine to affect the stability of these conjugate bases in organic compounds.
The first is the electronegativity of nearby atoms in groups,
which cause electrons to be pulled away from the basic site where the proton would be held.
The second is nearby pi systems providing the stabilizing effect of resonance.
And both of these factors affect stability in essentially the same way.
They're spreading out and delocalizing the charges that conform when a proton removal takes place.
So let's begin this exercise by considering the inductive effect on a simple organic acid with which you may be familiar.
We're going to start with ethanol and then we'll look at a few of its derivatives.
So today we're going to compare the relative acidities of five different organic compounds.
Trifluoromethanol, difluoromethanol, dichloromethanol, a compound known as 2-2 dichloroethanol, and ethanol itself.
Now I've already arranged them in order of decreasing acidity.
And the total range of acidity here goes from a pKa of 12.4 to a pKa of about 16.
So stop and think about that. We're talking about 50,000 fold acidity increase as we add these chlorines and fluorines to the molecule.
So the logical question here is why does the addition of a halogen to this molecule have such an effect on acidity?
Well the reason behind this is easy to see when we compare three of these compounds.
I'm going to use trifluoromethanol, 2-2 dichloroethanol, and ethanol itself to try to explain this phenomenon.
Now we know already that halogens are very electronegative. Fluorine in fact is the most electronegative element of all.
So in our conjugate bases as I've drawn them here, I have a large quantity of highly electronegative elements very close to the basic site.
In other words, I placed really strong dipoles nearby that are pulling electron density away from the basic site.
Less electron density at the basic site means less negative charge.
And less negative charge means it doesn't attract and hold protons as well.
So this is our explanation for why trifluoromethanol is so much more acidic than a simple alcohol like ethanol.
Now I take a look at my dichloroethanol molecule here. A similar effect is going to take place.
But the dipoles are smaller because of the reduced electronegativity of chlorine and they're farther away in space from the basic site.
This means that the effect of the chlorine atoms will not be as strong as those from the fluorines.
So they will attenuate the negative charge at the basic site a little bit, but not quite as much as the fluorines did.
And finally, of course, we have ethanol, which doesn't have any electronegative elements attached.
And so there is no way for this conjugate base to distribute its negative charge and decrease its own reactivity.
So this leads to a more stable conjugate acid and explains why the pKa of ethanol is so much higher.
So there are three things at work here. The electronegativity of the attached elements, the quantity of those elements that are attached,
and the proximity of those elements or substituents to the actual basic site.
So smaller fluorines, closer in greater quantity, lead to a stronger acid.
But that's not the only factor. Remember, we also said that resonance was important.
So let's take a look at some acids in which that trend occurs.
Here are three organic acids, naphthoic acid, benzoic acid, and the very familiar acetic acid.
I've highlighted their acidic protons here in blue so that we can see where they are.
And now I'm going to switch these structures over to something that's a little bit easier to look at.
Now, my acetic acid has a pKa that's about a full unit above that of naphthoic acid.
So something about adding these rings of carbon atoms with sp2 hybridization is increasing the acidity,
which means that it's stabilizing the conjugate bases.
So let's look at those conjugate bases now and see if we can figure out what's going on.
Well, here are my conjugate bases with the charges in place.
And the first thing that I'd like to point out to you is that just because we have this carbonyl here,
common to all of them, this particular group, which we call a carboxylic acid,
we'll take a much closer look at this later in the course,
but that entire group can distribute some of that negative charge,
which explains why all three of these compounds have pKa values that are so drastically low compared to ethanol.
But why is benzoic acid more acidic than acetic acid?
And why is naphthoic acid even more acidic than benzoic acid?
The reason is that we can draw resonance contributors for these two molecules
in which the negative charge has moved into the ring.
I'm not going to draw those contributors for you, but I'm going to show you their general effect.
And that is to attenuate even more of that negative charge in benzoic acid
and even more so in naphthoic acid.
So again, the most stable conjugate base belongs to the strongest conjugate acid.
So the trend holds, this is why we have to consider not only electronegativity, quantity and proximity of groups,
but also whether or not those groups are in resonance with the basic site.
But not all acids are so simple.
Ethanol, trifluoroethanol, acetic acid and benzoic acid all clearly have just one acidic hydrogen,
because their other hydrogens are bonded strongly and directly to the carbon scaffold.
So their acid-base chemistry is limited to a simple two-state system
in which the molecule is either protonated or deprotonated.
We call these types of acids monoprotic, since they have just one acidic hydrogen,
which can be removed under all but the most extreme conditions.
Now this makes acid-base equilibria involving monoprotic acids very easy to model,
since there's only two potential states, protonated or deprotonated.
But let's take a look at that citric acid molecule one more time.
In our initial example, I fudged a little bit and implied that citric acid had just one acidic proton
and only one associated pKa value,
that which governs the removal of its most acidic proton,
producing the associated conjugate base.
But take a closer look at that conjugate base.
It contains other acidic hydrogens,
which might be removed if a proton transfer reaction were occurring.
This means that the citric acid can, and sometimes actually does,
lose two or even three protons in an acid-base reaction.
When an acid can do this, we refer to it as a polyprotic acid,
since it has multiple acidic hydrogens.
The conjugate bases, which still contain some acidic hydrogens,
have the very interesting property of being able to act either as an acid,
losing another proton,
or as a base, retrieving the proton that it had lost before.
Now, we call species like this, which can act as acids or bases, amphoteric.
So, modeling the behavior of citric acid in a proton transfer reaction
is actually a bit more complex than I had originally led you to believe.
To be sure that we're modeling the behavior accurately,
we must consider the fact that it can undergo three separate acid associations.
Citric acid to dihydrogen citrate, with a pKa of about 3.2.
Dihydrogen citrate to hydrogen citrate, with a pKa of 4.8.
And finally, hydrogen citrate to citrate ion, with a pKa of 6.4.
Remember that in our original example today,
we used citric acid to neutralize an equal amount of methylamine,
producing methyl ammonium ion and dihydrogen citrate ion.
But we now know that the resulting dihydrogen citrate ion can also react as an acid.
Of course, it's a weaker acid than citric acid itself,
since it's already accumulated some negative charge as a result of the loss of its first proton.
But since that dihydrogen citrate has a pKa,
just 1.6 units greater than citric acid,
we know that it can act as an acid about 50 times weaker.
So mixing equal amounts of methylamine and citric acid
will actually produce a mixture of about 98% dihydrogen citrate ions
and 2% hydrogen citrate ions.
Now this means that our original assumption is probably pretty valid
when you're only adding an equal amount of methylamine.
After all, 98% is a pretty good number.
Now, if we add another molar equivalent of methylamine, however,
for a total of two molar equivalents,
we can create a mixture which is nearly all hydrogen citrate.
And the addition of a third molar equivalent will all but completely convert that into citrate.
Now all this is true because the pKa of the methyl ammonium is somewhere around 11.
It's much higher than any of those three acids.
So we can decompose the citric acid all the way down to citrate
using the proper amount of a strong enough base.
So in truth, to neutralize one mole of methylamine,
we really only need to add one-third of a molar equivalent of citric acid
because that citric acid is polyprotic,
having three protons, all of which are acidic enough to react with the methylamine.
Now, I'd like to talk to you about one more special type of proton transfer reaction
called tautomerization.
Now, tautomers are defined as two neutral species which differ only by the position of a single proton.
An example of this is a compound with which we're familiar, acetone.
Now, you may not think about the CH protons of acetone
as being very acidic,
but they actually can be removed in small quantities by strong enough bases.
And when this happens, the proton can be relocated to the oxygen atom,
creating a species where the proton has been moved,
so I'm going to have to put some charge units in here
because I've moved only the hydrogen nucleus up to that oxygen.
Now, naturally, we can take a look at this and say to ourselves,
the acetone looks an awful lot more acidic than the proton.
Naturally, we can take a look at this and say to ourselves,
the acetone looks an awful lot more stable.
There's no charge separation,
and the oxygen has two bonds instead of three.
There are many things about this structure which make it look much more stable than this.
But this species has got a card to play.
It has an sp2 carbon separating those charges,
which means that it can relocate the pi electrons associated with the carbon-oxygen double bond
to create a new neutral species in which the proton still remains on the oxygen.
So removing this rather unstable intermediate,
I can see that I now have two essentially similar stability species which can exist.
So the key to this is that sp2 carbon in the middle there.
Now, when that's not available,
we can still have a proton transfer within a molecule,
but we create something different called a zwitterion.
A zwitterion is something that differs from the neutral species only by the relocation of a proton.
But in this case, our zwitterion, like the amino acid glycine,
cannot attenuate that charge that is built up.
So in the charged species, we now have an sp3 carbon in between,
which means that there is no way to move electrons from one site to the other
in an attempt to neutralize that charge.
Now, even though that's true, this equilibrium does actually exist,
and we do find glycine in its zwitterionic state,
zwitter being the German word for hybrid.
The reason we find it in that state is that the pKa of a neutral carboxylic acid like this one
is somewhere around 4,
whereas that of the charged ammonium motif here is somewhere around 10 or 11.
So it's just like a proton transfer between, say, citric acid and methyl ammonium,
except that they've been tied together by an sp3 carbon.
So these are the two types of intramolecular proton transfers,
which we'll need to understand to navigate some of our future chemical reactions.
So today we tackled the first of many reactions that we'll be studying over the course,
the proton transfer reaction.
We started by discussing the three classifications of acids and bases,
specifically the Arrhenius definition,
in which acids are proton donors and bases hydroxide donors.
We looked at Bronsted-Lowry definition,
in which acids are proton donors and bases are proton acceptors.
And finally at the Lewis definition,
which focuses on the electron accepting ability of acids
and the electron donating ability of bases.
We then turned our attention to the reaction between acids and bases,
and how the pKa of competing acids can be used
to predict the outcome of a proton transfer reaction.
Then we took a look at exactly what it is that makes one acid stronger than another.
We discussed how the stability of the conjugate base is often the key
to predicting the acidity of a particular compound,
and how distribution of charge usually goes hand in hand with that stability.
Next we addressed polyprotic acids,
which have multiple acidic protons,
and the formation of these amphoteric species,
which can act either as an acid or as a base.
And finally we took a look at two kinds of intramolecular proton transfer reactions.
We saw how in some molecules,
that intramolecular proton transfer can produce new neutral forms called tautomers.
And in others it can generate charge separation,
and we call those species zwitter ions.
In our next lecture,
we're going to turn our attention back to structures again,
discussing a fascinating and crucial concept in organic chemistry,
the handedness of molecules.
I'll see you then.
