The field of industrial refrigeration has had obvious impacts on global economies, health,
and so much more.
Just think about how many times in the past week you've reached for a medicine or a meal
which was not freshly prepared for you.
The need to cool materials as a means of preserving them has been commonplace since
the beginning of recorded history.
But for most of that recorded history, the cooling of foodstuffs was accomplished by transporting
ice and snow from higher elevations or by digging of cellars or other rudimentary methods.
In 1826, American Frederick Tudor founded a company shipping ice from the cold pond waters
of Massachusetts to regions as far away as the Caribbean, Europe, and even India.
So high was the demand for this product in the 1800s and so lucrative was Tudor's enterprise
that he was famously able to ride out one additional business failure after another,
relying on his sole thriving company to become the world's first and probably only ice magnate.
But transportation of ice isn't the oldest recorded method of cooling foodstuffs.
The people of India had discovered centuries before Tudor that the contents of clay pots
could be cooled by allowing the water to permeate into the clay of the containers and then placing
those containers outside to allow the water to evaporate from their surfaces.
You see, evaporation of a liquid means its conversion from the liquid state to the vapor
state and this process requires that heat be absorbed by that evaporating material.
And the first law of thermodynamics, conservation of energy, leads us to the conclusion that
any heat absorbed by evaporating material must be removed from the solid material left behind.
So as water evaporates from the pots, the pots themselves are cooled.
This method of refrigeration is known as evaporative cooling.
As you might expect, effective evaporative cooling requires that quite a bit of material
be converted from the liquid to the vapor state.
And in the technique I just described to you, the coolant, which is water, vaporizes and
then is lost to the atmosphere.
If you want to cool again or any further, you have to get more liquid water and repeat
the process.
But in 1835, an American inventor named Jacob Perkins patented a system in which vaporized
refrigerant was not allowed to escape, but was piped into a different region of an apparatus
where it was recondensed, allowing it to be pumped back into the cooling chamber and revaporized.
The vapor compression refrigeration system had been born.
Now, in 1835, Perkin had to use what was available to him as a refrigerant, highly flammable,
somewhat toxic, and rather expensive ether.
Naturally, his invention was not viable competition for the ice shipping industry for these reasons.
Paying extra money for a refrigerator, which was somewhat likely to blow up, didn't seem
like a good investment to most people.
But the engineers of this era didn't give up.
And over the next century, experimentation with different refrigerants and compression
systems continued.
Still, none could provide safe, cost-effective, reliable cooling the way that imported ice
could.
But near the end of the 19th century, this changed with the introduction of a new class
of refrigerants called alkylhalides.
As the name implies, alkylhalides can be thought of as alkanes, in which one or more of the
hydrogen atoms has been replaced with a halogen.
This is from the column 7 of the periodic table containing fluorine, chlorine, bromine,
and iodine.
Now, we've already seen ways in which a halogen can be introduced to a carbon-containing
scaffold via radical halogenation.
And we've even performed an analysis on the chiral center of one of these compounds in
the form of Freon 151.
Today, we're going to see exactly why anyone would want to create such a compound.
As you just saw, we commonly refer to simple alkylhalides as alkyl fluorides, chlorides,
bromides, or iodides, depending on which halogen is attached.
Do not, however, let this fool you into thinking that the halogens are ionized as they are
in inorganic materials, like sodium chloride, for example, and table salt.
These are, in fact, covalently bonded to the carbon atom.
Now, in addition to classifying alkylhalides by which halogen is attached, organic chemists
frequently classify alkylhalides based upon the substitution of the carbon bearing the
halogen.
We call this atom the alpha carbon.
Now, if there are no other carbons attached to this alpha carbon, we call the compound
a methylhalide.
One alkyl group attached to the alpha carbon is a primary alkylhalide.
Two attached groups is a secondary, and three would be called a tertiary alkylhalide.
Now, when the exact identity of an alkyl group is not of consequence, we sometimes simply
use the abbreviation R to indicate a generic alkyl group is present.
So, the molecule commonly called propylchloride would be considered a primary alkylhalide
because of its single R group.
Next is isopropylchloride, which has two R groups attached to the carbon bearing the
chlorine.
So, this would be an example of a secondary alkylhalide.
And finally, here's a structure of the simplest tertiary alkylhalide, t-butylchloride.
Now, from an IUPAC naming perspective, halogens are treated exactly as any alkyl substituent
would be, using the prefixes fluoro, chloro, bromo, and iodo to define them.
So, using the IUPAC naming convention, propylchloride becomes one chloropropane.
Isopropylchloride becomes two chloropropane.
Antibutylchloride will be two chloro, two methylpropane.
Now, halogens are much larger and more electronegative than hydrogen.
And their presence on the molecule has two important effects.
The first is related to the size of the halogen atoms.
The size of the halogen atoms has a profound effect on the boiling point of whichever methylhalide
I'm dealing with.
So, here I've drawn for you some structures for all of the common methylhalides that we'll
encounter in this course.
I've also used methane here as a reference.
It's CH4, but we can attach a fluorine in place of one hydrogen to create methylfluoride,
a chlorine to create methylchloride, et cetera.
And when we take a look at the boiling points of these compounds, there's a very clear and obvious trend.
And that is that the larger the attached halogen atom is, the higher the boiling point of the
associated methylhalide will be.
And the reason for this is easier to see if I change these models from this ball and stick format
to what we call a space-filling model.
And the space-filling model is fairly clear to see that the electron cloud around methyliodide
is much larger than that around methylbromide, which is larger than chloride, et cetera,
all the way down to methane.
So, we're dealing with a situation where the polarizability increases as we add larger
and larger halides, causing their boiling points to increase as well as a result of stronger dispersion forces.
Now, let's take a look at another property of these alkylhalides, and that is the polarity of the bond.
Now, we know that halogens are more electronegative than carbon and hydrogen,
so we expect that a bond dipole will exist with some negative charge over here near the halogen
and a bit of positive charge on the associated alpha carbon.
But when we survey the bond dipoles of these common methylhalides,
what we notice is that fluorine actually has a slightly less polar bond with carbon than does chlorine.
Now, what's the reason for this, right?
Didn't I just tell you not too long ago that fluorine is the most electronegative element of all?
Well, the reason that the bond polarities are so similar among these alkylhalides
is because bond dipoles are also a function of the distance between the two atoms.
So, I've got to consider the length of these bonds, which is easier to see in the ball-and-stick model.
So, even though fluorine is my most electronegative element of the bunch,
it actually has the shortest bond of any of the methylhalides.
And the consequence of these bond lengths is that they counteract that electronegativity difference just a bit,
and it's a fairly happy coincidence, actually, that most of these carbon-halogen bonds have similar bond polarity,
makes them a little bit more predictable from a reactivity standpoint.
Okay, so we've already seen this slide in which we've compared the boiling points of methylhalides
as a function of how large the attached halogen is.
But it also stands to reason that with three additional positions on the alpha carbon,
that we should consider what happens when we add more than one halogen to our alkylhalide.
So, let's do this using chlorine as an example.
Instead of just one chlorine as on methylchloride,
I can have two chlorines attached to the alpha carbon in a compound called methylene chloride.
Three attached chlorines creates chloroform,
and four creates a compound commonly known as carbon tetrachloride.
So, if I look at the effect of adding additional chlorine atoms to my molecule as a function of boiling points,
it's very clear what's going on here.
Methane itself has a very low boiling point of negative 161 degrees centigrade.
Adding a chlorine gives me methylchloride, rather, with a boiling point of negative 24.
I get to methylene chloride with a boiling point of 40,
and adding additional chlorines continues to cause an increase in the boiling point to 61 and 77 degrees centigrade, respectively,
all because of that extra electron cloud that's brought to each of these compounds by adding additional chlorine atoms.
Now, carbon tetrachloride is a liquid at standard temperature and pressure,
and it was a popular garment dry cleaning solvent in the late 1900s,
but it's fallen out of favor recently due to environmental and health concerns.
Perhaps ironically, its popular replacement per chloroethylene certainly does look very similar, doesn't it?
Indeed, per chloroethylene is used in dry cleaning now,
but it's currently under scrutiny for its potential health and environmental impacts.
The first occurrence of alkyl halides in refrigeration was methylchloride.
It was put into use near the beginning of the 20th century,
but methylchloride's toxicity and flammability meant that a leaking refrigerator compressor could easily spell disaster.
So, methylchloride shares many of the dangers that Perkins' original ether coolant did.
It would appear that alkyl halides just weren't destined for this application.
But near the end of the 1920s, a researcher by the name of Thomas Midgley Jr.,
working for the Frigidaire Division of General Motors, devised a new alkyl halide compound.
Midgley's contribution was a method used to synthesize dichloro-difluoromethane.
And in doing so, he managed to create a compound with the useful physical properties he wanted,
but which was also not flammable or appreciably toxic.
Midgley and his contemporaries dubbed this class of refrigerants CFCs.
Lauded as a revolution in refrigeration technology,
Midgley's creation became the gold standard of refrigerants.
And before long, the era of mass-scale ice shipping was over,
as thousands of refrigerators worldwide were using and leaking these compounds into the atmosphere.
Now, we're all probably familiar with CFCs and the potentially calamitous environmental effect they have in the upper atmosphere.
This may be one of chemistry's greatest ironies.
These compounds were designed to make life on the ground safer in the form of refrigerators which won't poison or incinerate us,
but they ultimately began to produce a hole in the most vital protective layer of the upper atmosphere, the Earth's ozone layer.
You see, Midgley's invention may have been much safer near the surface of the Earth,
but as those dense vapors from this propellant and refrigerant slowly migrate into the upper atmosphere,
they mingle with solar radiation and a naturally occurring layer of gas known as ozone.
In the upper atmosphere, ozone forms and decomposes naturally in an equilibrium process,
absorbing dangerous UV sea light from the sun as it does so.
What Midgley and his contemporaries couldn't possibly have predicted
is that when Freon reaches this layer of the atmosphere and is exposed to high-energy UV radiation,
one of the carbon-chlorine bonds breaks.
This bond cleavage takes place in a homolytic process which is reminiscent of our radical halogenation reaction like we might use to create Freon.
But it divides the bonding electron pair between departing chlorine atoms and the carbon atoms to which they're bonded.
Now, the distinction here is that carbon-chlorine bonds are stronger than chlorine-chlorine bonds, so higher-energy UV light is required.
So, carbon-chlorine bonds which are regarded as generally stable at the Earth's surface
are anything but stable in the upper atmosphere where those high-energy photons are available.
And just like the photolysis of chlorine, this bond-breaking mechanism in Freon
creates a very reactive radical chlorine atom with only seven valence electrons.
Now we see where we get into environmental trouble with CFCs.
We know from our free radical halogenation discussion just how reactive these chlorine radicals can be.
But today, it has a new partner to react with, ozone gas.
And chlorine radicals participate in the breaking down of ozone into molecular oxygen, producing a molecule of chlorine monoxide.
And this chlorine monoxide then reacts with atomic oxygen which is also naturally present in the stratosphere.
This produces another molecule of oxygen and very unfortunately regenerates that chlorine atom.
So the chlorine radical, generated by light-activated homolytic bond cleavage in the upper atmosphere, catalyzes the decomposition of protective ozone.
At the end of the process, the radical catalyst is reproduced and can move on to decompose yet another molecule of ozone.
And in this way, a single chlorine radical can break down about 100,000 ozone molecules
before it's naturally consumed in a reaction with other atmospheric gases which are naturally present.
This non-natural acceleration of ozone decomposition causes a decrease in overall ozone levels,
which allows potentially unsafe radiation to pass through the upper atmosphere reaching the Earth's surface.
So the bad news here is that CFCs have disturbed the natural equilibrium between ozone production and depletion in the stratosphere.
The good news is that equilibrium is a dynamic process and as those CFCs are naturally consumed,
the original equilibrium should re-establish itself, replenishing the ozone layer over time.
Now there's little that we can do about the CFCs which have already been released into the environment.
But in order to avoid the negative effect of these chlorine radicals on ozone,
modern refrigerants have been designed without the use of carbon-chlorine bonds.
These new refrigerants are commonly called hydrofluorocarbons.
Now in a twist of fate, which we should probably expect by now, there are mounting concerns today regarding the use of hydrofluorocarbons
because of their ability to act as a greenhouse gas, trapping reflected infrared light and contributing to global warming.
So after carcinogenic carbon tetrachloride, flammable and toxic methyl chloride,
ozone-depleting CFCs and supergreen house hydrofluorocarbons,
why do we keep turning to compounds like alkyl halides for these applications?
The answer is tuneability of alkyl halide volatility.
Their relative stability and our ability to methodically and predictably modify the boiling points of these organic compounds
has made them a very difficult option to abandon in a number of applications,
not the least of which is refrigeration.
Now alkyl halides are also valued in synthetic organic chemistry for their balance of stability and reactivity.
Many alkyl halides will keep in a bottle on a shelf for years,
but can be converted into other useful reagents in a matter of minutes or hours in the laboratory.
The key to this balance of stability and reactivity lies in the fact that carbon halogen bonds are inherently fairly strong but polarized.
Average carbon fluorine and carbon chlorine bond enthalpies are actually similar to that of carbon carbon bonds.
Even carbon bromine bonds are quite strong.
This means that in the absence of other reagents, most alkyl halides have a long shelf life.
But unlike carbon carbon bonds, carbon halogen bonds are polar.
The more electronegative halogen pulls those bonding electrons closer to itself, creating that mild permanent charge separation across the bond.
And as you can see from our table, carbon fluorine, carbon chlorine, and carbon bromine bonds are all very similar in polarity,
since that less electronegative bromine has a longer bond length, for example.
And iodine's monstrous size isn't really enough to make up for its lower electronegativity, making its bond just a little bit less polar than the others.
Now, more often than not, we find that chlorine and bromine strike just the right mix of bond strength and polarity.
So they're usually the go-to alkyl halides for the types of reactions we'll soon consider.
Although so far we've examined some alkyl halides which contain many bonded halogen atoms, exploited for their physical properties,
synthetic organic chemists more frequently like to use alkyl halides containing only one or just a few halogens,
so that subsequent chemical reactions are more site-directed.
Furthermore, in the low pressure, high energy environment of the troposphere, radicals can easily form, but they're far less common in the lab.
Organic chemists much more frequently rely on the tendency of halogens to accept the full bonding pair in a process known as heterolytic bond cleavage.
Accepting both electrons from the bond produces a halide ion, which is more stable than a halogen radical,
and a positively charged hydrocarbon species also, which we call a carbocation.
The tendency of this process to happen spontaneously in an alkyl halide is a result of two factors.
One is the stability of the halide ion, and the other the stability of the resulting carbocation.
So the key to predicting how a particular alkyl halide will react lies in being able to understand the factors contributing to the stability of those two products.
Let's start by focusing on the halide ion. Fluoride, chloride, bromide, and iodide.
They all have a single charge and a complete octet in their outermost energy level.
So they're all fairly stable from an octet rule perspective, yet there's a steady trend of increasing stability in this set of ions as we go from smaller to larger.
So what's giving the iodide ion more stability than bromide, and bromide more than chloride?
The answer to the question comes in the form of a familiar topic, polarizability.
You'll recall that we discussed this concept when we talked about the volatility of these compounds.
The iodide ion with five valence shells has a large electron cloud, which gives its electrons a lot of freedom to move within that cloud.
This means that at any instant in time I might find a small region of greater electron density here, and then later here, and then later yet over here.
So the negative charge of an iodide ion is distributed over a very large volume of its electron cloud.
And remember that as a general rule, distributing charge means more stability.
Now let's take a look at bromide. Bromide has a smaller cloud, but it still carries the same negative charge compared to iodide.
So the negative charge of bromide is less distributed in a smaller volume of space, making it less stable.
And this trend continues to chloride and ultimately fluoride, with negative charge density becoming progressively more and more intense, resulting in less and less stable ions.
So in general, t-butyl iodide more rapidly dissociates into a halide and carbocation than does t-butyl bromide, which does so faster than t-butyl chloride, which outpaces t-butyl fluoride.
Next we have to take a look at the resulting carbocation and its substitution.
You see, carbocations contain a positively charged carbon atom with only three bonds to itself.
So the charged carbon has only six valence electrons, therefore it doesn't have a complete octet.
Instead it has three coplanar sp2 hybridized orbitals bonded to either hydrogens or r-groups, and a vacant p-orbital.
Now we observe in the lab that just like radicals and alkenes, the carbocation ions of higher substitution are also more stable.
In other words, tertiary carbocation, having three r-groups like this t-butyl cation, form more readily than do secondary carbocation like this isopropyl cation.
Similarly, primary carbocation like ethyl cation are rarely ever seen in the laboratory.
And finally, methyl cations which have no r-groups are the least stable of all.
So what's the reason for this trend in carbocation stability?
Well, the answer is a very familiar topic, hyperconjugation.
So to explain this, let me bring up the structure of a carbocation.
Remember, carbocation have the three r-groups or hydrogens attached to them at 120 degree angles within the plane.
And the vacant p-orbital is oriented straight up and down.
So if one of the adjacent r-groups is in fact an alkyl group, there should be a carbon with another bonding orbital adjacent to my empty p-orbital.
And it's the electron density from this bond to the adjacent carbon that can hop or slightly share with that empty p-orbital.
And it's this crosstalk that distributes that charge and attenuates a little bit of that positive charge right in the middle of the carbocation.
So if we enhance this effect by going from one to two to ultimately three r-groups, we continually stabilize the charge as we add each group.
So the rate of formation of a carbocation by an alkyl halide has two important influencing factors.
First, it gets faster as the halogen gets larger.
And second, it gets faster as the carbocation gets more substituted.
Now, it should be emphasized here that this is a general rule and there will be exceptions, particularly when we start to consider the effect that solvents can have on reactions.
But for now, this is a good general rule to get us started.
Now, carbocations and species like them make regular appearances in many common reaction mechanisms.
So it's worth shining the spotlight on them for a bit longer and showing you at least one very unusual property of these species.
Their ability to rearrange one or more of their bonds to increase their stability.
Now, we just finished discussing what a profound effect the substitution of a carbocation can have on its stability, with tertiary cations being more stable and secondary and so on.
We're already gaining an understanding of molecules' natural tendency to take on lower energy forms through chemical processes.
And carbocations are no exception to this rule.
Carbocations sometimes can alter their own structure through a process known as rearrangement.
These rearrangements can take place in two ways.
Secondary, meaning that they take place after the formation of the carbocation.
Or concerted, meaning that it takes place at the same time that the carbocation forms.
They can take place by those two mechanisms and they can also take place in two different ways, one known as hydride shifts and one known as alkyl shifts.
So let's take a look at some of those now.
The first type of shifts I'd like to show you is a secondary hydride shift.
So this will take place after the formation of a carbocation and will involve, as you can probably figure out, the movement of a hydrogen.
So I've drawn for you here a secondary carbocation.
Secondary because the carbon which holds the charge is bonded to two R groups.
One I've actually designated as an R group and the other I've expanded a bit so that you can see what's about to happen.
Now let's make a duplicate of this molecule here.
So I have a secondary carbocation, which is adjacent to a tertiary carbon, right?
One, two, and then three R groups attached to the adjacent carbon.
So knowing that this is a tertiary carbon and this is a secondary carbon,
this carbocation would much rather have its charge on the adjacent carbon.
And it's able to get it there using something called a hydride shift.
Now in a hydride shift, this attached hydrogen and its bonding electrons will both migrate to the adjacent carbon.
And in doing so, it will relocate the positive charge to the more substituted carbon.
So let's watch that happen.
The consequence of my hydride shift should be obvious. I've made a tertiary carbocation.
So when we draw reactions as line angle structures, we might see a carbocation like this,
but when we continue to analyze the reaction, discover that the product seems to have formed from a carbocation that looks like this.
And the reason for that is that a hydride shift has occurred to change my secondary carbocation into a tertiary carbocation.
Another very commonly encountered carbocation rearrangement is known as a secondary alkyl shift.
And this has a tendency to occur in a secondary carbocation which has an adjacent quaternary carbon.
You see now my adjacent carbon doesn't have a hydrogen at all, but rather has only R groups attached.
So this secondary carbocation, which would like to be tertiary, can't achieve that by a hydride shift because there's just no hydrogen to shift.
And when this is the case, there's one other mechanism which can take place.
And that is that the entire alkyl group can shift, including its bonding electrons to the associated quaternary carbon.
And when this process takes place, not only do I alter the location of the positive charge,
but I've actually retooled the entire carbon framework of this molecule.
Well, in this case a carbocation, but the resulting molecule.
So what this will look like in a line angle formula is if I have a carbocation,
which appears to have a secondary carbocation adjacent to a quaternary carbon,
I'll actually, usually, see a product that looks as though it formed from this tertiary carbocation.
And it's the consequence of this alkyl shift.
The third type of secondary rearrangement that I'd like to talk about is called a ring expansion.
And in a ring expansion it's very similar to an alkyl shift.
The difference being that my carbocation is now adjacent to a strained ring in the form of a cyclobutane.
And we know that cyclobutane contains a great deal of ring strain or bias strain.
And that it would rather be a five-membered ring than a four-membered ring.
And the presence of an adjacent carbocation gives it just that opportunity.
All we have to do is complete an alkyl shift which sort of drags the rest of the ring along with it.
And when that occurs, not only do I relocate the positive charge, but I also expand the ring.
So I've turned my cyclobutane ring into a cyclopentane ring.
So again, when I'm working out a reaction and I see a carbocation which looks like this,
I should be thinking about products which might form from a carbocation which instead looks like this.
Now, both hydride and alkyl shifts are not limited to secondary carbocation.
There's another class of these rearrangements which we call concerted rearrangements or primary alkyl shifts.
And these take place in the example of isobutyl chloride.
If I were to suggest that the chloride ion can be formed from this molecule producing a carbocation,
you should be suspicious because simply breaking the carbon-chlorine bond produces a primary carbocation.
And we know that primary carbocation is almost never formed because they're just not stable enough.
But what if the adjacent hydrogen could shift not after the carbon-chlorine bond had broken, but in concert with it?
We could bypass the primary carbocation completely, forming a tertiary carbocation through that concerted rearrangement.
Of course, we can make the natural extension of this and suggest that a concerted alkyl shift is possible
and molecules like 2, 2-dimethyl 1-chlorobutane as well.
All of these carbocation rearrangements can be either a supreme annoyance against which we have to guard
or a clever trick used to devise ingenious pathways to desired products.
In either case, when they're possible, they have to be accounted for during synthetic design.
Whether these processes are friend or foe, we'll see very soon that they can have a profound impact on the outcome of a synthesis.
So let's review what we've discussed today.
We've defined alkyl halides, which can be thought of as hydrocarbons in which one or more hydrogen atoms are replaced by a halogen substituent.
We examine both common and IUPAC systems for naming these compounds
and how halogens are treated just like any other alkyl substituents in systematic nomenclature.
We talked about how the presence of larger, more polarizable halogen atoms decreases the volatility of alkyl halides,
allowing chemists like Midgley to tune the physical properties of refrigerants and advance the science of refrigeration,
ultimately all but ending the global ice shipping industry.
Finally, we discussed a bit about the reactivity of alkyl halides,
and we investigated how the homolytic cleavage of carbon-chlorine bonds adds a catalyst to the upper atmosphere of the Earth,
accelerating ozone depletion and threatening the environment.
And we also took a look at how carbon halogen bonds behave in solution in the lab rather than in the upper atmosphere.
How these alkyl halides are set up to undergo a heterolytic bond cleavage
to produce halide ions and carbocation of varying stabilities depending on the size of the halide ion and the substitution of the carbocation.
Finally, we tackled the phenomenon of carbocation rearrangements.
We saw how these commonly formed reaction intermediates are most stable when their charged carbon is more substituted.
And we even saw how they can alter their structures through hydride and alkyl shifts and ring expansions in search of more stable states.
So now that we have a basic understanding of why and how alkyl halides can react,
we're ready to take it to the next level and start considering exactly what we can make from this versatile class of starting materials
by combining them with other reagents.
In the next few lectures, we'll see how the breaking of a carbon halogen bond can be a part of many different chemical reaction mechanisms,
all of which can be used to produce a host of useful compounds.
It's finally time to start designing a synthesis.
I'll see you next time.
