Last time, we investigated the phenomenon of partitioning and how it can be exploited
to separate compounds based on their relative affinities for two distinct chemical environments.
Specifically, we looked at liquid-liquid systems and solid-liquid systems.
In this lecture, we're going to explore one of the most powerful separation techniques ever developed,
one which, when properly applied, allows us to isolate almost anything we can imagine.
It's also a bit near and dear to my heart because I spent two and a half years of my life
chained to a lab bench analyzing pharmaceutical products with one of these techniques.
Now, you might say that in that way, it was chromatography which inspired me to return to school for my PhD.
Our brief look at chromatography starts with its inventor, Mikhail Tsvet.
Tsvet was educated in Switzerland, where he received his PhD in 1896.
Shortly after this, however, he found himself in Russia, facing a similar fate to that of Zitsev,
whose foreign credential had nearly marginalized him in the Russian system.
Tsvet's non-Russian credential was not recognized by the National Establishment,
prompting him to undertake a second PhD program to become a functional scientist in the Russian system.
I can only imagine the sinking feeling he must have had when he first realized
that he would have to earn his PhD all over again.
In retrospect, however, it may have been the single greatest thing that ever happened to him,
since it was the topic of his second PhD which earned him immortality in the science of separation.
You see, Tsvet became interested in self-physiology during his first PhD program,
and he wanted to continue working with natural plant products,
trying to understand the chemistry which drives their unique biology.
It was during experiments with the ubiquitous plant pigment chlorophyll
that he made the observation which would forever change his life and the science of separations.
Tsvet knew that isolated chlorophyll could be easily dissolved in an organic solvent known as petroleum ether.
Yet, when he attempted to extract the pigments from the leaves of plants,
he noted that it was very difficult to dissolve in the same solvent.
Even after grinding and tearing the leaves to expose more surface area and break open cells,
the distinctive dark green pigment simply wouldn't cooperate.
His conclusion was that the chlorophyll pigment must be adhered to the solid plant matter
through intermolecular forces, reducing its solubility in the petroleum ether solvent.
Using this idea as a springboard for his research,
Tsvet tried adhering chlorophyll to different solid surfaces
and then washing it away with various solvents
by allowing those solvents to flow through the solid matrix to which he had adhered the pigment.
He found that not only did chlorophyll migrate at different rates in different systems,
but also that mixtures of pigments would many times separate in space
because of the differing attractive forces at work between them and the two phases.
This created an array of colors on Tsvet's column,
prompting him to dub his new technique chromatography
from the Greek words meaning color and writing.
Where Tsvet's creation really differed from simple liquid-liquid or solid-liquid extraction
is that he added motion to the equation.
By allowing one of the phases to move across the other,
the partitioning of a solute between heterogeneous phases
can be used to move compounds across the stationary phase, but at varying rates.
Obviously, the more time a particular compound spends partitioned onto the mobile phase
or into the mobile phase, the faster it moves.
Indeed, the modern definition of chromatography is
a separation technique which relies on the differing affinity of a substance
for a stationary phase and a mobile phase.
We can very closely duplicate the results of some of Tsvet's experiments
using a simple piece of chalk, some markers,
and a solvent that's readily available to us, like ethanol.
So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to take that piece of chalk
which I've applied a little bit of some pigments from a marker,
and I'm going to use ethanol as a mobile phase
to cause those dyes and pigments to migrate, but at different speeds.
So ahead of time, I've already prepared my column, if you will,
and as I promised, this is an experiment that's pretty easily done right in your own kitchen.
This is nothing more than a piece of common sidewalk chalk.
This is calcium carbonate, the exact same stationary phase
used by Tsvet in his original experiment.
Now on this piece of chalk, I placed bands of different colors
simply by touching the tip of a marker to the chalk.
So this chalk is now my stationary phase.
It's going to stand perfectly still throughout the experiment.
I have a beaker here with a little bit of the solvent ethanol in it.
Now I'm using ethanol instead of petroleum ether
because the pigments from the markers are actually much more polar molecules
than the pigments that Tsvet was separating.
So I need a little bit more polar solvent to encourage this ink to migrate.
What I'm going to do now is place my chalk into this beaker
containing a very shallow pool of my mobile phase ethanol
and allow it to migrate up through the chalk through essentially capillary action.
So my chalk will absorb the solvent and chromatography will take place.
So let's start that now.
I'm going to very carefully balance my chalk here
and place a piece of aluminum foil over the top
in an attempt to discourage evaporation of my mobile phase
while separation takes place.
So if we wait for just a moment, we should already be able to see the chalk
is becoming darker as the solvent moves up toward the ink.
So before long, it's going to pass over my bands of different colors
and begin to separate those molecules based upon chromatography.
So our chalk has been developing for a little while
and even though the solvent has only run a very small distance
it's already very easy to see what's been going on here.
So let's take a closer look.
I'm going to remove my stationary phase along with the adhered pigments.
I'll move my ethanol to the side.
Now if I turn this chalk you can see very clearly
that different colored markers contain different colored pigments
and not only that but those different colored pigments have traveled different distances.
Now since calcium carbonate is a particularly polar substance
and ethanol is an organic solvent, I can say with relative certainty
for example that the yellow dye to produce the color of the yellow marker
contains molecules which are less polar
than say the compounds used in this blue dye which were used to produce the green marker.
And I can make this sort of qualitative assessment of the polarity of the different dyes within
simply by looking at how they move during my chromatography experiment.
Of course chromatography has advanced considerably over the past century.
Stationary phases like calcium carbonate and sugar from Svets experiments
have been replaced by a number of superior options.
The first of these was actually paper.
You see paper consists of cellulose, a long polymer consisting mostly of interconnected glucose units.
And we already know that these glucose units have many, many hydroxyls
which are available to interact with polar or hydrogen bonding compounds.
Two English chemists by the name of Archer J.P. Martin and Richard Singh
developed a method of chromatography using paper and organic solvents
as stationery and mobile phases respectively.
In 1942 they published a paper outlining this technique
but more importantly it discussed the fundamentals of partitioning
as it applied to chromatographic systems.
This technique proved extremely useful in the identification of small organic molecules
including amino acids like glycine and alanine.
This method was so influential that Martin and Singh received the 1952 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this concept.
Not only did these two receive the prize for their work
but a further validation came just a year later
when a young scientist named Stanley Miller used this method
to verify the presence of amino acids in his now famous Primitive Earth experiment.
More recently, advances in material manufacturing
had made quick identifications like millers even easier and more accurate.
For example, microporosilica can now be manufactured.
Silica is a fantastic stationery phase because even though its formula is SiO2
at its surface are an array of silanol groups or SiOH motifs.
These groups will interact well with anything of high polarity or good hydrogen bonding ability
and because silica can be manufactured with a tremendous amount of surface area per volume ratio
more compound can be separated with greater efficiency or on larger scales.
For example, instead of the everyday paper used by Martin and Miller
modern organic chemistry researchers often use a thin layer chromatography plate
with a plastic backing and just a 200 micron thick layer of silica bound to it.
That's just about the width of a human hair.
But that small amount of silica has a surface area of literally hundreds of square meters
because the extremely small size and porosity of the silica particles
gives it this very, very large surface area to volume ratio.
In the technique of thin layer chromatography, a small amount of compound to be analyzed
is spotted onto the plate as a solution and it's allowed to dry.
So once that spot is dried, it's placed into a developing chamber
which contains a thin pool of the selected mobile phase
which will move up the plate in the very same way that our mobile phase moved up the chalk in our previous demonstration.
So let's take a look at a thin layer chromatography experiment
just like we did our chalk experiment which simulated the work of Svet.
Now this time I'm going to put on some gloves just because I'd like to hold up for you
and show you what a thin layer chromatography plate actually looks like.
Now they come in many sizes and they come with many different stationary phases
but by far the most common uses silica and it's backed in plastic
so the shiny side on the back here is actually plastic on which chromatography would never happen.
But this is the surface which contains the very, very thin layer of microscopic beads of silica.
In fact, this jar contains loose silica, the likes of which would be adhered to the backing of the plate.
So as you can see it's extremely fine particle size
and that gives it its extremely large surface area to volume ratio.
Now I have a small developing chamber here which has alcohol in it just as before
and I've created a plate which I've spotted with some of the markers that we used in the previous experiment as well
and you're probably going to notice a market difference in their chromatographic behavior
because even though I'm using the same mobile phase, we're changing our stationary phase now
from calcium carbonate to silica, both very polar but in their own way
so we're going to see a drastically different separation pattern taking place.
Nonetheless, the development process is essentially the same.
I'm going to take my plate onto which I placed three small spots, one of green, one of orange and one of the red marker
and I've spotted them just as I did in my bars on the chalk stick
in such a way that they don't submerge beneath the thin pool of mobile phase
because I don't want them to dissolve into all that mobile phase.
So I'm going to place that inside very carefully, going to cover that back up with my foil
to discourage any evaporation of my mobile phase
and fairly quickly, we should be able to see that the alcohol mobile phase is making its way up the plate once again
and just as before with the chalk, when it encounters the spots, they will begin to migrate at a rate
which is consistent with their relative affinity for the mobile and stationary phases.
So we'll come back to this and take a look at it in just a few minutes when it's done.
So the mobile phase has moved an appreciable distance up the plate
which is the stationary phase in my TLC experiment, so I'm ready to take a look now at the result.
I'm going to remove my plate. Now if I were in the lab, I would very quickly take a pencil and mark the lane
because as we'll see here briefly, over time I expect that that alcohol mobile phase will begin to evaporate
and it won't be quite so clear as it is now where it traveled to.
Now it's very important for me to know that because I can use the distances traveled by the spots
relative to that traveled by the mobile phase to get some numbers that we'll talk about in a moment.
But first let's just take a look at the plate. So it's very obvious that the green marker actually contains some blue dye.
Now we may not have guessed that originally simply from looking at the marker itself,
but the chromatography plate makes this fact essentially undisputable.
Not only that, I can say that some of that blue dye moved very well with the mobile phase
and therefore didn't have a terribly high affinity for the stationary phase.
In other words, it's moving that way because it's less polar than the others.
We can even see similar components in the red and orange markers but in slightly different proportions
and of course the orange having more yellow and the red having more of the darker pigments in it.
So this is how TLC can be used to very quickly get qualitative assessments of compounds polarities and solubilities
in different solvents but also to give us a very quick and easy way to compare one lane to the next
and identify common compounds in different samples.
Now since my solvents still evaporating, I'll show you another one which I prepared earlier
in which the solvent has all but evaporated completely.
And again you can see I've got basically the same result.
Yet another very important property of this chromatography technique is that it's reproducible.
So as long as I use the same stationary and mobile phases each time,
I can expect the same relative mobilities for all the spots within a given sample.
So as the mobile phase wicks up through the plate by capillary action,
different compounds in our samples were moving at different rates.
Now compounds which interact more strongly with the polar silica move to shorter distance
while those which interacted better with the lower polarity mobile phase move to greater distance.
At the completion of the experiment we can measure those distances traveled by the sample spots
as a fraction of the distance traveled by the mobile phase.
And we report that number as the RF value for that sample in our particular chromatographic system.
RF stands for retention factor and it gives us a semi-quantitative way to describe simple chromatographic mobility,
like we just saw in our experiment.
Now thin layer chromatography may be a versatile, quick, low-cost way to observe the chromatographic mobility of a compound.
But working with such small quantities makes collection of a meaningful sample of the compound somewhat difficult.
In order to collect a sample which can be used as raw material, drug, an analytical sample, or a synthetic intermediate,
we need to increase the scale of the experiment.
This is frequently done in the lab using a technique known as column chromatography.
In column chromatography we abandon the thin layer of stationary phase on the backing in favor of a column.
Now this brings the third dimension into play and this means that a 2 centimeter wide column
can separate about 8,000 times as much sample as a TLC lane which is just 200 microns thick.
Now we accomplish this using a device like this.
It's a glass column which contains a Teflon stopcock at the base and a stem through which we can drain mobile phase.
I place a small bit of glass wool or some other obstruction in the neck to prevent solids from moving through,
then a nice even layered bed of sand onto which I would build a column of silica again using this finely, finely powdered silica material.
The key here is that because I'm using a column which has depth,
instead of that extremely thin layer of silica I'm using a very large bed of silica.
In fact the bed contains about 8,000 times the volume per unit length in a column this size compared to the kind of TLC plates that we saw previously.
So using a column I can get a larger quantity of material.
The only real catch here comes when we try to analyze the mobility.
We have to remember that in our previous examples the mobile phase migrated from the bottom of the column to the top.
But in this case once we packed a column and add sample we'd be adding mobile phase through the top and draining through the bottom,
meaning that all the motion is now downward.
So there's a common point of confusion is that even though the bands may appear to be reversed from a TLC experiment,
they're in fact, if they are reversed, exactly what we would expect.
Now the techniques that we've looked at in this lecture so far are just the very basic techniques taught at the introductory level,
though still used frequently in research labs today.
In recent decades though chromatography has undergone a virtual explosion of advancements
leading to techniques involving ultramicroscopic silica particles with such small pores
that powerful pumps have to be used to push solvent through them at high pressures.
We call this technique HPLC for high pressure liquid chromatography.
The extremely high surface area of the contents of an HPLC column allows very precise separations,
but it also requires a closed system consisting of a steel column to be used
so that it can resist the pressure applied by pumps which move the solvent.
So it's impossible to load compounds in the same way as traditional chromatography since the system is sealed.
Similarly, it's impossible to see even the brightest colored compounds as they move through the system
because the column is encased in steel.
Now the loading problem is solved with a device called an injection loop.
An injection loop consists of a manifold with two separate loops made of a pressure resistant tubing.
So when the valve handle is rotated, one loop is in line with the flowing mobile phase
and the other is in line with a special injection septum.
The sample is pushed into the open loop using a syringe
and when the handle is turned, places the injection loop in line with the mobile phase,
thereby introducing the sample to the chromatographic system without ever opening it and losing pressure.
Of course, since columns need to be packed into stainless steel cases,
it becomes impossible to monitor a run with my eyes even if my compounds are absorbing the visible light.
So HPLC systems also have a detecting system which is usually something like a simple spectrophotometer flow cell.
The simplest example of this is a UV visible detection system
in which a specific wavelength of light is aimed so that it passes through the exiting solvent, striking a detector.
As the sample molecules move out of the column and through the detector cell,
they absorb the light, leading to a reduced intensity at the detector.
So if we plot the observed absorbance as a function of time starting with the injection of the sample at zero minutes,
we can create what's called a chromatogram or a graphical representation of the separation taking place.
There are many more chromatographic methods available to the modern chemist.
Certainly many more than we can survey in a single lecture.
But no lecture on chromatography would be complete without the mention of gas chromatography, commonly referred to as GC.
Archer J.P. Martin is the name most commonly associated with the invention of gas chromatography.
Now, Martin is actually most famous for his invention of paper chromatography,
the technique used by Stanley Miller to detect the amino acids in his primordial concoction made in Harold Urie's lab.
Martin shared the 1952 Nobel Prize for that work,
but like most Nobel laureates, even the indisputable pinnacle of scientific honors was not enough to satisfy his curiosity.
Martin continued to explore ways in which partitioning could be exploited to separate organic compounds faster and even more efficiently.
It was around the time of his Nobel Prize award that he hit on another great concept.
Partitioning involves the motion of molecules from one phase to another.
So why confine this methodology to transitions between adhered solid states and dissolved liquid states?
After all, molecules move faster in gases and slowest of all in solids.
So it stands to reason that molecules could switch from phase to phase much more quickly if the gas phase were somehow included in the experiment.
So Martin wondered, could a form of chromatography be developed using liquid as the stationary phase and gas as the mobile phase?
Martin's idea proved viable.
He demonstrated that separation could be accomplished with extreme speed and precision using a dense liquid phase and a gas like helium as the mobile phase.
By slowly heating a column filled with a liquid stationary phase, through which a carrier gas like helium or nitrogen is flowing,
compounds are driven off one by one in order of decreasing volatility.
His new method allowed faster separation with far less material and has become a staple technique in forensic and analytical labs all around the world.
Using various detection methods, GC can be used to analyze practically anything that will vaporize.
In this lecture, we explored our last topics on the science of separations.
Specifically, we continued our investigation into partitioning,
which is the equilibrium that compounds naturally establish between two distinct phases upon or based upon their relative affinity for those phases.
We took a look at the work of Michael Svet, whose second PhD dissertation gave rise to the science of chromatography,
in which partitioning between a stationary and mobile phase leads to predictable rates of movement for compounds.
This movement is based upon their relative affinity for the two phases.
We saw how this very basic principle plays out on a piece of blackboard chalk, much like Svet's first experiment.
And then again on a TLC plate, which is designed for small-scale characterizations and method development.
And finally, we talked about columns, which could allow us to collect enough sample to carry our work forward and perform additional reactions or testing.
Finally, we briefly mentioned some of the more powerful techniques in use today for special applications from quality testing to medical research and beyond.
We looked at HPLC, which uses extremely fine silica with very small pores to generate a huge surface area,
giving us better separations but requiring powerful pumps operating at thousands of pounds per square inch to keep that mobile phase moving.
And we also saw how Archer J. P. Martin's second claim to fame, gas chromatography,
operates by partitioning between the liquid and gas phases rather than the traditional solid and liquid phases.
And we discussed how this gives more partitioning events in a given unit of time, creating a fantastic resolution in a very short experiment.
From recrystallization to distillation to liquid-liquid extractions and chromatography,
there is truly a solution for nearly any separation problem that could possibly come up in the lab.
We've come a long way, from atomic and molecular structure to the synthesis of organic compounds,
a host of identification techniques and methods used for purification.
In the last 35 lectures, we have managed to gather an understanding of some of the most basic tenets of organic chemistry.
But we spent most of our time looking back on the history of this complex and powerful science.
An absolute must, if one is to gain the perspective to meaningfully look forward,
at the possibilities that organic chemistry holds for the future.
So, the topic of our final lecture will be just that.
We'll experience the joy of taking some of what we've learned from the past 35 lectures,
adding a dash of imagination, and trying to gaze into the future through the eyes of an organic chemist.
I'll see you there.
