Steroid hormones are remarkably powerful organic molecules.
They can go far beyond simply determining the gender of a developing fetus.
Just consider the market for the two most commonly known of these compounds, estrogen
and testosterone.
Both are produced and marketed as pharmaceutical products to fight medical conditions associated
with aging.
To testosterone's ability to promote a process known as anabolism, or the building up of
complex organs and tissues in the body, has made it a useful substance in both the legitimate
medical treatment of wasting diseases, and also as a performance enhancing drug of abuse
in athletics.
Estrogen in its derivatives are used as contraceptive medications, and they also sometimes are
prescribed to postmenopausal women to help fight osteoporosis.
But it might surprise you to find out that both of these hormones, with their drastically
differing metabolic effects, are made up from the same starting materials in the body.
The common starting material in biological synthesis of these compounds is cholesterol.
And in the early part of the 1900s, a race was brewing to find a way to make this central
compound in vitro.
But one of the major challenges was finding ways to make new carbon-carbon bonds from
smaller molecules.
Now, during this period in time, dividing a new method to make this critical connection,
it was practically a guaranteed Nobel Prize.
In 1928, Otto Deals, a former student of the legendary Hermann M. L. Fisher and his own
protégé, Kurt Alder, published an article outlining a strategy then only called the
Dying Synthesis.
By the late 1940s, it was clear to all that this synthetic strategy was one of the keys
which would ultimately unlock the total synthesis of cholesterol.
In those days, a sort of holy grail of steroid chemistry.
In 1950, with the research groups of chemists Robert Robinson at Oxford and Robert Burns
Woodward at Harvard independently closing in on this goal, Deals and Alder received
their Nobel Prize for the Dying Synthesis.
In honor of the tremendous impact their development has had on organic chemistry, we now call
this reaction the Deals Alder Reaction.
Hopefully by the end of the day, you will see exactly how they did it and why they
so richly deserve this honor.
But before we can begin to fully understand the Deals Alder Reaction, we need to take
a step back and analyze a little bit simpler compound than these large hormone compounds.
We need to take a look at compounds called conjugated diene.
Now the very simplest conjugated compound possible in organic chemistry is this hydrocarbon
called 1,3-butadiene.
You may notice that the two double bonds of the compound appear to be separated by a carbon-carbon
single bond as I've drawn them here.
Now recall that compounds with pi bonds or the potential to have them tend to have resonance
contributors which can stabilize those compounds.
And 1,3-butadiene is no different, having resonance contributors which contain pi electron
density in the intervening carbon-carbon bond.
Now when this resonance involves the commingling of multiple pi bonds, as it does in our example
here, we refer to this special type of resonance as conjugation.
And in a compound comes with some important structural, physical, and chemical properties
as well.
You see, this is only achieved when all four of the pi atomic orbitals align with one another.
So for example, if I try to rotate the central carbon-carbon bond here by about 90 degrees,
I have a problem because our two pi bonds will be oriented perpendicularly to one another.
And because of that, they can't have pi electrons move from one to the other.
In other words, I can't establish the resonance that I could previously.
Now as you might suspect from this observation, conjugated dienes like ours have a strong
tendency to take on that planar conformation which aligns the p orbitals of all the sp2
carbon atoms in the compound.
Now all of this leads to a potential pair of stereo isomers in our example.
See the partial pi bond character of that central carbon atom creates a restricted rotation
producing two different isomers.
Now we call these S-cis or cisoid, which looks like this, or I can flip the central pi bond
and make it an S-trans or transoid conformation.
So the cisoid and transoid isomers, they tend to interconvert more quickly because there's
actually only a pi bond that needs to break.
So a bona fide cis and trans alkene, while they can't interconvert well at all, would
be interconverting much more slowly than this.
Nonetheless, the two different states, cisoid and transoid, can't exist as individuals.
Now, you can see from this that the requirement for conjugation is that the double bonds are
alternating.
If the double bonds are more than one carbon-carbon bond apart, let's try that.
Let's put the double bonds more than one carbon-carbon bond apart.
Well now there's an intervening sp3 carbon, and because the intervening sp3 carbon has
no available p orbitals, the electrons from the two pi bonds cannot exchange by resonance.
And alternately, let's bring up a compound where the double bonds are not spaced at all.
They're right next to one another in what we call accumulated dyne.
Now in this case, notice that the central carbon has to have two different p orbitals
participating in this bonding arrangement, and that means that it has to have two pi
bonds which are not parallel, but rather are normal to one another.
So in neither of these two cases, could we possibly make a compound that's conjugated?
It's only when we have that very special arrangement of alternating pi bonds that we see this very
special effect.
Now in spite of what we know now about the remarkable mobility of pi bonds in conjugated
compounds, when we try to name them, we revert to the most stable resonance contributor as
our reference.
Of course, this is always a contributor with all-neutral atoms and alternating pi bonds.
The name is constructed in much the same way as simple alkenes, but with the alteration
that before the ene suffix, we insert the prefix die, try, tetra, etc. based upon the
number of double bonds present.
For example, what's commonly called vinyl ethylene would be named 1-3 butadiene.
Now creating ever larger linear conjugated alkenes produces 1-3-5 hexatriene, then 1-3-5-7
octatetraene, and so on.
Now you may be wondering at this point if the analogy extends to cyclic conjugated compounds,
and the answer to this question is yes.
For example, 1-3 cyclohexadiene would be considered a conjugated compound as well.
Yet again, you may wonder if conjugation in cyclic compounds can run the full circumference
of the ring, like in this putative 1-3-5 cyclohexatriene molecule.
The answer to that question spawns such a rich chemistry that we're going to give it
a lecture all its own next time.
So for now, let's keep our focus on acyclic conjugated compounds and leave the more complex
cyclics for another day.
Just as we did with isolated alkenes, we can also survey the effective conjugation on stability
using heats of hydrogenation.
So let's do this using a simple system with only a few isomers, like pentadines.
As a reference, the heat of hydrogenation of one pentene is 125 kilojoules per mole.
Now if we add a second double bond, which is isolated from the other by multiple carbon-carbon
bonds, we create 1-4 pentadiene, which contains two isolated double bonds.
Not surprisingly, the heat of hydrogenation doubles, because we've essentially added a
second bond of exactly the same type.
But hydrogenation of its regioisomer, 1-3 pentadiene, shown here in the transconfirmation, releases
less energy than the sum of that of two isolated double bonds.
It's this observation which first led to our understanding of the stabilizing effect
of resonance.
This stabilizing effect extends far beyond simple diene hydrocarbons.
Resonance has similar effects on the stability of compounds containing heteroatoms, like
our familiar friends, enols, carbocations like allyl cation, and many others.
So let's take a closer look at our simple conjugated diene from earlier, and see if
we can explain this remarkable increase in stability.
We're going to begin by drawing it as what is clearly its most stable resonance contributor.
Then we're going to turn it on its side so that we can easily view the piatomic orbitals,
which are overlapping in space, to produce the new conjugated pi system.
Now if we try to create a representation of the resonance hybrid in this orientation,
it becomes clear that something very special is happening in our conjugated system.
The four pi electrons are not actually confined to those isolated pi bonds, but rather have
free run of the entire system.
So let's take a look at the molecular orbitals, first of a simple isolated alkene, and analyze
their energetics so that we can better understand the stabilizing effect one more time.
I'm going to start by showing you a very simple piatomic orbital.
So far in the course I've shown you these orbitals as simply having two lobes, one up,
one down, one left, or one right, but always at opposition to one another.
But the truth is that piatomic orbitals have a characteristic called phase, and we tend
to show this phase as being plus and minus.
This is a rather unfortunate choice of terminology because it really has nothing to do with charge
or anything else that's up or down, it could just as easily be bitter or sweet, beautiful
and ugly, they're just opposing phases.
Which means that I can draw my P orbital like this, or I can just as easily turn the phase
the other way.
So all P orbitals have two potential states that they can be in, that with their phases
either up down or down up, plus minus or minus plus, choose your language, but realize that
they have two opposing phases.
Now what this means is that if I put another P orbital next to it in an attempt to create
a pi system, there are actually our two different potential arrangements.
An out of phase overlap, see we have red-blue, blue-red, or an in phase overlap, where similar
phases red-red, blue-blue are overlapping.
Now only orbital lobes that are in phase with one another can combine.
So we get what's called a node in the out of phase overlap situation.
This is a higher energy state, and so the orbital formed by this will be higher in energy.
Whereas the in phase overlap creates no node, and in fact creates a larger space for the
electrons to move, and this creates our pi bond.
Now these are atomic orbitals, and the new orbitals that they form have shapes that look
more like this, which traverse larger regions of space.
But for today's discussion, to keep things simple, we're going to look more at the actual
P atomic orbitals before they've actually been combined.
So we'll be using this representation, but we'll still be thinking about the large molecular
orbitals as well.
So let's calculate now the energetics of the molecular orbitals in one three-butadiene.
So we know that our ethene had two different molecular orbitals, but what about one three-butadiene?
Well its pi system has two pi bonds, and therefore four electrons and four participating P orbitals.
So I'm going to turn the molecule on its side here, and place the P system on top.
And then what we're going to do is we're going to analyze all the potential orientations,
every permutations of phase up and phase down for these four orbitals combined.
So let's start with the simplest.
When all the orbitals are in phase, there are zero nodes, which means I've created a
very stable region of space for the electrons to move in.
So I'm going to put this at the bottom of my energy axis, and label it pi one.
So this is the orientation for my lowest energy molecular orbital.
The next best arrangement has a single node, right through the middle of the pi system.
So this will be higher in energy than the previous orbital.
We're going to call that pi two.
We can continue this exercise, creating a new overlap that has two nodes.
We're going to move that over and label it pi three.
And of course the last potential permutation has three nodes, and we're going to move that
to the highest energy position and call it pi four.
So what you might notice here is that if I put all these orbitals on an energy axis,
and I put the non-bonding energy here, which means basically the energy of a vacant P orbital,
that some of the molecular orbitals are more stable, and others are less.
So only when electrons move into these regions of space will they be happier than if they're
not in a bond at all.
To move into these orbitals would be energetically unfavorable.
Now fortunately in the case of 1,3-butadiene, we have four total pi electrons, which means
they can all find a home in a lower energy orbital.
This is the source of the stability of conjugated compounds.
They offer a more stable lower energy orbital for the electrons to move into when those
P orbitals combine.
Now when they're down here in this region beneath, we call them bonding orbitals for
obvious reasons, because they create a chemical bond.
So when we talk about orbitals up here above that non-bonding energy threshold, we refer
to them as anti-bonding orbitals, because they're very high in energy.
But the effect is even more predictable and goes even further than that.
We can look at it by comparing 1,3-butadiene, which we just looked at, with a slightly larger
conjugated alkene, 1,3,5 hexatriene.
So if we do the same exercise for these two compounds that we just did, we'll find that
when we turn them on their side and analyze their p-atomic orbital overlaps, there are
four molecular orbitals available for the butadiene, and in this case, there will actually be six
different orbitals possible for the hexatriene.
But there's something important you have to notice here beyond just the number of orbitals.
And that is that the distance between them in energy is changing.
Here the orbitals are closer together in energy than the others.
So if I take a look at these systems when populated, both of them create more stable
compounds than they would be if they didn't have conjugation.
So that's a good thing.
But the other important effect that we can see here is that the frontier molecular orbitals
called the HOMO and LUMO for highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital are different.
Not only different, predictably so.
Extending conjugation decreases the frontier molecular orbital energy gap.
Now in the meantime, nature has exploited this property of conjugated compounds in the
development of a rainbow of pigments used by plants to gather energy for photosynthesis,
attracts symbiotic animals, and even to protect themselves from light which could otherwise
damage their cellular structure.
One of the most familiar examples of this from our everyday lives is the pigment beta-carotene.
This is an example of the structure of beta-carotene using ChemDRAW.
Just like our much smaller examples, beta-carotene can absorb a very specific wavelength of light
to promote electrons in its pi system from the HOMO to the LUMO.
In this case, however, you can see that we have 22 p orbitals participating in its frontier
molecular orbital energy gap.
So that makes that gap so very small that it doesn't absorb ultraviolet light, but rather
low energy, visible light.
Now, if a specific color of light is absorbed when passing through or reflecting off of
an object, even when as small as a molecule, our eye detects all of the remaining wavelengths
in the transmitted or reflected light, causing us to see the complementary color of that which
is being absorbed.
In this case, orange is the complementary color to the absorbed blue light, so that's
the color that we see.
Now, beta-carotene, which is right here, is responsible in part for the color of fresh
carrots for which it was named, as well as certain color changes in the leaves of trees
in autumn.
See, as fall comes, deciduous trees undergo a process called senescence, during which
they break down and reabsorb the valuable chlorophyll which helps them to produce food
through photosynthesis.
Now, as the chlorophyll is removed from the doomed leaves, the other pigments like this
beta-carotene, which were overwhelmed by that strong coloration, are given their chance
to shine, even if only for a few weeks, as the leaf dies and detaches from the now dormant
tree.
And it's these 22 participating p-orbitals in the resonance of beta-carotene that are
responsible for much of the orange color that you see.
So this year, when the fall foliage begins to burst with color, think about this.
What you're really observing is the result of a complex dance of pie electrons within
the pigments of the leaves.
Now, you might also recognize that beta-carotene bears a striking similarity to another compound
we've already looked at, retinol, and that's not a coincidence.
Beta-carotene is one of a group of compounds commonly referred to as vitamin A, and when
ingested, some animal species, including humans, can convert beta-carotene into retinol.
But humans aren't very good at this.
Our bodies make our own retinol in other ways as well, so we don't really have a need to
convert large quantities of beta-carotene into this critical chromophore or molecule
which absorbs light.
So what happens when a carrot lover just can't say no to that 20th or 30th carrot stick?
Well, his or her body is unable to convert all the beta-carotene into retinol.
So instead, it stores the useful vitamin for a rainy day.
Now, beta-carotene, you probably noticed, is a hydrocarbon, so it's naturally stored
in the lowest polarity environment that your body can find, a fat tissue just beneath your
skin.
So if enough beta-carotene is consumed, and therefore stored in this way, it can lead
to a yellowing of the skin, or even the appearance that the skin has turned orange.
This condition, called keratinemia, is actually pretty harmless and will resolve itself over
time with a minor dietary modification.
Although conjugated systems are somewhat more stable than similar but isolated pie systems,
they can and do undergo many of the addition reactions that we discussed previously.
For simple isolated alkenes, the same kind of reactions will apply to conjugated alkenes,
but with a few important caveats.
For example, the highly connected pie systems of conjugated compounds, like alkenes, means
that they can often undergo more complex addition reactions, with unexpected regioisomers
forming.
And the classic example of this is in the addition of a hydrogen halide to 1,3-butadiene.
So let's take a look at the addition of this hydrogen halide to 1,3-butadiene.
We're all familiar with hydrochloric acid and its properties and how it tends to react
with alkenes.
So I'm going to put a 1,3-butadiene here in place of where we've already seen some
isolated alkenes in earlier lessons in the course.
And your instinct is probably right here.
To have your alkene attack the hydrogen of the HCl.
But in this case, you get more than one potential intermediate.
Notice that I could draw a carbocation with the positive charge on the secondary carbon
here, or I could draw it on the primary carbon here.
Now, of course, the truth about this is that it's really all the same intermediate.
And that what we're really looking at in this slide is two different resonance contributors
to what is actually a resonance hybrid with positive charges in two different locations.
Nonetheless, this means that attack can occur by the chloride on one of two different spots
on the intermediate.
The chloride attacks the secondary carbon.
We get the product that one would probably anticipate based upon our earlier lectures
on isolated alkenes.
If instead it attacks the primary carbon, we expect a product in which the chlorine
has added actually four atoms away instead of two atoms away from where we place the
hydrogen.
So, you can imagine in your mind that Z7, Markovnikov, would probably have a pretty
good argument over this one, wouldn't they?
Because Z7 would clearly say the more substituted alkene is what you're going to make, whereas
Markovnikov is more likely to argue that the more stable carbocation will dictate the product
of your reaction.
Now, although they didn't actually argue over this one, one can imagine it would be a pretty
epic battle, wouldn't it?
And the real catch here, the real clincher is they would both be right, it just depends
on the conditions.
We call the first situation here a one-two addition.
This product tends to form very rapidly.
We call the lower example a one-four addition, and this product is actually more stable,
but it also tends to form more slowly.
So we call these kinds of competitions between two different products which form under two
different sets of conditions, at least in this case, a thermodynamically or kinetically
controlled reaction.
So let me explain a little bit more.
Here's our reaction again, one three-butadiene with HCl.
But this time, let's consider the vertical here as being an energy axis, and track the
reaction as it goes.
So in the first step of my reaction, I'm going to form my intermediate, where I have positive
charge in two different regions.
Now this is the same for either pathway, so I only have to draw one.
But at this point, the pathway splits, and we go through two separate transition states,
one with the chlorine attacking at the primary, and one with it attacking at the secondary.
But notice that the intermediate which results in the attack on the secondary carbon is actually
lower in energy.
If we complete the reaction, though, what we find is that the higher energy transition
state has led us to a lower energy product.
So the question here is, which is driving the major product of this reaction?
Is it the stability of the transition states, meaning the rate of the reaction, or the stability
of the products, meaning the thermodynamics or the free energy of the reaction?
So if we simplify this, it's a bit easier to see.
We have a fast pathway to an unstable product, and a slow pathway to a more stable product.
So we call these kinetic products for that one which forms quickly, and a thermodynamic
product for one which takes longer to form, but is more stable.
So in the earlier decades of the 1900s, synthetic organic chemistry was earning recognition as
a powerful field of study, with tremendous potential for useful application in medicine,
industry, and beyond.
But as the 20th century dawned, the library of synthetic techniques available to organic
chemists was still somewhat lacking.
Another challenge facing chemists was that need for techniques to create new carbon-carbon
bonds.
And you may notice, as you review the previous lectures, that examples of techniques which
can accomplish this critical task are scarce.
In short, if you were a chemist in the early 1900s who could devise a new method for creating
carbon-carbon bonds, you might as well start writing your Nobel Prize acceptance speech.
One proof of this proviso is the Diels-Alder reaction.
In 1928, they devised a reaction scheme which exploited the geometry of conjugated dienes
in molecular orbitals to produce not just one new carbon-carbon bond, but two new carbon-carbon
bonds in a single step.
The Diels-Alder reaction is actually one of a class of reactions known as pericyclic reactions.
Pericyclic reactions consist of the exchange of multiple pi electrons simultaneously between
two molecules to create two new sigma bonds between them.
The Diels-Alder is designated a 4 plus 2 pericyclic reaction because it involves this
kind of a reaction between a conjugated diene having four pi electrons and one pi bond from
another reagent known as dienophile, which would have two pi electrons.
The simplest example which means these criteria is the reaction between the cisoid isomer
of 1,3-butadiene and ethene, so let's start there.
To envision exactly how this reaction takes place, let's recreate the molecular orbitals
of both molecules.
Recall from our earlier discussion in this lecture, 1,3-butadiene has four molecular
orbitals of which the pi2 is the highest occupied molecular orbital, or the homo, and the pi3
is the lowest energy unoccupied molecular orbital, or the lumo.
We collectively refer to the homo and lumo as frontier molecular orbitals because they
present the orbitals which can be vacated and occupied respectively when a reaction
takes place.
Ethene is, of course, a bit simpler since it only has two p orbitals in its pi system,
so pi1 is the homo and pi2 is the lumo.
This is the exciting part where the elegant simplicity of this reaction shines through.
As the two reagents approach one another, we can see that the homo of the diene and
the lumo of the dienophile are in phase with one another on both sides, and that the same
is actually true for the dien-lumo and the dienophile-homo.
Now here we can see why the diene has to be cisoid as well.
The ributed diene has the ends of its pi system too far apart to achieve the needed overlap
on both sides simultaneously.
What this means is that the two reagents are perfectly configured to exchange electrons
on both sides in a concerted process, and this produces two new sigma bonds from four
pi electrons.
The entropic penalty of making one molecule from two is very easily balanced and in fact
overwhelmed by the enthalpy benefit of trading those two pi bonds for the two sigmas.
The new carbon-carbon bond creation is complete.
What a rush, right?
So what makes the 4 plus 2 reaction so easy to complete is this in-phase alignment of
frontier molecular orbitals.
Because the molecular orbital geometries are perfectly set up for a reaction to take place,
all we need to do is mix the reagents and wait for the molecules to collide.
So we call this a thermally activated reaction.
But if we try to conduct an analogous reaction, for example, in a 2 plus 2 cyclization, making
cyclobutane from two molecules of ethylene, we see that the frontier molecular orbitals
are not properly aligned when the compounds are in their lowest energy states.
We're not completely out of luck though.
We can resort to a trick called photoactivation, promoting electrons into higher molecular orbitals
by shining light of just the right wavelength on them.
This essentially changes the identity of the frontier molecular orbitals, artificially
creating the overlap that we can get for free in a 4 plus 2.
Now, it's this detail that deals all the reactions are thermally activated, that makes them so
useful, and also the reason that I'm going to stick to the 4 plus 2 reaction as we go
forward.
Now, it also doesn't hurt that a number of biologically and commercially relevant compounds,
such as cyclic terpenes, contain a cyclohexene motif.
Of course, the deals all the reaction can be performed with more complex dienes and
dienophiles, leading to products with more robust stereochemistry than our cyclohexene
product from the previous example.
Notice that in the addition of a dienophile to the diene, both of the new carbon-carbon
bonds form on the same side of the newly created ring.
In the case of cyclohexene formation, this is purely an academic observation, since all
substituents of the newly joined carbons are hydrogen atoms.
But what if they're not?
To find a situation in which this applies, we need to look no further than the very first
step of the Woodward synthesis of cholesterol.
Woodward knew that he was trying to make a compound with four fused carbon rings on it,
from much simpler starting materials.
So why not consider the Deals Alder to start building his scaffold?
Why not indeed?
Woodward began his synthesis using one 3-butadiene to create his first fused ring.
The Deals Alder process ensured that the desired six-membered ring would form.
But Woodward had a new problem in his synthesis.
The newly fused rings had the proper connectivity, but were in the cis-confirmation, and clearly
his final product had to be in the trans-confirmation.
Today though, we've covered a great deal, so let's sum up.
We discussed the phenomenon of conjugation, in which multiple pi bonds in resonance with
one another lend extra stability to a compound or ion.
We made a few structural arguments for why this added stability exists, and we learned
a new way of modeling the energies of conjugated pi systems in alkenes, backing up our predictions
of stability with observed heat of hydrogenation.
We scratched the surface of conjugated diene reactivity by exploring two reactions.
First, the hydrohalogenation of one 3-butadiene, and how addition of the second double bond
leads to two possible products, a kinetic one, the one 2 product, and a thermodynamic
one in the one 4 product.
Then we examined a Nobel Prize winning reaction conceived by Otto Deals and Kurt Alder, a
reaction which allows us to quickly and easily form not one, but two carbon-carbon bonds.
We discussed how the frontier molecular orbitals of reagents in the 4 plus 2 pericyclic reaction
are perfectly suited for a thermally activated reaction, which can easily produce a motif
which got Woodward started on his way to the total synthesis of cholesterol.
Next time, we're going to take a look at what happens when we take these linear conjugated
systems to the next level by cyclizing them to produce a very special carbon scaffold.
I'll see you then.
